https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/movies/kyle-mooney-the-first-time-i-was-upstaged-at-a-talent-show.html
Kyle Mooney: The First Time I Was Upstaged at a Talent Show - The New York Times
Movies,Television,Actors and Actresses,Pop and Rock Music
July 18, 2017
4552
I was a chubby 9-year-old kid. Growing up in San Diego, my main interests were the Beatles, Louis Armstrong, “Star Wars,” baseball cards and drawing. I’m the youngest of three boys, and my oldest brother was super into Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton and played guitar. I wanted to be like him, so I asked for a guitar of my own for Christmas in ’93. I was a fast learner and still have some of the classics down: “House of the Rising Sun,” “Iron Man,” “Brain Stew.”On the last day of third grade, I asked the teacher if I could play for the class, and crushed with a simple 12-bar blues. My friend Tom started a chant for “Encore!,” and I think I played pretty much the exact same thing and got just as much love.My best friend was a kid named Jason. He was cool, kind of like the real-life version of Max from “Goof Troop.” Like most best friends, we shared similar interests. And not long after I got a guitar, he got one, too. Mine was a little classical acoustic guitar, but his was way more rad: this black electric with a built-in amp. It was probably the most metal thing I’d laid my eyes and ears on at that point in my life.With his sick new ax in tow, and my developing virtuosity (mostly thanks to Rob, the chill 20-something guitar teacher who gave lessons in the local mini-mall), Jason and I were heading toward a fruitful collaboration. I took it upon myself to bestow the shred knowledge I’d acquired. I walked Jason through “Sunshine of Your Love,” showed him the chords for “Wild Thing.” His little sister would watch in awe as we hung at his house and jammed. One time she asked if I knew “Blackbird,” and because that Beatles song is superhard, I came up with some lame excuse about how I was tired of playing it, but I knew some other really good songs with “bird” in the title.Not long after that, during the morning announcements in fourth grade, our teacher said that there were going to be auditions for the school talent show. I was stoked. At recess, I proudly proclaimed to my friend crew that I was going to try out. And then, Jason — my No. 1 — followed that up by saying he was, too.What?! How? He’d only been playing for, like, three months. What songs did he know other than the ones I taught him? He was nothing without me! This felt like a full-on betrayal.And, of course, we both got in.At rehearsals, we learned what everyone planned to perform. I was going to play “Yesterday,” and Jason would do a medley of rock songs, including “Bad to the Bone.” The big closer was definitely “Wild Thing.”On show day, I knew I was a goner. I was wearing my dad’s polo shirt tucked into plaid shorts. Jason wore a sick oversize tie-dyed shirt and Oakley sunglasses. A sense of impending failure ruined me. When the M.C.s announced that I was going to play “Yesterday,” the teachers and aides got psyched. But the kids ... the hundreds of children I was trying to impress ... couldn’t have cared less. I started strumming and put on the stiffest, whitest, most boring performance of that song ever. I didn’t even have the courage to look out at the crowd.When I finished and people started clapping, I knew that they were just doing it as a courtesy, out of obligation. I went backstage and sunk. Two acts later, Jason came on. Damn. He was so good, hopping around onstage like Angus Young or something. The kids lost it. It was the most punk thing to ever happen at Miramar Ranch Elementary. Truly, it was like Beatlemania. Kids were getting in trouble because they lost all decency and were screaming at the top of their lungs.Jason loved it. He was so alive. And as he closed out his performance with “Wild Thing,” I couldn’t help but think: “They should be screaming for me, not you! I taught you that change from the A major to open chord. I got you into the blues. You’re playing my songs.”I still have video of the curtain call from that talent show. In it, I stare ahead, not smiling, and robotically bow. Then Jason comes out. So confident and beaming. The kids scream again. I try to smile and make small talk with the little kid next to me who played Beethoven on piano, but the pain is obvious. That day, Jason became the most popular kid in school. And our friendship was never the same.I continued to play guitar for a few years, and my tastes expanded a little (mostly SoCal pop punk and ska), but can’t remember another time I played for an audience. By eighth grade, I had moved on to turntables; by ninth grade, I was into drum machines, samplers and rapping. In college, I pretty much abandoned music and started performing with the school’s improv and sketch troupe, and at some point that became my permanent thing.In the process, I’ve met a handful of Jason types. Performers who can take control of the audience, hold them in the palm of their hand, and make them scream. And I still get jealous. But I can also appreciate what they do — the work they put into it, the subtlety with which they move or speak, the charm, the confidence. And it inspires me. Jason made me want to perform better and work harder. And when I think about him on that stage now, I am mature enough to acknowledge that he put on one of the best rock ’n’ roll shows of the last half-century. It was transcendent.He does, however, at least owe me a shout out on Twitter for teaching him the pentatonic scale.