http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/19/us/politics/obama-to-extend-protections-for-gay-workers-with-no-religious-exemption.html
Obama to Issue Order Barring Anti-Gay Bias by Contractors - The New York Times
Discrimination,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Transgender and Transsexuals,Obama  Barack,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Government Contracts and Procurement
July 18, 2014
5666
WASHINGTON —  President Obama plans to sign an executive order on Monday that protects gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender employees from discrimination by companies that do federal government work, fulfilling a promise to a crucial Democratic constituency, White House officials said on Friday. But the directive will not exempt religious groups, as many of them had sought.The order will also, for the first time, explicitly protect federal employees from discrimination on the basis of gender identity, officials said. Federal workers are already protected based on their sexual orientation.Gay groups stepped up their already intense campaign to persuade Mr. Obama to sign the order after the Supreme Court’s decision last month in the Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores case. In that ruling, the court said that family-run corporations with religious objections could be exempted from providing employees with insurance coverage for contraception, and there were fears that the case would have repercussions for gay men, lesbians, bisexuals and transgender people.“With the strokes of a pen, the president will have a very real and immediate impact on the lives of millions of L.G.B.T. people across the country,” Chad Griffin, the president of the Human Rights Campaign, said in a statement on Friday. “These actions from the president have the potential to be a keystone in the arch of his administration’s progress, and they send a powerful message to future administrations and to Congress that anti-L.G.B.T. discrimination must not be tolerated.”Religious groups had sought the exemption to ensure that they would not lose federal money or contracts if they could not meet the new guidelines because of their beliefs.Galen Carey, the vice president of government relations for the National Association of Evangelicals, said he expected the president’s executive order would lead to a lengthy and expensive legal fight.“It would be better if the president could provide leadership that promotes tolerance all the way around,” Mr. Carey said, “rather than use the force of the state.”He said the exemption would have protected the groups’ freedom and “social harmony as our nation is working through these issues, on which there’s a lot of disagreement.”The directive is the latest example of Mr. Obama acting unilaterally after legislation on a domestic priority was stymied by Republican opposition on Capitol Hill. His executive orders have angered Republicans, and Speaker John A. Boehner is preparing a lawsuit to protest the president’s moves.Mr. Obama warned last month that he was prepared to act on his own to extend the protections because the drive in Congress for a national anti-bias law to cover nearly all employers, a bill known as the Employment Nondiscrimination Act, had stalled.In extending the new protections, Mr. Obama is building on two longstanding executive orders. He is adding sexual orientation and gender identity to the list of protections that apply to federal contractors and that were approved by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1965. And he is adding gender identity as a protected category to a 1969 directive by President Richard M. Nixon that applies to federal employees, which was later amended by President Bill Clinton to include sexual orientation.The issue of how to treat religious groups under any new order was a divisive one — among gays, lesbians, bisexuals, transgender people and religious leaders.Some gay rights groups were angry that the Obama administration had accepted the inclusion of a religious exemption in anti-bias legislation that passed the Senate — but not the House — last fall, but others saw it as the political price of securing the Republican votes necessary to enact it.Religious groups that have contracts with the federal government already have a limited exemption from existing anti-bias rules, based on a 2002 executive order by President George W. Bush. That directive allows them to factor their religious beliefs in their employment decisions.The directive will not change under the new rule. Michael Wear, who led the religious outreach during Mr. Obama’s re-election campaign and had joined calls for a religious exemption, said he was “encouraged” by that move.Mr. Wear said the new order provided “a path for the administration to both advance protections for L.G.B.T. Americans and continue to respect the religious identity of organizations serving our nation in partnership with the federal government.”But some groups wanted Mr. Obama to go further to protect religious groups in carving out an exception. One example of such protections would allow a Catholic charity that believes sex outside heterosexual marriage is a sin to keep its government financing if it declined to hire a gay man.Not all religious groups called for an exception.“Those of us who really care deeply about both the sanctity and the necessity of religious freedom have grieved to see people use that as a cover for overt discrimination, and the president is not going to allow that to happen,” said the Rev. C. Welton Gaddy, the president of the Interfaith Alliance.Mr. Gaddy — who helped organize 100 liberal religious leaders to write to Mr. Obama to oppose the exemption — said the Supreme Court’s decision in the Hobby Lobby case “shined a bright light” on some groups’ efforts to use religious freedom as an excuse for violating the rights of others.On Thursday, members of GetEqual, a gay rights group, stood up in silence during a speech by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. in Detroit to protest the inclusion of a religious exemption. On Friday, they were celebrating.“We’re so proud today of the decision made by the Obama administration to resist the calls by a small number of right-wing conservatives to insert religious exemptions into civil rights protections,” Heather Cronk, the group’s director, said.