https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/us/politics/state-of-the-union-speech-leaves-questions-about-usefulness-of-unlikely-goals.html
Bold Call to Action in Obama’s State of the Union, Even if No Action Is Likely - The New York Times
State of the Union Message (US),Obama  Barack,United States Politics and Government,United States,Republican Party,Democratic Party,Congress
Jan. 20, 2015
6788
WASHINGTON —  Near the end of his State of the Union address, President Obama noted, “I have no more campaigns to run.” A few Republicans in the audience cheekily applauded.Mr. Obama smiled but then offered an ad-lib retort: “I know,” he jabbed the Republicans, “because I won both of them.”Never mind that his party actually lost the most recent elections, delivering control of both houses of Congress to the opposition for the first time during his presidency. For an hour on Tuesday night, Mr. Obama commanded the biggest stage he will have all year, unbowed and self-assured, laying out an expansive and expensive legislative agenda as if he were the one who had triumphed.Watching an emboldened Mr. Obama, it would have been easy to forget that he was standing there just two months after the biggest electoral repudiation of his presidency. Indeed, with economic indicators on the rise and his own poll numbers rebounding slightly, he made no reference at all to the midterm elections, offered no concessions about his own leadership and proposed no compromises to accommodate the political reality.Instead, he asked congressional Republicans who have resisted new taxes at every turn over the last six years to raise taxes on the wealthy. He asked lawmakers who won their seats on promises of reining in government to reopen the spending spigot to provide free community college, child care and paid parental leave to millions of middle-income Americans. The program he outlined sounded pretty much like the one he would have sent to a Democratic Congress.“If you share the broad vision I outlined tonight, join me in the work at hand,” he told lawmakers. “If you disagree with parts of it, I hope you’ll at least work with me where you do agree. And I commit to every Republican here tonight that I will not only seek out your ideas, I will seek to work with you to make this country stronger.”But after the lights went out and the presidential motorcade had made its way back up Pennsylvania Avenue, the party balance had not changed. For all of Mr. Obama’s confident demeanor, the question raised by the speech was whether advancing initiatives with little or no hope of passage constituted an act of bold leadership or a feckless waste of time.Every president throws out ideas in a State of the Union address knowing they will not succeed, at least not right away — to frame the debate, lay down an opening bid, draw a line against opponents or set the stage for future action. But rarely has the disconnect between a president and Congress seemed as wide as it is now.Unlike President Bill Clinton, who moved to co-opt Republican issues like crime and welfare on his own terms when the other party captured Congress, Mr. Obama tacked left even as Capitol Hill tacked right. Rather than declare the end of big government, he responded with a defense of an activist Washington.Mr. Obama’s advisers said he saw little reason to hold back on his ambitions just because the new Republican majorities were unlikely to go along. Jon Favreau, his former chief speechwriter, said that pre-emptively scaling back his goals would be like going into a job interview and asking for the salary the employer was likely to give rather than bargaining for more.“Now, do I personally think the Republicans will be willing to meet the president halfway on tax reform?” Mr. Favreau said. “No, but that shouldn’t stop the president from proposing a solution that he feels would actually help solve the problem.”But Republicans said Mr. Obama risked looking ineffectual and out of touch if he simply promoted initiatives that Congress would never take seriously.Steve Schmidt, who worked in President George W. Bush’s White House and managed Senator John McCain’s campaign against Mr. Obama in 2008, said proposing free community college for most students and more paid family leave for parents seemed ludicrously unrealistic.“There’s a student-body presidency campaign component to this — no more homework and go home at 1 p.m.,” Mr. Schmidt said. He added, “You would expect he would gain the political maturity to come into the Congress with an open hand instead of a clenched fist.”John Feehery, a former top adviser to Republican congressional leaders, said there was still value in a president’s making long-shot proposals. “It’s important for setting the contours of the debate and for sparking the imagination of the listening audience,” Mr. Feehery said. “It helps if you don’t get laughed out of the room, but it’s hard to know what will be viewed as inspirational and what will be seen as insipid.”Even without congressional support, promoting his ideas allows Mr. Obama to force other political actors to respond. And he can point to past efforts that did not succeed in Congress but produced progress on other levels. Although he has failed to push through an increase in the minimum wage, for example, a number of states have responded to his appeals and raised it on their own.“With north of 30 million viewers tuning in, the State of the Union is the Super Bowl of political events,” said Josh Gottheimer, a former speechwriter for Mr. Clinton. “It’s an opportunity for a president to drive a new proposal down the field, regardless of legislative viability, and literally change the debate in one fell swoop.”Michael Waldman, another former Clinton speechwriter, said it would be a mistake for a president to let legislative politics stop him from proposing what he supports. “We don’t know what the big debates and policy fights of the post-Obama era will be,” Mr. Waldman said. “He is putting in his 2 cents. Perhaps Obama’s ideas won’t get enacted. But the Republican leadership’s ideas won’t get enacted either.”Yet critics said Mr. Obama might be making life more difficult for his would-be successor, former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, because his agenda could nudge her away from the middle in 2016. “He’s not just pushing her,” said David Frum, who was a speechwriter for Mr. Bush, “but to change the party around her to constrain her.”Mr. Frum added that although Mr. Obama hoped his agenda would put Republicans on the defense, it might have the opposite effect. “This is a document that unifies Republicans,” he said.It may also unify Democrats, leaving both sides as divided as ever. Mr. Obama dismissed any suggestion that he had any role in the division. He rebuffed “the pundits” and “the cynics” who called him “misguided, naïve” to have promised to bridge Washington’s divide.“It’s amazing what you can bounce back from when you have to,” he said, quoting a young mother whose family had emerged from the economic troubles of recent years. For a moment, he sounded as if he meant himself.