https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/22/opinion/on-trade-dont-leave-workers-behind.html
On Trade, Don’t Leave Workers Behind - The New York Times
Editorials,United States Politics and Government,Vocational Training,Layoffs and Job Reductions,United States Economy,Labor and Jobs,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Senate,International Trade and World Market,Trans-Pacific Partnership
May 22, 2015
6775
International trade typically produces winners and losers. Consumers benefit when they pay less for imported goods than similar domestic products. Some American workers are clearly hurt when foreign competition leads factories to shut down or move overseas. That’s why economists have long argued that government should help those displaced by the dynamics of freer trade.But to hear some Republicans tell it, trade only produces winners. Even as President Obama and Congress vigorously debate major trade agreements with Asia, Australia, Europe and Latin America, these legislators are trying to cut back on the few benefits that the government provides to workers hurt by foreign competition.A longstanding program known as Trade Adjustment Assistance gives displaced workers training for new jobs, extended unemployment benefits, reimbursement for relocation expenses and so on. But the program is quite modest, helping just 84,529 people in the 2013 fiscal year, and less than half of those people received any training.Congress made it harder for workers to qualify for T.A.A. last year. It is now available only to manufacturing workers; people laid off from service businesses like call centers cannot get help. And it assists only people affected by trade with a country that has a trade agreement with the United States. Those whose companies moved their jobs to China, for instance, are out of luck.Democratic lawmakers introduced a bill in February to expand the program to cover workers in the service and public sectors and to all workers hurt by foreign trade, regardless of the country involved. That bill would have provided up to $575 million a year for training. It would have restored funding to where it was in 2013, before Congress reduced the program and the budget cuts known as sequestration went into effect, leaving spending at about $300 million for training and related expenses.Republicans in the Senate have shown little regard for the T.A.A., labeling it an ineffective welfare scheme. Even so, they agreed with their Democratic colleagues on a compromise that would extend the benefits to more workers, but set the training budget at a still insufficient $450 million. On Friday, the Senate is expected to vote on T.A.A., along with a broader bill that would bind Congress to an up-or-down vote on trade agreements.Of course, if the Republicans had truly regarded the program as an ineffective way of helping people who have been hurt by trade get good jobs, they would have proposed reforms to make the program better. They did not, leaving only a stripped-down program that seems all the more petty considering what big corporations stand to gain in the trans-Pacific and trans-Atlantic trade agreements the United States is negotiating, including getting other countries to adopt strict patent and copyright laws.Even the amount of money the Democrats were seeking originally is far from sufficient. For decades, Congress has given far less attention to the needs of American workers than they deserve, especially those whose opportunities have been limited by forces largely outside their control, like poverty, weak education systems, discrimination and trade. The United States spends far less on training and other labor-market programs than other advanced countries — just 0.1 percent of gross domestic product, compared with 0.8 percent in Germany and 2.3 percent in Denmark, according to a recent report from the Council on Foreign Relations.If Republicans and the Obama administration want more bipartisan support for increasing trade, they should provide more support to American workers. This, of course, would also help the economy as a whole.