https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/podcasts/the-daily/donald-trump-jr-email-russian-lawyer-meeting.html
‘The Daily’: The President’s Son’s Email - The New York Times
The Daily,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Trump  Donald J Jr,Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
July 11, 2017
2822
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherA music producer. A lawyer from Moscow. The Miss Universe pageant. And now: the promise of help from the Russian government. We connect the dots on Donald Trump Jr.’s communications last summer.On today’s episode:• In the latest development about who knew what and when about Russia and the Trump campaign, we learn about an email sent to Donald Trump Jr. by the man who helped broker his meeting with a Russian lawyer to discuss information damaging to Hillary Clinton. As it was described to The Times by three people, the email indicates that the Russian government was the source of the information. Mark Mazzetti, our Washington investigations editor, joins us to discuss the revelations.• The longest war in the Americas is coming to an end. What happens when thousands of rebel fighters try to re-enter society as civilians? We talk with Nicholas Casey, a correspondent based in South America, about the disarmament of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by its Spanish acronym, FARC.Background reading:• New details about the email to Donald Trump Jr.• How a Miss Universe pageant led to a meeting.• Donald Trump Jr.’s two different explanations for the Russian meeting.• “Goodbye, weapons! Goodbye, war!”: FARC fighters lay down their arms after 52 years of guerrilla war.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”