https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/us/politics/republican-debate-highlights.html
Republican Debate Takeaways: Taking On Donald Trump, at Their Own Peril - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Republican Party,Fox News Channel
March 4, 2016
5299
At a critical and last-chance moment for the contenders, Thursday’s Republican debate in Michigan offered voters the clearest view yet of their options going into November. There was John R. Kasich, the last results-focused governor standing. There was Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who combines conservative economic orthodoxy with the foreign policy views of The Weekly Standard. There was Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, the slightly more populist, Wall Street-phobic version of a contemporary conservative. And then there was Donald J. Trump, who is — well, let’s just leave that to him.Time and time again, anxious Republican leaders have urged their more conventional standard-bearers in the race to take on Mr. Trump. Thursday night’s debate showed why that almost never works. He talks over attack lines. He refuses to admit to flip-flops, even when pressed by a moderator or hemmed in by video footage. He blusters his way past fact-checkers and rivals alike.By comparison, Mitt Romney’s lengthy takedown of Mr. Trump at a Utah university earlier in the day, a sober accounting of Mr. Trump’s heresies and weaknesses, felt more compelling than anything unleashed by the other candidates.The problem for Mr. Trump’s opponents: There is really no good place or time to take him down. He waved off Mr. Romney’s attacks, too, dismissing him as just another loser.The Republican Party is in open civil war. The two leading alternatives to Mr. Trump — Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio — openly loathe each other as well as him. Though each pledged to support the eventual nominee, it is almost impossible to imagine Mr. Cruz or Mr. Rubio rallying behind a Trump candidacy in the general election.Once upon a time, the bitter Democratic primary of 2008 between President Obama and Hillary Clinton seemed as though it had opened a vast chasm of alienation in the party. That was nothing compared to this.The thrill was gone. The puckish one-liners had all but disappeared. The even coarser stand-up routine of the past week, with its suggestive anatomical references, had been retired.Mr. Rubio, the counterpuncher par excellence, was a shadow of himself Thursday night. Incessant campaigning had left his voice hoarse. If he sounded sick, he looked tired and at times panicked — as if wondering just what on earth it would take to nick Mr. Trump’s Teflon.By the end, Mr. Rubio was speaking softly to the debate audience, asking almost beseechingly if they really wanted Mr. Trump as their party’s nominee.Thursday’s moderators were tough, well prepared and fair. And the evening had an early, self-consciously friendly exchange of greetings between Mr. Trump and the moderator Megyn Kelly. But it was impossible not to watch the debate without suspecting that the right-leaning and highly influential news network was using the evening to litigate each of Mr. Trump’s faults and vulnerabilities.The hosts — at least twice using video clips of Mr. Trump’s news media appearances — hit his flip-flops on guest-worker visas, pummeled him over his much-maligned Trump University real estate seminars and fact-checked claims that he could trim $300 billion from the federal budget merely by negotiating cheaper prescription drug prices.Rumors of back-channel negotiations among Republican elders, Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz will take on new life after this debate.Despite their mutual dislike, neither senator attacked the other. Instead of debating who was the more reliable conservative or immigration hard-liner, the two fought to see who could most effectively undermine Mr. Trump. Both assailed him as lacking conviction and integrity.If the Republican establishment’s strategy now is to deny Mr. Trump the nomination by keeping the field as large as possible — diluting his chances to reach a majority of delegates on the first round of votes at the party convention in July — the debate may have offered a preview.No candidate has made more of the last two debates than Mr. Kasich. Whether because he is not viewed as enough of a threat, or because Mr. Trump is by far the bigger one, none of the other candidates took a club to the Ohio governor Thursday night. That gave him a wide-open path to speak directly to voters about his governing philosophy and candidacy.Unlike his rivals, Mr. Kasich is running as a “compassionate conservative” who is disinterested in the culture wars and who can reach out to the opposing party. If his message does not resonate, it will not be because voters did not hear it.There was a time when it was considered indecorous for a candidate to look down at a watch during a debate or to sigh audibly while another candidate was speaking. Thursday night featured a round of anatomical references.“Look at those hands. Are they small hands?” Mr. Trump asked the crowd. Mr. Rubio, he said, had suggested that his small hands suggested that “something else must be small.”“I guarantee you there’s no problem,” he said. “I guarantee.”The exchange produced a CNN headline for the history books: “Donald Trump defends size of his penis.”