https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/14/fashion/stephen-schwarzman-billionaires-birthday-draws-team-trump.html
Camels, Acrobats and Team Trump at a Billionaire’s Gala - The New York Times
Schwarzman  Stephen A,Parties (Social),Trump  Donald J,Palm Beach (Fla),United States Politics and Government,Schwarzman  Christine Hearst
Feb. 14, 2017
919
Another weekend in Palm Beach. Another grand party attended by members of Team Trump.With 400 of his closest friends in attendance, the New York financier Stephen A. Schwarzman celebrated his 70th birthday on Saturday at his Four Winds estate in Palm Beach, Fla.Partygoers feasted on short ribs, while two camels wandered along a stretch of sand and a gondolier propelled his craft across the pool. Guests were treated to a 12-minute fireworks display that could be seen across Lake Worth Lagoon. To top off the evening at what is just one of the multibillionaire’s many homes, Gwen Stefani sang “Happy Birthday to You” before taking a quick twirl with the birthday boy around a dance floor constructed inside a two-story tent where acrobats shimmied and jumped.The cost? A person familiar with the planning who was not authorized by the host to speak on the record estimated it at between $7 million and $9 million.How, exactly, does one spend in the millions on a single party? Ken Fulk, a San Francisco events planner who oversaw the wedding of the technology entrepreneur Sean Parker, had some general estimates. A fireworks display can cost as much as $50,000, he said. Dinner for 400 at such an affair can come to about $200,000. But that doesn’t include waiters and other staff members, he said, which can add another $60,000.As for Ms. Stefani’s “Happy Birthday” performance? That would cost as much as $500,000, according to a Business Insider poll of CelebrityTalent.net.The guests had cocktails in the entry hall before moving on to the dining area, where later they ate cake sculpted in the shape of a Chinese temple with a dragon curled around the edges of the roof, according to one guest. The day after the celebration, some 150 people attended a private lunch hosted by Mr. Schwarzman.And what about the camels? Mr. Fulk estimated they cost $1,500 apiece. “We’ve had a few camels at parties, too,” he said with a laugh.Mr. Schwarzman, the chief executive of the global private equity firm the Blackstone Group and the chairman of the President’s Strategic and Policy Forum, a group established by Mr. Trump in December, has hosted grand affairs before. His 60th birthday soiree in 2007 was pilloried by some as an example of Wall Street excess in the time before the financial crash. That one, which reportedly cost between $3 million and $5 million, took place at the Park Avenue Armory in Manhattan. Martin Short was the master of ceremonies, Marvin Hamlisch played piano, and Rod Stewart and Patti LaBelle serenaded the guests.The Feb. 11 party marked the second Saturday in a row that Palm Beach society féted itself. President Trump and the first lady attended an American Red Cross ball on Feb. 4 at Mr. Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort, a party with a theme of “From Vienna to Versailles.” With its harpists, and waiters in powdered wigs, it was an exercise in 18th-century French opulence.Many of the guests at Mr. Schwarzman’s party were affiliated with the new White House, among them Mr. Trump’s daughter and son-in-law, Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner, and his cabinet picks Steve Mnuchin, Wilbur Ross and Elaine Chao, according to Bloomberg. The Schwarzmans sat together at their table with David Koch, the businessman and supporter of conservative causes, who sat to the left of Mr. Schwarzman’s wife, Christine Hearst Schwarzman. Ivanka Trump was seated to Mr. Schwarzman’s right.The event was planned by the New York firm Van Wyck & Van Wyck, in coordination with Ms. Schwarzman. According to its website, Van Wyck & Van Wyck’s clients have included former President Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Rupert Murdoch and companies such as Rolex, Amazon and Cartier. Executives for the company declined to comment on the party’s cost.The Trump team seems unable to resist a theme party. In December, a “Villains and Heroes” costume party hosted by the Republican donor Robert Mercer drew a contingent that included one of Mr. Trump’s senior advisers, Kellyanne Conway, who wore a Supergirl costume; the billionaire Trump supporter Peter Thiel, who dressed as the pro wrestler Hulk Hogan; and Mr. Trump, who wore his usual suit and tie.