https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/nyregion/de-blasio-keeps-fund-raising-lead-but-a-republican-makes-some-gains.html
De Blasio Keeps Fund-Raising Lead, but a Republican Makes Some Gains - The New York Times
Elections  Mayors,Campaign Finance,De La Fuente  Roque,Dietl  Bo,Malliotakis  Nicole,de Blasio  Bill,New York City
July 17, 2017
3139
Mayor Bill de Blasio continues to maintain a sizable financial advantage over all his likely challengers as he runs for re-election in New York, having brought in $414,123 in contributions and spent nearly as much over the last two months, according to a campaign fund-raising report filed on Monday.Mr. de Blasio’s likely Republican opponent,  Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, raised $249,797. Almost three-quarters of that amount, about $181,000, came in during the last two weeks of the reporting period, which ended on July 11. The rush of donations began after the other leading Republican hopeful, Paul J. Massey Jr., announced on June 28 that he was dropping out of the race.Mr. Massey, a wealthy real estate sales executive, had for a time been a dominant fund-raiser, but his campaign had failed to catch on with voters.But even as Ms. Malliotakis trailed Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, in overall fund-raising, she surpassed him in the amount that counts toward the city’s six-to-one public matching program. She raised more than $100,000 in that category — which is limited to the first $175 from each donor — compared with $61,000 for the mayor.Ms. Malliotakis’s filing also included two donations of $4,950 — the maximum allowed under the city’s campaign finance rules — from Republican backers of President Trump’s campaign: Robert Mercer, a wealthy financier, and his daughter, Rebekah.The donations were a kind of unintentional gift to the de Blasio campaign: It has made tying Ms. Malliotakis, who represents parts of Staten Island and Brooklyn in the Assembly, to the national Republican Party and specifically to Mr. Trump a centerpiece of its strategy since she became the Republican front-runner last month.“Their pockets have no bottoms,” Mr. de Blasio’s campaign said of the Mercers in an email sent to supporters on Monday. The email linked the Mercers to Mr. Trump’s chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, and the right-wing website Breitbart News. The email also referred to Ms. Malliotakis as “a Trump acolyte.”Ms. Malliotakis, speaking at a news conference in Queens to attack the mayor’s handling of crime and police issues, dismissed concerns about the donations as “irrelevant” and said she believed the mayor had also accepted money from people whom he “does not see eye-to-eye with all the time.” She added, “It has nothing to do with Trump.”Sal Albanese, a lawyer and former city councilman who is the most prominent Democratic challenger to Mr. de Blasio, brought in more money than in previous two-month periods, with $41,000 this time around, but he spent it just as fast. He remains far from his goal of qualifying for the city’s matching program; a candidate for mayor must raise $250,000 to receive matching funds.Mr. Albanese could still qualify for the Democratic primary debate with Mr. de Blasio next month. With his current contributions, he would have to collect roughly another $50,000 by Aug. 11 to meet the threshold for the debate.Bo Dietl, who is running for mayor as an independent, raised $245,266 during the two-month reporting period. Notably, he raised only $38,020 after Mr. Massey dropped out — a development that might have been seen as a boost to his bid as well. Mr. Dietl spent more than he raised over the last two months, including more than $150,000 on television advertising.Mr. Dietl, a former police detective who runs a private investigation company, had hoped to challenge the mayor in a Democratic primary but made a mistake filling out his voter registration form and wound up without a party affiliation. He then lost a court case in which he sought to run as a Republican. (Filings show he paid $10,000 to a lawyer, Martin Connor, who assisted in that effort.)Another independent-minded candidate, Roque De La Fuente, a millionaire real estate developer and California transplant, continued to put his own money into a campaign that has raised little from outside donors. Mr. De La Fuente, who sought the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016, but is running for mayor as a Republican, lent his campaign $350,000 and raised a little over $8,400 in contributions.One of the City Council candidates who raised the most money over the two-month reporting period was Mark Gjonaj, a Democratic assemblyman who is running for a seat in the Bronx. He raised $180,040 during the period, the majority of it from outside New York City. Mr. Gjonaj, one of several state lawmakers who are running for the City Council — a job that would result in a considerable increase in pay — is seeking a seat in a district in which no incumbent is running because of term limits.