https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/us/no-environmental-impact-study-no-border-wall-lawsuit-says.html
No Environmental Impact Study? No Border Wall, Lawsuit Says - The New York Times
Suits and Litigation (Civil),Border Barriers,Center for Biological Diversity,Grijalva  Raul M,Trump  Donald J
April 13, 2017
2409
PHOENIX — An environmental group and an Arizona congressman have sued to block the construction of President Trump’s wall along the southern border, threatening to derail one of his marquee projects well before it gets off the ground.The Center for Biological Diversity and Representative Raúl M. Grijalva, the ranking Democrat on the House Committee on Natural Resources, claimed in a federal lawsuit filed Wednesday in Tucson that the Trump administration had failed to study the wall’s environmental impact before gearing up for its construction.Mr. Trump’s plan to strengthen the border includes the hiring of 5,000 Border Patrol agents, increasing by 25 percent the ranks of the largest law enforcement agency in the country.The lawsuit seeks to stop any work until the government agrees to analyze the impact of construction, noise, light and other changes to the landscape on rivers, plants and endangered species — including jaguars, Sonoran pronghorns and ocelots — and also on border residents.The suit appears to be the first legal action against the wall, but it is only one of the many challenges the project faces, including who will pay for it and what form it will take.An estimate by the Department of Homeland Security put the cost at nearly $22 billion. Mr. Trump’s budget sets aside $1.4 billion for the wall’s initial development. Included in the proposals turned in to the federal government last week were a wall of solar panels and another topped by a monorail.“Trump can fantasize about the wall, but at the end of the day, it’s Congress that appropriates the money, and it behooves Congress to want an independent analysis to look at all the consequences before we throw money down a rabbit hole,” said Mr. Grijalva, a Democrat from Tucson.Gillian Christensen, the acting press secretary for the Department of Homeland Security, said in an email that the agency, “as a matter of policy,” did not comment on pending litigation.According to the lawsuit, 2001 was the last time the federal government formally studied the effects more agents, off-road vehicles, barriers, spotlights and other security measures have on wildlife, communities and public lands on the border.Since the Sept. 11 attacks, security measures along the border have increased more than in any other period in history, the lawsuit says, and the government sidestepped dozens of legal requirements as it fortified 550 miles of the United States-Mexico border.Randy Serraglio, Southwest conservation advocate for the Center for Biological Diversity, said border security had affected the surrounding region many times in recent years. A gate in an underground cross-border drainage tunnel, for example, acted as a dam during a powerful rainstorm in 2008, and the Mexican authorities blamed it for a major flood just south of the border, in Nogales. The gate had been installed to prevent smugglers from using the tunnel to ferry people and drugs into the United States.In the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in southern Arizona, a piece of border fence trapped debris during a storm that same year, flooding the Lukeville port of entry and the small city of Sonoyta, Mexico.“There are many examples of massive flooding and erosion, with millions of dollars of damage to communities and public lands,” Mr. Serraglio said. “Anecdotally, it’s very alarming, but what we’re missing is a sound scientific analysis. We believe this is the time to do that.”