https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/arts/television/bachelorette-commitment-issues-and-fraught-hometown-visits.html
Commitment Issues and Fraught Hometown Visits as ‘Bachelorette’ Nears End - The New York Times
Reality Television,Lindsay  Rachel L,ABC Inc,The Bachelorette (TV Program),Dating and Relationships,Contests and Prizes
July 18, 2017
170
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is underway on ABC, and The New York Times is still here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives are following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey while daydreaming of a casual summer Saturday at a Madison, Wis., farmers’ market. Can we steal you for a sec?AMANDA HESS The official victor of “The Bachelorette” is the guy who gets the girl at season’s end, but Happily Ever After is not the only endgame in the series. In many respects, the real winner is the contestant who manages to fail upward, getting tragically dumped on the show and then picked to serve as the series’ next eligible Bachelor. If you’re in it for self-promotion, you get to graduate from the supporting cast to star in your own season. And if you’re actually in it to fall in love, you get 30 potential partners to choose from instead of just one.Pulling this off requires a delicate personality-management strategy; it’s a little like shooting the moon in a game of Hearts. You have to come off as charming and sincere enough to become beloved by fans, but not so perfect that the Bachelorette actually wants to lock you down for herself. A typical out is to drop evidence of commitment issues: That’s how Rachel survived a near-engagement with Nick last season to embark on her own journey, and judging by his ambivalent performance this week, it looks as if Peter’s cribbing from the same playbook. This Disney-prince-handsome, Wisconsin-nice, gaptoothed personal trainer just can’t bring himself to commit to marrying a woman he has gotten to know over a few televised dates over the course of several weeks.All this scheming enriches the meta text of the show for viewers at home, who analyze each episode for clues to which contestant will win, who will be named the next Bachelor and who will wash up on “Bachelor in Paradise.” (The just-axed Dean has already been spotted shirtless in a cabana.) But it leaves our Bachelorette at a serious disadvantage in her dating game. One of the absurdities of this show is that potential romantic partners are actually penalized for having reasonable expectations for the pace at which lifelong commitments materialize. Realists like Peter get punted. The guys who are overeager to propose might be damaged, desperate or lying through their teeth — or else just literate enough in “Bachelor” lore to know that if they want a chance to really get to know this woman, they are obligated to take ABC’s donor engagement ring and slip it on her finger, even if that doesn’t mean what it does in the real world.Which category describes Bryan, our 37-year-old chiropractor from Miami? Rachel is always saying he is “always saying the right things.” Is his love real? Are his cheeks? Bryan is the rare “Bachelorette” front-runner for whom there has been a social media consensus among the show’s most vocal fans, who generally agree that he is a snake and he kisses weird. I gotta give it up for Bryan, though: One of the joys of “The Bachelorette” is engaging in sustained fine-grained assessments of strangers’ personalities, and over time, growing to sincerely hate some of them.Still, it’s hard not to feel a hint of dread for Rachel as this “process” draws to its inevitable conclusion. She comes across as an absurdly charming, bright, sincere, emotionally balanced grown-up, not to mention a black woman operating in one of America’s whitest TV landscapes — probably the show’s biggest catch of all time. It would have been challenging for producers to pick a slate of men who could match her physically, intellectually and emotionally, even if they weren’t invested in seeding the deck with fame-hungry buffoons and cryptoracists. (A significant proportion of the remainder are personal trainers.) And we have just watched her say that there is only one man left ready and willing to tell her that he’s in love with her, so maybe she’ll just go with him. As delightfully absurd as this show is, there’s something a little too real about that.JON CARAMANICA One of the promises of reality television — and one very rarely fulfilled — is that you might get a voyeuristic peek into a life you might otherwise be shut out of. An unguarded moment is golden. Rarely does it matter what was being guarded in the first place; the obliteration of the wall is the thing.But even a show like “The Bachelorette,” premised upon the quest for emotional vulnerability, rarely finds its way to true revelation. There are camera operators and grips, producers and supervising producers and executive producers, runners and assistants and Chris Harrison. Every move is the product of a dance that involves many.Which is why it’s so intriguing when intruders make their way into the show, as they did Monday night, during Rachel’s hometown dates. Here are temporary characters who haven’t been thoroughly vetted. And though these encounters have some structural scripting — on these visits, there is almost always a one-on-one between the show’s star and a parent, typically the mother, of the contestant — they also offer a welcome respite from the chiseled jawlines and petty infighting that are routine features of the show.This season’s hometown dates were extremely memorable, largely owing to the extended, uncomfortable trip to Aspen, Colo., to visit Dean’s family, especially his father, to whom he had not spoken in about two years. Dean’s mother died when he was 15, and he told Rachel that in the immediate aftermath, his father had been emotionally unavailable to the point of abandonment. A few years after his mother’s death, Dean’s father converted to Sikhism, took on a new name, Paramroop, and remarried.Dean has been the most buttoned-up of this season’s contestants, but from the moment he and Rachel approached his father’s house, he was visibly unsteady. And when he and his father were left alone by the others, what unfolded was an intimate, sometimes overwhelming conversation between two people struggling to find a way to hear each other. Dean accused Paramroop of failing as a parent when he was most needed. Paramroop accused Dean of being stuck in the past. The conversation was fractured, messy, wounding — and alarmingly real.It made for entrancing viewing, and a vivid lesson in what can happen when documentary cameras — a kinder term for reality-TV cameras — are granted the opportunity to witness a genuinely unprocessed, borderline calamitous moment with a minimum of intrusion.The rest of the episode had some smaller doses of unanticipated reality — the rich Baltimore accents of Eric’s family and friends, the nettlesome intensity of Bryan’s mother, the cumbersome couch with built-in cup holders at Peter’s family’s home — making this episode this season’s best, for reasons that had little to do with Rachel directly.After Paramroop stormed out of the conversation with Dean, Rachel tracked him down for some of that expected one-on-one time. Initially, he appeared to be open to the overture. But just as the two were set to sit down for their sharing time, Paramroop turned his head and caught the camera’s hungry lens, then walked away, restoring the wall.