http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/12/theater/reviews/the-with-the-hat-by-stephen-adly-guirgis-review.html
‘The _______ With the Hat’ by Stephen Adly Guirgis - Review - The New York Times
Theater,___________ With the Hat  The (Play),Guirgis  Stephen Adly,Rock  Chris,Cannavale  Bobby,Shapiro  Anna D,Sciorra  Annabella,Mother... With the Hat  The (Play)
April 11, 2011
5351
The play that dare not speak its name turns out to have a lot to say. Stephen Adly Guirgis’s vibrant and surprisingly serious new comedy opened on Monday night at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater under a title that cannot be printed in most daily newspapers or mentioned on network television.This is vexing for those of us who would like to extol the virtues of “The ___________ With the Hat,” at least in public. (The title also seems to have created problems for the people trying to publicize the play.) This is by far the most accomplished and affecting work from the gifted Mr. Guirgis, a prolific and erratic chronicler of marginal lives (“Jesus Hopped the ‘A’ Train,” “Our Lady of 121st Street”). But I’ll admit that upon first hearing the name of his play, I thought irritably, “How the ___ am I going to write about it?” As you see, I have already devoted much space-consuming ink to my quandary.But you know, the title really is the right one for this fast and furious study of lives in collision, which takes place in New York City at the intersection of love and hate. The characters portrayed by a marvelous, intensely focused five-member ensemble — including the stand-up comic Chris Rock, in a solid Broadway debut, and a blazingly good Bobby Cannavale — are always striving for a mot juste to explain their less than clear-cut feelings.And sure enough, the unmentionable noun in this play’s title carries exactly the weight of bewilderment, anger and awe with which all the characters regard one another. In “Hat” people are infuriating mysteries, even to themselves. But that doesn’t stop them from trying to come up with precise words that might define their ambivalent relationships and their own ever-elusive identities.You could even say that “Hat,” directed with fire and tenderness by Anna D. Shapiro (“August: Osage County”), is about both the inadequacy and necessity of language, which here includes assaultive bombardments of insults, the zippy slogans of television commercials and the orotund pronouncements of self-help manuals. (The dialogue is often choice, but there are very few lines I can quote in their entirety.) But that’s not a very sexy way to describe this show, is it?So let me say instead that “Hat” is a sort of contemporary, scabrous variation on “The Honeymooners,” that classic sitcom about blue-collar friends and spouses getting on one another’s nerves, starring Jackie Gleason. (Mr. Rock’s character, like Mr. Gleason’s, happens to be named Ralph, and Mr. Cannavale’s is called Jackie.) Of course irritation can reach extra-incendiary levels when it’s fueled by substances that Ralph Kramden had probably never heard of, like crack cocaine.Mood-altering substances have irrevocably shaped the lives of the characters in “Hat,” who are all users and abusers, or former users or abusers, or, quite possibly, both. (Nothing in “Hat” is entirely either/or.) Jackie is a onetime dealer, newly released from prison and trying to stay sober. This isn’t easy, given that Veronica (Elizabeth Rodriguez), his girlfriend, still snorts the white stuff and puffs on crack pipes with the unthinking casualness of someone chewing gum.So Jackie relies heavily on the counsel of Ralph D., his sponsor in a 12-step program and a man who talks the talk of self-empowerment with buttery smoothness. It is Ralph and his wife, Victoria (Annabella Sciorra), to whom Jackie turns after he spots a hat that does not belong to him in the residential hotel room that he shares with Veronica.That hat sure doesn’t smell like Jackie (he sniffs it with a beagle’s avidity), nor do the sheets on the bed, which have a distinctly masculine pong. Veronica swears she hasn’t been with anybody else, but then people are always lying in “Hat.” Except that they’re not — I mean, not in their heart of hearts, since truth and lies are a matter of perception, right?As for big emotions like love or even friendship, forget about trying to pin them down. Just ask Julio (Yul Vázquez, hilarious), who may or may not be gay, and who on different occasions tells Jackie, his cousin, that a) he never liked him, and b) he always loved him. Both declarations are equally convincing and equally well supported by evidentiary detail.These characters are all alike in that they are all contradictory. But they are contradictory in their own, specifically defined ways. The three living spaces that Jackie moves among — belonging to Veronica, to Julio and to Ralph and Victoria — are contrasting gems of self-portraiture. (Todd Rosenthal is the set designer.)This is clear, above all, in how they talk, in the references and rhythms of their speech. As in the plays of David Mamet and Harold Pinter (and for that matter, William Shakespeare), whoever has the most persuasive line of patter has the power, even when someone else is holding a revolver or flexing a mighty pair of biceps.For much of the play the power belongs to Ralph, who wields phrases like “the cycle of self-sabotage” in the style of a pistol-twirling gunslinger. As a professional stand-up seducer (which even insult comics have to be), Mr. Rock fits the part effortlessly. (You can easily imagine Ralph as a spellbinder when he testifies at support group meetings.) And Ralph’s straightforward confidence makes his logic-twisting all the more disarming.Victoria has finally awakened from Ralph’s linguistic spell, and Ms. Sciorra (so memorably deranged on “The Sopranos”) registers this disenchantment with a careful balance of dignity and self-abasement. A similarly delicate admixture infuses Mr. Vázquez’s portrayal of the health-food-pushing, revenge-ready Julio, who uses “Van Damme ” as a verb. It’s a wonderfully cool comic performance that avoids the temptations of sitcom pandering. (Those temptations, for the record, are offered by the script, and Ms. Shapiro and her cast deserve much credit for avoiding them.)But the broken, jagged heart of this production belongs to Ms. Rodriguez and Mr. Cannavale, who turn their characters’ relationship into a bruising, tragicomic apache dance of love, betrayal and indecision. (You may find yourself thinking of the sexual wrestling matches of Sam Shepard’s “Fool for Love” and the early plays of John Patrick Shanley.)Ms. Rodriguez’s Veronica is a sleekly feral amalgam of domesticity and destructiveness. And Mr. Cannavale, in his best work to date, exudes the magnified emotional presence you associate with verismo opera. That Jackie’s emotions, like those of everyone in “Hat,” are a muddle doesn’t mean that they don’t burn clear, or bright enough to scorch.THE _____ WITH THE HAT By Stephen Adly Guirgis; directed by Anna D. Shapiro; sets by Todd Rosenthal; costumes by Mimi O’Donnell; lighting by Donald Holder; sound by Acme Sound Partners; music by  Terence Blanchard; production stage manager, Charles Means; production  manager, Aurora Productions; general manager, STP/Marshall B. Purdy.  Presented by Scott Rudin, Stuart Thompson, Public Theater Productions, LAByrinth Theater Company, Fabula Media Partners, Jean Doumanian, Ruth Hendel, Carl Moellenberg, Jon B. Platt and Tulchin Bartner/Jamie De Roy. At the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan; (212) 239-6200, telecharge.com. Through June 25. Running time: 1 hour 40 minutes.WITH: Bobby Cannavale (Jackie), Chris Rock (Ralph D.), Elizabeth Rodriguez (Veronica), Annabella Sciorra (Victoria) and Yul Vázquez (Cousin Julio).