https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/29/nyregion/port-authority-picks-group-to-remake-la-guardia-airport.html
Port Authority Picks Group to Remake La Guardia Airport - The New York Times
Airports,LaGuardia Airport (Queens  NY),Queens (NYC),Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
May 28, 2015
7679
The first step toward turning La Guardia Airport into a travel hub fit for the 21st century was belatedly set in motion on Thursday afternoon. But the entire makeover probably will not be completed until the century enters its third decade.That was the news from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, more than 20 months after it solicited bids for the construction and operation of a new Central Terminal Building at La Guardia. At their monthly board meeting, the commissioners of the Port Authority approved the selection of a consortium led by the operator of Vancouver’s airport.Now, authority officials will begin negotiating a 35-year lease on the terminal, which is estimated to cost $3.6 billion. Those negotiations will take three to six months, followed by more than five and a half years of construction, Port Authority officials said.“Today we are taking a major step toward the renovation of La Guardia Airport and conforming it to 21st-century needs,” said John J. Degnan, the chairman of the authority.Scott Rechler, the vice chairman, said the much-maligned, 50-year-old terminal was a “front door to our region” but has been “sort of a stepchild” among the airport facilities the authority operates.The choice of a group to build and operate the terminal was complicated by the announcement last fall by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, that he would conduct a competition to find the best comprehensive designs for the city’s two main airports, La Guardia and Kennedy International. A panel of advisers appointed by the governor has been drawing up a master plan for La Guardia that the new, larger central terminal would have to fit into.The final report from that panel is not expected until the summer.In the meantime, Mr. Cuomo’s advisory panel revealed a few of its big ideas, which may be incorporated into the plan proposed by the winning bidder, known as La Guardia Gateway Partners.The panel has called for the revamped La Guardia to have a “central entry portal,” rather than a collection of separate terminals. Its other suggestions include a “people mover” to transport travelers between terminals, a connection to a rail link and a hotel on the site.The authority’s commissioners agreed on Thursday to spend as much as $400 million on the entry portal, if Gateway Partners can find a way to the work it into their plans. Among authority officials, the enthusiasm for the portal concept seemed to vary based on jurisdiction.Patrick J. Foye, the executive director and a Cuomo appointee, said the portal would contain shops and restaurants that would produce revenue to offset some of the cost of construction. Mr. Degnan, who was appointed by Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, called it a “neat idea” that “needs to be thoroughly vetted.”A spokesman for Gateway Partners declined to say what the consortium thought of the advisory panel’s ideas. The group is led by Vantage Airport Group, which operates the Vancouver airport, and Skanska, a large construction company. Its other members include an investment firm called Meridiam, Walsh Construction, HOK and Parsons Brinckerhoff.Angel Martinez, the Port Authority’s assistant director for La Guardia redevelopment, said Gateway Partners would demolish and rebuild the main structure of the terminal, to be known as Terminal B, in 37 months. He said the entire overhaul would take 68 months. Still, Mr. Foye said, that was faster, by five or six months, than the Port Authority itself could do the job.Mr. Foye said that the developer would put up $200 million of its own money and borrow $2 billion for the project. The Port Authority, he said, would provide $1.5 billion, collected from airline passengers’ ticket fees.