https://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/28/us/28mines.html
Surviving Miner Says Air Masks Failed - The New York Times
Mines and Mining,Explosions,West Virginia,Coal,Rescues
April 28, 2006
7112
In the final desperate hours of the Sago Mine disaster that left 12 men dead in West Virginia, at least four of the air masks meant to protect the miners from dangerous smoke and fumes did not work, the sole survivor wrote in a letter to victims' families this week."The first thing we did was activate our rescuers, as we had been trained," wrote the miner, Randal McCloy Jr. "At least four of the rescuers did not function. There were not enough rescuers to go around."The two-page typed letter offers the first detailed account of what happened to the 13 men trapped 260 feet underground, struggling for air as rescue crews tried to reach them."As my trapped co-workers lost consciousness one by one, the room grew still and I continued to sit and wait, unable to do much else," Mr. McCloy wrote.Mr. McCloy was comatose when he was rescued  and spent months in  a  hospital with extensive brain damage,  originally described as remembering nothing about the disaster.His letter, however, is a cogent and moving account of what happened, and it was not immediately clear how he came to compose it or why he chose to send it.Stephen P. Goodwin, the lawyer for the McCloy family, verified that the letter, obtained by The Associated Press, came from Mr. McCloy and that it had been dictated, but would not say who wrote it down for him. "All I will say is that the letter accurately reflects all of his thoughts and sentiments," Mr. Goodwin said.Phil Smith, a spokesman for the United Mine Workers Union of America, said: "The letter raises some key concerns yet again, as we have done in the past, about these oxygen generation packs." Mr. Smith said it was "absolutely imperative" that federal mine regulators  "begin an immediate and nationwide inspection of these units."In a statement, the mine owner, International Coal Group Inc., refused to comment on the validity of Mr. McCloy's recollection. But the company said the miners' air packs, also known as self-contained self-rescue devices, or S.C.S.R.'s, had been tested by federal investigators after the Jan. 2 explosion that trapped the miners."I.C.G. was informed that the S.C.S.R.'s found at the barricade were deployed and showed evidence of use," the statement said. "The federal investigators did not note any defective S.C.S.R.'s and all appeared to be in working order."The statement did not indicate whether workers at the mine, which resumed work on March 15, were still depending on the same equipment.Dennis B. O'Dell, administrator of occupational health and safety for the mine workers union, said that a typical oxygen pack had a shelf life of about 10 years. Under federal regulations, miners are supposed to visually inspect oxygen packs to see whether the color-coded indicator shows that they are functioning properly.In the letter, Mr. McCloy said the men were forced to share the few functioning air packs. He said the miners tried to escape but had to retreat because of smoke and fumes."We found a sledgehammer, and for a long time, we took turns pounding away," Mr. McCloy wrote, describing their frantic efforts to get the attention of rescuers above.Eventually realizing they were unlikely to escape alive, the men recited a "sinner's prayer," and began quietly penning farewell notes to their families, the letter said.While the cause of the explosion remains uncertain, the company has speculated that lightning bolt  ignited a natural buildup of methane in the mine. Federal officials are conducting an investigation   and are expected to release their findings next month.There have been 26 mining deaths nationwide in only the first four months of the year. Last year at this time, there were 13 nationwide.It was unclear how Mr. McCloy, who was initially unable to speak and now does so with difficulty, could have put together such a detailed chronology of events. Mr. McCloy, 27, who has been nicknamed the "miracle miner," survived exposure to toxic fumes for more than 40 hours.The statement from the coal company said that all of the oxygen packs had been inspected daily by miners and every 90 days by a mining official.Dirk Fillpot, a spokesman with the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration, said  his agency examined all the air packs recovered from the mine. Initial tests concluded that the packs were functioning properly, Mr. Fillpot said. He said his agency was "looking at whether the miners received adequate training in the use of their S.C.S.R.'s."In 2005, the Sago Mine had only one violation concerning its oxygen equipment, according to federal records. The violation was for failing keep proper records of inspections of the mine's oxygen packs.Representative George Miller of California, the senior Democrat on the House Committee on Education and the Workforce, expressed outrage at the revelations in the letter."The Bush administration killed a proposal in 2001 that could have required the more frequent replacement of these self-contained self-rescue units," Mr. Miller said, "required more inspections of these units, and provided more adequate training on how to use them."He also expressed frustration that a mine safety bill sponsored by Representative  Nick J. Rahall II, Democrat of West Virginia, and supported by the West Virginia delegation had yet to receive a vote from the full committee. It  would mandate  more oxygen packs in mines and the construction of safe chambers where miners could go if the exits were blocked in an emergency."Miners are dying at an alarming rate," Mr. Rahall said. "If this letter and the ongoing tragedies are not a motivation enough for Congress to act, then, by golly, I don't know what will be."