http://www.nytimes.com/1996/10/24/garden/a-warrior-architect-wrestles-his-demons.html
A Warrior Architect Wrestles His Demons - The New York Times
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN,CARDINAL  DOUGLAS,INDIANS  AMERICAN,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,ARCHITECTURE
Oct. 24, 1996
1622
ONCE a week around nightfall, just as sensory overload and burnout set in, Douglas Cardinal leaves his office near the Mall carrying only a bundle of sweet grass and sage. He drives across the Potomac River, past the chaste white-columned mansions of senators, to an inconspicuous, turtle-shape structure he has built in a dense wood by a stream.There, Mr. Cardinal, a Canadian architect of Blackfoot ancestry and winner of the capital's most important current architectural commission -- the National Museum of the American Indian on the Mall -- finds spiritual renewal in a traditional purification ceremony in which water is ladled over fiery rocks, enveloping the interior in stinging steam. In this sweat lodge, a microcosm of the native earth made of 32 saplings bent into a frame and draped with blankets, Mr. Cardinal wrestles with his demons of fear and weakness, and comes away fortified with self-knowledge and resolve.''If you can get your act together in here, you can use those lessons out in the world,'' he will say of ''running the sweats,'' a ritual learned from tribal elders in his native Alberta.''When your body is threatened, you start dealing with yourself. You start to see yourself as more spirit than flesh.''This slightly surrealistic scene, in which on one recent evening Mr. Cardinal was cutting cedar with a power saw and heating rocks with a blowtorch just 12 miles from the Washington Monument, offers insights into his struggle to come to grips with his native identity and shape an architecture reflective of it.Like the sweat lodge, the undulating $110 million, 250,000-square-foot museum he is designing for the Smithsonian Institution under the shadow of the Capitol also faces east toward the morning sun, which represents, he says, enlightenment and ''new days and opportunities.'' Significantly, given the political intrigues and bureaucratic hurdles of Washington, east in Plains culture is also symbolic of the eagle -- the creature who sees through things.And like his sweat lodge, tucked in a fragrant thicket on his land, frequented by geese and deer, the museum is viewed by many Native Americans as much more than a building. Standing at the nation's metaphorical heart, it could be, in Mr. Cardinal's words, ''a place of forgiveness, of survival and rebirth, of looking at the world anew.''Scheduled to open in 2002, the museum is a collaboration with GBQC Architects in Philadelphia, as well as a legion of native advisers and elders. The architectural commission is widely considered one of the plums of the decade, the last buildable site on the National Mall.Although still awaiting final approval from a retinue of Government agencies, Mr. Cardinal's design attempts to abstract and distill the essence of hundreds of Native American cultures. The museum's form, which resembles cliffs carved away, takes into account the prevailing winds; its windows are aligned so that at the winter and summer solstices, the sun's rays will come in like a beam to illuminate certain objects and spaces deep within the building.The landscaping will be an exhibition in itself, recalling the creek and wetlands that existed before the Europeans came. At the center of the building is a circular gathering spot, or potomac, for storytellers and dancers. Overhead will be a dome, whose form recalls ancient Indian burial mounds and kivas, the large ceremonial chambers of the Hopis and Pueblos, as much as it does postcard Washington.Although Mr. Cardinal has never designed a building in this country (a casino hotel for the Oneida Nation near Syracuse is under construction), he is a well-known, if controversial and somewhat prickly, figure in Canada, in part because of his willingness to plunge into the fray of native political causes, especially Indian education. His most visible project, the Museum of Canadian Civilization in Hull, Quebec, is a winding, languorous form loosely inspired by thawing glaciers. It has evoked strong love-hate emotions; Time magazine called it ''an earnest folly on a grand scale.''The philosophy of the Washington museum, which Mr. Cardinal calls ''a celebration of living culture, rather than a mausoleum,'' is itself a radical departure from the traditional approach in which Native American artifacts have been largely interpreted and paid for by white North Americans (you might call them philanthropologists).''We believe native peoples are quite capable of articulating the meaning of our material culture to our audiences,'' said W. Richard West Jr., the museum's director, who is Southern Cheyenne. ''Doug is a brilliant architect. He is also thoroughly and consistently informed by his own native experience, and his architecture reflects and bespeaks that experience.'' Denise Scott Brown, who developed the museum's master plan, added, ''He's not exactly a safe choice, but he's an exciting one.''These days, Douglas Joseph Henry Cardinal spends a lot of time meeting with elders of the Beltway variety. In addition, the architect, now 62 and a tribal elder himself, has been holding ''vision sessions'' with tribal leaders to get their input. Ever the warrior, as he sometimes calls himself, he has moved his main office from Ottawa to Washington, where he now lives with his fourth wife, Idoia Arana-Beobide, a 32-year-old Basque medievalist and rock climber, whom he affectionately describes as ''an aboriginal European who speaks a mesolithic tongue.''On the walls of their half-decorated apartment on Pennsylvania Avenue hang landmarks from his career, including a political cartoon from The Ottawa Citizen in 1984 that recalls the brouhaha over the Canadian Museum of Civilization. The architect made headlines when he spikily suggested that, rather than compromise the design, they ''bulldoze it back into a park.'' On another wall there is a crisscrossed pair of snowshoes given as a token of gratitude by the Cree village of Oujebougoumou in northern Quebec (population, 450), which asked Mr. Cardinal to help design a new village to replace its tar-paper shacks.From his 11th-floor terrace, Mr. Cardinal has a panoramic view of some of the most potent architectural symbols of the dominant European culture.''In Washington,'' he said in his soft-spoken, almost inaudible style, ''it's O.K. to be an Indian. In Canada, it isn't. That's just about where it's at.'' A thousand ironies were in his smile.He pointed to the columns and capitals of the National Archives. ''Look out the window there,'' he said. ''They are natural forms elevated to art. The only problem is, they're from Greece and Rome.''Mr. Cardinal's life's work has been to create deeply personal buildings that express his own place and culture. Born in Red Deer in central Alberta, about an hour's drive north of Calgary, he is ''metis,'' a French term for mixed ancestry (his mother was French, German and Mohawk; his father Blackfoot, French and Ojibwa). As in many metis families, there was pressure to assimilate. ''Like many native people,'' Mr. Cardinal said, ''my father felt you had to turn your back on native traditions to join the 20th century.''As a boy, Mr. Cardinal would often accompany his father, a game warden and forest ranger, into the spruce forests, where they would trap muskrat, badger and mink. Douglas would often bring a sketch pad along to study how rocks are formed or how a spider creates a web. These observations on the natural world would later influence his architecture. At St. Mary's Church in Red Deer (1968), his first and what many still consider his finest work, the suspended roof, tipped to one side slightly like a bowl, was inspired by the spider's gossamer craft.His first experiences with building were the motel units erected by his father as a side business to support the children, eight in all. At 18, he went to the University of British Columbia to study architecture. There he ran up against the elitist, old boys establishment, which did not go for his curvaceous, nonlinear style. He was curtly told, he said, that he ''didn't have the family background to be a royal architect.''Devastated, Mr. Cardinal left school and ''headed as far south as I could get,'' to Mexico, where he discovered Art Nouveau and Spanish baroque. (To this day, he feels drawn to the ''more emotional, sensual style'' of Antonio Gaudi, Frank Lloyd Wright and the late work of Le Corbusier.) He eventually wound up in Austin, Tex., taking a job as a draftsman with a classical, Beaux-Arts-oriented architectural office. There, he recalls, ''all the work was done with ink on linen, with quill pens.''In 1958 Mr. Cardinal enrolled at the architecture school at the University of Texas, where he became active in student politics and the civil rights movement. ''It taught me about commitment and making a stand,'' he said. He moved back to Alberta, receiving his first big break when he was hired to design a radical church in Red Deer that would spatially reinterpret the key sacraments, removing the barriers between priest and parish. The Canadian magazine Observer described it like this: ''From the outside it resembles a decaying castle buttressed by brick silos; its sinuous walls move up and down like hills.''When word got around that an Indian was the architect, native people in Alberta asked for his help. Mr. Cardinal became a vocal advocate for Indian education and for involving native people in their own constructions. ''The average native was spending 3.4 years in school,'' he said. ''I realized the situation at home was far worse than the American South.''But his growing political involvement took a toll. His marriage broke up, and the establishment became wary of him. ''One day I was a successful architect and the next day I was an Indian architect.''Close to a physical and emotional breakdown and seriously ill, Mr. Cardinal turned, at first dubiously, to the spiritual traditions of his ancestors.He credits these ceremonies, which lasted from sundown to sunup, with saving his life. Encircled by tribal elders in a black room, to the sound of drums, he at first fought the process. ''The more I fought, the more vertigo I had. So I let go. I started floating with the songs, feeling the trees, the rocks, the wind. It felt like the jolt you get in between being asleep and awake. I heard eagles' wings fly. I looked down and saw talons spinning in space. It was quite frightening. I was falling out of the sky and this thought came to me -- just spread your wings.''The ceremony confirmed his need to ''make a very strong declaration'' in the spirit of his buildings. The strength of his declaration has sometimes been construed as arrogance. When the parish of St. Mary's announced a plan to build what he felt was an unsympathetic addition to the church, he wrote that the building would become a monument to a ''lack of respect, indeed contempt, for the aboriginal soul.''One parishioner countered by saying, ''We built a church to worship God, not Douglas Cardinal.''His high-profile commissions and ability to straddle two worlds -- the ones of pinstripes and buckskin (at the opening of the Civilization Museum he wore both) -- have prompted some resentment and rancor within the Canadian architectural establishment. ''He appeals to the guilt of the nation,'' said Beth Kapusta, an editor at Canadian Architect magazine in Toronto. ''Hiring him is a method of absolution.''Mr. Cardinal himself vacillates between an abiding identification with his people and wanting simply to be known as an architect. He remains committed to working with native communities; among current projects is a campus for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College in Regina, where tribal elders counsel students.The symbols of the sweat lodge continue to sustain him. There is the sweet grass, which yields and bends in the wind. And in the center a rock, ''a solid commitment,'' immovable, like a mountain.