http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/20/nyregion/20patchogue.html
Guilty Verdict in Long Island Hate Killing - The New York Times
Lucero  Marcelo,Conroy  Jeffrey,Patchogue (NY),Decisions and Verdicts,Immigration and Emigration,Hate Crimes,Murders and Attempted Murders,Hispanic-Americans,Suffolk County (NY)
April 19, 2010
8450
RIVERHEAD, N.Y. — The white teenager accused of killing an Ecuadorean immigrant in a racially motivated attack was convicted on Monday of manslaughter as a hate crime, in a case that put a spotlight on anti-Hispanic violence on Long Island.The verdict in State Supreme Court came 17 months after the fatal stabbing in 2008 in Patchogue. The teenager, Jeffrey Conroy, was also found guilty of gang assault in the attack on the immigrant, Marcelo Lucero, as well as attempted assault on three other Hispanic men. He was acquitted of the most serious of the 20 charges against him, second-degree murder as a hate crime.On the first-degree manslaughter charge alone, Mr. Conroy, 19, faces a minimum of eight years and a maximum of 25 years in prison when he is sentenced by Justice Robert W. Doyle on May 26. Had Mr. Conroy been convicted of the murder charge, the maximum possible punishment was life in prison.As the verdict was read at 11:22 a.m., the courtroom was virtually silent. Mr. Conroy stood alongside his lawyer, facing the jury forewoman, who stood just a few feet away. When Mr. Conroy sat down after the verdict, he bowed his head for a few moments — the first time since the trial began nearly seven weeks ago that he had not held his head high.Mr. Lucero’s death exposed racial tensions on eastern Long Island and caused a number of Hispanic residents to come forward saying they were the victims of harassment and assaults. Advocates for immigrants criticized the Suffolk County Police Department for failing to fully investigate complaints of assaults on Latinos, and also criticized some county leaders and politicians for fueling the hostility with anti-immigrant statements. Federal authorities are investigating the department’s handling of reports of racially motivated attacks on Hispanics.Supporters of the Lucero family had told reporters privately in recent days that anything less than a murder conviction would be insulting, and would send the wrong message to Hispanics.Outside the courtroom on Monday, some Latinos expressed disappointment, including a representative of Ecuador’s National Department of the Migrants, and the Rev. Allan B. Ramirez, the Ecuadorean pastor of Brookville Reformed Church and an advocate for immigrants, who is assisting the Lucero family.“The message of manslaughter is that our lives are not worth very much,” Mr. Ramirez said.Others, including Mr. Lucero’s brother, Joselo Lucero, said they were satisfied that justice had been done. “The hunting season is over, at least for now,” Joselo Lucero told reporters, a reference to the prosecution’s allegation that Mr. Conroy and his friends often hunted for Hispanic men to assault, an activity that the authorities said they referred to as “Mexican hopping.”Prosecutors said Mr. Lucero, 37, who worked at a dry cleaning shop, was surrounded and attacked by Mr. Conroy and six others in a parking lot of the Patchogue train station shortly before midnight on Nov. 8, 2008. Mr. Lucero and a friend were walking to another friend’s house as the group approached.The verdict came 11 days after Mr. Conroy took the stand to proclaim his innocence and blame another teenager for the stabbing, the most dramatic and puzzling moment in the trial. Mr. Conroy said that the other teenager, Christopher Overton, 17, told him that he had stabbed Mr. Lucero and had asked Mr. Conroy to take the knife.Mr. Conroy testified that his five-page written confession to the police, in which he admitted stabbing Mr. Lucero, was a lie. He said in court that he lied to protect Mr. Overton, whom he had met for the first time earlier that evening, and because he did not realize at the time he was being questioned by the police that Mr. Lucero had died.The jury’s verdict meant that they had agreed with one of the arguments made by Mr. Conroy’s lawyer, William Keahon, that his client did not intend to kill Mr. Lucero. To convict Mr. Conroy of second-degree murder, the jury needed to find that he intended to kill Mr. Lucero, and to convict of first-degree manslaughter, they needed to find that Mr. Conroy caused Mr. Lucero’s death while intending to cause serious physical injury, not death.Mr. Lucero was stabbed once in the chest.  The knife did not penetrate the chest cavity or strike any major organs, but cut an artery and a large vein.Three of the 12 jurors said in interviews outside the courthouse that the debate among them throughout four days of deliberations focused on Mr. Conroy’s intent, not on his claim of innocence. “We didn’t buy it at all,” said one juror, Michael Engel, 36, a Long Island Rail Road train conductor.Mr. Engel and another juror, Eric Kramer, 42, an environmental engineer, said the phrase that sent the seven teenagers to Patchogue that night was important. “It was, ‘Let’s go beat up Mexican guys,’ ” Mr. Kramer said. “They never said, ‘Let’s go kill some guys, let’s go murder some guys.’ ”The Suffolk County assistant district attorney prosecuting the case, Megan O’Donnell, said that Mr. Conroy’s intent to kill was evident, because the entire blade went into Mr. Lucero’s chest.Ms. O’Donnell had told the jury that although Mr. Conroy did not appear intent on killing anyone when he climbed into the car with the six friends that night, in the moments before he stabbed Mr. Lucero, he did intend to kill him, she said, because Mr. Lucero had the audacity to fight back.“That’s highly possible,” said another juror, Amy Lester, 44, an executive in a technology company. “But if you can’t prove it and we can’t see it, how could you know that?”The jury was made up of seven men and five women. One was black, one was Hispanic and the rest were white.Mr. Conroy was the first defendant in the case to go on trial. Four of the teenagers pleaded guilty to second-degree attempted assault as a hate crime and other charges, and are cooperating with the authorities. The two others, including Mr. Overton, have pleaded not guilty and are awaiting trial. Mr. Overton’s lawyer has denied that his client stabbed Mr. Lucero.Mr. Conroy had been on the high school wrestling, football and lacrosse teams. Several of his relatives and friends had long believed that he was innocent and that he had been falsely branded a white supremacist. Mr. Conroy had his best friend give him a tattoo of a swastika a few months before the stabbing — “as a joke,” he had testified. His father, Robert Conroy, said in a previous interview,  “He’s not a monster.”Among the dozens of people who donated to Mr. Conroy’s father for his legal bills were several family friends who are Hispanic.Mr. Lucero’s brother, mother and sister visited the scene of the crime in Patchogue after leaving the courthouse. They stood near the spot where Mr. Lucero was found by the police that night. They made the sign of the cross, and prayed softly. Then Joselo Lucero spoke of a scholarship that had been established in his brother’s name at the high school the seven teenagers had attended. He said any student was eligible. Their ethnicity, he said, did not matter.