https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/24/arts/design/pop-artist-tom-wesselmanns-estate-will-be-represented-by-2-dealers.html
Pop Artist Tom Wesselmann’s Estate Will Be Represented by 2 Dealers - The New York Times
Art,Almine Rech Gallery (Manhattan  NY),Gagosian Gallery,Storm King Art Center,Levy  Dominique,Wesselmann  Tom,Lee Seung-taek (1932- ),Smith  David (1906-65)
Nov. 24, 2016
9568
Ever since the Sidney Janis Gallery closed in 2000, the work of the pop artist Tom Wesselmann, who died in 2004, has been without representation. “He wanted the latitude to continue working with whomever he wanted,” said Lane Wesselmann, one of the artist’s three children and a director of the estate. “He didn’t want to be hemmed in.”So in the interim, the family has mounted shows at various galleries, most recently at David Zwirner in London (Wesselmann’s earliest collages), at Mitchell-Innes & Nash in New York (a retrospective) and at Almine Rech in Paris, where the Wesselmann historical exhibition “A Different Kind of Woman” is running through Dec. 21.“Over the years, we have been approached a number of times,” Mr. Wesselmann said, speaking of representation. “The fit has never seemed quite right.”Wesselmann, an artist known for his suggestive female images, belonged to a distinctive fraternity that included Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and Claes Oldenburg, and drew creative energy from untraditional areas like billboards, advertising and movies.Recently, the family came to feel that it needed a dedicated gallery, particularly at auction, where prices for Wesselmann’s work dropped after the economic downturn in 2008. “You want to have engaged dealers,” Mr. Wesselmann said. “Not creating an artificial market, but they can motivate their client base and bid themselves. We had no one protecting the market for a number of years.”Now the estate has decided to be represented by two dealers, Ms. Rech and Larry Gagosian, who will also jointly publish the catalogue raisonné of Wesselmann’s “Great American Nudes,” to be completed in 2018.“This is an artist who has a lot of room to grow in terms of curatorial development and also market development,” Mr. Gagosian said.“It’s got an edge to it; to my eye, it seems very fresh — it hasn’t been overexposed,” he added of the work. “The way he deals with sexuality, the way he deals with feminism — there’s a controversy to it that’s very timely, very provocative. It hasn’t been overly homogenized. It sets off sparks.”While Wesselmann had a touring museum retrospective two years ago, that exhibition did not come to New York. “We’re hoping that by rebuilding the career, that sets the groundwork for a retrospective,” Mr. Wesselmann said. “It’s a very different world today, and I think you do need these big global galleries to compete to remain visible.”When the artist David Smith died in 1965, eight of his white welded-steel sculptures stood in the fields surrounding his home and studio in the Adirondack Mountains.Starting on May 13, the Storm King Art Center in Orange County, New York, will present them in an exhibition coinciding with the 50th anniversary of the center’s 1967 acquisition of 13 Smith sculptures.“He was very interested in having nature and the background of the landscape being one with the sculpture,” said John P. Stern, Storm King’s president. “These white works show that.”The group will include the three sculptures that make up Mr. Smith’s 1962 “Primo Piano” series as well as a selection of Mr. Smith’s earliest constructions, made of white coral gathered by the artist in the Virgin Islands in the early 1930s.At the same time, Storm King will feature work by the American artist Heather Hart, part of its Outlooks series, through which an emerging or midcareer contemporary artist creates a site-specific work.Ms. Hart, who does sculpture, drawing and printmaking, deals with issues of perception, history and spirituality.Her pyramid-shaped rooftop for Storm King will feature the testimonies of living African-American artists. The installation will be the locus of performances, discussions and events, including “The Black Lunch Table,” a collaboration with Jina Valentine, an artist and art professor, which was first staged in 2005 at the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture.“It’s very intentionally participatory,” said David Collens, Storm King’s director and chief curator.Some of Mr. Smith’s sculptures are on view at the Royal Academy in London, in an Abstract Expressionism exhibition that will travel to the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao in Spain.A few years ago, Dominique Lévy read Hans Ulrich Obrist’s interview with the Korean artist Lee Seung-taek. Later, she saw a piece at the Tate Modern from Mr. Lee’s “Godret Stone” series, in which he attaches rocks to wooden bars with rope. All of which influenced Ms. Lévy’s recent decision to represent Mr. Lee in the United States. (Gallery Hyundai will continue to represent him in Asia.)“Not only is he conceptual; he’s also incredibly politically engaged — making paintings with rope, his passion for elements,” Ms. Lévy said. “We’re going to start with the idea of the wind.”In March at her New York gallery, Ms. Lévy will mount a solo exhibition in which the artist explores the concept of dematerialization through natural phenomena like wind, fire, water and smoke.Born in Kowon, North Korea, Mr. Lee, 84, has lived since the Korean War in Seoul, where he works in sculpture, installation, performance and land art.His materials range from broken tree branches and wire to Korean hanji paper and human hair.“This is a man who for years and years worked for the state, doing figurative large sculpture to survive,” said Ms. Lévy, who also represents the Korean painter Chung Sang-Hwa. “We felt he really deserved a new recognition.”