https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/07/world/europe/coca-cola-withdraws-from-social-media-war-over-crimea.html
Coca-Cola Retreats From Social Media War Over Crimea - The New York Times
Crimea (Ukraine),Russia,Coca-Cola Company,Social Media,Maps
Jan. 6, 2016
8985
Coca-Cola withdrew a cartoon map of Russia from the web on Wednesday, after managing to anger both Russians and Ukrainians by first excluding and then including Crimea in Russia’s territory.The map, part of an Orthodox Christmas card uploaded last week to the company’s official page on VKontakte, Russia’s most popular social network, initially left out Crimea, the Black Sea peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014, along with Kaliningrad, an enclave on the Baltic Sea, and the Kurile Islands, which are claimed by both Russia and Japan.After a wave of criticism from Russian nationalists, the map was changed on Tuesday, adding all three regions. As the Ukrainian newspaper Ukrainskaya Pravda reported, the new map was accompanied by a note in the company’s name that read: “Dear community members, we sincerely apologize for this situation! The map has been corrected! We hope you will understand.”Among those who emphatically did not understand, Ukraine’s Hromadske TV reported, were Ukrainian Internet activists, members of Parliament and diplomats.Mustafa Nayyem, who helped start the Euromaidan protest movement in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, in 2013 and now is a member of President Petro O. Poroshenko’s party in Parliament, called for a boycott of Coca-Cola, along with the company’s other soft drinks. Within hours, outraged messages tagged #BanCocaCola flooded Ukrainian social networks.Among the messages was one from a Ukrainian blogger who noted that Coca-Cola’s famous attempt to foster global harmony in the 1970s, by teaching the world to sing the glories of its product, featured young women in vyshyvanka, a traditional embroidered Ukrainian blouse.Oleh Tyahnybok, the leader of Svoboda, an ultranationalist, right-wing party, joined in, pressing for an official ban on “this American company that’s de facto recognized Crimea to be Moscow’s.”By Tuesday evening, Ukraine’s Embassy in Washington reported that it had raised the cartoon map with both Coca-Cola and the State Department.“The Embassy emphasized that Coca-Cola’s actions violate the official U.S. position condemning Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea,” the diplomats wrote, and they “urged the company to immediately correct the mistake.”Faced with pressure from all sides, a Coca-Cola spokeswoman told Leonid Bershidsky of Bloomberg View that the map had been deleted. “We, as an international company, do not take political positions unrelated to our business, and we apologize for the controversial post, which we have removed,” said the spokeswoman, Anne Moore.Late Wednesday, Ukraine released a letter of apology sent to its ambassador in Washington by a senior executive at Coca-Cola, Clyde Tuggle, who said that “the revisions to the map were done by an outside agency without our knowledge or approval.”“It is not, and has never been, our policy to engage in the affairs of state in any of the more than 200 countries and territories where we operate,” Mr. Tuggle wrote. “Our mission is to refresh the world and spread optimism,” he added.After helping force one soft-drink manufacturer to get out of the map-making business, Ukrainians then turned to another. Ukraine’s ambassador to Austria, Olexander Scherba, noted that Pepsi, too, had published an online map of Russia that included Crimea.