https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/30/world/europe/new-five-pound-note-uk-vegetarians.html
Britain’s New £5 Note, Stronger and Safer, Isn’t Suitable for Vegetarians - The New York Times
Bank of England,British Pound (Currency),Great Britain,Vegetarianism,Veganism,Hinduism
Nov. 30, 2016
1001
LONDON — When it released a new 5-pound note in September, the Bank of England said the polymer bills were stronger, safer and better for the environment. One thing they are not, it turns out, is meat-free.To the dismay of vegans and vegetarians across Britain, the Bank of England has confirmed that tallow was used in the base of the new notes, worth about $6.25.If you’re wondering how many people would actually eat a bank note — as many did — the answer appears to be a lot: In promoting the new notes this year, the Bank of England said that 5,364 bills had to be replaced in 2015 because they had been chewed or eaten.Tallow, a hard, fatty substance usually made from rendered beef or mutton suet, is much more likely to be found in soap and candles than in a currency.“There is a trace of tallow in the polymer pellets used in the base substrate of the polymer £5 notes,” the Bank of England said repeatedly in responses to inquiries this week on social media. That led to an outpouring of outrage.“Being forced to pay taxes to contribute to animal products is a breach of rights,” Tim Doble, who describes himself on Twitter as a vegan, wrote in a tweet on Tuesday. “Shut. up. omnivores. You have no say in this,” he continued.The anger was not just abundant but also swift. By 4 p.m. British time on Wednesday, a petition calling on the Bank of England to make a vegan-friendly bank note — “This is unacceptable to millions of vegans, vegetarians, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and others in the U.K,” it reads — had received almost 100,000 signatures.Not all were sympathetic to that cause, with many observing there was no reason to eat a bank note in the first place.“Even if I was a vegetarian I still wouldn’t eat a five pound note,” wrote a Twitter user who identified himself only as Chris. “Don’t know what all the fuss is about. Have a carrot.”Critics of the new note pointed out that the issue was about much more than what people choose to eat. Although some people are vegan or vegetarian for health reasons, or because a meat-free diet suits them best, others are also concerned about animal welfare.The new notes also represent something of a problem for Hindus. Cows are considered sacred in Hinduism, and eating beef is prohibited. The latest census, released in 2012, showed that there were more than 800,000 Hindus in England and Wales, making them one of the biggest religious groups there.“There’s a choice issue that comes into it,” said Lynn Elliot, the chief executive of the Vegetarian Society in Britain. “If you go into the sofa shop, you don’t have to pick the leather one, you can pick the fabric one. But this is the currency of the land, so you don’t really have a choice.”When you’re trying to live a life that avoids harming animals, Mrs. Elliot continued, using a currency that includes a product derived from them makes that goal more difficult.The Bank of England has printed 440 million notes since this summer, but Mrs. Elliot said her group was working with bank officials to resolve the issue.On Wednesday, the Bank of England issued a statement saying that it respected people’s concerns and was treating them with “the utmost seriousness.” It said it had only recently been informed by its polymer supplier about the “extremely small amount” of tallow used in the production process.This is not the first time that tallow has been discovered in a product for which meat might seem unnecessary. McDonald’s had to pay $10 million to vegetarian and religious groups in 2002 after lawsuits were filed in the United States for its use of beef ingredients in its fries. When the company disclosed that it had used tallow, Hindu groups in Mumbai attacked one of the chain’s restaurants.Similarly, Guinness went vegan last year after coming under fire for using isinglass, a gelatinlike substance derived from dried fish bladders.The new £5 note was unveiled in June and was said to be made from polymer that would allow it to last at least 2.5 times as long as its cotton-paper predecessor. The Bank of England said the notes were safer to chew, and less likely to be destroyed by toddlers or pets.In the interim, there is a possible refuge for vegans: Scotland, whose leaders have been making noises about holding a second vote on independence after British voters decided in a referendum to leave the European Union. The Bank of Scotland, which prints currency, said in response to a question on Twitter that its £5 note was free of animal products.