https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/03/nyregion/closing-rikers-island-despite-rhetoric-intractable-obstacles-remain.html
Close Rikers Island? It Will Take Years, Billions and Political Capital - The New York Times
Rikers Island Prison Complex,Mark-Viverito  Melissa,de Blasio  Bill,Cuomo  Andrew M,Horn  Martin F,New York City,Correction Department (NYC)
March 2, 2016
7689
A decade ago, Martin F. Horn, then the commissioner of the New York City Correction Department, came up with a novel plan to close the worst of the jails on Rikers Island and replace them with state-of-the-art facilities in the Bronx and Brooklyn.They would feature natural lighting, air-conditioning, the latest security technology and, on the ground floor of the Brooklyn jail, a full block of retail space. A glossy rendering depicted that 1,700-bed jail fully integrated into the community, with well-dressed New Yorkers strolling past a Boss, a United Colors of Benetton and a Trader Joe’s.Mr. Horn took his proposal to churches and mosques, community activists, City Council members and leaders of the local political machines. Rikers Island, he told them, could not be fixed. Human waste bubbled into cells; overheated buildings put inmates and officers on edge; gang members broke off pieces of the radiators and sharpened them into weapons.At first, the idea of closing Rikers seemed to appeal to people, Mr. Horn said, but when they realized it could mean building jails in their neighborhoods, the mood turned. A fierce grass-roots opposition led by local activist groups like Community in Unity and Green Workers Cooperatives came together to quash the proposal.“I was buzz-sawed,” Mr. Horn said.In recent weeks, the idea of closing Rikers Island, the sprawling jail complex in the middle of the East River, has once again become a central topic of public discourse, with both Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, arguing that it is the surest way to put an end to the brutality and dysfunction inside city jails. Supporters of the plan envision whittling down the city’s inmate population, already at historical lows, and then dispersing the inmates still incarcerated, including those charged with the most serious crimes, to a constellation of modern neighborhood jails in easy proximity to families, lawyers and courthouses.But can it actually be done this time? Skeptics, including Mayor Bill de Blasio, argue that while the idea is a noble one, in practice it is highly unlikely to be realized: to succeed would require years if not decades, billions of dollars and enormous political capital, while distracting from efforts to address immediate problems facing the jails.City Hall officials have pointed out that it would not be the governor or the speaker who would bear most of the responsibility for pulling off such a daunting task; it would be the mayor.Over the last two years, in the face of relentless scrutiny of conditions at Rikers by local and federal law enforcement agencies as well as the media, the mayor has allocated hundreds of millions of dollars to improve conditions and reduce the violence. Early on, Mr. de Blasio appointed a correction commissioner, Joseph Ponte, with a national reputation as a jail reformer. In October, the administration settled a federal lawsuit over brutality at the jails that among other things called for improved training of officers, thousands of additional surveillance cameras and oversight by a court-appointed monitor.“Closing Rikers does not close the jail system, and we need to fix what’s inside these buildings — wherever we put them,” Anthony E. Shorris, the first deputy mayor, said recently.Most discussions about closing Rikers begin with the question of how to shrink the current population. On any given day, there are 10,000 inmates, mostly housed in nine jails on the island. Though that number is roughly half of the jails’ population in the 1990s, city officials have been trying to figure out how to drive it down further.They have come up with two main avenues for accomplishing this. The first is to expand diversion programs and change the bail system to prevent people arrested for minor offenses, like jumping a turnstile or smoking marijuana, from being sent to jail in the first place. The other is to speed up the court process so that people charged with the most serious crimes can have their cases adjudicated more quickly and either be released or be sent to serve their sentences in upstate prisons.Doing all of this will require extraordinary levels of coordination among the police, the state courts and prisons, prosecutors and defense lawyers, as well as the Correction Department. City studies have concluded that aggressive efforts by all the parties involved could lead to the inmate population’s being reduced by about 3,000, but that contraction would take five to 10 years.Assuming that crime rates, which are lower than ever, do not rise, that would leave 6,500 to 7,000 inmates to be housed in the community — mainly those charged with the most serious crimes or serving a sentence of a year or less.Currently there are jails in Brooklyn and Manhattan along with a barge moored in the East River that inmates call the Boat. The three facilities have a capacity of about 2,000. There is also a jail in Queens that is being used only for training, partly because the Correction Department academy is so overcrowded that recruits must attend classes in three shifts, with the last one ending around midnight.Like Rikers, these borough jails are so badly outdated and dilapidated they would probably have to be torn down and rebuilt, officials said. The Queens jail was closed in 2003 because it failed to meet basic state standards; it has only a small area on the roof for recreation, and no rooms for rehabilitative programs. The configuration of Brooklyn’s jail makes it hard for guards to monitor what is happening in cells.At one time, the San Francisco jail system, which is now recognized as a national model, was just as bad. After a boiler failed at one jail, instead of repairing it, the city parked a truck outside for 10 years to supply hot water. Broken windows were covered with plastic wrap. Even after a federal judge ruled the jail unfit for human habitation, the San Francisco Board of Supervisors repeatedly resisted building a new one.In the end it took more than a quarter-century — from 1979, when the idea was first proposed, until 2006 — to open a new, 760-bed jail with glass doors instead of bars and a semicircular layout that allows one guard to monitor 24 cells at once.In New York, City Hall estimates that building new jails would cost about a million dollars a cell, meaning a total of $5 billion to $7 billion, to replace Rikers, assuming the inmate population can be significantly reduced.Even if the money were to become available, officials would face sizable political obstacles from New Yorkers who do not want to live next door to a jail.For the last year, the de Blasio administration has been exploring options for moving 200 adolescents off Rikers to conform with the federal court settlement. But even with such a small number of inmates, officials have struggled to find a site that would be acceptable to future neighbors.Ms. Mark-Viverito, the Council speaker, has established a commission, led by the state’s former chief judge, Jonathan Lippman, to recommend proposals for criminal justice reforms, including closing Rikers. The commission is not expected to produce a report for at least a year.“I feel very strongly about this,” said Ms. Mark-Viverito, who, like Mr. de Blasio, is a Democrat. “It’s overdue. I know it’s a big challenge. I’m not afraid to take on big challenges. Big thinking and out-of-the-box thinking is the way that we arrive at progress.”Asked if she would be supportive of a jail being built in her East Harlem district, Ms. Mark-Viverito said that it was too early to say, but that her community was already oversaturated with social services. She said other neighborhoods should start doing their fair share.While Ms. Mark-Viverito proposed the idea of closing Rikers last month in her State of the City address, it is Governor Cuomo’s support of the idea that has generated much of the public attention.Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat who has clashed frequently with Mr. de Blasio, has no authority over city jails, which are funded through the municipal budget. Nor has he spoken to the mayor’s staff about the proposal.The governor is facing his own crisis in the state prisons. In June, two murderers escaped from the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, N.Y., near the Canadian border, exposing security lapses that were years in the making. At the time, the 170-year-old maximum-security prison had no surveillance cameras built into the cellblocks, which is standard technology at more modern facilities. The New York Times has reported on allegations of brutality by corrections officers at prisons across the state, including the deaths of three inmates following violent confrontations with guards.Mr. Horn, the former commissioner, said that while support from the governor and the Council speaker to close Rikers would be helpful, he still did not think it would happen.“It can be done physically, it can be done programmatically, it’s good policy,” Mr. Horn said. “But I don’t think it’s any more politically feasible today than it was then.”Bernard B. Kerik, another former correction commissioner, put it this way: “Who wants a 1,600-bed facility in their community?”