https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/us/politics/obama-gun-control-town-hall-cnn.html
Obama Pleads for Stricter Gun Laws and Faces Tough Questioning - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Gun Control,Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Executive Orders and Memorandums,CNN
Jan. 7, 2016
7240
WASHINGTON — In an intense but civil town-hall-style event broadcast live on television, gun rights activists repeatedly pressed President Obama on Thursday night to justify his gun control efforts, putting him on the defensive over an issue that has divided the nation’s capital and the presidential campaign trail.The blunt exchanges came on the same day that Mr. Obama pledged in an Op-Ed article published by The New York Times that he would not “campaign for, vote for or support” any candidates, including Democrats, who do not support “common-sense” gun control measures.Taken together, the twin public-relations efforts reflect the president’s desire to demonstrate for his supporters a commitment to gun control even as he seeks to reassure gun owners that he has no intention of confiscating their weapons.In the article, Mr. Obama urged Americans who agree with him on gun control measures to join him in pushing to elect new lawmakers in Congress.He said the effort to confront gun violence would require the same “relentless focus” of civil rights campaigns in the past.“We need the vast majority of responsible gun owners who grieve with us after every mass shooting, who support common-sense gun safety and who feel that their views are not being properly represented, to stand with us and demand that leaders heed the voices of the people they are supposed to represent,” Mr. Obama wrote.The election-year warning is a reminder by the president to the Democrats campaigning to replace him, including Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, that they must not stray too far from his agenda. Mrs. Clinton has pushed aggressively for more gun control measures, and Mr. Sanders, who has been accused of being too friendly to the firearms industry, also says he backs Mr. Obama’s actions.Democratic congressional candidates in conservative rural states who oppose gun control measures may lose Mr. Obama’s public backing, though it is unclear whether his support would be a benefit anyway. Some of the most high-profile Democratic opponents of gun control have been defeated or have retired, including former Senators Mark Begich of Alaska, Mark Pryor of Arkansas and Max Baucus of Montana.Aides to the president have long been frustrated that his push for new gun laws — which began in the days after the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre in 2012 — has been characterized by some gun rights activists as part of a conspiracy intended to seize their guns and take away their freedom.Earlier this week, Mr. Obama made an emotional plea during a White House event where he announced executive actions intended to expand background checks. At the forum on Thursday night, a rape victim, an Arizona sheriff and a gun shop owner each questioned Mr. Obama, urging the president not to make it harder for law-abiding citizens to obtain guns.“I have been unspeakably victimized once already, and I refuse to let that happen again to myself or my kids,” the rape victim, a woman named Kimberly, told the president. “Why can’t your administration see that these restrictions that you are putting make it harder for me to own a gun?”The bluntness of the questioners selected by CNN, which proposed and moderated the forum, created an environment for Mr. Obama that is unusual for a president who is more often surrounded by loyal aides, allies and handpicked supporters.But it also served a purpose that White House officials said they wanted: to let Mr. Obama respond to what he believes are incorrect or misleading arguments about his positions.Mr. Obama was polite but firm throughout the event, insisting that his efforts to improve the existing background check system would have no real effect on their ability to purchase guns.He rejected accusations that he wants to confiscate guns, calling that a ridiculous idea.“Yes, it is a false notion that I believe is circulated either for political reasons or commercial reasons in order to prevent a coming together of people of good will” to solve the problem of gun violence, Mr. Obama told the audience and Anderson Cooper, who moderated the forum.The session was held at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., a suburb of Washington. In his opening remarks, Mr. Obama urged firearm owners, hunters and other gun rights activists to join him in support of tougher laws that would target criminals while preserving the Second Amendment rights for law-abiding citizens.Doing otherwise, the president said, would condemn the United States to continue suffering through mass shootings, suicides, gang violence, domestic abuse and accidental shootings that have killed tens of thousands of Americans.“I respect the Second Amendment; I respect the right to bear arms,” Mr. Obama said. “All of us can agree that it makes sense to do everything we can to keep guns out of the hands of people who would do other people harm.”With help from Congress to mandate a more efficient universal background check system, Mr. Obama said, “We may be able to save a whole bunch of families from the grief that some of the people in this audience have had to go through.”In his Op-Ed article, Mr. Obama was unsparing in his criticism of gun manufacturers and their allies, accusing the industry of being “almost entirely unaccountable” for gun violence, and he said Americans needed to stand up to “the gun lobby’s lies.”In the article and during the live forum, Mr. Obama advocated research into new gun technologies that could make it possible for a gun to be fired only by its owner, not a criminal or a child who accidentally picks up a loaded weapon.“At a time when manufacturers are enjoying soaring profits, they should invest in research to make guns smarter and safer, like developing microstamping for ammunition, which can help trace bullets found at crime scenes to specific guns,” Mr. Obama wrote in the article.Some of Mr. Obama’s toughest critics were not at the forum.In a statement posted on CNN’s website, Andrew Arulanandam, an N.R.A. spokesman, said, “The National Rifle Association sees no reason to participate in a public-relations spectacle orchestrated by the White House.”The presence at the event of gun rights advocates was expected to lead to sharp exchanges, and the session did just that.But the forum also provided an opportunity for supporters of Mr. Obama’s position to express their views. A priest from a Chicago church thanked Mr. Obama for his efforts to expand background checks. Mark Kelly, the husband of former Representative Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, urged Mr. Obama to dismiss the conspiracy theories about his intentions.And an 18-year-old black man from Chicago told the president that he had lost his brother and “countless family and friends” to gun violence. He asked for Mr. Obama’s advice about growing up surrounded by poverty and violence.Mr. Obama urged him to be a role model and to resist peer pressure.“You’re really important to the future of this country,” Mr. Obama said, but he added that “I think it is critical in this debate to understand that it’s not just inner-city kids who are at risk in these situations.”