https://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/04/world/middleeast/04binladen.html
Message on Obama Attributed to bin Laden - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Bin Laden  Osama,Al Jazeera,Al Qaeda
June 3, 2009
3955
CAIRO — Just as President Obama arrived in the Middle East, the television channel Al Jazeera broadcast an audiotape on Wednesday that it said was from Osama bin Laden, accusing Mr. Obama of planting new seeds of “hatred and vengeance toward Americans.”The message focused on Mr. Obama’s decision to step up pressure on extremists in Pakistan. The speaker specifically blamed the president for the Pakistani military’s drive to retake an area in the Swat Valley that had recently come under the control of Taliban forces.The speaker also blamed Mr. Obama for the “one million Muslims” who had to flee their homes because of the fighting. United Nations and Pakistani officials estimate that as many as three million people have been displaced by the conflict.“Obama has followed the footsteps of his predecessor in increasing animosity toward Muslims and increasing enemy fighters and establishing long-term wars,” the recording said. “So the American people should get ready to reap the fruits of what the leaders of the White House have planted throughout the coming years and decades.”The recording, if verified, is a signal that Mr. bin Laden, the fugitive leader of Al Qaeda, remains alive and in touch with current events, and that he retains effective channels of communication with the outside world. The message was released a day after Mr. bin Laden’s lieutenant, Ayman al-Zawahri, issued an audiotape condemning the president.The White House played down the import of the recording, played throughout the day on television reports accompanied by images of Mr. Obama arriving in Saudi Arabia.“I don’t think it’s surprising that Al Qaeda would want to shift attention away from the president’s historic efforts and continued efforts to reach out and have an open dialogue with the Muslim world,” said Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, who added that intelligence officials had yet to verify the tape’s authenticity. “Americans have seen these types of threats before.”If authenticated, the recording would be the first from the Qaeda leader since January, when Al Jazeera broadcast an audio message attributed to him during Israel’s Gaza offensive and the last days of President George W. Bush’s term.The recording released Wednesday said  the Pakistani authorities were doing Washington’s bidding when they prevented the imposition of “Shariah law by fighting and killing and through bombings and destruction.”The recording continued, “Obama and his administration have planted new seeds to increase hatred and revenge.”  It added, “The number of those seeds is the same as the number of those harmed and displaced from Swat Valley and the tribal regions in North and South Waziristan and the number of their sympathizers.”Some terrorism experts offered different interpretations of the motives for the new tape. Frank J. Cilluffo, director of the Homeland Security Policy Institute at George Washington University, said the new statements attributed to Mr. bin Laden showed “perhaps more Al Qaeda’s fear that they are increasingly becoming marginalized in the eyes and minds of some key constituencies in the Middle East, and their need to show they are still relevant.”