https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/15/world/americas/kerry-havana-embassy-flag-raising.html
Kerry Strikes Delicate Balance in Havana Trip for Embassy Flag-Raising - The New York Times
Cuba,Kerry  John,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,United States International Relations,Castro  Raul,Rodriguez  Bruno,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,United States
Aug. 14, 2015
6806
HAVANA —  John Kerry, the first secretary of state to visit Cuba in 70 years, said on Friday that the Cuban government could not expect the United States to lift its trade embargo unless it moved to improve its record on human rights.“There is no way Congress is going to vote to lift the embargo if they’re not moving with respect to issues of conscience,” Mr. Kerry told reporters near the end of his 12-hour visit here.“It is a two-way street,” he added.To try to make headway on human rights and other thorny issues, the two sides decided Friday to form a new steering committee of Cuban and American officials. Its first meeting will take place in Cuba on Sept. 10 and 11, Mr. Kerry said, with another session in the United States.But there was no sign of flexibility on human rights on the part of the Cuban authorities. At a joint news conference with Mr. Kerry, Cuba’s foreign minister, Bruno Rodríguez, said his government was interested in pursuing new areas of cooperation, but he sought to deflect attention from his country’s record by criticizing Washington’s record on human rights.“We, too, have concerns about human rights in the United States,” Mr. Rodríguez said through a translator. “Cuba is not a place where there are acts of racial discrimination or police brutality that result in deaths; nor is it under Cuban jurisdiction or on Cuba territory that people are tortured or held in a legal limbo.”Mr. Kerry did not respond to those charges at the news conference, but he later said Mr. Rodríguez’s comments were “somewhat defensive and purposively pre-emptive.”Mr. Kerry’s visit was the first by a secretary of state since Edward R. Stettinius Jr. made a short trip to Havana in 1945. Though President Obama has restored formal diplomatic relations after more than half a century of hostility, the two countries have a long way to go to normalize relations.The morning’s highlight was a carefully choreographed ceremony at the American Embassy. Richard Blanco, a Cuban-American poet who read a poem at Mr. Obama’s second inauguration, becoming the first openly gay person to deliver such a reading, recited one of his works before Mr. Kerry spoke.Three retired Marines who had lowered the American flag when the embassy was closed in 1961 presented another to be raised by the Marines now assigned to the diplomatic post.The lectern for the ceremony was set up next to the flagpole near the north side of the waterfront embassy compound, making the waters of the Straits of Florida a backdrop for the speakers and musicians — what Mr. Blanco called “the lucid blues of our shared horizon.”Placing the scene unmistakably in Havana were three vintage Chevrolets parked strategically on the boulevard outside the compound fence, including a black 1959 Impala sedan, a cherry red 1957 Bel Air convertible, and a 1955 Bel Air hardtop coupe in baby blue and white.During his speech at the embassy under a baking sun, Mr. Kerry pressed his point that the Cuban government needed to do more to improve economic and political ties.“The president has taken steps to ease restrictions on remittances, on exports and imports to help Cuban private entrepreneurs, on telecommunications, on family travel, but we want to go further,” Mr. Kerry said.“Just as we are doing our part, we urge the Cuban government to make it less difficult for their citizens to start businesses, to engage in trade, access information online,” Mr. Kerry added. “Both sides need to remove restrictions that have been holding Cubans back.”Those remarks highlighted an issue that has sometimes been overlooked in the debate over the Obama administration’s decision to restore diplomatic relations with Cuba: Many of the steps that the United States is taking to encourage political and economic change here will fall short unless the Cuban government makes reciprocal moves.The White House’s new Cuba policy encourages telecommunications companies, for example, to provide services in Cuba and to export equipment that would link the island with the United States. But most Cubans need a license to access the Internet from their homes or businesses, which is not easy for ordinary citizens to obtain.The White House policy also seeks to encourage entrepreneurship. But the tax rates for small entrepreneurs in Cuba can be very high, and only a limited number of jobs are open to self-employment.The administration seeks to encourage financial transactions between the United States and Cuba. But the Cuban government charges a substantial commission for converting American dollars to pesos, Western officials point out.Human rights, however, remains among the most sensitive issues, and Mr. Kerry sought to balance his efforts to work with Cuba’s authoritarian government with his vocal defense of beleaguered Cuban dissidents.The embassy ceremony, streamed live on the State Department website, was attended by ranking Cuban and American officials, United States lawmakers, Swiss diplomats and some private citizens, but no Cuban dissidentsIn the afternoon, however, Mr. Kerry talked with Cuban human rights proponents and political activists at a reception at the official residence of Jeffrey DeLaurentis, who is serving as the top American diplomat in Cuba until an ambassador is nominated and confirmed. No Cuban officials were observed in attendance.The new committee that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Rodríguez agreed to establish will deal with three areas. One is what Mr. Kerry called “the easy package” — issues like maritime security and climate change where the prospects for cooperation are the greatest.Another somewhat more difficult area of discussion involves civil aviation and Internet access. The last area concerns vexing issues like human trafficking, financial claims the two side have lodged against each other and human rights.“Those are toughies,” Mr. Kerry said. “We are going to have some tough conversations.”Mr. Kerry also planned to meet with Cardinal Jaime Ortega of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Havana, who played a role in the back-channel talks on restoring relations. Mr. Kerry did not meet with President Raúl Castro or former President Fidel Castro, his brother.