http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/07/nyregion/in-debate-rangel-irritates-his-main-challenger-along-with-the-moderator.html
In Debate, Rangel Irritates His Main Challenger, Along With the Moderator - The New York Times
Debates (Political),Elections  State Legislature,Espaillat  Adriano D,Rangel  Charles B,New York State,Elections  House of Representatives,Walrond  Michael A
June 6, 2014
4668
Representative Charles B. Rangel and his main challenger, State Senator Adriano D. Espaillat, lashed out at each other on Friday during their first televised debate: Mr. Rangel accused Mr. Espaillat of running a racially based campaign and Mr. Espaillat charged that their district had suffered under Mr. Rangel’s leadership.“What the heck has he done, besides saying he’s a Dominican?” Mr. Rangel asked only minutes into the debate, which will be broadcast on Sunday at 11 a.m. on WABC-TV.Mr. Rangel said repeatedly that Mr. Espaillat had been “one of my biggest supporters” and had never been critical of him, until he “woke up one morning” and found that newly drawn lines had made the 13th Congressional District, in northern Manhattan and the Bronx, predominantly Hispanic, with a large Dominican population. Mr. Espaillat was born in the Dominican Republic.“He wants to be the Jackie Robinson of the Dominicans in the Congress,” Mr. Rangel said, adding, “The fact is that Jackie Robinson was a star before he reached the major leagues, and he’s not a Jackie Robinson.”Mr. Espaillat shook his head and said he was “saddened” that Mr. Rangel would stoop to such attacks.Mr. Rangel accused Mr. Espaillat of being behind a piece of voter mail sent out two years ago that accused a Dominican supporter of Mr. Rangel’s of being a traitor.“I would ask you: Do you believe that someone that has a Dominican background, if they don’t support you, would be a traitor?” Mr. Rangel asked.Mr. Espaillat narrowed his eyes.“You’re the one framing this debate along racial and ethnic lines,” Mr. Espaillat said quietly. “To come here and spew division in front of the city and the state is not becoming of you or your title as a congressman,” he continued. “I am deeply disappointed in you today, Congressman.”Mr. Rangel, who will turn 84 next week, will face not only Mr. Espaillat but also another challenger, the Rev. Michael A. Walrond, in the Democratic primary on June 24.Mr. Espaillat, 59, and Mr. Walrond, 43, have both sought to argue that Mr. Rangel, after 22 terms in office, has lost touch with his constituents; Mr. Rangel has said that only someone with his experience in Washington could serve the district well.On Friday, Mr. Walrond mostly sat on the sidelines, except to interject that his rivals’ behavior epitomized the rancor and personal attacks that were all too common in Washington.The three men sat in a row of chairs, in front of a coffee table. Mr. Rangel sat in the middle, wearing a dark suit with a bright red tie and a matching pocket square. When Mr. Espaillat was speaking, Mr. Rangel frequently slumped down in his chair, widening his eyes or raising his eyebrows as though he could not believe what he was hearing.Mr. Espaillat rehashed arguments he made in recent days that the congressman, through the Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone program, had steered government incentives to big-box stores that pay low wages, and that Mr. Rangel had voted for legislation supported by the financial industry.Mr. Rangel appeared frustrated by the criticism of the empowerment zone, urging viewers to “Google the information” to learn more about the program.“Why don’t we do this — go to the website, find out how many jobs the empowerment zone has created in our congressional district, in his senatorial district?” he said.A few minutes later, when Mr. Espaillat criticized Mr. Rangel’s support of a bill that would have weakened an element of the Dodd-Frank Act, which Congress passed in 2010 to overhaul the financial industry, Mr. Rangel, searching for a response, turned to the Internet himself, pulling out his tablet.“Congressman, are we paying attention here?” the moderator, Diana Williams, asked impatiently. “What are we doing with the iPad?”When Mr. Rangel continued fumbling with the device, Ms. Williams said sternly, “Congressman, are you Googling during this debate?”Even when criticized, Mr. Rangel was irrepressible, and sometimes he got the last word.Mr. Espaillat accused him of not being sufficiently loyal to President Obama, and said that he himself wanted to be “in lock step” with the president.“I’ll introduce you to the president so you can begin this cooperation,” Mr. Rangel said with a smile.Later, after Ms. Williams asked the three candidates whether they would support Hillary Rodham Clinton if she ran for president, and they all immediately said they would, Mr. Rangel managed to slip in, “I might add that President Clinton supports my candidacy.”In the candidates’ closing statements, Mr. Rangel came out of the gate with a sharp one-liner.“I’m Congressman Rangel,” he said. “I’m running for re-election on my record and, of course, the senator’s lack of a record.” After that, however, he rambled on, until Ms. Williams cut him off.