https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/01/us/politics/hillary-bill-clinton-donald-trump.html
Will Donald Trump Play Infidelity Card at Debate? Clinton Camp Girds - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Bill
Sept. 30, 2016
8394
Hillary Clinton’s campaign is preparing for the possibility that Donald J. Trump, reeling from harsh criticisms of his performance at the first presidential debate, will unleash a personal assault related to her husband’s infidelities at their next face-off in a week.It is an attack that her campaign aides have been aware could come since 2015, when Mr. Trump’s aides raised the impeachment battle that defined Bill Clinton’s second term as president to criticize Mrs. Clinton’s character.Now, with Mr. Trump’s advisers struggling to refocus the race away from his critiques of the appearance of Alicia Machado, the former Miss Universe winner who was invoked by Mrs. Clinton during the debate, the Republican nominee’s campaign has signaled a slashing effort going forward.Mrs. Clinton’s team, Democrats supporting her and many senior Republicans believe that rehashing Mr. Clinton’s behavior will be self-defeating for Mr. Trump, who is facing a historic gender gap and whose first marriage ended after an affair. Mrs. Clinton has also previously tended to benefit when she is seen as a victim of personal attacks.Still, Democrats consider such tactics inevitable, particularly since Mr. Trump is now being advised by several people connected to efforts in the late 1990s to reveal Mr. Clinton’s affair with the White House intern Monica Lewinsky and to the subsequent impeachment fight.Mr. Trump’s debate prep sessions included discussions about using the attack as a response if Mrs. Clinton discussed the Republican nominee’s treatment of women over the years. Now, there is a debate about whether to raise it to Mrs. Clinton’s face at the next debate, according to two people briefed on the discussions, who were granted anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.To prepare for such an attack, the Clinton campaign and groups supporting her have pored over opposition research about Mr. Trump’s statements about women over the years, as well as his marital history, preparing memos and papers that can be used to counterattack.“We are firmly convinced that he is only raising this because he is on defense over his own sexist comments about Alicia Machado and he is lashing out now in a position of total weakness,” said a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon.Mr. Trump, a first-time candidate with a decades-long trail of negative comments on talk radio and in interviews about women’s appearances and abilities, has only haltingly broached both the subject of Mr. Clinton and his infidelities – as well as disputed claims that Mrs. Clinton worked to discredit women involved with her husband. But through talking points administered to surrogates on Wednesday that referred to Mr. Clinton’s affairs and how Mrs. Clinton handled them, Mr. Trump has injected it into the bloodstream without saying it himself, a tactic he has used throughout his campaign.He discussed it himself in passing at his one public event on Thursday, a rally in Bedford, N.H.“The American people have had it with years and decades of Clinton corruption and scandal, corruption and scandal. And impeachment for lying. Impeachment for lying. Remember that? Impeach,” Mr. Trump said.Democrats believe such critiques will become only harsher and more pointed.Mrs. Clinton declined to wade into the topic on Thursday. “I’m not going to comment on how he runs his campaign. You’ll be able to see — we have two more debates — what he says and what I say,” told reporters.But Republicans have questioned whether such a line of attack would be effective. Several prominent party members, including Gov. Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas, who as a congressman helped lead the impeachment case against Mr. Clinton 20 years ago, have said publicly that they believe Mr. Clinton’s behavior is a dead issue and that Mr. Trump should “look to the future.”Correct the Record, a “super PAC” that defends Mrs. Clinton, has troves of background on women, including Juanita Broaddrick and Kathleen Willey, who have accused Mr. Clinton of sexual assault. The group has also prepared a vicious counterattack on Mr. Trump’s marital history, which includes two divorces and infidelity.Some of Mr. Trump’s advisers have tried to suggest a narrower line of attack: focusing on allegations that Mrs. Clinton tried to discredit women who said they had been harassed by Mr. Clinton. Chief among those suggesting this approach is Roger Stone, the longest-serving Trump adviser, who wrote a book called “The Clintons’ War on Women,” which lays out allegations from Ms. Broaddrick and Ms. Willey, which the Clintons or their lawyer David Kendall have denied. “The issue of Bill Clinton and women is not about marital infidelity, adultery or ‘indiscretions,’” Mr. Stone said.Mr. Trump, however, has struggled to articulate that concept, and around 5 a.m. Friday he posted a series of posts on Twitter attacking Ms. Machado once again.Jason Miller, a spokesman for Mr. Trump, did not respond to an email seeking comment.Before he ran for president, Mr. Trump, who invited the Clintons to his third wedding, dismissed the Lewinsky scandal as a nonissue. But the Trump campaign, in its third iteration of leadership, is now populated with and advised by people who witnessed the impeachment firsthand, and who see it as a potent issue. They were once part of what Mrs. Clinton dismissed as the “vast right-wing conspiracy” intent on dredging up scandals involving Mr. Clinton, including the Lewinsky issue.David Bossie, Mr. Trump’s deputy campaign manager, is the president of the conservative group Citizens United, and worked as an investigator who searched Arkansas for evidence of Mr. Clinton’s personal misdeeds during the 1992 presidential campaign. Mr. Bossie was later the lead investigator for the House committee investigating Mr. Clinton over a range of allegations during the late 1990s.Roger Ailes, the ousted chairman of Fox News, used the Lewinsky scandal and the impeachment aftermath to put his fledgling channel on the map. Mr. Ailes advised Mr. Trump in preparation for the general election debates.Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told The Times in an email on Friday that she believed her candidate showed “grace” at the last debate with regard to the topic.Ms. Conway said she was not advocating discussing Mr. Clinton’s dalliances, although she said discussing Mrs. Clinton’s behavior related to those women “should be more carefully examined.” It is a topic with which she is familiar — she is married to George T. Conway III, a lawyer who worked with Paula Jones, whose suit claiming Mr. Clinton had sexually harassed her years earlier helped precipitate the impeachment hearings. (Ms. Conway met her husband well after the case had concluded.)Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York City, planned to run for the Senate from New York against Mrs. Clinton in 2000, as she was trying to put the impeachment scandal behind her. Mr. Giuliani has become one of Mr. Trump’s closest allies, and he was the first to explicitly mention the Lewinsky scandal after their debate.Christopher Ruddy, who runs the conservative website Newsmax and who looked into allegations around the death of the Clinton White House aide Vincent W. Foster Jr., said he thought this was a fruitless line of attack.“I don’t think it’s smart politics to dredge up 20-year-old allegations,” Mr. Ruddy, who has contributed money to Mr. Trump, said of efforts to politicize Mr. Clinton’s personal behavior. “It didn’t work back in the ’90s.”Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker who helped initiate the impeachment proceedings and who now supports Mr. Trump, criticized the approach in an email, saying, “The bigger the choice the more likely Trump is to win, the smaller the topic the more likely Hillary is to win.”Carl Paladino, Mr. Trump’s New York campaign chairman, said that it was not “a topic of discussion,” but he also indicated that he considered it fair game if Mrs. Clinton attacked Mr. Trump over his treatment of women.Mrs. Clinton’s allies said that would be dangerous.“This is not a road Donald Trump wants to go down,” said David Brock, a former conservative muckraker who worked to expose the Paula Jones story but who came to support the Clintons and now runs Correct the Record and other groups that defend Mrs. Clinton.