http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/01/us/politics/congress-elections.html
Lawmakers Return Home to Focus on ‘Knife Fight’ for Senate - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Elections  Senate,Elections  House of Representatives
Sept. 30, 2016
6579
Straggling members of Congress bolted from Washington on Thursday for the campaign trail, and if Senate leaders can be believed, it is pretty rough out there.“It is sort of like a knife fight in a phone booth,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, about the razor-close nature of the handful of races that will decide control of the Senate.He and Senator Chuck Schumer, the New York Democrat who stands to assume the majority leader post if the party is able to mount a takeover, acknowledged that the Senate is up for grabs, with Democrats on offense.Mr. Schumer predicted a Democratic victory, but he said that the possibility of a win for his side had been made more difficult by an influx of money behind Senate Republican candidates from the political network headed by the conservatives Charles G. and David H. Koch, who are focusing more on the Capitol than on the White House.“They’re not putting money into the presidential, and they’re pouring money against us,” Mr. Schumer said. “But having said that, the public’s on our side.”With about six weeks to go, the Senate playing field is becoming clearer. Democrats are favored to take Republican-held seats in Illinois and Wisconsin, but Florida and Ohio — once promising targets — seem to be moving off the table for them. That leaves Indiana, Nevada, New Hampshire and Pennsylvania, and to a lesser extent Missouri and North Carolina, as the states probable to command the most attention and resources as candidates turn toward the finish line.Mr. McConnell, who said Republicans had always known 2016 was going to be a challenging cycle, is looking forward to 2018 when Republicans will have eight seats up for election compared with 25 Democratic seats. And some of those Democratic seats are in Republican-leaning territory such as Indiana, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota and West Virginia.“We fully intend to be on offense next cycle,” he said. “I like offense a lot better than defense. It’s a lot easier to score.”