https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/25/us/politics/donald-trump-in-iowa-sleeping-over-attending-church-getting-serious.html
Donald Trump Means Business in Iowa: Night in Motel, and a Day in Church - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Iowa,Republican Party,Debates (Political),Cruz  Ted
Jan. 24, 2016
4194
MUSCATINE, Iowa —  Donald J. Trump spent the last seven months saying he wanted to win. Now he is really acting like it.On Thursday night, minutes after National Review published a call-to-arms cover story blasting Mr. Trump as a wrecking ball to the conservative movement, his campaign manager leaned on the Republican National Committee, which promptly dropped the magazine as a co-host of a presidential debate in February. Then Mr. Trump turned a sleepy hunting trade show into breaking national news, calling  National Review “a dying paper” and excoriating his leading rival, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, before live television cameras.On Friday night, the candidate who almost always flies home in his private Boeing 757 to Trump Tower in New York or to his palatial Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Fla., instead slept in a Holiday Inn Express in Sioux Center, Iowa. (“Good mattress,” he said afterward. “Clean.”)And on Sunday, no doubt mindful that Mr. Cruz is counting on conservative Christians to carry him to victory in this state’s caucuses, Mr. Trump showed up for church here in eastern Iowa, with photographers trailing, sat quietly through the 60-minute service, left two crisp $50 bills in the collection plate and shook hands all around, before resuming his attack on Mr. Cruz at a news conference and rally nearby.Classic rapid response, pragmatic logistics and overt shows of faith are all basic parts of the job of running for president. For Mr. Trump, they have been only sporadically employed. Yet with each day, evidence accumulates that the master of the New York tabloids now grasps what it will take for him to win in Iowa, and beyond — and that he is laser-focused on doing it.“It’s crunchtime, folks,” Mr. Trump said backstage before his rally here on Sunday. “I mean, I want to win Iowa. I really want to win it.”It did not always seem so. At the outset in June, his candidacy was received as equal parts experiment and experimental theater — a test of an aggressively populist political message coupled with a stare-down of skeptics who treated his recurring threats to run for president as an empty play for publicity. Mr. Trump still recalls, often and with a bit of an edge, how many people predicted that he would never formally get into the race, or would prematurely get out.But the enterprise has developed into a full-fledged effort to swamp the caucuses next Monday because a win by Mr. Trump in that voting — where turnout is unpredictable and will determine the victor — would severely damage Mr. Cruz.“The truth is, I’d like to do well here, and I think we’re prepared to win here,” Mr. Trump said in an interview.Instead of lowering the stakes for himself in Iowa, Mr. Trump has raised them. He is pouring resources into the state’s television market, airing 60-second ads where other Republicans run 30-second ones. His campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, a fixture at his boss’s side for almost a year, has given up his seat on the jet and is living in Iowa for the duration, traveling the state to quarterback the get-out-the-vote operation. The campaign spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, has done the same.“He has figured out that he can win, and he’s trying to win,” said Henry Barbour, a Republican National Committee member who has repeatedly denounced Mr. Trump’s effect on the party. Mr. Barbour said Mr. Trump seemed better prepared with each turn on the stage.It would be easier, and perhaps cagier, for Mr. Trump to play down the importance of Iowa, play up Mr. Cruz’s strength with evangelicals and other conservatives here, and rush on to the Feb. 9 primary in New Hampshire, where he holds a wide lead in the polls. Raising expectations could make a loss in Iowa harder to bounce back from.“I probably wouldn’t have done it that way, but he’s unorthodox and thinks he can win everywhere,” said Charlie Black, a former adviser to Senator John McCain of Arizona, the party’s 2008 presidential nominee.Since he entered the race, a few benchmark moments have fueled Mr. Trump’s confidence, according to three people close to him who insisted on anonymity to avoid antagonizing him. Two of the moments came in August: getting through the first Republican debate, then drawing tens of thousands of people to a stadium in Mobile, Ala., where another New York politician would most likely not have received a comparable welcome. Signing a pledge to support the party’s nominee, whoever it was, amounted to a kind of psychological point of no return, the people close to him said.Mr. Trump, who is not given to introspection, said the toughest moment of the race was the day he announced his campaign from a gilded lobby at Trump Tower.“You never really know, O.K.? You can think you’re good at it, you can think you’re going to do well,” Mr. Trump said. “The hardest moment, in a way, was when I made the initial trip down the escalator.”Signs of Mr. Trump’s seriousness about winning Iowa were clear throughout his two-day trip, which also included a Saturday night stay and a steak and potato dinner at the Royal Amsterdam Hotel in Pella. Earlier that night, he was introduced warmly at a rally in Pella by Senator Charles E. Grassley, the popular Iowa Republican. (Mr. Grassley did not offer an endorsement, but Mr. Trump cannily pulled him back onstage for a photo that could suggest otherwise.)After noting that his real estate company buys from Pella Windows and Doors, a local manufacturer, Mr. Trump prodded voters, saying Republicans in Iowa did not have a track record of victory. “You haven’t picked a winner in 16 years,” he teased, while saying that choosing him would break that streak. And, as a studied politician would, Mr. Trump devoted 10 minutes to defending eminent domain, the land-seizure practice that Mr. Cruz has attacked him for embracing in his business.Mr. Trump’s team insists his Iowa organization will surprise doubters. But Mr. Cruz has spent a year building his operation, his supporters include many committed caucusgoers, and he is performing well with those who backed the top finishers in 2012.On Sunday here in Muscatine, Mr. Trump characteristically boasted that he was ahead in the state and then, using the time-tested formulation of a conventional politician, allowed that his lead might not be ironclad.“The polls have me winning now, but who knows about polls?” he said. “I mean, the only poll is the poll that takes place on Feb. 1. So we’ll see what happens.”