https://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/23/business/economy/23econ.html
Orszag Links Health Care Plan to Fiscal Balance - The New York Times
Medicine and Health,Reform and Reorganization,Orszag  Peter R
July 22, 2009
1788
A comprehensive overhaul of the health care system, eliminating inefficiencies and wasteful practices, will be crucial in correcting the nation’s unsustainable fiscal excesses, the White House budget director said on Wednesday. The Obama administration is increasing its pressure on Congress to act before the August recess.Speaking before an audience at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, Peter R. Orszag, the White House budget director, sought support for President Obama’s health care agenda. The president has already expended considerable political capital to push through a $787 billion economic recovery package and, most recently, to eliminate additional money for the F-22 fighter jet program.Mr. Orszag opened his talk by urging patience with the administration’s stimulus spending plan. But he soon focused on health care, arguing that while overhauling the system would raise costs temporarily, the policies would ultimately become at least “deficit neutral” and help restore fiscal balance.The drive to overhaul the health care system is “further along than it’s been in decades, with an array of allies that was once unthinkable,” Mr. Orszag said, dismissing news reports of rising political challenges on Capitol Hill.“If we fail to do more to move toward a high-value, low-cost health care system,” he said, “we will be on an unsustainable fiscal path, no matter what else we do.”But Mr. Orszag warned several times that the president would reject any bill that worsened the long-term fiscal situation, pledging that “at worst, we are going to be deficit neutral and meet the moral imperative of covering more people.”Whether the president can push his health care initiatives through Congress now is seen as a critical measure of how well he has maintained political momentum.Mr. Orszag’s speech came hours before the president gave an extended prime-time news conference in Washington in which his health care agenda was a central theme.In order to bring down long-term costs for health care, Mr. Orszag called for the creation of an independent commission that would measure the efficiency of specific medical providers and practices.The existing problem of inflated costs, he said, was caused by a “distinct lack of information about what works and what doesn’t, producing huge variations in the quality and cost of care.”He cited cost and efficiency discrepancies between top-tier service providers in different parts of the country. Mr. Orszag said that during the last six months of life, Medicare patients at the New York University Langone Medical Center spent an average of 31 days in the hospital, while the average was 12 days at the Stanford Medical Center in California.“East Coast versus the West Coast  —  or East Side versus the West Side?” he said. “If anything, it seems that higher-cost hospitals and regions provide lower-quality care, not higher-quality care.”Mr. Orszag said that an Independent Medicare Advisory Commission, a panel of “politically insulated” health experts who would set Medicare reimbursement rates, could track advances in medical technology and promote  efficiency.But Mr. Orszag conceded that the road ahead was long.“We don’t have enough knowledge to change from a fee-for-service to fee-for-value,” he said. “But moving more decisions into the hands of medical professionals and out of the political process will enable us to continually update the system.”At one point during the question-and-answer session, a man took the microphone to ask those in attendance whether they believed the benefits of a health care overhaul would outweigh the costs, and he drew a mixed response.Glenn Hubbard, the dean of the Columbia Business School and moderator of the event, quickly moved on to the next question.