http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/29/us/politics/florida-contests-could-tip-the-congressional-balance.html
Florida Contests Could Tip the Congressional Balance - The New York Times
Florida,Elections  House of Representatives,Elections  Senate,Primaries and Caucuses,Redistricting and Reapportionment,Rubio  Marco,Grayson  Alan,Murphy  Patrick Erin,United States,Congress
Aug. 28, 2016
6514
FORT MYERS, Fla. — Senator Marco Rubio went down the list of political enemies and rivals like a roll-call vote: President Obama. Hillary Clinton (“more Obama”). Both of his possible Democratic rivals, Representatives Patrick Murphy (“he has not had to struggle a single day in his life”) and Alan Grayson (“who frankly I don’t think is well”). And even Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, whom Mr. Rubio says he wants to prevent from becoming majority leader.The name that did not cross Mr. Rubio’s lips as he addressed supporters at the opening of a new campaign office here was Carlos Beruff, a wealthy businessman and Mr. Rubio’s lone, long-shot Republican challenger in Florida’s primary on Tuesday. Mr. Beruff’s central campaign theme seemed to be that Mr. Rubio was insufficiently fond of Donald J. Trump.Mr. Rubio began this year with hopes of being the face of generational change in his party on the road to the White House. Instead, he found himself reversing a decision to leave the Senate, seeking a second term for a job that he had essentially scorned.But Mr. Rubio’s race is only one in a slew of portentous and, in some cases, downright wacky contests that have dominated the state this year. Last year, acting on a Florida Supreme Court ruling that the congressional district map was unconstitutional, the court upheld a new map recommendation that altered 24 of the state’s 27 congressional districts.What happens in these Florida races could help determine both the fate of the Senate and the political complexion of the House.“For the first time, every single congressional district is competitive,” said Susan MacManus, a state politics expert at the University of South Florida. “What haven’t we seen in Florida this year? That’s the question. A lot of people think that this is the place where the Senate is won or lost. Many think that is why Hillary spends so much time here — not so much because she is worried about Florida, but because they desperately want to change that Senate seat.”The political crosscurrents buffeting the presidential race are playing out across the state, with contests pitting liberals against centrists, conservatives against archconservatives. For Mr. Rubio, who came to power six years ago as a Tea Party insurgent, his Senate race will test his ability to hold on as an establishment figure.In the end, Florida may well serve as an object lesson after a highly turbulent year, with voters quite possibly falling back on familiar names and party loyalty.“The redistricting has changed the landscape,” said Daniel A. Smith, a professor of political science at the University of Florida. “But I don’t see it changing us that drastically. In a state that will probably have more Democrats vote for president, Congress may still be skewed toward Republicans.”The ride here has been bumpy, in a distinctly Florida way.The race between the two Democrats who hope to unseat Mr. Rubio, for instance, has been a nasty contest underscoring each candidate’s weaknesses. One, Mr. Murphy, has been accused of padding his résumé, while his rival, Mr. Grayson, a favorite of many progressives, faces accusations that he abused his former wife. The accusations came after Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, angry that Mr. Grayson has been running a hedge fund while serving in the House, told him openly that he would like to see him lose.Largely ignored by her party’s power brokers — to the surprise and anger of many in the state — is Pam Keith, an African-American former judge advocate in the Navy who is endorsed in the primary by The Miami Herald.In the House, things are even more askew. In one corner of the state, Representative Corrine Brown is trying to keep her seat while under indictment; she has two challengers in the primary on Tuesday.A four-way race to fill Mr. Grayson’s seat south of Orlando includes his wife and his former district manager.Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the embattled former Democratic National Committee chairwoman, faces a primary challenge from Tim Canova, who was supported by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Mr. Canova looks headed for defeat, but not without bruising Ms. Wasserman Schultz all summer.One of the most watched races in the state is the Democratic primary between Annette Taddeo — a former candidate for lieutenant governor on the ticket with onetime Gov. Charlie Crist (who is running for a House seat, as well) — and former Representative Joe Garcia, her former friend and mentor, who came under fire in connection with a scheme involving fraudulent absentee ballots.Ms. Taddeo has the party’s backing. “I was a big supporter of Joe Garcia,” Ms. Taddeo said last week in an interview in Miami. “I opened up the doors of my home to his supporters. But he really disappointed me.” The winner will take on the newly vulnerable incumbent, Republican Carlos Curbelo, who beat Mr. Garcia in 2014.The stakes are high, and so are the costs in one of the nation’s most expensive places to wage a campaign for public office.Federal Election Commission records show that outside groups supporting candidates have already spent nearly $6.5 million backing or opposing contenders in the primaries.By comparison, in 2010, when Mr. Rubio was elected to the Senate, outside groups spent $10 million in the primary and general elections combined, according to analyses by the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit, nonpartisan think tank.Indeed, Mr. Beruff “has been running as a Trump-embracing outsider,” said Jennifer Duffy, a senior editor for The Cook Political Report, “but his consultants forgot to tell him it would take $20 million to run.”Republicans have long seen Mr. Murphy as Mr. Rubio’s real opposition. Outside groups that typically side with Republicans got an early start by attacking Mr. Murphy with nearly $3 million in ads in an apparent attempt to help Mr. Grayson, their preferred candidate.Mr. Murphy has stopped spending to reserve his cash for the fight with Mr. Rubio, whom he criticized last week in Miami for failing to show up to work in Washington, presaging a campaign theme. (Mr. Rubio has missed more roll-call votes than most of his Senate colleagues over the past year.)Mr. Murphy and his allies will try to paint Mr. Rubio as a candidate who is past his peak.For his part, Mr. Rubio has repeatedly sought to cast Mr. Murphy, who has spent much of his life aided in business and political campaigns by his wealthy father, as a layabout. “He’s also highly unaccomplished,” Mr. Rubio said.Recent polls show Mr. Murphy, who is less well known in the state than his opponent, pulling close to Mr. Rubio as the contest heats up.The spending by Republicans will help bolster this argument, and it is unclear if their efforts will bury Democrats with cash.“Florida has really been the center of the action in 2016,” said David Wasserman, the House editor for The Cook Political Report. “The demographic trends have really been good for Democrats, but because Hillary Clinton hasn’t broken through in the same way as she has in places like Colorado and Pennsylvania, it’s likely that Rubio could outperform her.”