https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/us/politics/elizabeth-warren-republicans-facebook-twitter.html
‘Nevertheless, She Persisted’: How Senate’s Silencing of Warren Became a Meme - The New York Times
Warren  Elizabeth,McConnell  Mitch,Sessions  Jefferson B III,Senate,Women's Rights
Feb. 8, 2017
8502
Some called it a gift to women’s rights, and the episode angered many who diagnosed it as a plot to muzzle a vocal senator, Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts.Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader and Republican of Kentucky, may have had the procedural right to cut short Ms. Warren’s speech on the Senate floor against Jeff Sessions’s nomination for attorney general on Tuesday.But critics had Twitter, and they roared back, using Mr. McConnell’s words in a rallying cry against what they saw as an attempt by a powerful man to silence a woman who was speaking her mind:“She was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she persisted.”As Mr. McConnell explained it, Ms. Warren had run afoul of Rule XIX, which forbids demeaning another senator, as she began reading a 1986 letter from Coretta Scott King on the day before the vote on Mr. Sessions’s nomination.The King letter criticized Mr. Sessions, a Republican, when he was up for a federal judgeship, for using “the awesome power of his office to chill the free exercise of the vote by black citizens” while serving as a United States attorney in Alabama.Regardless of the particulars of Senate practices, Ms. Warren and her supporters strongly rejected the idea that she had been out of line.The imagery of a man silencing a woman struck some as all too common, and his language rang familiar with many women who had their own stories of being silenced.“Nevertheless, she persisted” served as a hashtag-ready motto for women at the ready to break barriers.A broader theme — that women are too commonly shushed or ignored — emerged on social media. And #LetLizSpeak began trending. Women and men drew examples from the historical likes of Rosa Parks and the suffrage movement.The meme was applied to issues like reproductive rights and domestic abuse.On Wednesday, Republicans defended Mr. McConnell’s actions and accused Ms. Warren of ignoring repeated warnings to avoid violating the Senate rule. She had also read a letter from Ted Kennedy disparaging Mr. Sessions.“You don’t insult — whether it be from a letter, or from a message from God, or on golden tablets,” said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona. “That’s the rules of the Senate.”(On Wednesday, Mr. Sessions was confirmed as the United States attorney general on a near-party-line vote, 52 to 47.)In the end, Ms. Warren had her say. She read the statement from Mrs. King in full on Facebook.