http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/14/world/middleeast/14mideast.html
Israel and Turkey Patch Up Rift Over a Diplomatic Slight - The New York Times
Israel,Turkey,International Relations,Ayalon  Danny,Gul  Abdullah,Netanyahu  Benjamin,Erdogan  Recep Tayyip,Hariri  Saad
Jan. 13, 2010
7075
JERUSALEM — Israel’s deputy foreign minister issued a formal apology to the Turkish ambassador on Wednesday after ostentatiously humiliating him earlier in the week and aggravating strains in a complex and increasingly troubled relationship between Israel and Turkey, its closest Muslim ally.Turkey’s president, Abdullah Gul, had threatened to withdraw the ambassador if no apology had been forthcoming, and at first the deputy minister, Daniel Ayalon, refused, saying only that in the future he would express himself more diplomatically. But after a growing furor both in Turkey and in Israel, as well as the intervention of senior Israeli officials, Mr. Ayalon relented and handed a letter of apology to the ambassador.After reviewing the letter, Turkey’s prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, declared the matter closed, saying, “We have received the answer that we had been waiting for.”Mr. Ayalon had sought to express Israel’s anger at a Turkish television series depicting Israeli agents and diplomats trying to kidnap and convert Muslim children, the latest example of a raw anti-Israel sentiment in Turkish public discourse. The deputy minister called the Turkish ambassador to a meeting and, without informing the ambassador, invited television cameras, seating the ambassador below him across a table with only the Israeli flag on it.“The important thing is that people see that he’s low and we’re high and that there is no flag here,” Mr. Ayalon said, speaking in Hebrew, which the ambassador, Ahmet Oguz Celikkol, does not understand. He refused to serve refreshments or to accede to a videographer’s request that he and the ambassador shake hands on camera.Mr. Celikkol was unaware of his role in the affair until later, and then told colleagues and Israeli reporters that he had never been so demeaned in his professional life.Mr. Ayalon’s letter of apology said in part: “I had no intention to humiliate you personally and apologize for the way the démarche was handled and perceived. Please convey this to the Turkish people for whom we have great respect.”His earlier statement, which the Turkish government deemed insufficient, said that while his protest remained valid, “It is not my way to disrespect an ambassador’s honor, and in the future I will clarify my position in a diplomatically acceptable manner.”Israeli officials said the apology came after pressure from both President Shimon Peres and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.Mr. Ayalon, like the country’s foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, belongs to the nationalist Yisrael Beiteinu Party. Together they have sought to project a muscular, unapologetic foreign policy in the face of what many here see as a growing campaign to delegitimize Israel.With Mr. Lieberman under the shadow of a possible indictment for corruption, Mr. Ayalon, a former ambassador to Washington who speaks flawless English and has a smooth, confident style, was viewed as a likely successor. Now, questions surround his future.Israeli editorialists and many politicians, including from his own party, expressed outrage over what they called his amateurish and even crude behavior in this case, despite agreement by many of them that Turkey needed to be told of Israel’s displeasure.The Jerusalem Post, a center-right newspaper, said Wednesday in an editorial, “Yes, it is essential the Islamic government in Turkey know that there are consequences to its unbridled derision of Israel, but the public humiliation of a diplomat shifts the onus from Turkey’s bad behavior to Ayalon’s boorish performance.”Israel and Turkey have a long and close military alliance and economic relationship, and Turkey has become a vacation destination for Israelis. But the rise in recent years in Turkey of the Islamic-inspired Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P., has led to a new emphasis on Turkey’s relations with its neighbors to the east, including Iran.This has been partly fed by the decreasing likelihood that Turkey will join the European Union, and by the fury expressed by Mr. Erdogan about Israel’s war in Gaza a year ago and about what he considers Israel’s aggressiveness toward its neighbors.Relations between the countries became strained last year after Mr. Erdogan walked out of a panel discussion with Mr. Peres at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.The rift has never been fully repaired, and Mr. Erdogan remains a frequent critic of Israel.During a news conference with the Lebanese prime minister, Saad Hariri, on Monday, to cite the most recent example, he said the Israelis “have disproportionate capabilities and power, and they use them.” He added, “They do not abide by U.N. resolutions,” and said, “They say they will do what they like.”Mr. Erdogan has also expressed support for Iran’s pursuit of a peaceful nuclear program and has argued that the West follows a double standard by ignoring Israel’s nuclear arsenal.The Turkish Foreign Ministry denies that there has been any change in its foreign policy, and often reiterates that its only strategy is to build a stronger regional alliance to work more effectively for peace. Moreover, members of Turkey’s business and military elite do not fully agree with Mr. Erdogan.Many say that the relationship offers too many advantages to both countries to be forsaken, and most analysts believe it will survive this latest tiff. Israel’s defense minister, Ehud Barak, is to visit Turkey next week.“Turkey wants to normalize relations, get it back on track,” noted Sami Kohen, a columnist on Middle East affairs at Milliyet, a Turkish newspaper. “I don’t think we can anticipate the same kind of warm relations as in the past, but the two countries still have a lot of interests in common.”