https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/nyregion/nypd-officer-miosotis-familia-funeral.html
Police Mourn Slain Officer, as Do the Bronx Residents She Served - The New York Times
Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Attacks on Police,Police Department (NYC),Bronx (NYC),Funerals and Memorials,Bonds  Alexander (1982-2017)
July 11, 2017
9731
A pair of police sharpshooters stood atop a day care center in the Bronx on Tuesday morning and peered over the terra cotta and marble facade of a converted movie theater next door. The facade’s mechanical clock was stuck at a couple of minutes after 2. On the ledge, a pigeon cleaned its feathers.Below, the Grand Concourse, normally pulsing with activity, was deserted and silent, except for the rattle of shop grates being pulled open and police trucks idling. It was saving itself for a police officer’s funeral.Soon the concourse filled for 10 blocks with officers in their finest dress blues — Class A’s.They had turned out for the funeral of Officer Miosotis Familia, killed for doing little more than what her colleagues did on Tuesday morning: put on a New York Police Department uniform. Not an hour into her overnight shift on July 5, she was filling out paperwork in the front seat of a police truck when a man fired once through the passenger-side window. She was shot in the head and killed.The gunman, Alexander Bonds, had been the subject of three 911 calls earlier that night by his girlfriend, who reported that he was acting manic and paranoid. He had a history of hospitalizations for mental illness and had expressed anger at law enforcement officers in a video last year. The police killed him later that night.The mourners hailed from dozens of city precincts and specialty units, the gold letters on their lapels spelling out their assignments. Joining them were representatives from at least 85 other police agencies: Aurora, Colo., and Orlando, Fla., officers arrived first, and then others from Ottawa and the Emirate of Dubai. They lined up 25-deep in front of Loew’s Paradise Theater, a 1929 baroque-style movie house that was decommissioned and taken over by World Changers Church.Inside the church, 4,000 mourners filled the seats and spilled into the outer aisles.Before the church moved in, officers from the 46th Precinct, where Officer Familia patrolled, used to dip in for the air-conditioning on hot summer days. But the area around the old movie house, within a few blocks of where Officer Familia was killed, had been dear to her as well.She often stopped at Mom’s Bakery, steps from the church, to buy one-pound tres leches cakes to celebrate police colleagues’ birthdays. They were $40 each, no discount. Pamela Paredes, 28, who has worked there for six years, said Officer Familia greeted her with a smile when she placed her order in the morning, and then again when she picked it up in the early afternoon.On Tuesday morning, Ms. Paredes peeked through a window full of display cakes at the officers gathering outside.Among them were mourners who had been through earlier chapters in the city’s history of targeted police killings. The father of Wenjian Liu, ambushed along with Rafael Ramos in Brooklyn in 2014, had a shining well of tears in each eye as he walked across the concourse with his wife. And Lawrence Byrne, the Police Department’s deputy commissioner for legal matters, whose brother Edward Byrne was shot and killed in his patrol car in 1988, watched with his colleagues.Each such ambush occasions a fresh reckoning with the state of policing in New York City, and Officer Familia’s killing was no different. Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill delivered an impassioned speech on Tuesday, tinged at times with outrage and directed as much at the public as at his officers, about the nation’s feelings toward the police. Again and again, his voice creaked with emotion.“Hate has consequences,” he told the crowd. “When we demonize a whole group of people — whether that group is defined by race, by religion or by occupation — this is the result.”He spoke of police officers’ shouldering the burden of a rash of society’s failings: drug addiction, underfunded schools, inadequate mental health treatment. He voiced pride in what has changed since Officers Liu and Ramos were killed in 2014, amid protests over the killings of unarmed black men, while exhorting the public to trust the police.“We are on firmer ground now, with police and communities working more effectively together,” he said. “But in mid-2017, there unquestionably is a creeping apathy among the public about the work and role of its dedicated police officers.”Commissioner O’Neill, like almost everyone who knew Officer Familia from the street or the station house, spoke of her smile. One of 10 children raised in Washington Heights, she became known for mediating disputes at home and on the street. She was promoted posthumously to first-grade detective.“She embodied the American dream,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said, “a child of immigrants, the first in her family to go to college: a beautiful New York City story.” She was the sole caregiver for her three children — Peter and Delilah Vega, 12-year-old twins, and Genesis Villella, 20 — and her 86-year-old mother, Adriana Valoy.“She lived for them, but she died for all of us,” Mr. de Blasio said.As he spoke, a small group of officers outside the church appeared to turn their backs, signs of a pocket of unease that remains among some rank-and-file officers two and a half years after many more of them did the same at a funeral after the 2014 Brooklyn killings.Patrick Lynch, president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, criticized Mr. de Blasio before the service for going to Germany as police officers prepared for the funeral. The mayor’s office called it “a bogus controversy ginned up by the media and those looking to politicize Detective Familia’s death.”Officer Familia’s sister, Mercedes Proefrock, took the stage in the church and called her family up. They huddled in a three-deep embrace.Officer Familia’s son, Peter, spoke of how his mother “made sure we had every single thing we wanted,” despite her dangerous job.Then Genesis draped her arms around Peter and Delilah. “Mom, I miss your smile,” she said. She said her mother had found her calling in policing but managed also to act the part of guidance counselor, philosopher and philanthropist. “Thank you, thank you for everything,” she said.As she spoke, a city corrections officer outside used her white gloves to wipe away tears.The funeral was unusual in that it was held in the heart of the district Officer Familia patrolled, on a block with a pawnshop and a 99-cent store that has resisted the tides of change. It has been more than a decade since the funeral for an officer murdered in the line of duty was held in the Bronx.It drew people who had encountered Officer Familia on their worst days.Among them was Deakys Abreu, 45, who had bought a white skirt and a white necklace for the funeral. Ms. Abreu said Officer Familia had handled a domestic violence case for her in 2005. “She was my strength, she was my heroine,” Ms. Abreu said in Spanish, as she and her daughter stopped on their way home at the memorial marking the spot where she was killed.Cleopatra Teaque, 47, had come, too. She became friendly with Officer Familia in 2011 and came to count on her for advice and encouragement. When Ms. Teaque had a problem with her boyfriend two years ago, she called Officer Familia, who helped her secure a spot in a residence where she stayed for two years.After Officer Familia was shot, Ms. Teaque rushed to the station house, where she said officers told her, “Your girl is gone.”