https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/us/politics/jeff-sessions-approved-as-attorney-general-by-senate-committee.html
Jeff Sessions Approved as Attorney General by Senate Committee - The New York Times
Sessions  Jefferson B III,Senate Committee on the Judiciary,Franken  Al,Cornyn  John,Appointments and Executive Changes
Feb. 1, 2017
8501
WASHINGTON — A divided Senate Judiciary Committee approved the nomination of Senator Jeff Sessions as attorney general Wednesday, despite a fierce pushback from Democrats over President Trump’s firing this week of the Justice Department’s acting chief, who had objected to the administration’s refugee policy.The action came on a straight party-line vote, with 11 Republicans supporting their former colleague from Alabama and nine Democrats opposing him.The full, Republican-controlled Senate now appears ready to approve Mr. Sessions’ nomination next week, which would give the Justice Department and its 113,000 employees a full-time boss after a tumultuous few days that called its independence into question.The judiciary committee vote came two days after Mr. Trump ousted Sally Q. Yates, a holdover from the Obama administration who was acting attorney general. Ms Yates had refused to defend the president’s order on refugees, saying its legality was unclear. The White House accused her of having “betrayed” her department.Democrats zeroed in Ms. Yates’s dismissal, and said Mr. Sessions, an early supporter of Mr. Trump’s long-shot campaign who went on to become an influential adviser, would not have the independence to challenge the White House on questions of the law and policy. At his confirmation hearing last month, Mr. Sessions pledged repeatedly that he would be able to “say no” to Mr. Trump if needed and would not be “a mere rubber stamp” on issues like immigration and national security.The debate turned ugly as committee members traded personal barbs and accusations of “untoward” behavior. The jousting started when Senator Al Franken, a Minnesota Democrat, began challenging Mr. Sessions’s civil rights record and claimed that another committee member, Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, had “misrepresented” the issue.Mr. Cruz was not at the committee hearing at the time, but his fellow Texan, Senator John Cornyn, rushed to his defense and cut off Mr. Franken midspeech.“I object to the senator disparaging a fellow member of the committee here in his absence,” Mr. Cornyn interjected angrily.“Well, he should be here — first of all — and, secondly, he disparaged me,” Mr. Franken responded.“I would hope he would do it to his face,” Mr. Cornyn said. The attack on Mr. Cruz, he said a moment later, was “untoward and it’s inappropriate and I object.”Senator Charles E. Grassley, the chairman of the committee, told the two senators that “we’d be better off if we just let it go.”But the two senators did not, and Mr. Grassley eventually complained that they were putting him “in an awful bad position.”“Could you please leave personalities out of it?” he implored.Mr. Franken went right on talking — with Mr. Cruz at the center of his attacks.