https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/world/canada/canada-today-climate-change-and-a-contest.html
Canada Today: Seeking Friends on Climate and Our First Contest - The New York Times
Canada,Global Warming,Trudeau  Justin,Bombardier Inc
June 9, 2017
2480
As I wrote this week, Canada is far from giving up on the United States when it comes to climate change despite President Trump’s decision to pull the country out of the Paris accord.That is because many American states are on the same page as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. He has been dispatching his cabinet ministers south, including Catherine McKenna, the environment minister, to try to make deals with American states on climate issues, effectively trying an end run around Mr. Trump.History suggests that making friends with states is a sound plan. Some of you may recall that during the 1970s, the major environmental problem facing some parts of Canada was acid rain. Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, mainly from coal-fired electrical plants in the United States, were acidifying lakes and streams and killing fish.Efforts to get American legislation in place during the presidency of Ronald Reagan met repeatedly with failure despite strenuous lobbying by Canada. But six states, including New York, asked a court to order the Environmental Protection Agency to take steps to block emissions that led to acid falling on Canada. They won at the trial level, but the decision was overturned on technical grounds.But more important, after the legal wrangling, states in the Northeast and Midwest forged ahead and brought in their own laws to cut emissions, largely solving Canada’s problem.In a speech this week laying out Canada’s foreign policy priorities, Chrystia Freeland, the foreign minister, complimented Washington for its global leadership over the last 70 years and wistfully suggested that that time has come to an end. But the government’s effort to work with the states shows that Canada still has friends in the United States. They just aren’t in Washington.Read: Canada’s Strategy on Climate Change: Work With American StatesRead: Canada Will Pursue a More Robust Global Role, Minister SaysOn June 22, Mr. Trudeau will be interviewed before a live audience in Toronto by my colleagues Peter Baker, the chief White House correspondent, and Catherine Porter, the Toronto bureau chief. The event is being organized by The New York Times and the Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto. It is sold out, but we set aside 26 tickets for readers of Canada Today who correctly answer a not-so-difficult quiz. You can find the entry form and details here. Good luck to all. I’ll be at the event, and I hope to meet some of you there.For Canadians, it has a familiar ring: transit disruptions caused by either defective vehicles or delivery delays involving Bombardier. New subway cars from the Montreal-based company for its hometown are four years behind their original schedule, partly because someone eventually figured out that they were too big to fit through some Metro tunnels.Toronto’s attempts to relieve Tokyo-style overcrowding on major streetcar routes with new jumbo-size articulated models from Bombardier have been plagued by a long list of delays. And many of the streetcars it did actually receive were defective.Most recently, the regional transportation authority in Toronto gave up hope that Bombardier will deliver trains in time for the opening of a new crosstown light rail system and placed an order with one of its competitors. That dispute has been a bit of a bonanza for litigation lawyers, of course.While it may not entirely be consolation for Canadian commuters, they are not alone. The Times’s Marc Santora reports that New York City’s C train has become one of the low points in its subway system in part because of production problems afflicting new cars being made by, yes, Bombardier.Read: How Did the Subway Get So Bad? Look to the C TrainThe Tony Awards, Broadway’s most sought after distinction, will be awarded on Sunday. After surveying some voters, Michael Paulson, The Times’s theater reporter, concluded that “Come From Away” is in a very tight contest to be named best new musical. The Canadian show is about how Gander, Newfoundland, embraced stranded travelers after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.Read: Tony Voters Point to Tight Races and Sure BetsMany Canadian cooks have longed for Trader Joe’s to bring its Organic Jalapeño Limeade, Sriracha Baked Tofu and other house-brand groceries to Canada. Pirate — or as it later became, Irate — Joe’s filled that void in Vancouver, British Columbia. But no longer.Read: Pirate Joe’s, Maverick Distributor of Trader Joe’s Products, Shuts DownIn the lead up to the sesquicentennial edition of Canada Day, the country is in something of self-congratulatory mood. Not joining in, however, is Jesse Brown, a journalist and host of Canadaland, a podcast that covers the news media, politics and other aspects of Canadian society. He is an author of “The Canadaland Guide to Canada,” a satirical look at the nation’s symbols and myths that was published this spring.My colleague Dan Levin recently spoke with Mr. Brown about the book:And a little bit on the late side, here is the June edition of Watching, our film and television recommendation service, tailored for Netflix viewers in Canada. The link is below.Read: The Best Movies and TV Shows New on Netflix Canada in June