http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/02/us/supreme-court-rules-in-anthony-elonis-online-threats-case.html
Supreme Court Overturns Conviction in Online Threats Case, Citing Intent - The New York Times
Elonis  Anthony Douglas,Supreme Court (US),Threats and Threatening Messages,Facebook Inc,Social Media,Freedom of Speech and Expression,Decisions and Verdicts
June 1, 2015
5590
WASHINGTON —  The Supreme Court on Monday made it harder to prosecute people for threats made on Facebook and other social media, reversing the conviction of a Pennsylvania man who directed brutally violent language against his estranged wife.Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., writing for the majority, said prosecutors must do more than prove that reasonable people would view statements as threats. The defendant’s state of mind matters, the chief justice wrote, though he declined to say just where the legal line is drawn.Chief Justice Roberts wrote for seven justices, grounding his opinion in criminal-law principles concerning intent rather than the First Amendment’s protection of free speech. The majority opinion was modest, even cryptic.Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. voted with the majority, though he said a defendant’s recklessness in making threatening statements should suffice to require a conviction. The majority opinion took no position on that possibility.“Attorneys and judges are left to guess,” Justice Alito wrote.Justice Clarence Thomas issued a similar criticism in his dissent. “Our job is to decide questions, not create them,” he wrote. “Given the majority’s ostensible concern for protecting innocent actors, one would have expected it to announce a clear rule — any clear rule. Its failure to do so reveals the fractured foundation upon which today’s decision rests.”The case concerned Anthony Elonis, a Pennsylvania man who had adopted the rap persona Tone Dougie and posted long tirades in the form of rap lyrics on Facebook. Chief Justice Roberts called his statements “crude, degrading and violent.”Mr. Elonis wrote that he would like to see a Halloween costume that included his wife’s “head on a stick.” He talked about “making a name for myself” with a school shooting, saying, “Hell hath no fury like a crazy man in a kindergarten class.” He fantasized about killing an F.B.I. agent. “Pull my knife, flick my wrist, and slit her throat,” he wrote.Some of the posts contained disclaimers or indications that they aspired to be art or therapy. At Mr. Elonis’s trial, his estranged wife testified that she understood the posts as threats.“I felt like I was being stalked,” she said. “I felt extremely afraid for mine and my children’s and my family’s lives.”Mr. Elonis was convicted under a federal law that makes it a crime to communicate “any threat to injure the person of another.” He was sentenced to 44 months.The Supreme Court has said that “true threats” are not protected by the First Amendment, but what counts as such a threat has not been especially clear.The question for the justices in the case, Elonis v. United States, No. 13-983, was whether prosecutors had done enough to prove Mr. Elonis’s intent. Prosecutors had argued that the words and their context were enough, saying people should be held accountable “for the ordinary and natural meaning of the words that they say in context.”Mr. Elonis’s lawyers said more was required. Ideally, they said, prosecutors should have to prove that the speaker’s purpose was to threaten someone. Failing that, they said, prosecutors should at least have to prove that the speaker knew that it was virtually certain that someone would feel threatened.The trial judge disagreed. All prosecutors had to prove, the judge said, was that Mr. Elonis “intentionally made the communication, not that he intended to make a threat.” It was enough, the judge said, that a “reasonable person” would foresee that others would view statements “as a serious expression of an intention to inflict bodily injury or take the life of an individual.”“This is distinguished,” the judge said, “from idle or careless talk, exaggeration, something said in a joking manner or an outburst of transitory anger.”The appeals court agreed. But Chief Justice Roberts said a criminal conviction requires more than consideration of how the posts would be understood by a reasonable person (the legal standard lawyers call negligence). Rather, he said, prosecutors had to prove that Mr. Elonis was aware of his wrongdoing.The law barring threats, Chief Justice Roberts wrote, “is satisfied if the defendant transmits a communication for the purpose of issuing a threat, or with knowledge that the communication will be viewed as a threat.” Saying the parties had not argued the point, he declined to say “whether recklessness suffices.”Justice Alito wrote that recklessness in the sense of consciously disregarding the risk that a statement will be interpreted as a threat should be enough. “We are capable of deciding the recklessness issue,” he wrote, “and we should resolve that question now.”Justice Thomas, who would have upheld Mr. Elonis’s conviction, said the majority’s approach was unsatisfactory. “This failure to decide,” he wrote, “throws everyone from appellate judges to everyday Facebook users into a state of uncertainty.”