https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/20/world/europe/litvinenko-inquiry-blocked-to-avoid-upsetting-russia-british-official-suggests.html
Litvinenko Inquiry Blocked to Avoid Upsetting Russia, British Official Suggests - The New York Times
Litvinenko  Alexander V,International Relations,Russia,Great Britain,Murders and Attempted Murders,Poisoning and Poisons
July 19, 2013
5511
LONDON — The British authorities said publicly for the first time on Friday that concern for “international relations” had been a factor in blocking a public inquiry into the poisoning death of Alexander V. Litvinenko, a former K.G.B. officer, an apparent reference to their desire to avoid upsetting the Kremlin.The admission, in a letter from Home Secretary Theresa May, followed the government’s rejection of a request by Judge Robert Owen, a senior judge appointed as coroner in the Litvinenko case, to hold a public inquiry after the authorities formally prevented him from hearing sensitive evidence at an inquest, the more usual form of investigation into suspicious deaths.In her letter, Ms. May said, “It is true that international relations have been a factor in the government’s decision making.”“An inquest managed and run by an independent coroner is more readily explainable to some of our foreign partners,” the letter said, “and the integrity of the process more readily grasped, than an inquiry, which has the power to see government material potentially relevant to their interests, in secret.” The letter did not refer specifically to Russia.Under British law, evidence cannot be heard in secret at a coroner’s inquest, but it can in a public inquiry.Taken together, the two moves to restrict evidence have deepened a conviction among Mr. Litvinenko’s family and supporters that Prime Minister David Cameron does not want the affair to further damage relations with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, whose cooperation Britain seeks in areas including the Iranian nuclear dispute, the Syrian civil war and energy supplies.Some analysts, moreover, have depicted the affair as a test of Britain’s readiness to put what the former spy’s widow, Marina Litvinenko, calls a quest for justice ahead of the realpolitik of international diplomacy.Mr. Litvinenko, 43, died of radiation poisoning after ingesting a highly toxic isotope, polonium 210, at a central London hotel in November 2006, just weeks after acquiring British citizenship. British prosecutors are seeking the extradition from Russia of another former K.G.B. officer, Andrei K. Lugovoi, to face murder charges. Mr. Lugovoi denies killing Mr. Litvinenko. Russia has refused to send him to Britain for trial, saying it is constitutionally forbidden from extraditing its own citizens.Judge Owen asked to hold a public inquiry after ruling in May in favor of a request by the British Foreign Office to bar testimony at an inquest relating to any role played by the Kremlin in Mr. Litvinenko’s death and any discussion of whether Mr. Litvinenko was, as his widow asserts, an agent of MI6, the British intelligence service, who was killed on orders from Moscow.In her letter, Ms. May told Judge Owen, “Like you, the government is anxious that as much as possible of the investigation is conducted in public, and in such a way that Mr. Litvinenko’s family are as closely involved in the process as is consistent with the public interest.”She said an inquest would be able to address those goals, using publicly available evidence “to explore the circumstances in which the polonium was brought into this country, to ascertain the likely movement of the polonium and those who were apparently carrying it around the country, to expose the evidence about the events leading up to the murder.”