https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/31/realestate/a-brooklyn-condo-sells-for-a-record-15-million.html
A Brooklyn Condo Sells for a Record $15 Million - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Condominiums,Myers  Mike,Louis-Dreyfus  Julia,Dumbo (Brooklyn  NY)
March 31, 2017
9789
The triplex penthouse perched atop the Clock Tower building in Dumbo, Brooklyn, has finally sold after lingering on the market for more than seven years, for a steeply discounted $15 million.The sale price for this nearly 7,000-square-foot apartment was 40 percent below the $25 million original list price in August 2009. Yet it was still the highest price ever paid for a single condominium unit in Brooklyn, and it was also one of the city’s most expensive closed sales in March.The city’s biggest transaction over the last month was at 432 Park Avenue, the tallest residential tower in the Western Hemisphere, topping out at 1,396 feet. A penthouse on the entire 83rd floor of the 96-story building, between 56th and 57th Streets, sold for $65,163,580 to an unidentified buyer, according to property records. Its monthly carrying charges total $32,289.In other notable sales, the 1898 limestone-clad Clarence Whitman Mansion on the Upper East Side, one of Manhattan’s grandest residences, has a new owner. The comedian Mike Myers unloaded his brand-new TriBeCa condo, just weeks after buying it. And Phyllis B. Louis-Dreyfus, the stepmother of the actress Julia Louis-Dreyfus, sold her Fifth Avenue co-op.THE CLOSING FOR THE CLOCK TOWER penthouse, at 1 Main Street, took place on Tuesday, according to the listing broker, Frank Castelluccio of the Corcoran Group. Monica Luque of Douglas Elliman Real Estate represented the international buyer, whose identity was shielded by the limited liability company Tic Toc Tower.The three-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bath penthouse had been in contract since last June after the asking price was dropped to $18 million. But the closing was delayed, Mr. Castelluccio said, while the developer, the Two Trees Management Company of Dumbo, made some design modifications to the apartment at the buyer’s request.“He felt very tranquil there,” Mr. Castelluccio said of the buyer, who plans to use the unit as a primary residence, “even though the whole city was buzzing underneath.”The apartment has several inimitable features — like the four 14-foot clocks set into the windows, ceiling heights measuring up to 50 feet and a private glass elevator. And then, of course, there are the New York Harbor and cityscape views that include several bridges and the Statue of Liberty.This sale is the priciest for a Brooklyn condo, according to the appraiser Jonathan J. Miller, of Miller Samuel. The previous highest sale, he noted, was an apartment at the Pierhouse at Brooklyn Bridge Park that closed in early March at $10.67 million.THE CLARENCE WHITMAN MANSION, a 24½-foot-wide, six-story townhouse at 7 East 76th Street near Central Park, was sold by the Japanese philanthropist Bungo Shimada to an unidentified buyer. The price was $41.5 million, according to the listing broker, Stan Ponte of Sotheby’s International Realty. The house had been on and off the market since late summer 2015 and was listed for as much as $50 million.City property records recorded the closed sale at $33.2 million, but Mr. Ponte said that amount represented only 80 percent of the total transaction. The remaining $8.3 million from the sale, he said, is going to Mr. Shimada’s Tabizuru Foundation.Mr. Shimada, who had owned the house since 1990, is a member of the family that founded the Shimabun Corporation of Japan, which specializes in iron and steel recycling. He took great pains to restore and update the townhouse, Mr. Ponte said.“He updated the property with air-conditioning and many other modern conveniences, but he didn’t destroy the interior,” he said.The house has nine bedrooms, five full and four partial baths, and seven fireplaces over 14,000 square feet, all accessible via elevator and a central staircase. The main living area, on the first two floors, includes a parlor with a small Juliet balcony and a library, where a quarter-sawn oak door opens to a hidden card room.The home also has a 450-square-foot gym on the fifth floor and a guest apartment on the top level, with a living room, kitchen, en-suite bedroom and a solarium.MR. MYERS TOOK A LOSS in the sale of his TriBeCa apartment at 443 Greenwich Street. He paid $14.68 million in early January for unit No. 5A, which has four bedrooms and four and a half baths over 4,241 square feet. But less than a week after the recorded closing, in an apparent change of heart, the apartment was back on the market for $15 million. It sold in mid-March for $14 million.Mr. Myers already owns a penthouse in SoHo, at 72 Mercer Street, which was purchased in 2007 for nearly $8 million. The transactions for both of these properties were through the Perry Trust.The co-op apartment sold by Ms. Louis-Dreyfus is a full-floor unit on the ninth floor of 1125 Fifth Avenue, between 93rd and 94th Streets. The price was $16 million. The home, which offers Central Park views, has five bedrooms, four and a half baths, a library, eat-in kitchen and laundry room, according to the Corcoran listing.Ms. Louis-Dreyfus was married to the businessman William Louis-Dreyfus, who died last year.