https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/briefing/donald-trump-jr-mosul-wimbledon.html
Donald Trump Jr., Mosul, Wimbledon: Your Wednesday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 12, 2017
4651
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• “If it’s what you say I love it.” That was Donald Trump Jr.’s response to an intermediary’s offer of dirt on Hillary Clinton as part of Moscow’s support for the Trump campaign.The exchange of emails led to the June 2016 meeting between then-candidate Donald Trump’s eldest son, along with two top advisers, and a Kremlin-connected Russian lawyer. Here’s a timeline of the events.We obtained Donald Trump Jr.’s email exchange with the intermediary, a former British tabloid journalist. We asked Donald Trump Jr. to comment, but he pre-empted us by posting the emails on Twitter.The Miss Universe pageant of 2013 in Moscow became an unexpected focal point in the murky circumstances that led to the meeting. Now, people close to the president are anonymously blaming one another for disclosures to the news media._____• Our correspondent took a tour of Mosul a day after the Iraqi government declared victory over the Islamic State there. In some parts of the city, artillery fire could still be heard.“While this is a major moment for Iraq,” she wrote, “I doubt this fight is over.”_____• Environmentalists in Poland, supported by the European Union, are fighting to prevent logging in the Bialowieza Forest, a Unesco World Heritage site.Poland’s environmental minister has dismissed concerns, saying the issue has become “some kind of a flagship for the left-wing-libertine movement of Western Europe.”Separately, new research found a “global epidemic” of steep declines in animal populations because of habitat destruction and climate change. It warned of an “ongoing sixth mass extinction.”_____• The International Olympic Committee will announce the host cities for the 2024 and 2028 Summer Olympics in September.The only two candidates, Paris and Los Angeles, will have to agree which goes first. The French capital is favored for 2024, the centenary of the last time it hosted the Games.Above, Emmanuel Macron, the French president, who went to Switzerland to promote Paris’ bid._____• At Wimbledon, Novak Djokovic was among those criticizing match officials over court conditions and scheduling. He plays his quarterfinal match against Tomas Berdych today.Venus Williams, above, advanced to the semifinals by beating Jelena Ostapenko. She will face Johanna Konta, the favorite in Britain, next. Here is today’s full Wimbledon schedule.At the Tour de France, Marcel Kittel of Germany won the 10th stage with remarkable ease. Chris Froome of Britain retained the overall lead._____• Pascal Rigo, an entrepreneur who once worked for Starbucks, has embarked on a crusade to rescue France’s ailing boulangeries by creating a network of tiny bakeries. “The problem is with the economics of the boulangerie, not the bread,” he said.• A broad E.U. trade accord with Ukraine will take effect in September, the European Council said before a summit meeting today in Kiev.• Iberia, the Spanish airline, said it would stop requiring job applicants to take a pregnancy test after it was fined for discrimination.• News in gadgetry: Louis Vuitton is unveiling its first smartwatch. And Alexa, Amazon’s domestic bot, has made some adoring fans, who have come to rely on “her” for advice and comfort.•  Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Britain’s withdrawal from the E.U. could mean the end of European lawmakers’ wasteful trekking between Brussels, above, and Strasbourg. The European Parliament might stop meeting in the French city, which would host the European Medicines Agency (now based in London) as compensation. [The New York Times]• Saudi Arabia’s public schools will offer fitness classes to girls for the first time. Now comes the question of what, exactly, they’ll be allowed to do. [The New York Times]• Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is trying shuttle diplomacy in a bid to end the standoff between four Arab nations and Qatar. [The New York Times]• North Korea has sent tens of thousands of its citizens to Russia to work in what critics say amounts to a slave trade. [The New York Times]• Our investigative reporters, along with colleagues at ProPublica, found 28 White House appointees working on deregulation who have potential conflicts of interest. [The New York Times]• Some European leaders will gather today in Trieste, Italy, for the Western Balkans Summit meeting, aimed at E.U. expansion in that region. So far, it’s an elusive goal. [Deutsche Welle]• George Soros, the billionaire financier, denounced as anti-Semitic a Hungarian government campaign that questions the motives for his philanthropy. [BBC]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Spend some time tonight preparing a feta-brined chicken, before roasting it tomorrow.• It’s a struggle to stay afloat in the daily data surf. Try avoiding the tyranny of constant contact.• People are often too close to their work to be a decent judge of it.• As Boston undergoes the most intense building frenzy in its 400-year history, there is concern that new high-rises are plunging cherished public spaces into shadows.• People with disabilities tend to receive inferior medical treatment. Our writer has an idea to change that: recruit more medical professionals who are themselves disabled.• In memoriam: Jon Underwood, the British founder of the Death Cafe movement, died at 44. Pierre Henry, the French composer who anticipated the innovations of techno, died at 89.• Finally, we met up with Rosita Missoni, co-founder of the luxury fashion brand that bears her name, at her home outside Milan.She was crouched in the mud of her vegetable garden, picking zucchini for risotto. (We got her recipe.)Given North Korea’s latest weapons milestone, we thought we’d review the basics of the intercontinental ballistic missile.A land-based, guided missile, the ICBM has a range of at least 5,500 kilometers (3,400 miles). After it arcs into space, its warhead separates, falling back through Earth’s atmosphere to a target. Most designs carry multiple warheads, against which defenses are limited.ICBMs — a Nazi ambition — were developed during the Cold War arms race. Russia got out in front, launching the R-7 in 1957 as part of the Sputnik satellite program. The U.S.’s SM-65 Atlas followed in 1959, and China tested the Dongfeng 5 in 1971. India and Israel are thought to have ICBMs or to be close. Submarines can loft similar long-range missiles, as France and Britain have demonstrated.ICBMs are entwined with the concept of nuclear deterrence: warding off an attack with the prospect of nuclear retaliation and mutually assured destruction. None have been used in a conflict.The U.S. and Russia are, by treaty, reducing their vast arsenals of ICBMs. China has an estimated 50 to 100.North Korea aspires to put nuclear warheads on its new Hwasong-14 ICBM, but could also use it to deliver chemical or biological agents.Jennifer Jett, William J. Broad and David Sanger contributed reporting._____This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.