http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/19/us/politics/contests-in-new-hampshire-may-alter-political-map.html
Contests in New Hampshire May Alter Political Map - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,New Hampshire,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Ayotte  Kelly A,Hassan  Margaret
Sept. 18, 2016
6562
New Hampshire is in the bottom quarter of states in terms of its electoral and popular votes in the United States presidential race. But no other place has more competitive races with national implications.The presidential contest, a Senate race, both House seats and the election for governor are all up for grabs. The outcomes could shape the 2017 political map.It is worth remembering the state’s crucial role in 2000. Despite all the attention to Florida, if Al Gore had taken New Hampshire — he lost by 7,000 votes — he would have won the electoral as well as the popular vote.This year, the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, has advantages in the state. He won a huge victory in the February primary, while on the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton was soundly defeated by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Only 4 percent of New Hampshire’s voters are minorities, a Democratic base, and almost 57 percent of the likely electorate is made up of noncollege-educated whites, the seventh-highest rate in the country for a group that tends to favor Mr. Trump.Yet in the last six presidential races, the once reliably Republican state has voted Democratic five times; Barack Obama twice won decisively. The Democratic campaign in the state is much better organized.As in most of America, the focus is on the evils of the other candidate. Last week, Mrs. Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, drew a boisterous cheer from a crowd in Exeter when he referred to Mr. Trump’s infatuation with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia: “If you can’t tell the difference between dictatorship and leadership, then you have no business being president,” he said.Five hours later, enthusiastic supporters packed a gymnasium in Laconia to hear Mr. Trump. In his fourth visit to the state since the primaries in February, he accused Mrs. Clinton of corruption and blamed her for every major failure in the Middle East, including a “central role in unleashing ISIS.” Along with forcing Mexico to pay for a border wall, he vowed to make the Middle East Gulf states pay for a refugee haven, claiming that these states would not exist “for very long” without United States support. For good measure, he asserted that New Hampshire lost one in three manufacturing jobs in President Obama’s economy. (The state’s unemployment rate is 2.9 percent, the second lowest in the country.)The state’s largest newspaper, The New Hampshire Union Leader, last week endorsed the Libertarian candidate, Gary Johnson. The outcome may hinge on how much independents — who account for about 40 percent of the state’s electorate — support Mr. Trump, Mrs. Clinton or the third-party candidates. The election forecaster Nate Silver still rates Mrs. Clinton’s chance of winning at 64 percent.New Hampshire also features this cycle’s most heavyweight Senate race: the Republican incumbent Kelly Ayotte against Gov. Maggie Hassan, a Democrat. They are both smart, popular and well known — to voters, they are just Kelly and Maggie. Both national parties think that they will win the seat, and outside groups are pouring in millions of dollars, making WMUR, the TV station in Manchester, the only sure winner.The Republican ticket causes Ms. Ayotte some discomfort. She says she supports Mr. Trump, though she will not endorse him. Earlier, she called on the Republican representative Frank Guinta to resign after he was sanctioned for campaign finance violations; he won his primary last week.Ms. Hassan ties Ms. Ayotte to Mr. Trump at every opportunity. In a brief interview, Ms. Hassan said Ms. Ayotte “stands with Donald Trump, even though prominent members of her own party say he presents a clear and present danger to the country.”Republicans say Ms. Ayotte’s willingness to criticize both the Republican presidential nominee and Mr. Guinta appeals to independent voters.Naturally, much of the national focus is on big battlegrounds like Florida and Ohio. But the Granite State may provide important indicators early on election night. If Mr. Trump loses the state, any path to victory will be elusive. Likewise, Democratic hopes of taking control of the Senate may be dashed if Ms. Hassan loses.