https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/us/politics/president-daily-brief.html
What Is the President’s Daily Brief? - The New York Times
Espionage and Intelligence Services,Office of the Director of National Intelligence,Trump  Donald J,United States,Pence  Mike,United States Politics and Government
Dec. 12, 2016
2118
WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump has indicated that he does not intend to receive daily intelligence briefings about global affairs and national security threats after his inauguration, breaking with a tradition that commanders in chief from both parties have followed since the Cold War.Mr. Trump has received only a few briefings since his election victory, largely declining the intelligence community’s offer to give him the same “President’s Daily Brief,” or P.D.B., that President Obama receives each morning. Defending his practice in a Fox News interview broadcast on Sunday, Mr. Trump noted that Vice President-elect Mike Pence and “my generals” were receiving the daily briefings, and said he saw no need to do so, too.“You know, I’m, like, a smart person,” Mr. Trump said. “I don’t have to be told the same thing and the same words every single day for the next eight years. It could be eight years — but eight years. I don’t need that. But I do say if something should change, let us know.”The President’s Daily Brief is a summary of high-level intelligence and analysis about global hot spots and national security threats written by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. While the intelligence community produces many reports and assessments, the P.D.B. is written specifically for the president and his top advisers. Its origins trace back to a daily intelligence summary given to President Harry S. Truman starting in 1946, according to the C.I.A. Its current form began with C.I.A. briefings for President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964, according to David Priess, a former C.I.A. analyst and intelligence briefer during the Clinton and George W. Bush administrations, who has written a history of the P.D.B., “The President’s Book of Secrets.”The intelligence community tailors the P.D.B. to each president’s interests and style of absorbing information. At times, the briefing has included a “deep dive” into a specific question that a president may have asked or information that briefers believed he needed to know, such as the early August 2001 briefing Mr. Bush received at his Texas ranch reporting that Osama Bin Laden was determined to strike inside the United States. After the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, Mr. Bush received a supplement called the “threat matrix,” which listed more detailed intelligence about potential terrorist plans. Under Mr. Obama, the brief has taken on some new topics and different forms, including a periodic update on cyberthreats against the United States. The P.D.B.’s form has also evolved. For example, Mr. Bush preferred oral briefings to accompany the document, while Mr. Obama has preferred to read the briefing on a secure tablet computer that lets him page through underlying specific details.Several former senior intelligence officials said that getting the briefing every day is not strictly necessary, especially if Mr. Trump delegates substantial amounts of authority to his subordinates. But they stress that regular briefings are still important because it is helpful in a fast-moving crisis if a president already has a baseline of knowledge about topics, such as a foreign leader’s thinking and military abilities. Also, briefings permit a president to quiz briefers on inconsistencies and questions of fact or interpretation that form the basis for the most important national security decisions — those only the president can make.Matt Olsen, the former director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said that “it’s critical for the president to get an intelligence briefing, if not every day, almost every day” rather than just checking in periodically.“Ultimately these decisions come to the president, so as much as you could rely on staff to track intelligence, you are being called on constantly to make operational decisions that put American lives in jeopardy,” he said.One possible problem, said Andrew Liepman, a former senior C.I.A. official who helped write P.D.B. entries on the Middle East and terrorism for several presidents, is that the intelligence community has developed a formulaic and repetitive style of writing. The reason, he said, is policy makers wrestling with difficult dilemmas have tended to seize on any variations in analysts’ wording as meaning that something significant must have changed — even if nothing has.“I think over time, the intelligence community has overcorrected and become almost boring and robotic in its language,” he said. “The community takes great pride in that predictability and consistency.”Another possible problem, said Michael Morrell, a former C.I.A. deputy director and analyst who helped brief Mr. Bush, is that Mr. Trump is being offered a P.D.B. that was written for Mr. Obama at the end of eight years in office.“It is tactical — it presupposes a tremendous amount of knowledge on the part of the reader, and the number of strategic places in there are few and far between because of where Obama is in his presidency and how much he knows,” Mr. Morrell said. “So I’m not surprised Donald Trump looks at this and says, ‘This is weird.’”But if that is the case, Mr. Morrell added, it is the responsibility of Mr. Trump’s briefers to use the P.D.B. as a jumping off point for a broader discussion that will engage him.It is the job of the intelligence community to figure out how to brief Mr. Trump so that he will recognize the value of intelligence, Mr. Priess said. He suggested that they try being more succinct.“It may be that he is more suited to intelligence briefings essentially in the form of tweets — short, punchy statements that leave out some of the nuances but give him the core message without giving him the sense of being talked down to or getting repetitive text,” he said. “Sometimes you’ve got to come up with a way to make this more interesting.”