http://www.nytimes.com/2002/05/04/us/how-do-west-virginians-spell-pork-it-s-b-y-r-d.html
How Do West Virginians Spell Pork? It's B-Y-R-D - The New York Times
UNITED STATES,WEST VIRGINIA,BYRD  ROBERT C,PUBLIC WORKS,FINANCES,BUDGETS AND BUDGETING,ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS
May 4, 2002
4085
A traveler curious about the unusual number of federal public works in this state that were not just procured by but prominently named after Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia should pause for reflection at the State Capitol rotunda.Here, halfway between the mammoth Robert C. Byrd Locks and Dam project on the state's western border (where a bas-relief of the senator greets citizens) and the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope (considered the world's largest moving research instrument as it reaches toward the heavens from an eastern Appalachian pasture) stands a double-life-size statue of these projects' relentless patron, Senator Robert C. Byrd.Gesturing grandly in the Statehouse, the senator, hailed by the Citizens Against Government Waste watchdog group as setting the ''Alpha Porker'' standard for ''taxpayer funded narcissism,'' holds the Constitution in his left hand. He grasps it as firmly as if it were the next batch of projects funneling through his chairmanship of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Washington's grand cornucopia of federal largesse.''State policy is to wait 50 years after a politician's death before a statue can be built for him in the Capitol,'' a Statehouse guide explained. ''But for Senator Byrd, West Virginia figured it should make an exception.''No wonder. For, as the eight-term Democrat might say in his favorite role as the Senate's classicist orator, rarely since Caesar has a public official been so memorialized within his lifetime across his realm.Between the sprawling locks and dam and the $75 million radio telescope, the state is dotted by at least 30 other federal projects with the Byrd preamble in their addresses. There are two Robert C. Byrd United States Courthouses, four Robert C. Byrd stretches of highway, freeway, expressway and drive, and a Robert C. Byrd Bridge. And two Robert C. Byrd Interchanges to reach these valuable amenities.There is the Robert C. Byrd Lifelong Learning Center, the Robert C. Byrd Hardwood Technology Center, the Robert C. Byrd Health and Wellness Center, and the Robert C. Byrd Institute for Advanced Flexible Manufacturing. This economically stressed state has advanced handsomely into the modern era of government infrastructure and employment as its favorite son has amassed 50 years of clout in Washington.''I want to be West Virginia's billion-dollar industry,'' Senator Byrd happily admitted in 1990.In more than meeting that goal, he has been far from defensive. Giving as avidly as he gets, the senator has flicked away critics, calling them ''a bunch of peckerwoods.'' He seems to relish being known here at home as the Prince of Pork.''West Virginia has always had four friends: God Almighty, Sears Roebuck, Carter's Liver Pills and Robert C. Byrd,'' the senator declared on re-election night 2000. He was exulting as voters offered what may be the ultimate Byrd memorial, a state record 78 percent majority in which he carried all 55 counties.''It has never been my expectation that any facility be named for me, although I am humbled that some have,'' the senator declared, disclaiming vainglory as the quid pro quo for bringing home the bacon. ''It is a deep honor when West Virginians make the kind gesture to name a project for me in appreciation for my efforts in their behalf.''Not everyone believes the state's many Byrd name signs are happenstance. ''What next -- West 'Byrdginia'?'' Taxpayers for Common Sense, another watchdog lobby, asked last year in complaining.''I've been watching these egocentric public works for years and fully expect to see the Robert C. Byrd Traffic Light in some coal hollow,'' said a Democratic longtime state official. He was complaining but, like officials in both parties, loath to be identified publicly as a critic of Senator Byrd. ''Can't slay our golden goose,'' the Democrat grumbled.If anything, West Virginians display a shared pride at the senator's annual helpings from the federal pork barrel. The other day a newspaper headline about Senator Byrd's being honored by the Humane Society as a defender of animal rights fondly summarized: ''The Prince of Pork Now Tries to Save the Hog.''Coursing through West Virginia's amiable cities and soothing backwoods, a visitor finds that the Byrd sightings roll on from high school to clinic to aerospace education center, with the Robert C. Byrd Institute for Composite Technology and more on the drawing boards.Not all are grand. The Charleston Gazette recently attempted to make a master list, counting more than 30 projects named for Robert C. Byrd -- and thus far none for the state's other Democratic senator, John D. Rockefeller IV. The paper reported that the Robert C. Byrd Library at Wheeling Jesuit University was merely a conference room consisting of a table, two sofas and six chairs. It is in the Erma Ora Byrd Center for Education Technologies, named for the senator's wife.If all the job-rich projects brought to the state by the senator were named after him, the list would be far longer. These include prime national centers of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service and other bureaucratic wheelhouses that he shepherded to the state.''If you're talking pork in the Senate, Senator Byrd is far and above the winner, absolutely,'' said Tom Schatz, president of the Government Waste watchdog group in Washington. This lobbying effort devotes a special ''Byrd Droppings'' section on its Web site to the senator, estimating that as Appropriations chairman he annually brings home 10 times the national average of legislative pork, or $236 per state resident last year.Local critics are reduced to satire. One Web site essayist, scorning ''The Ever Present Presence of the Master,'' imagined visiting one of the state's busier federal workplaces, the sign painting shop that keeps Senator Byrd's name pristine on all the projects named after him. The sign painter is found thinking ever more grandly, finally planning the ultimate West Virginia sign: ''Robert C. Byrd System of Life As We Know It.''In its way, the State Legislature beat the sign painter to the punch last year when it voted to add one more distinction to the rotunda statue of Senator Robert C. Byrd, an additional sign announcing: ''West Virginian of the 20th Century.''