https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/fashion/la-la-anthony-carmelo-power-starz.html
Seafood and Dancing With La La Anthony - The New York Times
Anthony  La La,Anthony  Carmelo,Power (TV Program),Bars and Nightclubs,Restaurants
June 7, 2017
6276
La La Anthony sat down at a table at Catch NYC, the It spot for seafood and rooftop dancing in the Manhattan meatpacking district, and took out her smartphone.“I’ve been working like crazy,” she said, presenting a screen filled with appointments, among them the BET Awards ceremony in Los Angeles, a film festival in Ischia, Italy, and the Season 4 premiere of “Power,” the Starz drama in which she plays the loyal bestie LaKeisha Grant.Complicating her busy life is the steady drumbeat in the tabloid press concerning her marriage to the star New York Knicks forward Carmelo Anthony, with TMZ and The New York Post reporting on its fraying.At the same time, Ms. Anthony is taking care of her 10-year-old son, Kiyan, who, like his father, is devoted to basketball, as a member of the New York Gauchos travel team in the Bronx. “Literally, his schedule is more insane than mine,” she said. “As a matter of fact, I have to tell his dad that he has to take a bag lunch to school tomorrow. He’s going on a field trip.”Once she had tapped out the text, she talked about her new living arrangement. “I used to live on the High Line,” she said of the apartment where she resided with Mr. Anthony and their son. “Now that I live in TriBeCa, there are so many random cool bars to just go into.”A woman from Catch stopped at the table and said: “Hi, boo, how’s everything? You look as beautiful as ever.”“I’m starving,” Ms. Anthony said. “But I don’t want to make any decisions — just do a mix.”This would be her last meal before the start of a diet proposed to her by  Charles Passler, a nutritionist who counts Victoria’s Secret models among his clients. The regimen he recommended was a seven-day series of shakes, protein bars and vegetables drizzled in olive oil.She was waiting for her niece, Kiyonna Anthony, the daughter of her husband’s late sister, Michelle Anthony, to join her at the table, but something was holding her up.The meal arrived. While digging into fried artichokes, Ms. Anthony checked her phone again, saying, “I want to see if artichoke is on the list of approved vegetables.” In a moment she had her answer: “Oh, it’s not.”She bit into crispy rice with spicy tuna on top and checked the phone once more. “My son,” she said apologetically. “That’s the only reason I keep looking at my phone. He needs to be asleep. He wants to know what time I’m coming home.”Ms. Anthony said she spent her usual night out in the company of Ciara, Kelly Rowland, Serena Williams and Kim Kardashian West. “Kim doesn’t like to go out,” she said. “You have to drag her out. Serena is obsessed with karaoke. She does songs I’ve never heard of.” Not long ago, Ms. Anthony added, she had visited Ciara in Seattle. “Future, her son, FaceTimed me the other day. He was like: ‘Auntie La La, where’s my motorcycle? You promised me a motorcycle,’” she said, laughing.Kiyonna Anthony rushed to the table. After saying she had gone to the wrong Catch location, she ordered a glass of red wine. The two quickly started reminiscing about Kiyonna’s 25th birthday party, which had a theme based on “Paid in Full,” a 2002 movie about 1980s Harlem gangsters.“We love a theme party,” La La said as her niece pulled out her smartphone to show a photo of a group of women in throwback Adidas track suits.Close to midnight, La La and Kiyonna decided to hit the rooftop dance floor one level up. They left the table and headed for the elevator.“I see royalty, I can’t mess around,” the elevator operator said.When the doors opened onto the rooftop, Mark Ronson’s “Uptown Funk” was blasting. LuMees smartphone cases were lighting up the dance floor. Ms. Anthony, wearing a cropped sweater from Baja East, Frame jeans and thigh-high boots, started dancing, along with her niece, only to be surrounded by people trying to get a picture.“I love you!” one woman said, phone in hand.Later, in an outdoor seating area away from the dance floor, Ms. Anthony spoke about what was going on with her and Mr. Anthony, whose lives have been captured on the VH1 reality shows “La La’s Full Court Wedding” and “La La’s Full Court Life.”“We want to be the best we can be for our son,” she said. “That’s the most important. I would do whatever to make sure he’s happy.”She seemed ready to call it a night.“I need to get up and get ready for the detox.”