http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/30/business/global/30ruble.html
Russia Slow to Pick Up the Lead in Bribery Cases - The New York Times
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (1977),Russia,Daimler AG,Siemens AG,Bribery,Suits and Litigation,Frauds and Swindling
April 29, 2010
4034
MOSCOW — On April 1, the U.S. Justice Department unsealed documents showing in remarkable detail how the German carmaker Daimler had paid millions of euros in bribes to Russian government officials to clinch sales of patrol cars for the police and sedans for the presidential motorcade.In Russia, the response was silence. For weeks, prosecutors made not a single statement.Finally, the Russian Ministry of Interior announced last Friday an internal investigation into its car purchases. This week the prosecutor general vowed in a televised meeting with government officials that there would be no cover-up.Still, the Daimler case is the latest in a series of cross-border investigations into corporate bribery that appears to reflect a stark difference in how Russian and foreign governments approach corruption. The foreign governments, of Germany and the United States in particular, have made intense headway in going after companies that pay bribes, part of an international crackdown promoted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.The Russians, who are not part of the Paris-based organization, seem highly reluctant to do anything.In fact, in a remarkable case in 2007 involving the engineering giant Siemens, prosecutors in Germany published a list of two dozen names and positions of Russian officials they said had taken bribes.Even then, the police in Russia did not pick up the lead.“I thought I might be questioned, but that never happened,” Nikolai I. Galevko, one of the officials whose names appeared on the list, said by telephone Wednesday from his home in a provincial town south of Moscow.“I was never afraid I would be arrested,” he said.The German court found that Siemens had paid Mr. Galevko €147,600, or $195,100, in bribes for business at the provincial telephone company where he was a vice president; Mr. Galevko denied he ever took money from Siemens. Whoever is right, the Russian police never bothered to find out.“You would assume this would be a concern” for Russian law enforcement, Elena Panfilova, the director of the Moscow office of Transparency International, an anti-corruption group, said during an interview. But it is not, she said.One impediment is a Russian reluctance to allow foreign investigators to set the agenda on anti-corruption cases, which are politically tinged. Another is that some of the officials implicated in cases that come out in the West years after the act occurred have since been promoted. Many may now outrank the police tasked with investigating them, she said.The reluctance to prosecute cases in Russia, even when foreign courts have already handed down verdicts, casts doubt on repeated pledges of President Dmitri A. Medvedev to open a broad front against corruption.Yet, even as the Daimler case into corruption at Russia’s main domestic police agency unfolded, another case came to light.German prosecutors revealed that they were investigating whether the German branch of Hewlett-Packard had paid an €8 million kickback to win business equipping the Russian prosecutor general’s offices with computers.A branch of the Russian prosecutor’s office, the Investigative Committee, searched Hewlett-Packard’s office in Moscow; it was not disclosed what action, if any, was taken to search its own offices.The German authorities have arrested three people; The Securities and Exchange Commission and Justice Department in the United States have reportedly joined the investigation into whether the computer maker violated the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. The United States claims jurisdiction for bribery that takes place anywhere in the world if it involves companies whose shares trade in the United States or that do business in the United States.The primary intent of the U.S. legislation is to stem corrupt practices in the overseas operations of American companies. Foreign officials, too, can be indicted under the rule, though this is unusual. It is typically left to foreign governments to use the investigative spadework of the U.S. Justice Department to prosecute their own officials, if they see fit. Often, nothing is done.Daimler settled charges in the U.S. District Court in Washington and a related S.E.C. investigation by paying $185 million in fines, while two of its subsidiaries, including the Russian unit, pleaded guilty to bribing foreign government officials in 22 countries from 1998 to 2008. The filing said Daimler made an additional $50 million in profit from the bribery schemes. The Russian officials were identified by agency and title.American investigators said Daimler used slush funds referred to as “cash desks” to pay officials in 22 countries including China, Turkmenistan and Iraq. In Russia, they documented at least €3.8 million in payoffs from Daimler to several officials in the Russian Interior Ministry, the country’s main domestic law enforcement agency, the presidential motor pool called the Special Purpose Garage and various municipal governments, according to the filing.The Special Purpose Garage provides vehicles for the Russian president, prime minister, speakers of both chambers of Parliament and visiting foreign dignitaries.On the sale of just one Mercedes car to the Special Purpose Garage, for example, American prosecutors say Daimler kicked back €58,000 from the car’s invoiced purchase price of €375,814. Almost in passing, the U.S. court filing mentions the names of shell companies and banks such payments were funneled through.Pavel Klimovsky, a spokesman for the Russian Ministry of the Interior, said an internal investigation had been opened. Investigators, he said, have asked the Moscow office of Daimler for information about the U.S. court case and are awaiting a reply.Yuri Chaika, Russia’s prosecutor general, said in televised comments Wednesday that a request for assistance went out to the Americans three weeks ago and that he was waiting for an official reply.A spokeswoman for the U.S. Justice Department, Laura Sweeney, said that she could not comment on specific cases but that the department routinely cooperated with foreign law enforcement organizations.The court filings, while not identifying officials by name, provide what would appear to be good clues.In one case, for example, the investigators say Daimler transferred thousands of euros directly into the personal bank account of an official in charge of vehicle procurement in a provincial city. As of Thursday, a month later, nothing has happened.