https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/20/us/politics/donald-trump-louisville-kentucky.html
Trump, Embattled in Washington, Recharges Among Fans in Kentucky - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Louisville (Ky),Presidential Election of 2016,Immigration and Emigration,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
March 20, 2017
1411
LOUISVILLE, Ky. — President Trump, embattled in Washington, traveled here on Monday to deliver a rollicking populist and nationalist appeal, promising to rewrite trade agreements, clamp down on illegal immigration and keep terrorists out of the country — all in the service of putting “America first.”In a speech ostensibly timed to push the Republican health care law through Congress, Mr. Trump drew deeply on the themes that animated his 2016 campaign, whipping up a rapturous crowd with promises to reopen shuttered coal mines and throw lawless immigrants out of the country.Mr. Trump promised that health care legislation would undo the “disaster” of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act. But he presented it less as a cornerstone of his legislative agenda than as a necessary prerequisite to finance deep tax cuts.“We have to get this done to do the other,” Mr. Trump declared.For Mr. Trump, who is enduring one of the most difficult stretches of his young presidency, the rally was a chance to bathe in the adulation of a campaign crowd, a sea of people waving placards that said: “Buy American. Hire American” and “Promises Made. Promises Kept.”“This place is packed,” he exulted. “We’re in the heartland of America, and there is no place I would rather be.”In the packed stands of Freedom Hall in Louisville, the swirl of questions back in Washington — about the Trump campaign’s ties with Russia or the president’s debunked assertions that he had been wiretapped by his predecessor — seemed a million miles away.That was exactly the point. Mr. Trump’s aides have used these campaign-style events to buoy their boss and provide a respite from the pileup of pressures in Washington. Mr. Trump recycled many of his favorite lines from the aftermath of his election victory in November.“There is no path to 270,” he said gleefully, recalling the skepticism that he would win an Electoral College majority. He talked about a representative of the “fake media” who asked him recently what it would take to unite the Republican Party. “I said: ‘Wait a minute. We won the House. We won the Senate. We won the White House.’”On the legislative business at hand, repealing the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Trump acknowledged that the Republican bill would have to be changed to make it through Congress. But he offered no details and appeared unconcerned about the ultimate outcome.“We’re going to negotiate; it’s going to go back and forth,” Mr. Trump said. “In the end, it’s going to be great.”Mr. Trump pointed to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who as the Republican leader will have to shepherd health care legislation through the Senate. “Hey, Mitch, we going be O.K.?” he said. “That health care looking good?” Mr. McConnell introduced Mr. Trump as the leader who would help the United States recover from the wreckage of the Affordable Care Act.The president saved most of his fire for trade. He said he would renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement and other “terrible” trade deals to bring jobs and factories back to the United States. The nation, he claimed, has lost 60,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.“We sacrificed our own middle class to finance the growth of foreign countries,” Mr. Trump declared. “Ladies and gentlemen, those days are over.”“We won’t be played for fools, and we won’t be played for suckers anymore,” the president said.Mr. Trump noted that he had cleared the way for the Keystone XL and Dakota Access pipelines, and would demand that they be built with American steel. He said that under its new administrator, Scott Pruitt, the Environmental Protection Agency would go from a “job killer into a job creator.”Mr. Trump, who last week visited the grave site of President Andrew Jackson in Tennessee, added a new historical figure to his pantheon of populists: Henry Clay, the Kentucky lawmaker who served as speaker of the House and secretary of state in the early 1800s.Clay, the president said, had pioneered an economic philosophy known as the American System, which he said prefigured his approach: steep tariffs to protect American exports and generous government spending on roads, canals and other public works projects.“Like Henry Clay, we want to put our own people to work,” Mr. Trump said. “We believe in two simple rules: Buy American, and hire American.”“After spending trillions and trillions of dollars overseas,” he added, “we are going to start taking care of our country.”Mr. Trump left the capital at the end of a tumultuous day that showcased the perils and promise of his presidency.In the House, lawmakers grilled the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, and the director the National Security Agency, Adm. Michael S. Rogers, about ties between the Trump campaign and Russia. In the Senate, Mr. Trump’s nominee for the Supreme Court, Neil M. Gorsuch, introduced himself in what will be several days of confirmation hearings before the Judiciary Committee.Mr. Trump made no reference to Mr. Comey’s testimony and only a brief reference to Mr. Gorsuch. He urged the Senate to swiftly confirm “an outstanding man from an outstanding family.”This was the third speech of Mr. Trump’s presidency that had an explicitly political theme, drawing on his campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again.” It had been conceived as a rally with supporters in a state where one of the Republican senators, Rand Paul, had expressed opposition to the Republican health care legislation, which Mr. Trump is backing.The visit to a major coal-producing state also resonated in the context of Mr. Trump’s plans to lift emissions restrictions on coal-fired power plants, something he is expected to do with an executive order on climate issues that the administration has yet to release. Mr. Trump said he had already eliminated some regulations on the coal industry, and he promised that the executive order would do more.“We are going to put our coal miners back to work,” he said. “They have not been treated well. But they are going to be treated well.”