https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/07/world/asia/cui-tiankai-chinas-envoy-to-us-aims-to-allay-tensions.html
Cui Tiankai, China’s Envoy to U.S., Aims to Allay Tensions - The New York Times
China,Cui Tiankai,Xi Jinping,Obama  Barack,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,United States International Relations
June 6, 2013
4909
BEIJING —  In the Great Hall of the People last week, a man with graying hair and a broad face was among the phalanx of aides surrounding China’s new president, Xi Jinping, as he planned with the Americans for the California summit meeting.The Chinese diplomat with perhaps the deepest knowledge of the United States, Cui Tiankai, the country’s ambassador in Washington, is its chief behind-the-scenes facilitator for the meeting that will bring together Mr. Xi and President Obama at Sunnylands, the Walter H. Annenberg desert estate, starting Friday.Before leaving Beijing to take up his ambassadorial post in April, Mr. Cui suggested to those around him the urgent need for the two leaders to know each other and to meet privately — somewhere outside the capitals, he said — so the recent scratchiness of the United States-China relationship could be smoothed.A trusted negotiator who reports to superiors up the hierarchical chain of China’s government, Mr. Cui, 60, is no stranger to big China-United States events. He is so firmly entrenched that in January he visited both Henry A. Kissinger and Hillary Rodham Clinton, then the secretary of state, to get their takes on the state of the relationship between the two countries before taking up occupancy at the new I. M. Pei-inspired Chinese Embassy in Washington.“He’s a thoughtful, fair-minded person, capable of objectivity,” said David M. Lampton, director of China studies at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, who has known Mr. Cui for many years. “He has his instructions, but he is capable of putting them in the best possible light.”Mr. Cui’s first experience in the United States was at Johns Hopkins in 1986 as part of an early wave of Chinese officials sent to the country to broaden their horizons. He entered a yearlong postgraduate public policy program, delving into microeconomic theory, the conduct of foreign policy and United States-China relations in a course taught by the China scholar A. Doak Barnett.Mr. Cui had always expected to have a career as an interpreter, Dr. Lampton said. But he rose steadily through the ranks of the Foreign Ministry, serving at the United Nations and as spokesman of the Foreign Ministry in Beijing.He then led various departments at the Foreign Ministry, including a new policy-planning unit where the bulk of the business was the United States.From 2007 to 2009, he served as China’s ambassador to Japan, a period before relations went sour. Mr. Cui has a hard-headed read on Japan, associates say, and believes that the United States may come to regret not trying to urge a total remake of the political system, as in post-World War II Germany.He served as a principal briefer for Mr. Xi on American policies and habits when Mr. Xi toured the United States last year as vice president. He was the main conduit for the complicated negotiations on a joint communiqué between President Hu Jintao and Mr. Obama in 2009.And as a senior official in China’s Foreign Ministry, he has attended countless international meetings. There, he has jousted with American diplomats and smoothed over differences, always putting China’s interests foremost, but listening to the American point of view, say Americans who have worked with him.Two episodes involving the collision of Chinese and American ways of doing things illustrate Mr. Cui’s ability as a diplomat to bridge the stark differences between the two systems, those who know him say.When Chen Guangcheng, a human rights lawyer, turned up at the American Embassy in Beijing in May 2012 during a visit by Mrs. Clinton, it was left to Mr. Cui to find an equitable outcome to an awkward situation for China that threatened to derail the relationship between the countries.Fairly quickly, Mr. Cui persuaded the Chinese government to accede to Mr. Chen’s request: that he stay in China as a free person and study law at a university near Beijing, unhindered by security officials as he had been in his home province.But then, Mr. Chen changed his mind and demanded to go to the United States, even accompanying Mrs. Clinton on her plane when she left China.So Mr. Cui had to take the case of Mr. Chen to senior officials again. After some tense negotiations when Mr. Cui was reported to have shown irritation at the American defense of Mr. Chen, the Chinese government agreed that he could leave.Kurt Campbell, who dealt with Mr. Cui as an assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, said the veteran diplomat always had a particular style.“He is very strategic, always comes with a game plan, is never rattled, and if he did express anger, it was as part of a show,” he said.It was at a social affair at Mr. Campbell’s farm in the Virginia countryside in 2010 that Mr. Cui faced another challenge. Mr. Campbell invited Mr. Cui and a group of State Department colleagues to his rural weekend getaway, a chance to relax and to show the Chinese diplomat the Civil War territory in which he was interested.There, according to an account that Mr. Cui gave reporters in Beijing in March, Mr. Campbell brought out a 1950s tractor. It was similar, Mr. Cui said in a meeting with reporters, to the tractor he drove in Heilongjiang Province in northeast China when, like millions of people in the 1970s, he was sent to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution.“He asked, ‘Do you know how to drive it?’ So I drove a circle, a circle on the grass. He was very happy,” Mr. Cui said, referring to Mr. Campbell. “We even took some photos in front of it.”At the time, it was unusual for Chinese officials to talk about the Cultural Revolution — it has become more acceptable since Mr. Xi has referred to his own experiences in that period — and some Americans at the gathering felt that Mr. Cui might have been embarrassed.If that was the case, his discomfort was not clearly evident.On his next visit to Washington, Mr. Cui gave Mr. Campbell a model Dongfang tractor, a popular brand in China.