https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/24/world/americas/haitians-mexico-brazil-deport-united-states.html
Haitians, After Perilous Journey, Find Door to U.S. Abruptly Shut - The New York Times
Haiti,Illegal Immigration,Deportation,Homeland Security Department,Immigration and Emigration,Visas,United States International Relations,Brazil
Sept. 23, 2016
8417
TIJUANA, Mexico — They passed the corpses of other migrants who had tried to cross the Americas. They were cheated by smugglers and fleeced by armed bandits, and they suffered long stretches of hunger.Finally, after months of traveling across nine international borders, the Haitians made it to Tijuana, where thousands of their countrymen had already been allowed to enter the United States this year. All they had to do, they thought, was wait for their appointments with immigration officials and they, too, would be allowed on American soil.Then, suddenly, they learned that their journey — and the hopes of thousands of others like them heading toward the American border — had most likely come to an abrupt, crushing end.On Thursday, the Obama administration, in an effort to halt an extraordinary wave of Haitian migrants streaming to the United States, announced that it was tightening its immigration policy on Haitians. Those who appeared at the American border without visas would almost certainly be sent back to Haiti.The unexpected change sowed deep disappointment and confusion among the hundreds of Haitians at the border who thought they were only days away from entering the United States. Thousands more are still on their way, risking their lives on a perilous trip, probably in vain.“I feel bad, I feel bad,” Renard Paul, a Haitian migrant, said when told about the policy change. He struggled to digest the news, hoping it was just a rumor.“All the misery we suffered on the way here,” he muttered.For months, Haitians have been traveling north from Brazil, where they had gone to find work after Haiti was devastated by an earthquake in 2010. At the time, Brazil, in need of low-wage workers, had welcomed many of them with humanitarian visas.But Brazil has slipped into economic and political malaise, causing many Haitians to lose work, sink deeper into poverty and set their sights on the United States instead.Making their way mostly by land, some found an additional incentive to head for the border because of the American election. The next president might be Donald J. Trump, they said, and they wanted to get into the United States before his wall went up.The vanguard of the migratory surge arrived here in May. Since then, more than 5,000 Haitians without visas have been allowed to pass through the Southern California border crossings.Many others — Mexican officials say as many as 1,000 — are still in Tijuana, crowding the city’s migrant shelters, budget hotels and rooms-for-rent where they have spent many days waiting for their appointments with American immigration officials.And thousands more Haitians are still on the way, many of them likely unaware that the special immigration privileges for Haitians have been revoked.Sarah Saldaña, director of United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, testified in Congress this week that by the estimates of a few Central American governments, an additional 40,000 may be en route — an astoundingly sharp increase from earlier estimates that migrant advocates had heard.Haitians had been entering the United States because of a change in deportation policy after the 2010 earthquake. In an acknowledgment of the special political and economic troubles in Haiti, American border officials were allowing them to enter under a humanitarian parole provision, with permission to stay in the United States for as many as three years.But on Thursday, the Obama administration announced that it was fully resuming the deportations of undocumented Haitians, meaning that anyone who showed up at a border post without a visa would likely be put into a fast-track deportation process that is often used for migrants without visas.The news stunned advocates on both sides of the border, who struggled to predict what might happen next.Would Haitian migrants now stay in Mexico, or head elsewhere in Latin America? Would those heading to Tijuana heed suggestions by American officials to turn around and go back to Brazil? Would Mexico and other Latin American countries help absorb them? Would some waiting at the border, having come this far, try to cross into the United States illegally?Mr. Paul, 40, whose wife and five children live in Haiti, said he was pretty sure of one thing: He wasn’t going back to Brazil. He had spent nearly four years there, working as a mason.“There’s nothing there,” he said. “We’re looking for a better life. If we can’t work, we can’t feed the family.”His journey from Brazil to Tijuana had taken 11 weeks. Thieves in Nicaragua stripped him of everything, including his shoes. Now, he said on Friday, he was totally despondent: “I have no energy now.”The path from Brazil to Tijuana is full of hazards. Stories circulate of people being swept away as they forded fast-moving rivers. In interviews with more than 20 migrants here, they described passing advice up and down the route, mostly using cellphone messaging apps: which buses to take, the names of the good smugglers, addresses of migrant shelters, the unique perils of various border crossings.The migrants — mostly men — have arrived in Tijuana carrying little, usually no more than a knapsack or a plastic bag. Some also carried toddlers and infants. One woman gave birth this month after crossing the border from Guatemala into Mexico. She was on a bus with her infant the next day for the three-day trip to Tijuana.The route generally led from the Brazilian interior to Peru, through Ecuador and on to Colombia. Many then took a boat before they started walking again, sometimes for days, through the Darién Gap of Panama, always with a relay team of hired guides, each of whom charged from $10-$20 a head.Costa Rica became a key staging ground for what many said was the most difficult stretch of the trip: crossing Nicaragua. Getting through that country required a smuggler. Guides charged from several hundred dollars to $1,500 per person and the trip took several days, some of it on foot.But payment offered no guarantees of safe passage. Haitians here told how their smugglers abandoned their groups midway through the crossing, leaving them vulnerable to bandits or, worse, the Nicaraguan security forces, who returned the migrants to the Costa Rican border. Some migrants got stuck for weeks or even months in Costa Rica waiting for family or friends to wire them money to complete the journey.At the Mexican border, most Haitians have masqueraded as citizens of the Democratic Republic of Congo. The collective wisdom is that the Mexican authorities treat Africans better than Haitians and are more inclined to give them 20-day transit passes. Real Africans find this masquerade laughable.“They don’t even know there are two Congos,” scoffed Evans Demorais, 31, a Nigerian migrant here. “They are saying: ‘Please, are you from Africa? What is the capital of Congo? Who is the president?’”By the time the migrants arrive in Tijuana, after trips that could sometimes take six months, most have spent between $3,000 and $5,000, and some as much as $7,000.“They arrive here exhausted — in all senses of the word,” Margarita Andonaegui, the coordinator of Tijuana’s Desayunador Salesiano Padre Chava shelter, said.The Haitians are not the only ones making the journey. Migrants from across the Americas, Africa, Europe and Asia also started coming, especially in early summer — a diversity that shelter administrators had never seen before in their dormitories.“Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Sudan, Cuba, Pakistan, Cameroon,” Ms. Andonaegui said, reading from a log of nationalities she kept. “Bangladesh, Russia, the Dominican Republic, Iraq, Côte d’Ivoire.” More than two dozen nationalities in all, though the range has contracted in recent weeks, leaving this migrant trail populated mainly by Haitians and Latinos.The sudden increase in people from around the world along the Brazil-to-Mexico migrant route suggested the opening of new smuggling corridors as Europe’s borders have tightened.Homeland Security officials cited the surge in Haitians on the southwestern border as a major impetus for the policy change. They also insisted that the political and economic situation in Haiti, just over two weeks away from a highly contested presidential election, had improved enough to allow for Haitians to be safely returned.But immigrants’ advocates criticized the decision, hoping to press President Obama to roll back the change.“Tell us the facts and figures and prove that Haitians will not be deported back to an unsafe situation,” Benjamin Johnson, the executive director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said.The Rev. Pat Murphy, the director of Casa del Migrante, a shelter in Tijuana, said that the migrants in his shelter have been recalling the pain and risks of the trip they had just endured.“They started talking about the people who were left behind, the people who died on the path,” he said. “As if to say: ‘I can’t go back there. I’m alive.’”