http://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/22/opinion/give-new-york-its-fair-share-of-homeland-money.html
Give New York Its Fair Share of Homeland Money - The New York Times
NEW YORK STATE,NEW YORK CITY,UNITED STATES,ATOMIC WEAPONS,BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE,STATES (US),FINANCES,SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS,BUDGETS AND BUDGETING,TERRORISM
Aug. 22, 2004
9254
In a few short days, the Republican Party will be coming to town, and President Bush as well as the leadership of Congress will rely on New York's police officers, firefighters and other security personnel to ensure their safety. With New York City on the highest level of alert for the past 35 months and especially with the latest warnings, our first responders are working overtime to keep all those who live in and visit our great city safe and secure. That is why I hope that after Congressional leaders and the president rely on New York's finest, they will finally do right by the city (and the state) and address the imbalanced and illogical way that homeland security funds are distributed.In the latest fiscal year, Wyoming received $38 per person while New York received less than $5.50 per person from the largest pot of federal homeland security funding. This irrational system is the result of a decision to allocate more than 75 percent of some $2.9 billion the federal government spends on homeland security without regard to threat. Instead, each state gets a guaranteed minimum portion of this money, with the rest being divided up on a per-person basis. Under this system, New York City received only 3 percent of the $2.9 billion in the three largest homeland security programs, and only 2.5 percent of 2004 homeland security-related funds.This year, New York City has received $97 million from all Department of Homeland Security programs. The annual cost of homeland security operations for the Police Department alone is more than twice that. Add in the needs of the Fire Department and other first responders, and the increased spending required due to the most recent terror warnings, which specifically mention New York and Washington, and it is abundantly clear that the current system makes no sense.New York City is a symbol of our nation, and it is because of its symbolic significance that the city is a top target. It is wrong for New Yorkers to bear the burden of security alone. With more than 8 million residents and a work force that comes into the city every day from places like Westchester, Long Island and other surrounding communities, preventing another terrorist attack in New York City protects an entire region of people. At a time when the city is making tough budget decisions, it's past time for the federal government to honor its commitment to protecting homeland security by giving New York the resources it deserves. The first step is fixing the formula so that funds reflect the threat our communities face.Don't take it from me. The 9/11 commission has also called for changing the formula so that it is based on threat and risk, not pork-barrel politics. The report said, ''Federal homeland security assistance should not remain a program for general revenue sharing.'' I could not agree more.We need leadership across the board to fix this broken system. With a stroke of a pen, President Bush could change much of the funding to a threat-based formula, thereby ensuring that in a little less than three months New York would receive more of the financing it so desperately needs. The fact is that the Bush administration chose to distribute $2.2 billion without regard to threat, thereby guaranteeing less money for places like New York City.The administration may claim it was a Congressional decision, but that is just not the case. Congress specifically gave the administration the discretion to distribute the bulk of funds how it saw fit. It was the administration that decided against a threat-based formula.That is not to say that Congressional leadership has no role in this decision and bears no blame for the faulty plan. Shortly after Sept. 11, 2001, I proposed legislation that would improve the formula, increase overall funding, allow flexibility so that first-response agencies can address their specific needs, and eliminate a layer of bureaucracy by sending money directly to cities and towns. Despite their spoken support, the president and Republican Congressional leaders have consistently failed to act on this proposal.I know funding formulas can seem arcane and bureaucratic, but these dollars represent the choices we make in the battle against terrorism. We know where the threat lies, and yet the administration has chosen to put politics above our homeland security needs. It is time to make a different choice. Spreading the money thinly across the country may be in the political interest of many elected officials, but it is not in the best interest of protecting our country. We need to put our money where the threat is -- which means more funds for New York City.As for those who will soon come to New York and sing the praises of our police officers, firefighters and other emergency personnel, they need to match their actions to their words. The House and Senate return to Washington just a few days before the third anniversary of Sept. 11. Then perhaps, Congress and the White House will vow to put politics aside and fix the formula. Then and only then will New York City receive the money it needs and deserves.