http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/18/world/asia/18mazar.html
In Afghanistan’s North, a Former Warlord Offers Security - The New York Times
Afghanistan War (2001- ),Afghanistan,Politics and Government,Noor  Atta Muhammad,Mazar-i-Sharif (Afghanistan)
May 17, 2010
951
MAZAR-I-SHARIF, Afghanistan — In a country still gripped by war, the families picnicking around the azure-domed shrine in the central square here are perhaps the clearest sign that this northern provincial city has distinguished itself as one of the most secure places in the country. An estimated one million people visited Mazar-i-Sharif for Afghan New Year celebrations in March and in the weeks after without incident.It helps, of course, that Mazar-i-Sharif and the surrounding Balkh Province lie far from the Pakistani border and the heartland of the Taliban insurgency in southern and eastern Afghanistan. But there is something else that sets Mazar-i-Sharif apart, almost everyone here agrees, and that is the leadership of the provincial governor, Atta Muhammad Noor.Some regard Mr. Noor, 46, a former mujahedeen commander and an ethnic Tajik, as a thinly disguised warlord who still exercises an unhealthy degree of control across much of the north and who has used that influence to grow rich through business deals during his time in power since 2001.But there is little doubt that Mr. Noor has also managed to do in his corner what President Hamid Karzai has failed to achieve in other parts of Afghanistan: bring development and security, with a good measure of public support, to regions divided by ethnic and political rivalries.For that, Mr. Noor has slowly gained the attention and support of Western donors and become something of a study in what kind of governing, imperfect as it is, produces results in Afghanistan.Since 2001, American and other Western officials have tried to buttress the central government under Mr. Karzai as a means of securing Afghanistan by weakening powerful regional warlords and bringing lucrative customs revenues into the state coffers. Mr. Karzai has installed political allies as governors around the country, yet many have failed to provide security or services and have indulged in corruption, alienating Afghans from the government at all levels.Supporters of Mr. Noor say he has made the transition from bearded guerrilla fighter to business-suited manager. Though many presume he has used his position of power to make money, Mr. Noor speaks out against corruption and has apparently checked it enough to maintain public support. That support has enhanced security, and the security has allowed others to prosper, too, another important reason that he has maintained popular backing.Such is his support that Mr. Noor is the one governor whom President Karzai has been unable to replace, or has chosen not to, even after Mr. Noor campaigned against him in the presidential election last year.A skillful politician, Mr. Noor has also gained the upper hand over some formidable political rivals, solidifying his power in the region as they left to take up posts in Kabul, including even Mr. Karzai’s ally, the Uzbek militia leader Abdul Rashid Dostum.In an interview in his lavish party offices, Mr. Noor denied rumors that he takes a cut of every investment that flows through the region and said he made his money legally — he has interests in oil, wood trading, fertilizer and construction, among other things. “In legal ways, I did do a lot of work,” he said. “I did my own business.”Instead, he criticized Mr. Karzai’s management of the country and said the president never followed through on plans to regulate revenue collection, policing and relations between the central government and the provinces. He derided Mr. Karzai’s efforts to curb corruption, saying the president should not appoint corrupt people in the first place.Mr. Karzai had also failed to act as the Taliban insurgency spread into the north in recent years, he said.“If we don’t have the cooperation of the people, you cannot stop it,” he said of the insurgency. “There has to be a deep contact between the people and the government. If officials are not embezzling or taking bribes, then definitely the people will trust the government.”Even for skeptics of Mr. Noor, the success of his approach in Mazar-i-Sharif is hard to ignore. While insurgents remain active in two districts of the province, this city has emerged as an investment haven and has become one of the largest sources of revenue in the country, according to the Finance Ministry.Provincial leaders and businessmen attribute the improved security here to Mr. Noor’s skill in maintaining good community relations and to his deep knowledge of the region’s intricate patchwork of tribes and loyalties, earned during his years as a military commander in the north.Mr. Noor joined the mujahedeen to fight the Soviet occupation  at 16 and commanded hundreds of fighters against the Taliban by 2001. Today he maintains personal contacts with district, tribal and former mujahedeen leaders who cooperate on intelligence, according to an aide, Qari Qudratullah.Mr. Noor, who is from Mazar-i-Sharif, knows everyone, including the thieves and gangsters, Nader Nadery, deputy head of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, said. While protecting some, Mr. Nadery added, Mr. Noor has gained popularity by catching thieves and returning stolen goods to their owners.Dr. Muhammad Afzal Hadeed, a surgeon and the newly elected head of the provincial council, said: “He had good relations with the people, and the people are cooperating with him. These two factors made it work.”In the farming district of Balkh, west of Mazar-i-Sharif, the mainly Pashtun residents said security had vastly improved in the last five years. Businessmen, some of whom have moved from the south to invest in Mazar-i-Sharif, say they can do business here without fear of the kidnapping and extortion that plagues the capital. The governor, whose father was a fur and rug trader, is pro-business, they say.“The first thing he did was to eliminate poppy and smuggling and attract businessmen,” said Sayed Mohammad Taher Roshanzada, head of the chamber of commerce in Mazar-i-Sharif. “His slogan is, ‘Make money and spend it here.’ ”In Hairatan, a shabby river port on the northern border with Uzbekistan, brand new fuel storage tanks and a new railway line, Afghanistan’s first, are spreading out amid the desert scrub.The port is now the entry point for 80 percent of Afghanistan’s fuel imports, including up to half of the fuel supplies for American and NATO forces, said Muhammad Ayub Ghazanfar, an ethnic Uzbek whose family business is the region’s biggest importer of fuel and foodstuffs.Much of that business has come north because of attacks on convoys through Pakistan, he added. “The only reason for Mazar’s progress,” he said, “is because of the security.”