https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/13/upshot/obamacare-repeal-is-moving-forward-when-will-changes-affect-consumers.html
Obamacare Repeal Is Moving Forward. When Will Changes Affect Consumers? - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Budgets and Budgeting,House of Representatives,Senate,Law and Legislation
Jan. 13, 2017
1769
Senate Republicans took a major first step in repealing Obamacare this week. Consumers, though, should keep in mind that many steps remain before any changes will affect individuals with health insurance.If you’re one of the estimated 20 million Americans who gained coverage through the health law, you are extremely unlikely to lose coverage this year. If you get your health insurance through work or Medicare, the repeal legislation alone will have minimal effects on your coverage, even in the long run. Here’s our guide to what still needs to happen before any laws change.The Senate passed a budget resolution early Wednesday morning that sets the stage for a bill that could strip major provisions from Obamacare. But even for that stage-setter to become official, the House has to pass its own version of the same bill. That vote is expected Friday, and passage is likely, but not yet guaranteed.Republicans plan to use a special process to pass the bill that will protect it from a filibuster in the Senate. But that means it can change only some parts of Obamacare. Congress passed such a bill in 2015, and it could be a possible blueprint for what’s coming. (President Obama vetoed that one.) But there are various details that are still under negotiation. The detailed repeal proposal is expected to be introduced by Jan. 27, a nonbinding deadline included in the budget resolution.That is not a given. Several Republican senators have expressed concerns about the repeal plan. Their objections are not all the same, so it is difficult to predict how they will ultimately vote. Some object to individual provisions, while others are concerned about timing, and still others are worried about the budget impact. Republicans hold a narrow edge in the Senate, with 52 seats, and no Democrats are expected to support the measure.Similar concerns could drain the measure of a vote majority in the House as well, though Republicans have a larger margin there and could pass the bill with more defections.Donald J. Trump has said he would like the repeal bill to be accompanied by a bill to replace key provisions of the health law. A replacement package will be harder to pass through Congress because it will require 60 votes in the Senate. But he has made Obamacare repeal a priority, suggesting he is likely to sign the repeal bill even if it arrives alone.Members of congressional leadership have said that they want a stable transition between the old health care system and the new one that they are hoping to develop. That means there will be delays to implementation built into their repeal bill. The exact period of delay is not clear, but it’s likely to be in the two-to-four-year range.Lawmakers may not have  control over what happens to insurance markets in the aftermath of the bill, but consumers are unlikely to see major changes to their health insurance this year because contracts are already signed and regulations are already in place for this plan year. Major disturbances could begin as soon as early next year.A lot depends on the details of the bill, whether Congress passes additional legislation, and what other actions the Trump administration takes to regulate insurance markets. But people most likely to experience big changes are those who buy their own health insurance, whether in an Obamacare marketplace or directly from an insurance company. Many people with Medicaid coverage could lose their coverage or see substantial changes at the end of the delay period.Insurance from an employer or Medicare will be largely unchanged by the repeal, though Republicans might overhaul those systems with subsequent legislation. Anyone who gets insurance through work now and might like to retire or start their own business could be affected by the changes to the individual insurance market.