http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/11/us/underwear-bomb-plot-detailed-in-court-filings.html
Nigerian’s Bomb Plot Detailed in Court Filings - The New York Times
Terrorism,Abdulmutallab  Umar Farouk,Awlaki  Anwar al-,Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula,Yemen
Feb. 10, 2012
8852
WASHINGTON — In August 2009, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a Nigerian graduate student, traveled to Yemen and began visiting mosques, asking where to find Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born radical Muslim cleric who preached on the Internet in support of Al Qaeda’s brand of militant Islam. Their intensive plotting together for the next five months, and how they tried to pull off a suicidal bombing of a jet bound for Detroit that Christmas, has now been laid out publicly in more detail than ever before.By spelling out the case against Mr. Abdulmutallab, the Obama administration also went a long way toward explaining why officials decided that Mr. Awlaki, a United States citizen, had evolved from a propagandist to an “operational” terrorist. That, in turn, led to their extraordinary — and still officially unacknowledged — decision to kill Mr. Awlaki, without a trial, in a drone strike last September.The story was portrayed in two court filings supporting prosecutors’ request that a judge sentence Mr. Abdulmutallab to life in prison. They contained evidence, largely based on several months of extensive conversations he had with interrogators in early 2010, that prosecutors would have introduced at his trial had he not abruptly pleaded guilty on its second day last October.The filings say Mr. Abdulmutallab, after making contact with Mr. Awlaki, spent three days at the cleric’s house discussing martyrdom and “jihad,” or Islamist holy war. It said that Mr. Awlaki introduced him to a top bomb maker for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Yemen affiliate of the terrorist group, approved a proposal to blow up a plane, and instructed him to attack an American airliner.“Prior to the defendant’s departure from Yemen, Awlaki’s last instructions to him were to wait until the airplane was over the United States and then take it down,” one of the filings said.The failed attack set off a wave of fear, helping to derail the Obama administration’s plans to prosecute five accused conspirators in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. It also ignited a public debate about reading terrorism suspects the Miranda warning about their rights against self-incrimination, and prompted a secret decision by the administration to try to kill Mr. Awlaki.In early 2010, officials began hinting that Mr. Abdulmutallab had told interrogators that Mr. Awlaki had played a role in his attempted attack, and in July 2010 the Treasury Department accused Mr. Awlaki of playing an “operational” role for Al Qaeda’s Yemen affiliate by “preparing” him for the attack, but offered no evidence. The court filings make clear that this conclusion was largely based on Mr. Abdulmutallab’s interrogations and fills in what he divulged.The Nigerian man is said to have told his questioners that he started listening to Mr. Awlaki’s sermons in 2005. Four years later, he decided to go to Yemen to meet Mr. Awlaki “in order to discuss the possibility of becoming involved in jihad.”In Yemen, the filings said, Mr. Abdulmutallab visited mosques and asked many people if they knew where he could find Mr. Awlaki, who was in hiding. Eventually he gave his cellphone number to an intermediary, and Mr. Awlaki sent him a text message asking him to call. He did, and Mr. Awlaki asked him to write an essay “explaining why he wanted to become involved in jihad.”Mr. Abdulmutallab spent several days doing so and asking for Mr. Awlaki’s guidance. After reading it, Mr. Awlaki had him picked up and driven through the desert to his house. Mr. Abdulmutallab told Mr. Awlaki he was willing to undertake any mission Mr. Awlaki chose, the filings said.Mr. Awlaki sent Mr. Abdulmutallab to a bomb maker for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, Ibrahim al-Asiri, who proposed that he undertake a suicide bombing of a plane. Mr. Awlaki gave the final approval for the plan, the filings said.Mr. Abdulmutallab spent two weeks training at a Qaeda camp, where he met others — including, the filings said, Samir Khan, an American citizen who helped produce an English-language Internet magazine promoting terrorism called Inspire. (Mr. Khan was killed alongside Mr. Awlaki.)Mr. Asiri, the filings said, constructed the underwear bomb, using about 200 grams of the explosive PETN, and instructed Mr. Abdulmutallab how to use a syringe to inject a chemical that would initiate a fire, which was in turn supposed to detonate the explosive. Mr. Abdulmutallab also made a five-minute “martyrdom” video in early December.The filings also say that while Mr. Awlaki left Mr. Abdulmutallab free to choose the flight and date, it was the cleric who decided the target would be American. Mr. Abdulmutallab told agents his motivation “was the religious obligation to conduct jihad, not hatred toward the U.S.”To drive home the argument that he must never be released, the government also offered details about what he thought would be the final moments of his life and those of the other 289 people aboard the plane. When the airplane was about to cross over the United States border, they say, he went to the restroom, washed his face, brushed his teeth, put on cologne, returned to his seat, said prayers, and then pushed the plunger on the device — but it failed to detonate.Because he believed “that the outcome of his mission was in God’s hands,” one filing said, he told his questioners that he interpreted the failure of the bomb to explode as evidence that “it was not his time to die,” perhaps because God wanted to test his patience or purify him more before his eventual martyrdom.