https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/realestate/a-tribeca-penthouse-sells-for-48-million.html
A TriBeCa Penthouse Sells for $48 Million - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Ryan  Meg,Gyllenhaal  Jake,Serra  Richard,Greenwich Village (Manhattan  NY),TriBeCa (Manhattan  NY),New York City
June 30, 2017
9786
The penthouse at the pinnacle of 56 Leonard, the distinctive Jenga-like glass skyscraper in the heart of TriBeCa, has finally sold.The full-floor apartment, with a wraparound terrace and panoramic views of the Hudson River and New York Harbor, closed at $47,866,945 — the priciest sponsor unit in the 60-story building. It was also the city’s most expensive sale for the month of June, according to property records.But this purchase could easily be surpassed by neighboring apartments that hit the market only days ago: The penthouses encompassing the 53rd and 54th floors are being marketed together as a potential duplex for $65 million. The unidentified owner paid just over $53 million for the units in January.Several other notable transactions closed during the last month. The actors Meg Ryan and Jake Gyllenhaal each bought apartments at 443 Greenwich Street, another development in TriBeCa. Noelle Beck, who has appeared in several soap operas and prime-time television shows, and her husband sold their Gramercy Park townhouse. Jerryd Bayless, who plays for the Philadelphia 76ers of the National Basketball Association, bought a co-op in SoHo. And the renowned sculptor Richard Serra purchased a full-floor co-op loft in TriBeCa.THE 56 LEONARD PENTHOUSE, No. 60, has four bedrooms and four and a half baths, and is around 7,800 square feet, according to the listing with the Corcoran Sunshine Marketing Group. Monthly carrying costs are $9,175. The buyer, from California, used the limited liability company Uticon Investment Holdings.This sprawling apartment, with 19-foot ceilings and floor-to-ceiling windows, has more than 900 square feet of outdoor space, including a terrace off the kitchen and great room, and a private balcony off the enormous master bedroom suite. There is also a library, a conservatory, an exercise room, a formal dining area and a gallery with a skyline view.Nearly all the apartments at 56 Leonard have been spoken for. Just two sponsor units — a half-floor penthouse and a one-bedroom — remain, according to the listing broker. The cantilevered building was designed by the Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron and developed by the Alexico Group.Izak Senbahar, Alexico’s president and the owner of the penthouse on the 57th floor, said that most of the apartments went into contract two years before the building’s opening, in May 2016, and that the majority of the buyers were local. “We had a lot of families from TriBeCa who upgraded,” he said, “and a lot of Wall Street guys that wanted to be close by.”AT 443 GREENWICH, Ms. Ryan and Mr. Gyllenhaal each bought a three-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bath apartment.Ms. Ryan, whose long string of movies includes “When Harry Met Sally” and “You’ve Got Mail,” paid $9.39 million for No. 6C, which is 3,155 square feet, using the Third World Dog Trust. Mr. Gyllenhaal’s apartment, No. 5J, slightly smaller at 2,868 square feet, closed at $8.63 million. Mr. Gyllenhaal, who was nominated for an Academy Award for his role in “Brokeback Mountain,” made his purchase through Woodrow Trust.Ms. Beck, who has appeared in “As the World Turns” and “Law & Order,” and her husband, Eric Petterson, sold 243 East 17th Street, a 28-foot-wide Anglo-Italianate-style house, for $13.5 million. The buyer made the purchase through an L.L.C. The couple had paid $1.6 million in 1997 for this four-story home, with rear and front gardens, and they had wanted as much as $17 million when first listing the property in 2014. The most recent asking price was $14.5 million.MR. BAYLESS, A GUARD for the Philadelphia 76ers, paid $5 million for unit No. 3C at 117 Prince Street, a 2,500-square-foot co-op with two bedrooms, two baths and oversize windows. The seller was Marie Douglas.Mr. Serra’s purchase — a loft apartment encompassing the second floor of the cast-iron building at 173 Duane Street — closed at $7 million. The 4,200-square-foot unit has two bedrooms and two baths, along with a spacious artist’s studio, a gym/yoga room and a great room. He and his wife, Clara, already own a full-floor apartment on the third floor. The sellers were the artist Merrill Steiger and Arthur Gurwitz.Mr. Serra is best known for his large-scale sculptures; in 2014, he was awarded the President’s Medal from the Architectural League of New York, the first time the prize had been given to an artist.IN OTHER NOTEWORTHY SALES last month, Linda Wells, the founding editor of Allure magazine, bought a Fifth Avenue apartment for $3.45 million, after listing another Fifth Avenue residence. The publisher Mark Magowan and his wife, Nina, sold their Park Avenue duplex for $19.25 million. The estate of James H. Evans, who had served as the chief executive of the Union Pacific Corporation and the Central Park Conservancy, sold his Fifth Avenue duplex for $8.68 million. And the writer Wendy Gimbel, the author of “Havana Dreams,” and Douglas S. Liebhafsky sold their Greenwich Village townhouse for $14 million.