https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/dining/little-alley-restaurant-opens-in-murray-hill.html
With Roots in Shanghai, Little Alley Opens in Murray Hill - The New York Times
Restaurants,Little Alley (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Relocation of Business,Umami Burger,Empire Stores (Brooklyn  NY),Hudson Hotel,Brookfield Place (Manhattan  NY),Brooklyn (NYC),Manhattan (NYC)
June 20, 2017
9752
LITTLE ALLEY The name of this restaurant, selected by Yishu He, who owns it with the chef Yuchun Cheung, is a reference to Shanghai’s network of alleyways, or long tang. Mr. Cheung, a native of Shanghai, has cooked there and in New York, at China Blue in TriBeCa, and his entire staff has roots in Shanghai. The menu offers smoked carp, white cut chicken, fish soup with pickled mustard greens and lime, lion’s head with salted duck eggs, dong po pork, Shanghai rice cakes, stir-fried thick noodles, and, of course, soup dumplings, alongside many tofu dishes and vegetable preparations. The dining room is spare, with brick walls and plain wooden tables and chairs. (Opens Wednesday): 550 Third Avenue (37th Street), 646-998-3976, littlealley.nyc.&PIZZA An organic pizza crust, not a bowl of grains, serves as the base for ingredients at this restaurant, the first New York branch of a Washington, D.C.-based chain. Customers can choose between a preset combination or a custom pie, topped with several of dozens of ingredients. The pies are oblong, about 6½ by 18 inches and meant for one person. They’re ready in minutes, moving along a conveyor as they’re assembled: 15 West 28th Street, 646-968-4634, andpizza.com/nyc.CAMPERDOWN ELM Reclaimed wood has become standard in restaurant décor, but it’s especially appropriate for a spot named after a tree in Prospect Park. The owner Nao Minami and the chef Brad Willits, who was the executive sous-chef at Agern, have created a neighborhood restaurant with new American fare in the former Thistle Hill Tavern. The menu starts with snacks and gradually moves to large plates. (Friday): 441 Seventh Avenue (15th Street), South Park Slope, Brooklyn.DEL FRISCO’S GRILLE This informal chain, serving steaks, seafood, salads and sandwiches, has opened a second Manhattan location: Brookfield Place, 250 Vesey Street (West Street), 212-786-0760, delfriscosgrille.com.FATBIRD SOUTHERN KITCHEN AND BAR The celebrity chef Cat Cora has opened her fried chicken palace in the meatpacking district, where tables spill onto the sidewalk. The menu is stuffed with deviled eggs, mac and cheese, crab hush puppies, biscuit sandwiches, chicken and waffles, shrimp and grits, ribs, pies and fried chicken, both classic and hot Nashville style. There’s also a burger and drinks galore, some served in Mason jars. Service starts with breakfast: 44 Ninth Avenue (14th Street), 212-633-2473, fatbird.com.FUKU WALL STREET Another outlet of David Chang’s small fried chicken and chicken sandwich chain is in the midst of its soft opening (Monday through Friday, dinner only). In addition to chicken sandwiches, there’s a summertime ginger-chicken bowl and, for dining in only, a Korean-inspired feast called Chimek, consisting of a whole chicken in two styles, with sides ($42 total), and optional beer: 110 Wall Street (Front Street), eatfuku.com.LITTLENECK GRAND Aaron Lefkove and Andy Curtin have seafood restaurants in Gowanus and Greenpoint, Brooklyn, and they are adding this one in Williamsburg. It’s the largest of the group, with seating for 70 and, like the others, a menu of New England fish shack specialties. They’re starting with breakfast and lunch; dinner will follow soon: 131 Grand Street (Berry Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-218-6054, littleneckbrooklyn.com.MILK A popular Los Angeles ice cream parlor specializing in colorful macaron ice cream sandwiches is setting up shop in New York for a few days. And if you sample the ice cream, keep in mind that the brand’s pints will soon be available in stores nationwide. (Wednesday through Sunday): 52 Kenmare Street (Mott Street), themilkshop.com.RESTAURANT AT ROSE HILL The restaurateur Frederick Lesort of Matisse has joined forces with Philippe Olivier Bondon, who worked on St. Barts, to open this hotel restaurant. The dining room showcases contemporary and midcentury art. The chef Keith Geter, who has worked in New York, Anguilla and Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, has developed an American menu (Thursday): HGU New York hotel, 34 East 32nd Street, 212-448-1302, rosehillrestaurant.com.TAQUERIA EL ATORADERO Denisse Lina Chavez and Noah Arenstein are increasing their presence in Brooklyn with the addition of this Mexico City-style taqueria, with specialties like tacos topped with French fries and combination chorizo-cheese tacos. (Friday): 636 Degraw Street (Fourth Avenue), Gowanus, Brooklyn, elatoraderobrooklyn.com.UMAMI BURGER The fourth New York outlet of this California-based chain has a new feature: breakfast. There are four egg-based sandwiches on brioche buns, no hamburger meat involved. For the rest of the day, there is largely the standard menu, including a truffle burger, and a full bar. (Friday): Hudson Hotel, 358 West 58th Street, 212-554-6217, umamiburger.com.VHH FOODS Vinegar Hill House is opening an informal spinoff with outdoor seating in Dumbo, Brooklyn. Jean Adamson, the chef who owns the restaurants with Sam Buffa, had stepped back from the kitchen but is doing the cooking in the new venture. Customers order at a counter and are signaled when the food is ready during the day. Evenings, there’s waiter service. The all-day menu offers sandwiches, tartines, vegetables and various meats, many served by the pound for picnics in the nearby park. Unusual coffee drinks, like a nonalcoholic mai-tai iced latte, are a specialty: Empire Stores, 55 Water Street (Main Street), Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-243-1569, vhhfoods.com.THE LOBSTER CLUB This will be the third part of Major Food Group’s Seagram Building restaurant makeover, in the space that housed the Brasserie on the 53rd Street side of the building. The group has hired the chef Tasuku Murakami, who was at Sushi Azabu in TriBeCa, and held a Michelin star for many years. Jeff Zalaznick, a partner in Major Food, said the restaurant, set to open in October, will be a Japanese brasserie serving sushi and cooked food. It is being designed by Peter Marino, a prominent architect whose firm specializes in high-fashion stores. Major Food has been holding on to the restaurant name’s for quite some time. Originally, it was to be for a small spot near Carbone in Greenwich Village that became ZZ’s Clam Bar: 98 East 53rd Street.TWO WATERLINE SQUARE All new high-rise developments seem to require a food component of some kind these days, and space permitting, it’s likely to be some sort of food hall. Waterline Square, a complex of three residential towers under construction from 59th to 61st Streets on the Far West Side, fits the pattern. Two Waterline Square, designed by Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates, will house a combination market and collection of fast-casual and more upscale restaurants. All are being created and run by Cipriani, the company founded in Venice in 1931 that has become a global collection of restaurants, hotels, clubs and catering halls. The details of Cipriani’s plans for the space have not been decided, and a late 2018 opening is projected.CHAZZ PALMINTERI RISTORANTE ITALIANO The Broadway star’s namesake restaurant on Second Avenue will close on Saturday and reopen near the theater district the next day. The menu will remain largely the same, but the restaurant will have outdoor seating. (Sunday): Cambria Hotel, 30 West 46th Street, 212-355-5540, chazzpalminterinyc.com.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.