http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/nyregion/nurse-in-newark-tests-negative-for-ebola.html
Tested Negative for Ebola, Nurse Criticizes Her Quarantine - The New York Times
Ebola Virus,New Jersey,New York State,Hickox  Kaci,Christie  Christopher J,Cuomo  Andrew M,Newark (NJ),Newark Liberty International Airport (NJ),Nursing and Nurses
Oct. 25, 2014
5156
A nurse who was being quarantined at a New Jersey hospital after working with Ebola patients in Sierra Leone criticized her treatment on Saturday as an overreaction after an initial test found that she did not have the virus.“I am scared about how health care workers will be treated at airports when they declare that they have been fighting Ebola in West Africa,” the nurse, Kaci Hickox, wrote in an essay on the website of The Dallas Morning News, in collaboration with a friend who works for the paper. “I am scared that, like me, they will arrive and see a frenzy of disorganization, fear, and most frightening, quarantine.”She described being held in isolation for about seven hours at Newark Liberty International Airport on Friday, left alone for long stretches and given only a granola bar when she said she was hungry.Ms. Hickox, 33, was placed in quarantine under a new policy announced on Friday by the governors of New York and New Jersey. All people entering the United States through Newark Liberty and Kennedy Airports will now be quarantined for 21 days if they had direct contact with Ebola patients in Guinea, Liberia or Sierra Leone, even if they show no symptoms of infection.On Friday night, New Jersey health officials said the nurse had developed a fever after arriving, but on Saturday, they said her blood had tested negative for Ebola. Additional tests will be conducted.Ms. Hickox disputed that she had had a fever. She wrote that at the airport, a forehead scanner showed her temperature to be 101, but that came after four hours during which she had not been allowed to leave.“My cheeks were flushed, I was upset at being held with no explanation,” she wrote. “The female officer looked smug. ‘You have a fever now,’ she said.”She was eventually escorted by eight police cars to University Hospital in Newark and taken to a tent outside the building. An oral thermometer showed her temperature to be 98, she wrote.She added that the doctor felt her neck and rechecked the temperature. “ ‘There’s no way you have a fever,’ he said. ‘Your face is just flushed.’ ”Her complaints served as a broadside against the new quarantine policy, which goes further than recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The new policy has raised concerns among some health experts and doctors that it will discourage people from going to West Africa to try to contain Ebola at its source. The World Health Organization reported on Saturday that there were more than 10,000 suspected or confirmed cases in the three hardest-hit countries.The C.D.C. calls for self-monitoring for travelers who have had contact with Ebola patients, but not for isolation, because a patient is not believed to be contagious until symptoms appear. But C.D.C. officials said that states had the right to go beyond their recommendations.On Saturday, in a sign of growing concern about the virus, Gov. Pat Quinn of Illinois, the home of O’Hare International Airport in Chicago, began a quarantine program similar to the one in place in New York and New Jersey. Connecticut, which enacted a similar policy on Oct. 7, has quarantined nine people who have so far showed no symptoms.White House officials held a meeting on Saturday to discuss whether to revise nationwide policies regarding the return of health care workers from affected West African countries. An official said the administration may take further action, although it wanted to avoid anything that would hinder the ability to fight Ebola in West Africa.On Friday, the day after a New York City doctor who had worked in Guinea through Doctors Without Borders tested positive for Ebola, the governors of New York and New Jersey described the quarantines as a necessary caution. Some of the details of where travelers would be quarantined, whether at their homes or elsewhere, were still being worked out Saturday.Asked about the nurse’s essay while visiting Iowa, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said, “My heart goes out to her because she’s someone who has been trying to help others and is obviously ill,” referring to earlier reports of a fever.“I’m sorry if in any way she was inconvenienced but inconvenience that could occur from having folks that are symptomatic and ill out amongst the public is a much, much greater concern of mine,” he continued. “I hope she recovers quickly, and we’re going to do everything we can in New Jersey and in our public health system to make sure that she does.” In a telephone interview on Saturday night, Ms. Hickox’s father, Leon Hickox, said that his daughter “is not ill in any way.”Doctors Without Borders said on Saturday that “there is a notable lack of clarity about the new guidelines,” and that it was concerned about the treatment of Ms. Hickox, who worked with the organization. It said she was in an unheated tent set up as an isolation ward next to a building at University Hospital. But a hospital spokeswoman, Stacie Newton, said the nurse was “in a building that’s part of the hospital.”The New York City doctor, Craig Spencer, 33, remained in isolation at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan on Saturday, with officials saying he had “entered the next and more serious phase of his illness, as anticipated with the appearance of gastrointestinal symptoms.” Mayor Bill de Blasio continued his reassurance tour on Saturday, sampling most of the menu at a meatball shop in Manhattan that Dr. Spencer had visited last week, as “a reminder about some core truths about Ebola.”“It cannot be contracted through casual contact. It is not an airborne disease,” he said.In New Jersey, health officials did not say how long Ms. Hickox was to be kept at University Hospital. The nurse’s mother, Karen Hickox, said her daughter called her on Saturday morning crying. “She felt like you would treat a dog better than she’s been treated,” she said in an interview.Kaci Hickox grew up in Texas and worked for the C.D.C. in Las Vegas until recently, when she moved to Fort Kent, Maine, her mother said. She has worked in several African countries with Doctors Without Borders.In the essay, Ms. Hickox described her last night at an Ebola management center in Sierra Leone, when she gave crushed Tylenol and anti-seizure medicine to a dying 10-year-old girl as her body jolted in bed. “It was the hardest night of my life,” she wrote.“We need more health care workers to help fight the epidemic in West Africa,” she wrote. “The U.S. must treat returning health care workers with dignity and humanity.”The essay drew more than 1,000 comments on the Morning News’s website, including some criticism of Ms. Hickox. Many readers argued that the quarantine was necessary and that it should not be a major inconvenience for the nurse to spend 21 days in quarantine to ensure that the virus does not spread. Still, others argued that the quarantine was fair but that the authorities should have treated her better.In a statement, the C.D.C., which was involved in Ms. Hickox’s case, described workers like her as “heroes” and said: “We must protect their health, safety, and well-being and treat them with respect when they return home while continuing to take action to protect Americans so Ebola does not spread here.”If Ms. Hickox was asymptomatic, said Udi Ofer, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, he would have questions about the legality of her quarantine.“Mandatory quarantine of people exhibiting no symptoms and when not medically necessary raises serious constitutional concerns about the state abusing its police powers,” Mr. Ofer said.Nicolas P. Terry, director of the Hall Center for Law and Health at the McKinney School of Law at Indiana University, said Ms. Hickox could challenge her quarantine on the grounds that she was being held without cause. But he said if the order was directed only at travelers in countries affected by Ebola and did not say they had to be symptomatic, then her only choice would be to challenge the validity of the order itself.“If she fits the definitions and the symptoms of the New Jersey emergency regulation, they can keep her,” Mr. Terry said.Ms. Hickox’s mother said she had sent her daughter a text message asking if she thought she would be detained when she returned home: “She texted back: LOL that’s not going to happen.”