https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/12/upshot/does-donald-trump-need-the-hispanic-vote-not-as-much-as-you-might-think.html
Do Donald Trump and Republicans Need the Hispanic Vote? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Hispanic-Americans,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Race and Ethnicity,Political Advertising,Florida,Republican Party
Aug. 11, 2016
6248
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor in New York, discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.Toni You posted a Twitter quiz for your followers: “It’s easy to get Clinton to 269: Kerry & Gore states + NM/VA/CO. What’s her easiest path to 270?”It’s scary for Donald Trump’s campaign that it’s so easy for Hillary Clinton to get to 269 electoral votes, but also a little unnerving for Clinton supporters to see that they can come up short despite winning Pennsylvania, Colorado, Virginia and Wisconsin. She would need one more electoral vote.Nate Yeah, obviously this is only interesting if the race tightened considerably. Right now, Clinton leads in all of these states. But in the event that the election got close, Clinton would have a lot of options, and all of them seem pretty plausible to me: New Hampshire, Ohio, Nevada, Iowa, Florida and North Carolina. They’re very distinct demographically, so I think it’s tough for Trump to run the table. But I can also conjure up an argument for why Trump can win all of those states.Toni Trump likes to talk about walls. If the race does get closer, there seem to be two firewalls for Clinton. Trump needs to win Florida, and the Latino vote there is a big obstacle.If he can get over that, the second wall is Pennsylvania, and a huge obstacle there is suburban voters, particularly in the counties near Philadelphia.Nate Well, I don’t consider Hispanic voters a firewall. They’re just not a large enough share of the electorate. They’re a key component of Clinton’s coalition, but they’re small enough that they can be “jumped.”I would turn it around: I think Donald Trump needs to break through among white voters without a college degree in Florida and Nevada. It’s hard, but it’s not impossible.The college-educated vote in Pennsylvania really could turn out to be a “firewall.” The Quinnipiac and Marist polls gave Clinton a 21- and 15-point lead in the state with that group — which is a huge improvement from four years ago. Those sort of numbers really do make it hard to see how Trump is going to win the state, which is reflected in his double-digit deficit there.Toni This gets at a question I’ve been meaning to follow up on. You’ve shown, and so have Sean Trende and some other analysts, that the Hispanic vote is overrated in analyzing the 2012 election and even in analyzing this election.In one of our chat articles, you even said, looking at the future, “Right now, I’d guess that the next Republican who wins the presidency will do so without doing far better among Hispanic voters,” and “I don’t think we know how much upside a populist-conservative party might have among white voters.”But Florida has been an important swing state for years, and continues to be very important this year. So these two thoughts seem to be in conflict: a) The Hispanic vote is overrated; b) Florida is the most important state. But you’re saying there’s a simple answer. There just aren’t enough Hispanics in Florida?(A recent survey from Univision showed Trump winning only 12.9 percent of the Hispanic vote in Florida.)Nate I’ll be honest. I simply do not understand how people look at the numbers and conclude that the Hispanic vote is the end-all-be-all of electoral politics. Hispanics will make up roughly 15 percent of voters in Florida. That’s not nothing. But even big shifts among 15 percent of the electorate can be swamped by little shifts among the remaining 85 percent. It’s just math.Now, things can work out such that those 15 percent of voters are decisive. Maybe Trump can’t make big gains among white voters in the state. Then, losses among Hispanic voters could give Clinton a modest lead. But if Trump can make even modest gains among white voters in Florida — and he did very well there in the primary — then he’s going to win the state.I think the real reason Hispanic voters have an outsized place in the public’s understanding of the electorate is that they’ve had some of the biggest swings.Maybe 40 percent voted for George W. Bush in 2004, and then just 27 percent for Mitt Romney. The rest of the electorate has seemed really stable.But if the rest of the electorate starts moving — and we’re seeing big shifts among white voters, especially along educational lines — then even big shifts among Hispanic voters can quickly be swamped.Toni Beyond Florida, as you’ve demonstrated, people have undercounted how many whites are in the electorate. And there’s a realistic path to win by dominating with working-class whites. Hispanics tend to be concentrated in states like California, Texas, New York, New Jersey, Illinois — states that are not in play.Nevada seems to bolster your point. It appears to be a closer race, in terms of polling, than many had forecast. It has a high percentage of working-class whites, and although the Hispanic vote is fairly large, it’s still dwarfed by the white vote.Nate I’m not totally convinced that Nevada would be very close if it were polled right now. But it hasn’t been a safe state for Clinton, that’s for sure.I think one problem for Clinton is that there isn’t a lot of room for her to do better among Hispanic voters. Obama might have pushed 80 percent of the Hispanic vote there, so there aren’t as many Republican Hispanic voters for her to woo as there are in Florida or even Arizona.Another problem for Clinton, as you mentioned, is that Nevada just isn’t a very well-educated state. There are more white working-class Democrats for her to lose than there are white college-educated Republicans for her to pick up.To put Nevada out of play, Clinton needs to have a great final two months of registration.Keep in mind: Demographic shifts happen gradually in the census, but abruptly in the electorate. We could definitely look at the numbers in late September and say, “O.K., Trump isn’t going to win here.” But that hasn’t happened yet.Toni Let’s go back to Florida. The Hispanic vote is growing. The Cuban-American vote is becoming less Republican. Migration among Puerto Ricans is making an impact. And Puerto Ricans, as American citizens, can register to vote easily and quickly. There’s also a fairly sizable black population (17 percent), adding to the diversity of the state.In the longer run, it’s not healthy for Republicans to get crushed there by the Hispanic vote. And it’s going to be hard to turn around. Republicans could be boxed in. If you try to appeal to Hispanics, you could turn off working-class whites. If you try to appeal to working-class whites, you might turn off Hispanics. I guess I’m more pessimistic than you about Republican hopes in Florida in 2020 and beyond, and there’s every reason to believe Florida will continue to be a crucial state.Nate Well, look, I’m interested to figure out what happens in 2016 before we start gaming out 2020.Here’s all I’ll say: I see no reason to assume that a more effective candidate than Donald Trump couldn’t win white working-class voters in Florida by more than a 70-30 margin. Trump might even be able to do it himself, this year. And the truth is that even a big shift among Hispanic voters is pretty incremental in comparison.Now, maybe none of this happens. Maybe the Republicans hit their ceiling among white working-class voters in Florida (I think it’s happening in Georgia, or at least very near it). But until that happens, I see no reason to rule out further gains.Toni Georgia is now widely viewed as a tossup state. And one of the reasons, as you pointed out in an article this week, is related to education levels among whites. But something that shouldn’t be lost is the influence of the black vote. Georgia is third in the nation in black percentage of the population (almost 32 percent). And Trump is facing the prospect of receiving low single digits of that vote (his numbers are almost cartoonishly low). That’s a huge hole to dig out of. It’s like starting a basketball game trailing by almost 30-0.Nate Yes and no. Yes, Trump is not going to do well among black voters. And in a state like Georgia, that makes it possible for Clinton to win with very low levels of support among white voters.But it’s not at all clear that Trump is losing ground among black voters. Mitt Romney was reduced to cartoonish levels of support among black voters. In our compilation of pre-election polls from 2012, President Obama had a 92-3 lead among registered black voters. So I think it’s tough to argue that Trump is going to do much worse than Romney. And at the same time, he could (potentially) benefit from lower black turnout.So, whether you think of the black vote as the reason for Trump’s problem in Georgia is a matter of perspective. On the one hand, black voters will certainly make up a majority of the votes for Clinton in the state. On the other hand, I think it’s tough to argue that they’re the main reason the state is moving in her direction, at least compared with 2012.If you take a longer-term view — say, compared with 2004 or 2000 — then the huge influx of black voters into the electorate is the No. 1 reason the state has moved into play. But it has not been enough to get Democrats over the top, as Barack Obama can attest.Toni Right, and a state like Mississippi is an example of the limits of the black vote. It’s the No. 1 state in black percentage of the population, but the vast majority of whites vote Republican, and so African-Americans and Democrats are overmatched. But I notice that our forecasting model is giving even Mississippi a small chance to turn blue. And Kansas as well; a recent poll had Trump leading there by only five points. Can you explain how the demographics of Kansas could put the state in play? In 2012, Romney beat Obama, 60-38, in Kansas.Nate I think both of those states are real stretches for Clinton. If she’s winning in those states, she’s almost certainly winning by more than 10 points nationally — and I would guess with the help of a considerable Libertarian vote (more than 5 percent) in conservative areas. But Trump has a basic problem in both states: He has a lot of room to fall among well-educated white voters, and there just aren’t many opportunities to compensate with gains among working-class white voters.Toni As Trump’s poll numbers have sunk, it has given Republicans more cover to ditch him (and some have been doing so). One of Trump’s themes is winning: “We’re going to win again.” Well, he’s not winning, he’s losing. It could cause him to be more desperate — referring to “Second Amendment people” to stop Clinton and calling Obama the “founder of ISIS” — in trying to turn things around.All the while, Clinton is on the airwaves with ads. I was watching Katie Ledecky and Michael Phelps swim at the Olympics on Tuesday, then a Clinton TV ad appeared slamming Trump. But Trump is not up with any advertisements at all.Nate I suspect they’re going to go on the air fairly soon. They’ve raised a solid amount of money.I doubt they’re going to try to set up an especially large field operation.Most of the political science research says that ad effects decay pretty quickly. If that’s true, then Clinton’s early advantage may not be as important as Trump’s ability to compete on the air down the stretch. But who knows — obviously we’re in uncharted territory.Toni It’s two weeks after the Democratic convention. How solid do you think her bounce is? It seems to me it’s going to be hard for Trump to change minds. What can he tell a suburban mom in Pennsylvania to switch her allegiance?Nate I think it’s pretty solid. We should wait a little longer to be sure, but this has the markings of a real shift. It hasn’t faded — if anything, it’s grown. She’s made big gains among Democratic-leaning voters — the sort who would be expected to stick by her in the end.Toni In a Bloomberg poll listing some of Trump’s controversial actions, his mocking of a reporter’s disability “bothered” people the most. His response to the Gold Star Khan family also met disapproval from a high percentage of people. Some social science research suggests that emotion can be more effective than facts in trying to change minds. Trump has supplied plenty of ammunition, in terms of emotional appeals, to the Clinton team, something they can continue to use until Election Day.Nate Most of the Clinton campaign’s ad efforts have focused on these sort of messages. I’ll be interested to see if or when they transition to something else, like national security or targeted appeals to Republicans. If they’re going for a landslide, it wouldn’t be surprising if that’s where they started to turn.Last week, Nate and Toni discussed Donald Trump’s electoral strategy and his forecast of a rigged election.