https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/sports/soccer/angel-maria-villar-arrest-fifa.html
Ángel María Villar, High-Ranking FIFA Official, Is Arrested in Fraud Inquiry - The New York Times
Soccer,Spain,International Federation of Association Football (FIFA)
July 18, 2017
1259
Ángel María Villar, the president of the Spanish soccer federation and a FIFA vice president, was arrested on Tuesday as part of a fraud investigation relating to matches played by Spain’s national team.Mr. Villar was detained by the Spanish police alongside his son, Gorka, and other soccer officials. The arrests were ordered by a judge from Spain’s national court who has been investigating the finances of the national team. The police said in a statement that the detained officials were accused of crimes including embezzlement, fraud and the falsification of documents.Mr. Villar, 67, has run Spanish soccer for the past three decades and was re-elected unopposed in May as president of the national federation, despite being entangled in different corruption inquiries. Mr. Villar’s longstanding influence has also stretched far beyond soccer-crazy Spain. He is a vice president of FIFA, soccer’s world governing body, and last year he was also the interim president of UEFA, the European soccer authority, overseeing the European Championships.Mr. Villar was arrested in connection with an investigation started by a 2016 complaint over how the federation had organized and financed some matches played by the national team. The police said on Tuesday that Mr. Villar was accused of using the games to benefit Gorka Villar, a sports lawyer. Juan Padrón, the vice president of the Spanish federation, was also arrested on Tuesday, accused of mismanagement and embezzlement, including from illegal contracts signed between the federation and third parties, according to the police statement.Over the past three years, Mr. Villar has denied wrongdoing in several continuing fraud investigations. His opponents portray him as an influence-peddling president whose friends and relatives have benefited since he took charge of the Spanish federation in 1988. Gorka Villar became one of the leading officials in South American soccer, as director general of Conmebol, the region’s federation, until he resigned last year after being summoned by a judge in Uruguay investigating soccer corruption there.In May, Ángel Villar was re-elected as president of the national federation after two rivals withdrew their candidacies before the vote amid criticism of how the election was staged. The vote was initially scheduled for last year, but was postponed in a dispute over voting rules after Mr. Villar opposed the use of an electronic ballot, even though the idea was supported by the state sports agency as a means of guaranteeing the secrecy of each vote. Instead, Mr. Villar complained to FIFA about excessive interference by the Spanish government in the affairs of Spanish soccer.“Villar is the last of his kind, kept in power thanks to a system of clientelism that must disappear,” Miguel Ángel Galán, an owner of Spanish soccer schools who had considered running against Mr. Villar, said in an interview this year.The arrests in Spain come as soccer has been undergoing a changing of the guard since 2015 after an American investigation into corruption among FIFA officials.Neither FIFA nor UEFA offered any comment on Tuesday after the arrests in Spain.While managing to stay at the helm in Spain, Mr. Villar has suffered some setbacks to his standing in world soccer. In November 2015, Mr. Villar was fined 25,000 Swiss francs by FIFA’s ethics committee for refusing to take part in an investigation into whether bribes were paid to secure the elections of Russia and Qatar as World Cup host nations.While Mr. Villar was not accused of any wrongdoing at the time, FIFA’s ethics committee could still end up investigating his role in some international deals. Last year, Mr. Villar also lost out in his bid to turn his interim leadership of UEFA, which followed the suspension of Michel Platini, into a full-term appointment as president.The legal problems of Mr. Villar and his federation date to April 2014, when the superior council of sports, a Spanish state agency, began an investigation into alleged irregularities in the federation’s disbursement of about 1.9 million euros ($2.2 million), which was earmarked for the upgrade of stadiums owned by some of Spain’s nonprofessional clubs.Since then, several other payments by the federation have come under investigation, including 1.2 million euros that was meant to help Spain’s bid to stage the 2018 World Cup, alongside Portugal. (Russia was eventually selected as the host nation.) To bolster the World Cup bid, the Spanish federation agreed at the time to finance some charitable projects, including a soccer academy in Haiti, which had been devastated by an earthquake. The academy, however, was never set up.Last year, the federation also came under court investigation for forgiving part of the debt of two smaller clubs that were breaching the federation’s own financial rules for professional clubs. One of the two clubs, Recreativo de Huelva, is the oldest in Spain; the other, Marino Tenerife, is based in the hometown of Mr. Padrón, the vice president of the Spanish federation who was arrested on Tuesday. The police said they raided the offices of the local soccer federation in Tenerife on Tuesday.On Tuesday, the president of Spain’s council of sports, José Ramón Lete, told Spanish news media that the arrest of Mr. Villar showed that Spain was a functioning state of law, even if “it isn’t good for the image of the sport.”Even as the fraud allegations mounted against him, Mr. Villar continued to benefit from the international success of Spanish soccer during his time in charge. In 2010, Spain’s national team won the World Cup for the first time — as well as two consecutive European championships — under a coach, Vicente del Bosque, who was appointed by Mr. Villar. Spanish clubs have also dominated European soccer. Spain had two representatives in this year’s semifinals of the Champions League, and Real Madrid won the title.In January, Mr. Villar appeared before a judge and said that he took no part in the decision to forgive the debt of the clubs, pinning the responsibility on his subordinates, including Jorge Pérez, the federation’s former secretary general. After a fallout with Mr. Villar, Mr. Pérez said that he would run against Mr. Villar’s re-election, but eventually withdrew his candidacy.