http://www.nytimes.com/2001/03/11/nyregion/some-say-corzine-s-stock-holdings-may-pose-problem-in-work-on-banking-committee.html
Some Say Corzine's Stock Holdings May Pose Problem in Work on Banking Committee - The New York Times
NEW JERSEY,GOLDMAN SACHS & CO,SENATE,CORZINE  JON S
March 11, 2001
6859
The vast Wall Street holdings that both bankrolled Jon S. Corzine's successful Senate campaign in New Jersey and became a target for his opponents are spurring a new round of questions about whether his financial interests will influence his decisions now that he is in Congress.The concerns over Mr. Corzine's holdings, most of which are tied up in stock of Goldman, Sachs & Company, have intensified because he was recently appointed to the influential Senate Banking Committee. The committee has jurisdiction over the financial industry and, therefore, over matters that affect Goldman Sachs, the company Mr. Corzine once headed.Mr. Corzine has pledged to sell his Goldman stock and place his assets in a blind trust to avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest if he had to vote on any issues that might influence the value of those holdings.For now, Mr. Corzine is contractually prohibited by Goldman Sachs from selling those stocks, which are valued at close to $300 million, for roughly three years. That means it will be some time before Mr. Corzine can sell off all his Goldman Sachs shares. But in a recent interview, Mr. Corzine said that even if he were allowed to liquidate all his stock, he would not do so in one fell swoop, seeming to back away from the decidedness of his earlier position.In the interim, Mr. Corzine says he is taking steps to place all his assets in a trust that he has no direct control over -- though that would not immediately qualify as a blind trust because of the enormous, known stake he has in Goldman Sachs stock.The senator also stressed that his Goldman Sachs holdings would not influence his work on the banking committee and that his situation did not constitute a conflict of interest. ''I've never felt that it was going to color me in my decision making,'' he said.Mr. Corzine also produced a five-page opinion from the Senate Ethics Committee that essentially agreed with his contention that he was not violating the Senate's conflict-of-interest rule. The opinion, which he had apparently sought, was signed by the committee's chief counsel, Victor Baird, and dated Feb. 1.It said that Mr. Corzine no more violated the conflict-of-interest rule than a dairy farmer would if he were elected to the Senate and then voted to extend price supports for the dairy industry.But government-reform groups say that Mr. Corzine's situation, as a member of the banking committee with significant holdings in Goldman Sachs, a major player in the banking industry, is troubling.They say that it will be extremely difficult for Mr. Corzine to avoid a conflict of interest since the company has a direct stake in many issues that go before that committee.Mr. Corzine's situation is hardly unique in Washington. Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill this week had to deal with similar questions about his $117 million stake in Alcoa Inc.Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary who was also Mr. Corzine's predecessor as co-chairman of Goldman Sachs, placed his assets in a blind trust in 1993, when he entered government service. Goldman Sachs was not publicly traded at the time.Gary Ruskin, the director of the nonpartisan Congressional Accountability Project, said Mr. Corzine's situation underscored the overall weakness of the Senate's conflict-of-interest rule.The rule has been repeatedly undermined, he said, because the ethics committee has interpreted it to apply only to individuals who are major owners of a business affected by legislation that might come before the Senate.''A stamp of approval from the ethics committee should give no one any confidence at all,'' Mr. Ruskin said. ''Think of all the things Mr. Corzine can do to affect the value of his own holding in Goldman Sachs from his perch on the Senate banking  committee.''Charles Lewis, the executive director of the Center for Public Integrity, said Mr. Corzine could have turned down his appointment to the banking committee and avoided any apparent conflict altogether. ''He has taken no steps to distance himself from his former employer,'' he said. ''It's not the only committee in the Senate.''Mr. Corzine's office said that Goldman Sachs's management had relaxed his sales restrictions several times and allowed him to sell portions of his stock. He started out with 4.3 million shares, his office said, but is now down to 3.3 million shares. (With the closing price at $87 on Friday, the stock was worth $287 million.) The proceeds from the sales will be placed in a blind trust, his office said.Mr. Corzine acknowledged that his situation could, on occasion, create the appearance of a conflict of interest, but only an appearance. ''It's not a perfect situation,'' Mr. Corzine said.And he appeared to back away from the commitment he made during the campaign season when Republicans tried to raise questions about whether his wealth would influence his politics.Back then, Mr. Corzine said he would appeal to Goldman Sachs to allow him to sell his stock more quickly than the three-to-four-year timetable stipulated in the contract he signed when he left the firm.But he said recently that even if he got a waiver from his contract with Goldman Sachs, he might not want to sell off all his stocks immediately, noting that he did not want to flood the market with his Goldman Sachs stocks and risk diminishing their value.''If they gave me a waiver, I'm not sure I would do that right now,'' he said, referring to the complete liquidation of his stock holdings. ''That prejudices my family's interest.''Mr. Corzine did say he would recuse himself from voting on any legislation that would appear as though it presented a conflict of interest. He noted that he had recently done just that, when the Senate Banking Committee took up a measure that would alter fees the Securities and Exchange Commission imposed on certain transactions.He said he did not think such situations would present themselves frequently. He stressed that the banking committee's jurisdiction extends beyond the areas that affect his former company. ''I'm not going to recuse myself all that often,'' Mr. Corzine said.But government-reform groups say that Mr. Corzine creates another problem if he recuses himself from voting on matters in which he merely appears to have a conflict of interest: depriving the people he represents in New Jersey of a say in such matters.''His voice won't be heard on many major issues involving banking and finance that are pending before the Senate,'' said Mr. Ruskin of the Congressional Accountability Project. ''This means a diminution of his own power and, therefore, of the voice of New Jersey residents.''Placing him on the banking committee is fraught with problems,'' Mr. Ruskin continued. ''I'm not saying he should step down. But his seat on the banking committee is fraught with ethical problems and a questionable choice. He could be sitting on another major committee where his voice could be fully heard.''