http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/world/middleeast/david-petraeus-urges-stronger-us-military-effort-in-syria.html
David Petraeus Urges Stronger U.S. Military Effort in Syria - The New York Times
Syria,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Petraeus  David H,Central Intelligence Agency,Free Syrian Army,United States International Relations,Assad  Bashar al-,Senate Committee on Armed Services,United States Defense and Military Forces
Sept. 22, 2015
5877
WASHINGTON —  The Obama administration’s Syria policy came under sharp criticism Tuesday from one of its own former top military commanders and C.I.A. directors —David H. Petraeus — even as the White House is weighing new options for fighting the Islamic State in Syria.Mr. Petraeus, in his first public testimony since resigning as director of the C.I.A. in 2012, told a Senate committee that the United States should establish safe havens in Syria where a moderate rebel force could operate and displaced Syrians could find refuge under the protection of American and allied air power.He also proposed that the United States take military action to stop the barrel-bomb attacks that President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has carried out against civilians in Syrian towns and cities, and urged that steps be taken to strengthen the military effort against Islamic State militants in Iraq, including by exploring the use of small American teams to call in airstrikes on the part of Iraqi forces.But his most severe criticism was that the United States and its partners had done little to build up military leverage against the Assad government sufficient to bring about a political solution to the bloody conflict.“It is frequently said that there is no military solution to Syria or the other conflicts roiling the Middle East,” Mr. Petraeus told the Senate Armed Services Committee. “This may be true, but it is also misleading. For, in every case, if there is to be any hope of a political settlement, a certain military and security context is required, and that context will not materialize on its own. We and our partners need to facilitate it — and over the past four years, we have not done so.”Obama administration officials have been holding high-level meetings this week to try to figure out ways to strengthen their military effort against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.A Pentagon effort to train rebel forces to take on the Islamic State has produced only a handful of fighters. Officials with United States Central Command, which oversees American military operations in the Middle East, said Monday that only about 70 individuals who had been trained under a $500 million program to take on the extremists were currently in the field.The administration is now weighing how to capitalize on the gains that Syrian Kurds have made against the Islamic State, especially in the northeastern part of the country. The Kurds, aided by coalition airstrikes coordinated with United States Special Operations forces, have driven the Islamic State from a stretch of territory south of the Turkish border and east of the Euphrates River, starting with the town of Kobani.The idea under consideration by the White House is to build on that effort by expanding support to a group of 15 Arab militias, which have a total of some 5,000 fighters. The United States would provide ammunition, but not weapons, in anticipation that the militias would work alongside Kurdish forces and push south, toward Raqqa, the Islamic State’s de facto capital.“The core question is whether we can find additional forces on the ground who are eligible for” American support, and who are “prepared to tighten the noose around Raqqa,” said one senior United States official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal policy deliberation. “Some of these guys might fit that bill.”Another idea under consideration is to provide specialized training to small numbers of Syrian rebel fighters, including techniques to help them call in airstrikes from ground positions and then inserting them into larger opposition units.Several administration officials emphasized that no decisions had been made. But American officials say they are worried that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia will press his vision for Syria and declare that the United States-led campaign against the Islamic State has been a failure when he speaks to the United Nations next week.While administration officials say their hope is to combat the Islamic State without being drawn more deeply into the Syrian conflict, critics say the White House has ceded the initiative to Iran and Russia, whose military buildup at a base south of Latakia now includes about a dozen Su-25 Frogfoot ground attack planes.Mr. Petraeus said, “Russia’s recent military escalation in Syria is a further reminder that when the U.S. does not take the initiative, others will fill the vacuum — often in ways that are harmful to our interests.”Secretary of State John Kerry has held out the hope that Russia may cooperate with the Obama administration in combating the Islamic State, but Mr. Petraeus was more skeptical. Moscow’s goal, he said, is to solidify Russia’s military presence between Latakia and Tartus, where Russia has a naval base, and to shore up Mr. Assad, at least until a replacement acceptable to the Kremlin is found.Explaining his proposal for setting up safe havens — he called them “enclaves” — Mr. Petraeus said they would be defended by Syrian rebels trained and supported by the United States. American and allied air power, and possibly a small number of American military advisers and support troops, would also help protect the areas.In a parallel initiative, he said, Mr. Obama should demand that Mr. Assad stop his barrel-bomb attacks and, if Mr. Assad does not, order the American military to knock out his air force or airfields. The goal of the twin initiatives would be to encourage the formation of a moderate rebel force that would produce a counterweight to the Syrian government and the Islamic State, and put pressure on the government to agree to a political settlement, he said.“The central problem in Syria is that Sunni Arabs will not be willing partners against the Islamic State unless we commit to protect them and the broader Syrian population against all enemies, not just ISIS,” Mr. Petraeus said.As director of the C.I.A., Mr. Petraeus proposed that the Obama administration mount a covert program to train and arm moderate Syrian rebels. That program and the Pentagon’s parallel effort have failed to change the course of the Syrian conflict, but critics say the administration did not carry them out effectively.