https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/27/sports/olympics/the-olympic-games-exceeded-low-expectations.html
The Olympic Games Exceeded Low Expectations - The New York Times
Olympic Games (2016),International Olympic Committee,Bach  Thomas,Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)
Aug. 26, 2016
8997
RIO DE JANEIRO — The last day of the Olympics was windy and intermittently rainy: not quite beach weather.But the time had come. With the closing ceremonies imminent, Sunday was no-regrets day, the moment to check all the boxes you should have checked earlier, which meant it was time to go into the ocean off Copacabana Beach.I grew up around the sea in Honolulu and San Diego and have swum and bodysurfed in all sorts of places, but in Rio, I have to admit that the bad news got to me: polluted water in the lagoons and bays; super bacteria and floating debris; municipal cleanup promises unkept.So, against my instincts, I decided to stay dry and when, a few days into the Olympics, it became clear that so many others — Cariocas and tourists alike — were not making the same decision, I stuck with it as a form of self-sanction: a reminder that the negative backbeat leading into an Olympics so often ends up feeling out of tune, as the Olympics start making their own music.Despite covering every Games since 1992, I had still fallen for it. Exhibit A was the four cans of mosquito repellent, bought in the United States, that were sitting unused on a table in my hotel room, a still life to fear.This is not to imply that the Zika virus has not been a major issue in Rio or that water pollution in Guanabara Bay does not remain one. But it is to make clear that a lot of us in my business got it wrong when it came to the impact those issues would have on the Olympics themselves.“All we do is read what’s in the headlines, and the headlines always scare you,” said Bubba Watson, one of the leading golfers who did elect to play in the Games when many opted out.Rio deserved a more balanced, less hysterical prologue, just as it deserves a more balanced, less triumphal epilogue.That the Rio organizers and the International Olympic Committee avoided major drama should not be nearly enough to suggest that the Rio Games were a major success: only that the bar had been set so low that public expectations were surpassed.That was true for Brazilians as well as outsiders. Relief and the release of pent-up pride were the dominant sentiments I encountered in the final days, helped along by gold medals in men’s soccer and men’s volleyball: two sports that mean much more to Brazilians than the traditional Olympic staple of track and field.The Olympics, like many a human endeavor, remain an expectation game. Under-promise and over-deliver truly is great advice. Though Rio’s and Brazil’s leadership promised plenty, outsiders, including the I.O.C. itself, sounded so many alarm bells that athletes and visitors arrived ready to roll with difficulties in a way they never would have if, say, Chicago had been awarded the Games instead of Rio.Who knew then that Brazil’s seemingly stable economy would fall off a cliff?Whatever the pronouncements from Thomas Bach, the I.O.C. president, who struggled to find the right tone in Rio, there is no way that the I.O.C. would have made the same decision seven years ago if it had known then what it knows now.Bringing this particular Olympics to the finish line was often as much fun as a foreclosure, and while the daily oversight meetings involving the I.O.C. and the local organizing committee quickly became pro forma in the second week of the Summer Games in Beijing and London, they remained all too substantive and necessary down to the wire in Rio.Imagine how much worse it could have been if Brazil had not had the experience of staging soccer’s World Cup in 2014?Unfortunately Brazil’s double act on the global stage did not work out as planned. It did not announce a country ready to flex its political and economic muscle on a grander scale but rather provided further evidence that Brazilians — remarkably resilient and welcoming people — still know how to muddle through. It was also, as Sebastián Fest wrote in Argentina’s La Nacion, a missed opportunity to dismantle the stereotype of “improvisational, disorganized Latin Americans.”But under duress, Rio still did a remarkable job even if there were too many empty seats and there was too little Olympic atmosphere in too many venues. There was also an extraordinary degree of behind-the-scenes intervention required from the I.O.C. and the international sports federations.“I think the I.O.C. will be out of the risk business for a while and really looking at as safe and secure bids as they can for the future,” said Michael Payne, a former IOC marketing director who was a consultant on Rio’s Olympic bid. “The delivery of these Games in the end has all come together, but the process of getting it there has strained the system to the limit. I wouldn’t treat it as retrenchment. The Olympic journey is a long journey. I’d treat it as the whole system catching its breath.”The question is whether it was worth it, above all for Rio?Payne and others think Rio will still get a tourism bump down the road because of the spectacular images of the city and Copacabana’s beach-party atmosphere that were seen worldwide. There will also be legacy: a new metro line and improved transport system; some modern stadiums and a public golf course that drew rave reviews during the Games.But Juliana Barbassa, a Brazilian and longtime Rio correspondent who wrote “Dancing With the Devil in the City of God” about Rio’s Olympic journey, thinks it was, on balance, a bad bargain.“I don’t think it was worth it honestly,” she said in Rio on Monday. “I feel about this moment we are living now the same way I did immediately after the World Cup. Essentially you have a lot of people saying, ‘You naysayers said this was going to be terrible and a disaster and look, we had a wonderful time. People had fun in Rio; the Games went off as they were supposed to.’“But my argument was never that we couldn’t stage a big international event. Of course we can. We have the engineers and the logistical experts. The problem always was: Is this the best use of money and political effort and energy for the city of Rio? And I continue to argue that it wasn’t. Experts have reached different numbers on the total costs: 12, 13 billion, even 20 billion dollars. That could have easily been spent on infrastructure or on programs that would have made a huge difference in the lives of millions of people.”But absent the Olympic project and deadline, it is uncertain whether a significant fraction of that money would have been available to improve those lives.The Olympics are not eternal as the ancient Greeks proved. They work only as long as the world believes they are worth the trouble, and these are hardly boom times after a terribly wasteful and morally bankrupt Winter Olympics in Sochi in 2014 followed by the socioeconomic concerns generated in Rio.Tokyo in 2020, which has had its own budgetary issues, still looks like a comparative haven. Paris and Los Angeles look like the front-runners for 2024. The IOC already has done a lot of re-examination: see its so-called Agenda 2020, which examined, among other items, bidding and the Olympic sports program. But it still needs to do much more (Agenda 2024?) and needs to seriously examine the idea of creating a geographical rotation among permanent sites that are equipped to handle the Olympics without ripping up their cityscapes. The Winter Games, struggling to find hosts, need this just as much as the Summer Games.Rotation works well for major golf events like the British Open, providing variety and stability. It could work globally, too, even if the odds remain against it. I.O.C. members like that the Games can be a change agent, not just a mega sporting event.“I don’t think the Olympics make for a good urban transformation tool,” Barbassa said. “It’s a flawed model. Instead of a city’s priorities taking precedence, it’s the Olympic priorities that take precedence, and I think Rio is a perfect example of that.”And as Rio reaffirmed with Usain Bolt and Simone Biles, it is the athletes, not the politicians, who distribute most of the magic dust.The setting is not nearly as important to the Olympics as their inspired victories, heartfelt failures and raw emotions; even less important in an era when television can make scattered venues feel unified to the viewer.The athletes came through again in Rio, and on Sunday afternoon despite the overcast skies, some made their way to Copacabana, posing for photos in their team gear in front of the now-empty beach volleyball arena or in front of messages they had drawn in the sand.There were roars from nearby bars and high-rise apartment windows that could be heard above the pounding surf: roars for Brazil’s men’s volleyball players’ finishing off Italy to win the host nation’s final gold medal.It was a crescendo finish to a discordant process, and as I slipped at last into the ocean and looked back at flawed, complex and beautiful Rio from the sea, it was easy to feel the buzz of the present; much harder to feel good about whatever comes next.