https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/arts/television/bachelorette-rachel-lindsay-premiere.html
Fraught Racial Dynamics in the ‘Bachelorette’ Premiere - The New York Times
Television,Race and Ethnicity,Blacks,The Bachelorette (TV Program),ABC Inc,Lindsay  Rachel L
May 23, 2017
690
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is upon us, and The New York Times is here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives will be following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey, starting with unpacking all the cultural signals jammed into Monday night’s premiere. Can we steal you for a sec?AMANDA HESS It’s always startling to watch 31 bros descend on one single lady as she valiantly pretends that it’s her ultimate fantasy. These early episodes really underscore the fundamental difference between “The Bachelor” and “The Bachelorette”: “The Bachelor” is secretly the more female-driven show, while the sheer accumulation of men in “The Bachelorette” quickly develops into a very aggro scene. Some of the boys are so bad this season! But so many of them got roses anyway, if only for the producers’ villain-cultivation purposes. (“Whaboom!”)But can we talk about Dean, the start-up recruiter with “righteous” tattooed on the inside of his lip?When Dean infamously told Rachel in “After the Final Rose” that he was ready to “go black” and “never go back” — and then licked his lips and stared at her with all the confidence of a mediocre white man — I naïvely hoped that he would be set up as a heel instead of a true romantic prospect. Then he confronted her about it right when he stepped out of the limo! And then Rachel said she liked it! And then they built sand castles! And then he got a rose! I think that says a lot about how the show is going to handle race this season.JON CARAMANICA There is, in the sprawling, no-holds-barred documentary “O.J.: Made In America,” a quick semiotics lesson about O.J. Simpson’s early Hertz commercials, the ones that famously depict him running through an airport. In those ads, it is noted, no other black people are present — not the rental agents, not the airport extras, not the people who cheer O.J. on as he runs, from an elderly grandma type to a gaggle of Girl Scouts. The director placed those white cheerleaders in the ads as a way to endorse O.J. — in an era when black pitchmen for white America were almost nonexistent — so that O.J. might endorse Hertz.I thought about this during the opening segment of the “Bachelorette” premiere, when Rachel is relating her path to the “Bachelorette” throne. The first endorsement, of course, comes from Nick, last year’s Bachelor, who endorsed Rachel all the way until he squeezed a declaration of love from her, then cut her at the final three.Rachel tells this story, then bucks up. In voice-over, as she drives through Beverly Hills, she insists, “If I am just myself, and I keep it real, then nothing can go wrong for me.” Cut immediately to a gaggle of white college students surrounding her for a posed picture. The voice-over continues: “I haven’t even started this journey and I’ve gotten so much support from people.” Cut to Rachel sitting in a tulip-clogged park, speaking to two older white women, one of whom gives Rachel a hug and murmurs some hilarious advice: “Don’t sleep with all of them.”This all happens in the first five minutes. The men competing for Rachel’s heart have diverse backgrounds, but those scenes were a reminder that in the four-plus decades that have passed since those O.J. ads were filmed, not all that much has changed. And it’s possible for this show to have taken a stride toward progress while still suffering from lack of imagination.JENNA WORTHAM I’m immediately smitten by Rachel. That laugh! That gap! That gorgeous waterfall weave. Is it strange I fear for her safety? All that testosterone in one room is terrifying. Is this what it’s always like?! But I have ultimate confidence that Rachel knows what she’s doing. I mean, she brought her comfort animal to the set with her. If that’s not prescient, I don’t know what is.I thought she handled Dean perfectly: She playfully reproached him when he got out of the car, and he looked so appropriately chagrined when he approached her. True, she told him she “loved” his comment, but she also told the “Whaboom” guy she loved his schtick, too, and graciously talked to that creepy little doll Adam brought with him that inexplicably “spoke” French.And the editing right after Dean’s moment seemed imbued with a little judgment — the way the camera showed the stony reactions of certain contestants, mostly black, as he walked into the room, followed by a few moments of her telling another contestant that she was “sweet and sour,” repeatedly. That felt very deliberate to me! But it’s also possible I’m giving the producers too much credit on that one. This is a bona fide circus, and she’s determined not to be a sideshow act, but the ringleader. She’s a good sport, or at least understands that her role right now is to be the ultimate good sport. Rachel seems to understand that all eyes are on her, to see how she handles these offenses and light racism and the idiocy of the contestants. She seems to know that she has to go high when they go low, lest she fall into the trope of an angry black woman.It’s not unlike how I feel when I see that my favorite Pilates studio in Williamsburg has decided to start offering an “African drumming class” on Saturdays. Sometimes it’s better just to ignore it and move on. Constant outrage is exhausting. And she’s not here to make friends — she’s here to find a man.I’m not expecting ABC executives to know how to handle the racial dynamics of this show. You can already see they’re avoiding it, somewhat. There was the way the black contestants seemed to believe they had a better chance with her, and the discomfort of the white contestants during the serious moments of masculine ribbing. It might be deliberate, but it also seems evident they have no idea what to emphasize or de-emphasize. But the moments when the racial dynamics do leak through are fascinating.Take Rachel’s interaction with Bryan, for example. The code-switching in that moment was riveting. He was teaching her a little Spanish, and then dropping black slang into the conversation, you know, to let her know he’s “down,” and then he transitioned into his best impression of a tender heartthrob, and decided to give her a kiss — with way too much tongue, in my opinion. And she loved it. She loved it!