https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/us/after-1600-pennsylvania-avenue-where-to.html
After 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Where To? - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Obama  Michelle,Obama  Sasha
Oct. 11, 2015
6320
LA JOLLA, Calif. —  Pity Chicago.President Obama again flew past his former hometown during the weekend for fund-raisers in Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles and then on to the greens in La Jolla — the 13th time he has played golf in California as president.The repeated visits to the courses have fed growing speculation, largely in the Golden State, that the Obamas will settle here after he leaves office in 2017.Or will they live in New York? How about Chicago? What about staying in Washington?If the Obamas even know, they are not talking, but that has not stopped a boomlet of media attention on potential postpresidential houses large and larger. Here is a sampling:In July 2014, The Los Angeles Times reported  that the president and his wife, Michelle, were “believed to be in escrow” on a $4.25 million home in a gated community in Rancho Mirage near Palm Springs. The 8,232-square-foot compound next to a bighorn sheep preserve sat on a hilltop and had a main house with four bedrooms and a guesthouse with three. It had a pool with a 20-foot waterfall, two spas and a putting green with a sand trap.Five days later, the newspaper reported that the house had sold for $3.5 million to a couple in Omaha with no apparent ties to Mr. Obama.This year, Marty Nesbitt, a longtime friend of the Obamas from Chicago, was linked with the purchase in Hawaii of an $8.7 million house that was featured in the 1980s TV series “Magnum, P.I.” Reports suggested that the purchase was a clear sign that the Obamas were planning a return after the White House to the state of Mr. Obama’s birth.The Hawaiian estate, known as Robin’s Nest on the TV show but Pahonu in real life, features five bedrooms, five and a half bathrooms, a gatehouse, a boathouse, a four-car garage, tennis courts, a turtle pond and 500 feet of beach frontage. But it was nonetheless considered to be something of a fixer-upper.There is meanwhile more serious talk that Mr. Obama will settle on the East Coast. Alonzo Mourning, a former basketball star who plays golf with the president, has told Politico that while Hawaii is a possibility, “the one thing that stood out more than anything else was New York.”Friends say Mr. Obama could teach there at his alma mater, Columbia University, and would find the city invigorating. The Obamas have made frequent visits to New York for social occasions, and Malia Obama, the older of the couple’s two daughters, has spent two summers working there.As for Chicago, some people close to the Obamas say they are unlikely to live there again. Mr. Obama’s library will be there, near the University of Chicago, but when Mrs. Obama was asked in 2012 whether she would “ever want to move back to your old life,” she seemed to rule it out.“My old life? I don’t know if that’s possible,” Mrs. Obama said. “We still have our house in Chicago, and it’s there, and we go back and visit.” She added that she was not sure “whether the old life will be there.”A former administration official who continues to work with the White House said that “the unspoken and widespread assumption is that they’re never going to live in Chicago again.”“They don’t go back there now because when they do it so disrupts the neighborhood that it makes it really unpleasant for everybody,” the former official said.And Washington? The Obamas have on at least two occasions mentioned that an important consideration will be the potential disruption to the education of Sasha, who in January 2017 will be a 15-year-old high school sophomore.“We’ve got to make sure that she’s doing well,” Mr. Obama told Barbara Walters on ABC in 2013. “Sasha will have a big say in where we are.”Reggie Love, a former aide to Mr. Obama, said recently that the Obamas would remain in Washington until Sasha graduated from high school in 2019. Although Mr. Love declined to say more last week, former aides said he was probably on the right track. (Malia Obama will be in college in 2017.)“I feel like this is a foregone conclusion that they’re staying in D.C., at least for a couple of years,” said Bill Burton, a former deputy White House press secretary who now lives in Santa Barbara, Calif. “My own speculation is that they’ll buy something in New York but live in D.C. until Sasha graduates.”For now, Mr. Obama continues to live in the White House and follow what has become something of an obsession — golf. According to a count kept by Mark Knoller of CBS News, Mr. Obama has played 256 rounds since becoming president and now lets few weekends go by without hitting the links. Since he will no longer have easy access to his own helicopter, airplane or motorcade, he may want a course in the neighborhood, which could rule out living in the heart of any city.Which state has the most golf courses? Florida.