http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/19/washington/19bolten.html
An Eye for Detail and the Resolve to Push Change - The New York Times
Bolten  Joshua B,Bush  George W,Politics and Government
June 19, 2006
6865
WASHINGTON, June 18 — Every weekday morning at 7:30, a coterie of senior advisers to President Bush gather in the Roosevelt Room of the White House to chart the day's course. For years, they took the same seats — until Joshua B. Bolten arrived and, without warning, rearranged the chairs.That might sound like fodder for a joke about shuffling the deck chairs on the Titanic, but to Mr. Bolten, who became Mr. Bush's chief of staff in April with a mandate to get the beleaguered White House back on track, it was serious business. Whether the task is plotting last week's surprise trip to Baghdad or improving the flow of information at meetings — "I actually spent a good hour or two thinking about the structure of the table," he said of the Roosevelt Room — few details have been too small to escape his notice.Now, after months in which the White House has suffered from plummeting presidential approval ratings and missteps, its new detail man is making a mark. He has brought new people to critical jobs, has worked to repair frayed relationships with Republicans on Capitol Hill and has tried to ensure that the White House takes advantage of its breaks, like the killing of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the jihadist leader in Iraq."Part of the problem is they were having pops of good news in the last few months, but it seemed like they were happening in a vacuum," said Dan Senor, a former administration spokesman in Iraq who is now a crisis management strategist in New York. "Josh's organizational intensity and attention to detail helps the White House better capitalize on these individual pops of good news, and that's what you need to build momentum."There is a long way to go before Mr. Bolten can say he has turned the White House around. The president's job approval ratings remain low, hovering just below 40 percent. A majority of the public still believes that going to war in Iraq was a mistake. Republicans in Congress have yet to agree on immigration legislation and remain in danger of losing their majority in the midterm elections this fall.Mr. Bolten, in his first interview since taking the job, professed not to care about the polls. "My measure will be, are we doing our jobs well?" he said. "And if we are and our poll numbers are still low, I'll still be very proud of what we're doing."Mr. Bolten is trying to impose fresh discipline while opening up an insular White House that famously brooked no dissent. It is a balancing act that signals the essence of an effective chief of staff, said Kenneth M. Duberstein, who was asked by President Reagan to orchestrate a second-term comeback."Josh has made it clear," Mr. Duberstein said, "that he is going to tell the president what he needs to know, not just what the president wants to hear."During his two months on the job, Mr. Bolten has helped recruit a new press secretary, Tony Snow, and a nominee for Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., a senior Wall Street executive. He relieved Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, of managing policy on a day-to-day basis and instructed him to focus on politics — a move that Republicans hope will put them in a much better position for the midterm elections.At the White House, Mr. Bolten invited Iraq experts who had been highly critical of the president into the Oval Office to brief Mr. Bush. On Capitol Hill, Mr. Bolten is tending to lawmakers' needs. Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, said she spent months asking the White House to help mediate a House-Senate dispute over a long-stalled postal bill. When Mr. Bolten arrived, she asked again, and he assigned someone to the task the next day.While he is known for working long hours, Mr. Bolten is known to have a playful side as well. On Thursday night, Mr. Bolten's rock band, the Compassionates, was the featured entertainment at the White House Congressional picnic. The 51-year-old bespectacled chief of staff, ordinarily mild-mannered, played bass as the band performed tunes like "Born to be Wild.""Bolten has had an enormous influence," said one Republican close to the administration, who was granted anonymity to speak about internal White House matters. "Internally, there is more openness, there is more real discussion about the challenges that are faced. People aren't trying to gloss over bad news."In the interview, Mr. Bolten was obviously pleased with how things were going, saying he sensed "a good energy" at the White House. He said that last Tuesday, the day Mr. Bush flew to Baghdad, was his best day yet. The plan for Mr. Bush to slip away unnoticed from Camp David was hatched in Mr. Bolten's office."On the way over I was nervous, but mainly about the possibility that our trip would be disclosed and the security people on the ground might consider it too dangerous for a big target like that to come in with advance notice," he said. "Then when it became clear that we wouldn't have to turn around, I was just thrilled to be there with the president, I think, at a really historic moment."When Mr. Bush asked Mr. Bolten, his budget director, to replace Andrew H. Card Jr. as chief of staff, it was not viewed as an especially bold choice. Republicans like Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi had been calling for a fresh face; Mr. Bolten, who has worked with Mr. Bush since the 2000 campaign, was part of the inner circle of an administration that seemed to be turning ever more inward."I've been impressed with him, quite honestly," Mr. Lott said recently. "You can't give Bolten credit for killing Zarqawi, but one of the critical things that Josh did is decide that Karl Rove needed to be moved out of policy and back into politics, and focus on politics and message more."Mr. Bolten also quickly seized on Mr. Bush's mandate to revamp the organization, confiding to one friend that he sometimes felt like "the recruiter in chief." In the interview, he said he was "basically done on the personnel side" and dismissed speculation that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld might be next to leave."I'm a big fan of his," Mr. Bolten said.For all of Mr. Bolten's success, some say the jury is still out. Among them is Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, who clashed with Mr. Bolten in a private meeting earlier this month over the administration's domestic eavesdropping program."It's too soon to tell," Mr. Specter said of Mr. Bolten's performance.Mr. Bolten says his task now is to "keep the White House focused on the two most important things on the president's agenda": the war in Iraq and the economy. But his real challenge is preventing Mr. Bush from becoming a lame duck by ensuring that Republicans keep control of Congress this November."If he does that," said Grover Norquist, the president of Americans for Tax Reform, a conservative advocacy group, "everyone will be extremely pleased. If he doesn't, then it doesn't really matter what other decisions he makes."