http://www.nytimes.com/2003/04/11/sports/golf-burk-fights-the-battle-she-s-given.html
GOLF; Burk Fights The Battle She's Given - The New York Times
AUGUSTA NATIONAL GOLF CLUB,NATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS,BURK  MARTHA,MASTERS GOLF TOURNAMENT,DISCRIMINATION,WOMEN,GOLF,FEMINIST MOVEMENT,NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA
April 11, 2003
4442
So many times, Martha Burk thought it would be over.She thought it would be over -- and forgotten -- when she received a three-sentence letter last July signed ''Hootie Johnson'' informing her that he would not, as her organization had requested, open Augusta National Golf Club's membership to women before this year's Masters Tournament.She thought it would be over -- and her battle won -- when the club announced six weeks later that it was dropping the sponsors she had pressed to pull out of the Masters. When two prominent members publicly supported her. When the former chairman of the network that broadcasts the tournament quit the club. When President Bush's choice for treasury secretary did the same.But on Monday, three days before the tournament was supposed to start, there was Martha Burk on her cellphone at 10:30 p.m., planning her response to a federal district court ruling that did not allow her group to protest outside Augusta's front gate.It is not over yet.''Well, I've never had plans for an illegal protest,'' she told an Augusta television station, her Texas voice all molasses. ''We think the judge acted in the interests of Augusta National Inc. and not the public interest.''Then, talking to the woman organizing the busloads of protesters: ''We're going to appeal, but hell, tomorrow's Tuesday!''Burk heads the National Council of Women's Organizations, and the request to Johnson, the chairman of Augusta National, was written under that heading, with the backing of the council's board and 160 member organizations.Yet largely because of the way Johnson's supporters have portrayed it, the battle to open Augusta to women has become about one woman, as the names of the groups supporting the club suggest: TheBurkStopsHere.com, Women Against Martha Burk. And so in less than a year's time, Burk has become the nation's most prominent feminist, even though most people could not pick her out of a crowd.In 20 years, she has gone from bored Texas housewife to software entrepreneur to feminist activist. She has represented the United States at international conferences on women and has a long history of fighting for feminist causes, from the Equal Rights Amendment to the rights of women in Afghanistan.Now, she has been accused of wasting what even critics call her considerable talents on a trifle. And opponents say she trivialized the war in Iraq by suggesting that if female soldiers are fighting for democracy there they should be allowed to belong to a golf club here. With her twangy sound bites, Burk can occasionally sound flippant. Even she admits that she is having a great ride. ''There I was, right after Monday Night Football, buddy!'' she said this week, describing one of her news media coups. ''I was tickled to death!''But this is not a lark, Burk says. She is relentless in promoting her message: the fight is not about golf, it's about power, specifically, the exclusion of women from a club that includes scores of the nation's most powerful men. And Augusta is more than just a private club.''People want to think of it as their poker group,'' she said. ''It's a for-profit corporation deriving revenue from public broadcasts over public airwaves.''This is symbolic of all the ways women are left out. It legitimizes sex discrimination when American C.E.O.'s are engaging in it with impunity. It's not proper, as they say in Augusta.''It is perhaps appropriate that her position at the council is unpaid; this is more than a job to Burk.''It's genetic,'' said her husband, Ralph Estes. ''It's not a choice. It's who she is, this view of what's right about equity for women and discrimination in general.''I'm the husband; I get mad, I get hurt. She must get hurt sometimes inside, but she has an amazing ability not to dwell on that or turn her attention from what she's trying to do.''Which explains why Burk, 61, was standing alone in a cold rain at midnight on a deserted street in downtown Washington earlier this week.It had been a horrible travel day: rain in Washington canceled her flight to New York, snow in New York delayed her return. She waited in the cold at the airport for the ride to a studio for an interview with ESPN.When she finally arrived, there was no one to let her in. And for 20 minutes she stood on the street, leaving voice mail messages for anyone and everyone who might find someone to let her in: the producer, network headquarters in Connecticut.Finally inside, she shook out her short hair and got right back to her message.The host wanted to talk about her comments about the war, made in New York at a news conference outside City Hall the previous week. What can you say, the host asked, to people who ask, ''How dare you?''''I don't think it's trivial that women are over there serving for democratic values and Augusta is flouting them,'' she said. ''I think it's really wrong when we can't walk the walk at home. It's not just Augusta; it's the pay gap, the glass ceiling.''Burk's strength has been to remain on message but to mix in enough humor to appeal to different audiences. Earlier in the evening, she appeared on the Comedy Central cable network on ''The Daily Show,'' which is most popular among men 18-24. She gets in her line about this being about power. Then the host, Jon Stewart, asks about a backlash. ''Well, the K.K.K. has come out in their support now,'' she says, brown eyes twinkling. ''When the K.K.K. is on your side, you know you've lost the battle!''The audience whoops and cheers.''This is something our adversary did not understand,'' she said later, ''that just because our name is not known, we don't know how to do media, we aren't in a few Rolodexes.''Still, Burk never thought she'd be pushing the causes of the National Council of Women's Organizations on Comedy Central and ESPN.Until June, she worked in relative obscurity for the council in a small office with one assistant near the White House, on issues like supporting pay equity and opposing the privatization of Social Security.The council was formed in the battles for the Equal Rights Amendment and includes groups like the National Organization for Women, the Coalition of Labor Union Women, Women in Community Service and the Y.W.C.A. of the U.S.A.Last April, on her way back from a visit with her grandchildren in Texas, Burk read a newspaper column about Augusta's excluding women and an article about Lloyd Ward, then the United States Olympic Committee's chief executive, pressing Johnson to admit women. She tore out both and put them in a folder for her June board meeting.The way several women at the meeting recall it, the board discussed a federal appellate court appointment, an International Women's Day event and a commission on women in sports. Then Burk asked what people thought about sending a letter to Augusta.''We couldn't get over how this club had gotten past us,'' said Eleanor Smeal, president of Feminist Majority, who has been a friend of Burk's for nearly 20 years.Still, Burk adds, ''this was nothing, absolutely nothing.'' So little that when she got Johnson's response on July 9, she simply put it down and went across the hall to have lunch with her husband, who works at the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning research center.Ten minutes later, a reporter called. Johnson had put out a statement saying he would not open Augusta to women ''at the point of a bayonet.''Burk and others say they presumed that the article about Ward meant that there was an effort under way to open up Augusta; the council, they thought, would merely add a supportive nudge.Johnson made it clear he would not be nudged.''We just sort of did it to see what would happen,'' said Heidi Hartmann, a board member. ''His response invited sticking with the issue.''Burk has enjoyed much of the ensuing frenzy.On the wall of her office she has highlighted a passage from a letter from a sports radio talk show host: ''Your particular stripe of man-hating, bra-burning, left-wing feminism does nothing more than polarize the genders. Is it possible that this is exactly what you are hoping is the result?'' Underneath, Burk has written, ''MORE WORK FOR MOTHER!''''These guys get so worked up,'' she says, shaking her fists. ''They send us four-page letters ranting and raving asking us why we don't have anything better to do.''She said she would prefer that the council's other issues got all the attention. But those issues don't have dedicated sections in newspapers or programs on talk radio.''We don't get to pick our battles,'' Burk said over a beer between flights. ''If we did, I would probably pick abortion rights or Social Security or welfare. We have to fight discrimination where we find it. This one happened to set off a natural fascination not of our own making. It fell into a very robust media infrastructure, and I think we would be making a very bad judgment not to take advantage of it.''More succinctly, she says, ''If we could just get Hootie Johnson to work on welfare reform.''Burk, who was also called Hootie as a child, has always been determined. Her father, now 86, says she got it from her mother, who grew up poor but built a dress business that helped lift the Burks into the upper middle class before her death.Burk went to college, married young and had two sons. She earned a doctorate, using graduate assistantships to pay a sitter, and then started the educational software company that has allowed her to work without salary.After a divorce, she moved to Wichita, Kan., where she went to NOW meetings, thinking she would meet like-minded women, and soon became chapter president. She adopted a strategy: she would get NOW mentioned in the news media at least once a month. It was not difficult, because Wichita is home to the Tiller Clinic, a magnet for abortion protesters.She and Estes, who had become her second husband, moved to Washington in 1990 to work on more national issues. To this day, she has remembered what she learned locally about the news media.''She understood from the beginning that this had the possibility of opening a door where another issue might not,'' Smeal said.In the original letter to Johnson, Burk offered to meet with him in person. In retrospect, Smeal said, he might have been wise to take her up.''If he had met with her, he would not have carried on,'' she said. ''He does not understand who he's up against at all.''