https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/24/nyregion/five-men-are-charged-in-a-brooklyn-beating.html
Five Men Are Charged in a Brooklyn Beating - The New York Times
Assaults,Hasidism,Blacks,Williamsburg (Brooklyn  NY),Fried  Joseph,Shomrim Volunteer Patrol,Patterson  Taj,Hate Crimes,Winkler  Abraham,Hollander  Aharon,Herskovic  Mayer,Braver  Pinchas
April 23, 2014
9742
Five men who prosecutors said were associated with a Hasidic neighborhood watch group in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, were indicted on Wednesday in connection with a brutal beating of a gay black man in December.The men — Abraham Winkler, 39; Aharon Hollander, 28; Mayer Herskovic, 21; Joseph Fried, 25; and Pinchas Braver, 19 — were charged with assault, gang assault and unlawful imprisonment for setting upon Taj Patterson, 23, whom they suspected of vandalism. All five defendants pleaded not guilty and have been released on bail.A spokesman for the patrol, Joseph Pollack, said in a statement that “reports that all five defendants indicted today are members of our organization are not true, and the acts alleged in these indictments are contrary to our mission and our membership.” He did not say whether any of those arrested were members.The attack and subsequent arrests recalled an era of heightened tension between Jewish and black residents of Brooklyn that has largely dissipated in recent years, and elected leaders moved quickly to head off any potential rifts. Letitia James, the public advocate, commended “our communities for remaining united in the face of violence.”The Police Department’s hate crimes unit had been investigating the attack. “It was a very serious crime with incredibly serious injuries caused to the victim,” Commissioner William J. Bratton said on Wednesday before the last of the suspects had been arrested. “We initially looked at it as a potential hate crime.”But Kenneth P. Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, did not charge any of the men with hate crimes, a possible indication that no witnesses could be located who heard statements suggesting that bias was a motive.The attack occurred in the early morning hours of Dec. 1 on Flushing Avenue. The men, described by prosecutors as associates of the Williamsburg Safety Patrol Unit, also known as a shomrim, had been responding to reports from neighbors that a man had been damaging cars in the area. No one called the police.There they came upon Mr. Patterson, who was passing through on his way home to Fort Greene. Believing him to be the vandal, the men chased Mr. Patterson down the avenue before cornering and detaining him.As they conducted their own investigation into the vandalism reports — reports that the police would later deem unfounded — Mr. Patterson tried to leave, prosecutors said. By that time, a crowd of more than a dozen had gathered.It was then, prosecutors said, that members of the crowd held down Mr. Patterson as others, including the men charged, punched and kicked him, breaking an eye socket and causing him to lose vision in his right eye.They stopped, the authorities said, only when a city bus driver intervened and threatened to take photographs of the assailants. The men fled. The police said the first 911 call reporting the assault came in around 5:45 a.m.Harold Baker, the lawyer for Mr. Fried, said he planned to fight the charges.“I believe Mr. Fried was mistakenly identified in this case,” he said.Another lawyer, Michael Farkas, said that his client, Mr. Hollander, was a member of the patrol and that prosecutors had “inaccurately and unfairly characterized” the situation. Lawyers for the other defendants could not be reached.Mr. Patterson could not be reached for comment. His father declined to address the arrests, but said his son was “doing good.”