https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/07/sports/tennis/bryans-capture-missing-piece-at-wimbledon.html
Bryans Capture Missing Piece at Wimbledon - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Bryan  Mike,Bryan  Bob
July 6, 2013
4471
WIMBLEDON, England —  Their strings and nerves were tighter than Bob and Mike Bryan would have liked at the start of the Wimbledon men’s doubles final on Saturday, but there was ample time to make the necessary repairs.When their match against the 12th-seeded pairing of Marcelo Melo and Ivan Dodig started with whiffed volleys and an 0-5 deficit, rackets were sent off the court to be restrung at a lower tension, and calm, experienced words were exchanged. Then the Bryan twins rallied for a 3-6, 6-3, 6-4, 6-4 victory that produced their record 15th Grand Slam title together. The match ended with a soaring chest bump that capped one of the most impressive 12-month periods in the history of the sport.“It was a very rough start,” Bob Bryan said. “Those guys played hot. You know, our legs were a little Jell-o-y. It helps to have a three-out-of-five-set match. You have time.”By claiming their third Wimbledon title, the Bryans hold all four Grand Slam titles at the same time, the first time any men’s doubles team has done that in the Open era, which began in 1968. (The Australians Ken McGregor and Frank Sedgman won seven consecutive Grand Slam titles from 1951 to 1952). Before winning the United States Open last September and the Australian and French Opens this year, the Bryans also won the gold medal at the London Olympics last August.The only comparable achievement belongs to Steffi Graf, who won all four Grand Slam events and the Olympic singles gold in 1988. Having won the first three legs, the Bryans can win the traditional calendar-year Grand Slam in September in New York.“This one, in the context of our career, is probably up there at the top,” Mike Bryan said. “I didn’t think anything could feel as sweet as the gold medal, but this one just feels like there’s a cap, a lid or a ribbon around our career.”Bob Bryan said accumulating so many victories has made continuing to pursue titles easier.“I think that’s the reason why we’ve been playing so well, is because we have everything,” he said. “Everything now feels like a bonus. It just feels like we’re adding nuts and whipped cream and cherries to our great career. We said that a few years ago: if we retire today, we feel like we’ve done it all. Let’s go have some fun and add to whatever this is.”“Whatever this is” is open to interpretation, but there is little argument that the Bryans are the most successful American men in tennis today, far outpacing any of their singles counterparts. There will be only one American man in the top 20 when the singles rankings are released Monday, with John Isner squeaking in at No. 19. The only active American man who has made the semifinals of a Grand Slam singles event is 30-year-old Robby Ginepri, who reached the final four of the 2005 United States Open but is now ranked 240th.But although the Bryans play to nearly full stands wherever they appear, their matches are rarely televised. Television contracts for tour events are often exclusively for singles, and networks rarely choose to show doubles matches while singles is being played at Grand Slam events.“Do we seek out doubles matches? Absolutely not,” said Jason Bernstein, the senior director of programming and acquisitions for ESPN. “And why is that? Because generally, big names aren’t playing doubles.”Bernstein said that although the Bryans were a good story, they do not play opponents who might create especially intriguing matches.“You could argue their dominance might hurt the sport,” Bernstein said.The Bryans, 35, seem to have accepted that doubles is never going to be in the spotlight, no matter what they achieve.“It’s ratings,” Bob Bryan said after their quarterfinal win. “Like Kim Kardashian’s TV show — it’s trash, but it’s the highest rated, you know? And she’s a star, and people want to see her, whatever, walk her dog on TV just because she’s a star.”Mike Bryan said: “We always go on the court and say, ‘Let’s put on a great show.’ It’s not about getting in your shell and just grinding; you’re there to put on a show for the fans, especially when we play night matches in the U.S.“N.B.A. players put on a great show. LeBron does his thing. And if we can do our part as well, and give them the chest bump when they’re asking for it, we will.”With little to prove, the Bryans continue to set goals that only they can achieve: 100 career titles (Saturday’s was No. 91), and 10 years as the No. 1-ranked doubles team (this year will be the ninth).“Then try to get to Rio and get another medal,” Mike said.