https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/sports/baseball/cuba-tampa-bay-rays-espn.html
In Havana, Rapprochement Through the Lens of ESPN - The New York Times
Baseball,Television,United States International Relations,ESPN,Tampa Bay Rays,Cuba
March 22, 2016
6236
The game between the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban national team in Havana on Tuesday was a television spectacle, presented by ESPN as a game entwined in international politics. The visuals were clear from the frequent cuts between the on-field action and President Obama and President Raúl Castro, who were sitting together at Estadio Latinoamericano. Economic policy was laid out in Obama’s remarks about how business from America will help give the United States leverage in Cuba.Obama got even more of a star turn in Havana than he gets when he fills out his men’s and women’s N.C.A.A. tournament brackets on ESPN. Of course, there is no political agenda to bracketology unless you’re talking about Duke and North Carolina. You saw him cheering, standing, gesticulating, turning occasionally to the first lady, Michelle Obama, who, it turns out, objected to some umpires’ calls, and chatting with Castro. When the Rays went ahead, 1-0, he tapped Castro on the shoulder — could Obama have been gloating? — a gesture the dictator returned with a handshake.The president even offered Castro’s opinion about the pace of baseball. “He was saying baseball is too long,” he told ESPN’s announcers, but he thoughtfully noted (with Major League Baseball Commissioner Rob Manfred sitting behind him) that actions have been taken to speed up games.Obama was ESPN’s star of the day, overshadowing Castro, his host, and James Loney, who drove in three Tampa Bay runs in a 4-1 victory over the Cubans. Obama gave a lengthy interview to ESPN’s announcers. He schmoozed frequently, with ESPN’s cameras on him, as if he were working a rope line, greeting the likes of Derek Jeter (the frequency of their contact suggested a blooming bromance), Dave Winfield and Rachel Robinson. About the only thing Obama did not do was put on a headset in the Rays’ dugout and talk remotely to the ESPN crew about the infield shift, as managers frequently do between innings of the network’s baseball games.There was a special poignancy to Rachel Robinson’s presence in Cuba. Her husband, Jackie, played in the same stadium in 1947 for the Montreal Royals, before breaking the color barrier with the Brooklyn Dodgers soon after. Robinson’s act of courage was a precursor to the civil rights movement of the 1950’s; the civil rights movement made it possible for Obama to become the first African-American president. “That’s the power of baseball,” he said. He talked about how fans rooting for a black man taught Americans that skills and character matter, not skin color.But he told ESPN’s announcers that baseball still had much work to do, in hiring more black and Latino managers and finding more minority owners.One of ESPN’s announcers, Eduardo Perez, played a special role. His father, Tony, left Cuba and became a baseball Hall of Famer, playing mainly for the Cincinnati Reds. On this trip, he visited relatives in Cuba who had stayed behind and showed video of his reunion with them when Tony Perez joined the broadcast by telephone. Perez did not impose his family connection on the broadcast and asked Obama one question about what he would tell Cubans about their future as the United States and Cuba try to transform their once-frozen relationship.But the younger Perez did object to the sight of Luis Tiant, the Cuban-born major league star who threw out the first pitch and shook hands with Castro. “I don’t know if I would have done that,” he said. Perez did not elaborate, other than to say he would reflect on that moment when he arrived home in Miami.But an ESPN colleague, Dan Le Batard, a first-generation Cuban-American, wrote an essay earlier this week that was far blunter than Perez’s comments. Le Batard examined the pain of his parents and the country that was lost to them. His father, Gonzalo, is part of Le Batard’s show, “Highly Questionable.”Separate from the improving relations between the United States and Cuba is the reality of Le Batard’s parents’ past — an ocean, he writes, “filled with the Cuban bodies that tell the story, lives literally thrown to the wind in desperation, hoping to reach America’s possibility-soaked shores on boats made of old tires and wood and poverty’s debris. No free press. No elections. No freedom. That’s the Cuba that still surrounds the baseball diamond where we play this game.” He also writes: “And now, my parents, old exiles, have to watch Obama and Jeter and ESPN throw a happy party on land that was stolen from my family — as the rest of America celebrates it, no less.”But Le Batard’s fury was not intrinsic to the game broadcast. The festive and hopeful flavor of the broadcast was reflected more by Rays pitcher Chris Archer. He not only passed one of starter Matt Moore’s gloves to Obama as a gift and joked with the Obamas that they had ignored his posts on Twitter inviting them to go out for Cuban cuisine or a coffee, but he also offered comments to ESPN’s Tim Kurkjian that gibed with the goals of Obama and M.L.B in the Cuba rapprochement. “I’m hoping that we’re laying the foundation for something special going forward,” he said. “Obviously we have differences as countries, differences in opinions about human rights, but hopefully we can find some common ground.”