https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/nyregion/amtrak-penn-station-repairs.html
Amtrak Plans to Close Several Penn Station Tracks for Major Repairs - The New York Times
Railroads,Commuting,Transit Systems,Delays (Transportation),Amtrak,Long Island Rail Road Co,New Jersey Transit,Pennsylvania Station (Manhattan  NY),Moorman  Charles W (1950- )
April 27, 2017
7706
Amtrak officials confirmed on Thursday that they were planning to close several tracks at Pennsylvania Station in New York this summer for major repairs, but the railroad’s chief executive refused to say how many tracks would be closed or for how long.The decision to close tracks during busy weekdays will disrupt the lives of thousands of commuters who rely on the station. But during an announcement about the railroad’s repair plans, Amtrak’s chief executive, Charles W. Moorman, repeatedly declined to provide a specific number of tracks that would be closed or to say how disruptive the work would be for commuters.A federal official who had been briefed on the plans said Amtrak was trying to limit the number of closings to about three or four tracks at once. Amtrak officials want to avoid the chaos that ensued this month when they closed eight of the station’s 21 tracks after a derailment, said the official, who was not authorized to discuss the railroad’s plans publicly.On Thursday, Mr. Moorman said Amtrak wanted to consult with New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Rail Road, the other railroads that use the station, before disclosing details about the track closings.“It is our goal to cause the least amount of disruption in that station that we can,” he said in a call with reporters. “There are going to be some tracks closed during some weekdays. It doesn’t mean that there are going to be lots of tracks closed every weekday for extended periods of time, and part of our goal is to make sure that we minimize that.”Mr. Moorman said Amtrak would defer spending on technological improvements to pay for the accelerated replacement of tracks in the station, which he estimated would cost “tens of millions of dollars.” He also announced several proposals to improve operations and safety at Penn Station, including creating a joint operations center to coordinate responses to incidents.Penn Station, North America’s busiest train station, handles 600,000 passengers and 1,300 trains daily and is a major nexus in the busiest rail corridor in the nation. Closing several tracks is expected to disrupt service on all of the railroads that use the station.Two recent train derailments led to extraordinary delays across the region and shined a harsh spotlight on the station’s deteriorating infrastructure after years of neglect as Amtrak has grappled with financial problems. Now Amtrak officials have determined that the tracks are so brittle that they need urgent repairs. They recently reduced the speed limit along the tracks to Penn Station.But the decision to schedule the work during the workweek was a departure from Amtrak’s traditional strategy of trying to minimize disruptions by limiting repairs to nights and weekends.On Thursday morning, the train delays at Penn Station continued. Amtrak said passengers should expect delays of up to 30 minutes because of track maintenance.New Jersey officials reserved judgment on Amtrak’s plan on Thursday, saying they awaited the details to gauge the potential effects on the state’s commuters and its economy.Gov. Chris Christie, who had threatened to withhold payments to Amtrak for New Jersey Transit’s use of Penn Station and other assets, said on Thursday: “I’m not happy that it should’ve been done a long time ago and they didn’t do it. But they’re doing it now, and that’s going to be good for the commuting public over the course of the next couple of years when these improvements are made and service becomes more reliable.”Mr. Christie said that Amtrak’s admission proved that the recent troubles at Penn Station were “predominantly Amtrak issues” and that he had been right to call Amtrak to account for them. “Now this doesn’t mean that there aren’t times where New Jersey Transit makes mistakes,” Mr. Christie said. “Of course they do.”Steven H. Santoro, the executive director of New Jersey Transit, said in Trenton on Thursday that it was imperative that his agency have a chance to review Amtrak’s plan to determine what impact it might have on New Jersey’s commuters and economy. He also said that New Jersey was demanding “a much greater voice” in how Amtrak dispatches trains into and out of Penn Station and how it spends money on repairs and improvements.Mr. Santoro was scheduled to return to the Statehouse in Trenton on Friday to testify at a legislative committee hearing on the recent disruptions. Mr. Moorman and other rail officials were also scheduled to answer questions at that hearing.On Wednesday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York called Penn Station a “debacle” and said he had lost patience with Amtrak.“I wish, frankly, that we controlled Penn Station,” Mr. Cuomo told reporters. “It would be a much different situation.”Officials at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the Long Island Rail Road, took a more measured tone at a board meeting on Wednesday. Fernando Ferrer, the acting chairman of the authority, said he had made it clear to Amtrak that Penn Station had to improve.“We’d like to work collaboratively,” Mr. Ferrer said. “It’s in everybody’s best interest.”Amtrak also announced that Thomas F. Prendergast, the former chairman of the M.T.A., would oversee a review of operations at Penn Station. Mr. Prendergast, who left the authority in January and is widely respected in the transportation industry, will make recommendations about how the three railroads can improve coordination at the station, Amtrak said.On April 14, chaos erupted in Penn Station after false reports of gunfire. Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, said the incident had exposed security flaws at the station, and he called for Amtrak to create a centralized command center for police officers from different agencies.“The next Penn panic could be an actual disaster,” Mr. Schumer, the minority leader, said at a news conference on Sunday. “Not just a wake-up call.”