https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/books/review/new-books-we-recommend.html
10 New Books We Recommend This Week - The New York Times
Books and Literature
July 13, 2017
1314
These days it feels like books offer one of two diverging paths: immersion or escapism. For those in search of a book that illuminates the here and now, we’ve got “The Chickenshit Club” (yes, we are printing that title), about why the 2008 financial crisis produced so few prosecutions, and “Making Rent in Bed-Stuy,” an observation of the challenges posed by gentrification. Two new novels take on serious subjects: honor killings in Bangladesh and Syrian refugees in Greece. For total escape, turn to a rich biography of the 19th-century photographer Nadar or a rollicking account of the Le Mans car race. And if you’re wondering why we all make such wildly different choices, including about what to read, then “Behave,” a book of popular neurobiology, is here to explain.Enjoy reading whichever works for you.Pamela PaulEditor of The New York Times Book ReviewTHE GREAT NADAR, by Adam Begley. (Tim Duggan Books, $28.) In this concise and thoughtful biography, Adam Begley gives a subtle accounting of the career of the 19th-century French photographer Nadar while reminding us of his subject’s many other talents and exploits. (He was a gifted caricaturist, a journalist and editor, and a pioneering balloonist.) Our critic Dwight Garner said that Begley, whose previous book was a biography of John Updike, had “found a great life to delineate — this book, like that life, roars past with a whooshing sound.”HUE 1968: A Turning Point of the American War in Vietnam, by Mark Bowden. (Atlantic Monthly, $30.) With his signature blend of deep reporting and character-driven storytelling, the author of “Black Hawk Down” offers a detailed and ambitious history of the 24-day battle that exposed the hollowness of American claims about the Vietnam War.THE CHICKENSHIT CLUB: Why the Justice Department Fails to Prosecute Executives, by Jesse Eisinger. (Simon & Schuster, $28.) Why was virtually no one prosecuted in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis? A Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist for the nonprofit ProPublica examines the cultural shifts in the legal and business worlds since the turn of the century that led to solicitous attitudes toward corporations. It’s basically an “elites” problem: the prosecutors and the defense attorneys on opposite sides of the table are increasingly the same people, just at different points in their careers. Prepare to be incensed.MAKING RENT IN BED-STUY: A Memoir of Trying to Make It in New York City, by Brandon Harris. (Amistad/HarperCollins, paper, $15.99.) Has any borough of this city changed as rapidly and dramatically in the last two decades as Brooklyn? In this searing debut memoir, an African-American critic describes his life as an aspiring filmmaker in a historically black neighborhood, analyzing gentrification and millennial culture.BEHAVE: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst, by Robert M. Sapolsky. (Penguin Press, $35.) This quirky, opinionated and magisterial synthesis of psychology and neurobiology offers a better understanding of just where our behavior comes from. Our reviewer called it “a wild and mind-opening ride,” and noted: “Darwin would have been thrilled.”BEAUTIFUL ANIMALS, by Lawrence Osborne. (Hogarth, $25.) On a Greek island, two wealthy young women encounter a handsome Syrian refugee, whom they endeavor to help with disastrous results. Osborne is a psychologically acute observer of privilege and bad behavior among the expatriate class. As the story moves along, the novel takes on the tone of an existential noir.RETURN TO GLORY: The Story of Ford’s Revival and Victory at the Toughest Race in the World, by Matthew DeBord. (Atlantic Monthly, $26.) This page-turning combination of business book and adventure saga tells the tale of the Ford Motor Company’s triumphant return to championship competition at the endurance race called the 24 Hours of Le Mans.THE HUE AND CRY AT OUR HOUSE: A Year Remembered, by Benjamin Taylor. (Penguin, paper, $16.) A sixth-grader’s chance meeting with President Kennedy on the morning of his assassination opens this touching and eloquent self-portrait of an odd, bewildered boy born into the frightening middle of the 20th century.LOVE LIKE BLOOD, by Mark Billingham. (Atlantic Monthly, $26.) Detective Inspector Tom Thorne investigates the murder of a Bangladeshi teenager in a novel that probes the phenomenon of honor killings and casts doubt on the work of the Metropolitan Police’s Honor Crimes Unit.STANDARD DEVIATION, by Katherine Heiny. (Knopf, $25.95.) Katherine Heiny’s 2015 story collection, “Single, Carefree, Mellow,” won over many critics. Now she offers readers her humorous and insightful first novel, the portrait of a New York City marriage. Full of sly charm.