http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/24/world/middleeast/jihadist-mediator-killed-in-suicide-attack-by-rival-extremists.html
Jihadist Mediator Killed in Suicide Attack by Rival Extremists - The New York Times
Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Terrorism,Al Qaeda,Syria,Iraq,Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
Feb. 23, 2014
4659
BEIRUT —  A high-ranking jihadist operative who was sent to Syria by Ayman al-Zawahri, the head of Al Qaeda, to mediate conflicts between fighters was killed there on Sunday in a suicide attack by another extremist group, activists said.The envoy, known by the name Abu Khalid al-Suri, was a Syrian-born veteran of Al Qaeda who is believed to have been close to Osama bin Laden and to have fought against American forces in Afghanistan and Iraq.The suicide attack that killed him struck a base of a rebel group he helped lead, underlining the divisions that have fueled fights among jihadists and other rebels across northern and eastern Syria in recent weeks.In Syria, Mr. al-Suri was a leader of Ahrar al-Sham, an Islamist rebel group that is close to the Nusra Front, Syria’s official Al Qaeda affiliate. Opposition activists blamed another extremist group, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria for the bombing. That group was cut off by Al Qaeda earlier this month because of its violent attacks on rebel and other jihadist groups.The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that five other fighters were killed along with Mr. al-Suri when a suicide attacker blew himself up inside one of the group’s bases in the northern city of Aleppo.Mr. al-Suri’s death is unlikely to diminish the power of extremist groups in parts of Syria, although it may intensify the conflicts among them.Clint Watts, of the Foreign Policy Research Institute who studies Al Qaeda, said the killing came in the context of the struggle between the Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria to be Syria’s dominant jihadist force.In killing Mr. al-Suri, the group sent a message to Mr. Zawahri that “ISIS is in Syria for the long haul and there will be no remediation,” Mr. Watts said. The killing also let other groups know that they too could be targeted for their links to Al Qaeda.Mr. al-Suri criticized the group in an audio recording attributed to him that was released last month, saying that the group “sought to corrupt the jihad in Syria, as it did in Iraq and Afghanistan” and calling on it to stop attacking other jihadists.“Direct your car bombs at the infidels and do not busy yourself with fighting the mujahedeen and killing them,” he said.