https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/us/san-francisco-lawsuit-trump-sanctuary-cities.html
San Francisco Sues Trump Over ‘Sanctuary Cities’ Order - The New York Times
San Francisco (Calif),Illegal Immigration,Herrera  Dennis J,Lee  Edwin M,Immigration and Emigration,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Trump  Donald J,Executive Orders and Memorandums,United States Politics and Government
Jan. 31, 2017
678
SAN FRANCISCO — San Francisco on Tuesday became the first city in the country to sue President Trump over his order to withhold federal funding from so-called sanctuary cities, saying the order was unconstitutional.In a lawsuit filed with the United States District Court of the Northern District of California, San Francisco’s city attorney, Dennis Herrera, requested an injunction on the Trump administration’s attempted crackdown on sanctuary cities, which limit city agencies and local law enforcement from assisting in the enforcement of federal immigration laws.“You can’t put a gun to the head of states and localities to get them to comply with what you might want at the federal level,” Mr. Herrera said.The Trump order says it is in the interest of public safety for local officials to cooperate with federal immigration authorities and seeks to withhold federal grants from municipalities that have sanctuary city policies.San Francisco is home to around 30,000 undocumented residents, Mr. Herrera said. The city receives around $1.2 billion in federal funding, but city officials say it is unclear how much is at risk. San Francisco’s sanctuary city law took effect in 1989.In a news conference at City Hall, Mr. Herrera said the executive order was unconstitutional because it “tries to turn city and state employees into federal immigration enforcers.”San Francisco’s mayor, Edwin M. Lee, argued that forcing city officials to assist federal immigration authorities would make the city less safe because illegal immigrants would be afraid to cooperate with the police.“Sanctuary cities are safer,” Mr. Lee said. “You talk to our police chief and our sheriff and other law enforcement professionals, they believe having open communications with all elements of our society is much more preferable.”In San Francisco, a city proud of its liberal traditions, Mr. Trump received 10 percent of the vote in November. Protests have erupted here over the Trump order on sanctuary cities and the order limiting immigration from predominantly Muslim countries.Mr. Lee said the city was aware of the risk of confronting the Trump administration. “It’s no surprise that this president might continue to target us,” he said. “We have to be ready.”San Francisco featured in the debate over sanctuary city policies in 2015 after a resident, Kathryn Steinle, 32, was shot and killed by Juan Francisco López-Sánchez, an immigrant who was in the country illegally, had a criminal record and had been deported at least five times.Mr. Trump seized on the killing as “yet another example of why we must secure our border.”Mr. Lee has said the killing “should never have happened” because San Francisco’s sanctuary city policy allows for cooperation with federal immigration authorities when dealing with felons.Hundreds of cities could potentially be affected by the administration’s order, said Grisel Ruiz, a staff attorney at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco. But she cautioned that there was no clear definition of a sanctuary city and that they varied greatly in degree of cooperation with federal authorities.