https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/us/trump-hiring-freeze-veterans-affairs.html
Trump’s Hiring Freeze Creates Confusion for Veterans Affairs - The New York Times
Hiring and Promotion,Trump  Donald J,Veterans Affairs Department
Jan. 27, 2017
6962
President Trump’s move this week to freeze the hiring of federal workers has sowed confusion in the Department of Veterans Affairs, and it may be driving a wedge between the president and veterans, who overwhelmingly backed him during his campaign.Veterans make up nearly a third of all federal workers — about 623,000 people. And they are especially numerous in low-level support jobs likely to bear the brunt of the freeze.“This has sent shock waves across the entire veteran community,” Paul Rieckhoff, chief executive of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, said in an interview this week. “A lot of our members are extremely worried.”Officials at the Department of Veterans Affairs are still trying to figure out the effects of the freeze.The White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, said at a news conference after the signing of the executive order that the department was not exempt, adding “the V.A. in particular, if you look at the problems that have plagued people, hiring more people isn’t the answer.”A few hours later, the acting secretary of veterans affairs, Robert D. Snyder, seemed to contradict the White House, saying in a brief statement that the department plans to “exempt anyone it deems necessary for public safety, including front-line caregivers.”The statement led many veterans to breathe a sigh of relief, assuming the health care system would be largely unaffected. But what counts as front line? Department representatives would not elaborate, saying they had been told to not answer questions. Hospital employees said they had received no guidance, but that nearly all hiring had been postponed while the agency parses the meaning of the executive order.On Thursday, the Republican leaders of the House and Senate veterans affairs committees sent a letter asking for clarification, but have not gotten a response.“Everyone is still scratching their head,” said Garry J. Augustine, executive director of Disabled American Veterans. “I’m hearing from the V.A. they feel they can still hire doctors and nurses, but they don’t really know.”On Friday the acting secretary issued an internal memorandum specifically exempting more than 70 professions. The memo, obtained by The New York Times, allows for hiring for “mission critical” staff including doctors and nurses, but also cafeteria workers and burial crews.The freeze comes as the veterans health care system is trying to claw itself out of a backlog of appointments caused by rising demand and a shortage of providers. Veterans groups have acknowledged progress made toward increasing efficiency and hiring in the last two years, but more than 300,000 veterans were still waiting more than a month for an appointment, according to the latest data.Mr. Trump was a relentless critic of the agency on the campaign trail, calling it “the most corrupt” agency in the government, and promising to “make the V.A. great again,” though he provided few specifics.The department has struggled with low morale and byzantine hiring practices that take months, even for low-level employees. It has about 45,000 vacancies.Even if front-line caregivers are exempted, a freeze could still cripple the system’s ability to provide health care, said Dr. Katherine Mitchell, who oversees specialty medical care for the department in Arizona.“You cannot provide front-line care without the support staff,” she said. “Doctors can’t do their jobs without people to schedule appointments or clean rooms or do physical therapy.”Dr. Mitchell was one of the whistle-blowers who exposed long delays in care at veterans hospitals in 2014 that led to some patients dying while awaiting care.She said a hiring freeze could bring about another “disaster.”“Common sense says we need all health care workers to be exempt,” she said. “If not, I don’t think it is a stretch to say people will die.”