http://www.nytimes.com/2003/11/20/international/20CND-TURKEY.html
Explosions in Istanbul DestroyBritish Consulate and Bank;At Least 27 Killed, 400 Injured - The New York Times
Turkey,Terrorism,Violence
Nov. 20, 2003
8938
ISTANBUL, Nov. 20 - Two huge truck-bomb explosions wrecked the British Consulate and a British bank here on Thursday, killing at least 27 people and wounding 450 in an assault that coincided with President Bush's state visit to London.As Mr. Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain prepared for a joint declaration of anti-terror resolve, the 18-story Istanbul headquarters of HSBC bank, and minutes later the British Consulate several miles away were blown apart by bombs that witnesses said were contained in pickup trucks driven up to the buildings.The British consul general, Roger Short, a 58-year-old career diplomat, was among those killed. Distraught people, screaming for help with blood streaming from open wounds, ran through the busy streets that surround both the bank and the consulate. Rescue workers dug into rubble searching for the dead and injured, and guided others from the carnage via second-story windows or wrecked storefronts.In London, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said before flying to Istanbul to see the devastation first hand that the bombings bore ``all the hallmarks of international terrorism practiced by Al Qaeda.''An anonymous caller to the Anatolian news agency said the attack on Thursday was a joint effort of Al Qaeda and a Turkish group, the Islamic Front of the Raiders of the Great Orient, or IBDA-C, the agency reported. The same group also claimed responsibility for the twin bombings of two Istanbul synagogues on Saturday, in which 23 people were killed.Just before the Istanbul attacks, a suicide bomb killed five people Thursday in the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk, a major center for Iraq's Kurds. [Article, A14]American officials said they do not see evidence of coordination between the attacks in Iraq and the terrorist bombings in Turkey, a longtime NATO member and American ally whose government nonetheless refused after long hesitation last spring to allow American troops to pass through Turkish territory to invade northern Iraq.Most Turks opposed the war in Iraq. But this week's attacks suggest that terrorists want to punish any country, and particularly Muslim nations, allied with the United States. As Mr. Bush noted in a speech in London on Wednesday, Islamic states allied with the West have become terrorist targets many times in recent months - in Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim country, in Saudi Arabia, in Morocco, and in occupied Iraq itself.Since the war in Iraq, one fear of neighboring governments had been that instability and violence would spread outward from Iraq itself. In recent days, attacks in the region have seemed to gain in gruesome intensity.Seventeen people died in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, when a bomb ripped through a housing compound on Nov. 9. Now, two carefully selected twin bombings in less than a week have struck at both Turkey's close ties with the West and with Israel, and the centuries-long coexistence of Jews and Muslims here.In the United States, Attorney General John Ashcroft said Thursday that this week's bombings were very much in the mode of Al Qaeda. ``We should make no mistake in thinking that terrorism is somehow abating,'' he said.While Turkey has long suffered terrorist attacks, largely because of a war with Kurdish separatists, it has not seen anything like this week's bombings in its 80-year history as a secular Muslim state.Both the government and many citizens, stunned by Saturday's synagogue attacks, had hoped that they would prove an aberration. Suicide bombings have not been a tactic used by Turkish groups in the past. But events have now raised the chilling prospect of a ready reservoir of young Turks willing to give their lives for an amorphous cause.Some critics linked the spread of violence to the rise of political Islam in Turkey despite a carefully cultivated secular political culture.The unholy acts during the holy month of Ramadan are likely to alienate moderate Muslims even further from terrorism carried out in the name of Islam. More Muslims have died in the two sets of bombings than either Christians or Jews.``Those who bloodied this holy day and massacred innocent people will account for it in both worlds,'' said Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. ``They will be damned until eternity.''Certainly, Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair drew a stark and forceful contrast between terrorists who they said hate freedom, and those of any religion or ethnicity who practice democracy and tolerance.``They hate freedom,'' Mr. Bush said of the terrorists. ``They hate free nations. Today, once again, we saw their ambitions of murder. The cruelty is part of their strategy. The terrorists hope to intimidate; they hope to demoralize. They particularly want to intimidate and demoralize free nations. They're not going to succeed.''Mr. Blair, alluding to the stakes in Iraq, stressed the importance of defeating terrorism everywhere. ``It is in a free, democratic and stable Iraq that not just the violence, but the wretched and backward philosophy of these terrorists will be defeated and destroyed,'' he said.Mr. Erdogan called the attacks ``another example of a callous assault against peace and stability in the country by those circles who have no sense of humanity.''The first Istanbul blast was at the Turkish headquarters of HSBC, the world's second-largest bank, shearing off the facade and shattering the windows of nearby high-rises.Body parts, the charred shells of cars and broken glass were scattered around a 9-foot-deep crater in the streets outside the bank. Water gushed from the top floors of the building.Bystanders bloodied and covered in dust looked dazed as they walked past lines of ambulances. Several people helped carry the limp bodies of victims.Minutes later, around 11 a.m., at least 15 people were killed when the consulate in the historic Beyoglu district was blown apart.The explosion occurred just 300 yards from the Neve Shalom synagogue that was attacked on Saturday. The cramped district where both buildings were located is frequented by tourists and business people, and features shops, bars and restaurants, as well as several consulates. The American Consulate nearby was moved just months ago to a more secure location.The building where Mr. Short was working was destroyed, witnesses said. He had served as consul general in Istanbul since 2001, was Britain's ambassador to Bulgaria from 1994 to 1998, and oversaw peace-building efforts in Bosnia-Herzegovina from 1999 to 2000.``I thought somebody hit our bus from the back, then I saw black smoke rising,'' said a sobbing Mehmet Altan, who was on a bus near the bank when the explosion occurred. ``Cars were damaged all around us. I saw the charred body of a driver at the wheel.''Mehmet Celik, who was slightly injured, said a light brown pickup truck exploded in front of the HSBC headquarters. One bank employee, Suleyman Karatas, told the Anatolia news agency that the scene inside the bank, which has 600 employees, was like ``a bloodbath.''Cigdem Dicle, blood and dust covering her suit, stood in shock only a few feet from the wrecked building in which she was working when the bomb exploded. ``There was a massive explosion, I couldn't tell what was happening,'' she said. Another banker's pink shirt was soaked with the blood of friends he helped carry into the ambulances.Near the British Consulate, Hakan Kozan said the blast came from a white pickup truck. ``I heard a slam on the brakes and 10 seconds later the explosion came,'' Kozan told The Associated Press.Gunduz Akyurek and his friend had been unloading their car nearby when the explosion came. ``A car hit the wall of the building and we were about to rush to help whoever was inside, thinking that it was an accident, when we were thrown back by a huge explosion,'' he said. ``People who were lying unconscious on the ground, and the car was upside down, partly destroyed.''In remarks defending the Turkish police work, Mr. Erdogan highlighted the difficulty of combating terror attacks on soft targets such as consulates, which are intended to be beacons of a foreign country's culture that are located in central districts and accessible to all would-be visitors. ``Terrorism does not have a specific address. We don't know when, what, where and how terrorism will hit the targets. Can you show me one country that has sorted out the terrorism problem?''Some experts in the United States said that police work is just as important as military action in trying to combat the forces that struck hardest at America on Sept. 11, 2001.`` ``You can't just win this war militarily,'' said Bruce Hoffman, a leading expert on terrorism and a vice president of the Rand Corporation in Washington, D.C. ``Military force plays an important part, but an equally important part is intelligence sharing and law enforcement.'' A report that is to be issued next month by the United Nations predicts that, of necessity, Al Qaeda will turn attention to targets more accessible than warships, embassies and landmarks that were their early hallmarks.The lesson driven home by the recent attacks, a senior United States government official said, is that ``the terrorists can attack anywhere, and the civilized world has to be ready to defend everywhere.''