https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/fashion/summer-shopping-hamptons-pop-ups.html
A Week of Pop-Ups, Sales and Other Shopping Events - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Shopping and Retail,Dover Street Market New York (Manhattan  NY  Retailer),Sonia Rykiel CDM,Hamptons (NY),Manhattan (NYC),Armarium Inc
July 12, 2017
3293
It may be quiet in the city, but out east, the social circuit is heating up. On Thursday, the fashion rental platform Armarium will open a summer pop-up with breezy party looks like a Sonia Rykiel viscose dress with asymmetrical flared sleeves ($475 rental, $3,510 retail), along with perfect everyday pieces like Flagpole Swim bikinis ($385) and Loup Charmant maxi-dresses ($595) to buy. At 42B Jobs Lane, Southampton, N.Y.That same day, the bridesmaid dress e-tailer Weddington Way will open a shop-in-shop at the Banana Republic Rockefeller Center location. You’ll find actually pretty poly-chiffon gowns in 19 different colors ($195). At 626 Fifth Avenue.Celebrate Bastille Day on Friday with a glass of rosé at the French linen purveyor Yves Delorme, where you’ll receive a 20 percent discount on everything in the store. At 1070 Madison Avenue.Dover Street Market will reopen on Saturday for its biannual New Beginning. Spot the Calvin Klein acid yellow vinyl-covered coat ($3,995) — it was one of the most meme-worthy looks of the fall shows — in the label’s new dedicated space on the fourth floor; shop cool kids like Gosha Rubchinskiy and the surf-punk label Noon Goons and an assortment of sneakers in a new 3,000-square-foot retail floor in the basement; and find new insect-inspired bijoux with kinetic body parts, like a beetle brooch in rose silver and pearls ($6,600) by Delfina Delettrez, in the jewelry space. At 160 Lexington Avenue.Also on Saturday, the California-chic home décor label Serena & Lily will host a Mamas & Minis event with the maternity label Hatch Collection at its Hamptons outpost from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. Shop wardrobe staples like a featherweight tank in Cyprus gauze or white cotton that looks great both during and after pregnancy ($158) while little ones make sand dough sculptures. At 332 Montauk Highway, Wainscott, N.Y.At the No. 6 Basement Sale, which continues through Saturday, you’ll find discounts up to 70 percent on vintage clothing, shearlings, leather clog boots and more. At 6 Centre Market Place.From Friday to Sunday, Simon Miller covetable Bonsai bucket bags, denim and ready-to-wear will be marked down up to 50 percent. At 167 Canal Street, fifth floor.The Tibi spring collection, filled with power-sleeve tops and other directional separates, is now marked down 70 percent. At 120 Wooster Street.