https://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/28/world/americas/in-mexico-learning-courtroom-basics.html
In Mexico, Learning Courtroom Basics - The New York Times
Courts and the Judiciary,Mexico
Aug. 27, 2012
5328
MEXICO CITY — The witness’s testimony was beginning to show cracks. He grew visibly tense, his knuckles turning white as he gripped the table harder.Catalina León, the defense lawyer cross-examining the witness in a triple murder case, had zeroed in on his inconsistencies. Indeed, the witness had witnessed little at all, having been standing at an angle that made it impossible for him to identify one of the men arrested in the crime.“We were having a fit of laughter because they didn’t expect it and were very angry,” said Ms. León of the opposing counsel during a break.Such tough questioning may seem the bedrock of courtroom justice in the United States, but here in Mexico, where trials are decided by judges and rely almost entirely on written briefs, the lively exchange was a rare sight. Rare enough, in fact, that it was still just a rehearsal, part of a training session conducted by American and Mexican prosecutors as this country revamps its justice system.Four years ago, Mexico’s Congress adopted a legal overhaul that will enable prosecutors and defense lawyers to present evidence and question witnesses in open court, a practice that already exists in a few states but whose rollout is scheduled to be completed nationwide by 2016.More open trials, the theory goes, will increase due process and accountability in a country where the much-publicized arrests of cartel bosses are common, but the actual convictions of criminals are not. Fewer than a quarter of crimes in Mexico are reported and over all, just 2 percent result in sentences, according to a 2010 report by the Trans-Border Institute at the University of San Diego.Police corruption is rife. Investigations are often shoddy, and mass jailbreaks common. And while Mexico’s effort to turn around its justice system is a slow, long-term process that may not pay dividends for years, analysts on both sides of the border say it is vital nonetheless.These reforms “are key,” said José Antonio Caballero Juárez, an investigator at CIDE, a Mexico City research institute. “They will give transparency to a process that is at the moment very opaque.”Though the United States has focused much of its anti-crime aid toward Mexico on helicopters and other equipment under the $1.6 billion Merida Initiative, the program is now shifting toward the shoring up of institutions, a step that analysts call overdue.“Mexico understands this is not a quick fix but a holistic approach,” said Lanny A. Breuer, who is in charge of the Justice Department’s criminal division in Washington.In June, a group of 10 Mexican judges spent several days learning about the American court system at a new Justice Department-sponsored institute in Puerto Rico for foreign judges, observing firsthand how trials are conducted, receiving coaching from American judges, even giddily trying on the kind of robes that American judges wear.Judges, American officials have said, have been among the most resistant to the change because in the current system, which dates to the 19th century, their determinations face little scrutiny. Prosecutors and defense lawyers submit written reports and documents to a judge who reviews them privately and issues a verdict, often with little explanation. Proceedings are conducted almost entirely behind closed doors, leading to worry about the possibility of bribery.“The new system changes you from being a commander to being an umpire,” Mr. Breuer said of the judges.But many judges are coming around to the notion of a public airing of the evidence and testimony and the confidence it can build in the system.“Frankly, I came here reluctant toward the new system; human nature is resistant to change,” said Victor Romero, a Mexico City federal judge, who smiled as he donned a judicial robe for the first time. “More than anything, I think that it is fear of the unknown. This experience has impacted me favorably because I have been able to see its benefits.”Here in Mexico City, under a $5 million program initially developed by the United States Justice Department and the Mexican attorney general’s office in 2011, 7,700 federal prosecutors, investigators and forensics specialists have been trained in the open, accusatory-style trial system.Mexico, however, has been slow to make the change.Mexico has 31 states and one federal district, but only a handful of them have fully adopted the oral trial system. Prosecutors, lawyers and judges have to undergo training, but legal experts say that it is mostly a lack of willingness from the government that has delayed the transition.“It is going to take a shift in attitudes in Mexico about the criminal justice system and how it works,” said David Shirk, director of the Trans-Border Institute, “in order for these reforms to be successful.”A recent training session at a hotel conference room in Mexico City suggested that the students — active prosecutors and investigators from different states in Mexico — had been learning fast.They were given a single case through the six-month training period: a triple homicide on one of Mexico City’s main avenues. The two opposing counsels were not allowed to meet during the training period, so that neither side knew of the other’s strategy.As the trial progressed, the students, stiff and nervous at the outset, began to loosen up.“A black Tuesday, tragic, in which the victims were intercepted with treachery and advantage,” said Erick Gutiérrez in his opening statement, gesturing with his hands as he paced brusquely in front of a projector.On several occasions, a tentative “Objection!” resounded through the brightly lighted hotel conference room, leading Angel Moreno, a federal prosecutor from Texas who played judge during the mock trial, to display an almost imperceptible smile.Ms. León, the Mexican federal prosecutor who acted the part of defense lawyer, provided the highlight of the trial when she pulled out a tape measure and had the witness hold it as she walked away, extending it to about 23 feet. That was the distance from which the witness said he had seen the shooters, one of whom, he asserted, had a scar on the right side of his face.A volunteer walked onto the stage with a pink paper napkin — meant to represent a moon-shaped scar — taped to the side of his cheek. When he faced the way the witness directed, the participants could tell that the witness would have been unable to see the killer’s right side.“I’m very happy with the dexterity and creativity they have shown,” said Carlos Cardona, an American prosecutor in Puerto Rico who helped in the training.To standardize procedures across the country by the 2016 deadline, 205 of the graduates of the course are going to teach other federal employees what they learned, so the new techniques trickle through to the entire federal justice system. But about two-thirds of the states have yet to begin the transition, and experts worry that many are still unprepared, with both prosecutors and judges untrained in the new system.Ms. León acknowledged the changes will take time, but said the effort would pay high dividends. “It’s going to help us a lot,” she said. “It guarantees better justice.”