https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/us/james-comeys-tumultuous-fbi-tenure-in-headlines.html
James Comey’s Tumultuous F.B.I. Tenure, in Headlines - The New York Times
Comey  James B,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J
May 9, 2017
5551
President Trump dismissed the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, on Tuesday afternoon on the recommendation of Attorney General Jeff Sessions, according to Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary.Mr. Comey led the bureau as it undertook the task of investigating the campaigns of both major party nominees for president of the United States. The Clinton campaign was investigated for the candidate’s use of a private email server, and the Trump campaign was investigated over possible ties to Russia.Mr. Comey, appointed director in 2013 by President Obama, publicly commented on the Clinton investigation during the campaign but did not acknowledge the investigation into Mr. Trump’s campaign until after the election was over.Here is a collection of stories in The New York Times about Mr. Comey’s tumultuous time at the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.April 22, 2017: Mr. Comey tried to keep the F.B.I. out of politics during the 2017 presidential race as it investigated both Hillary Clinton and the Trump campaign. But he ended up plunging the bureau into the center of a bitter and divisive election.March 20, 2017: Mr. Comey told the House Intelligence Committee that the F.B.I. was investigating whether members of President Trump’s campaign colluded with Russia to influence the presidential election. The Times collected some of his answers to lawmakers’ questions.March 5, 2017: Mr. Comey asked the Justice Department to publicly reject President Trump’s allegation that President Barack Obama ordered Mr. Trump’s phones to be tapped.Jan. 24, 2017: President Trump asked Mr. Comey to stay on as the director of the F.B.I. During the campaign, Mr. Trump harshly criticized the agency and the Justice Department.Jan. 10, 2017: Top officials at America’s intelligence agencies showed then President-elect Donald J. Trump a summary of unsubstantiated reports that Russia had collected compromising and embarrassing information about Mr. Trump.Oct. 31, 2016: An F.B.I. investigation into the Russian role in the United States presidential election had so far not found any conclusive or direct link between Donald J. Trump and the Russian government.Oct. 28, 2016: Days before the presidential election, Mr. Comey said in a letter to Congress that the F.B.I. had come across additional emails in an unrelated case pertaining to its investigation of Hillary Clinton’s email service.July 5, 2016: Mr. Comey said Hillary Clinton was “extremely careless” in using a private email address and server but recommended no criminal charges against her, ending an investigation that loomed over her campaign.