https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/us/politics/karen-handel-facts-bio.html
Who Is Karen Handel, Winner of the Georgia Special Election? - The New York Times
Elections  House of Representatives,Republican Party,Handel  Karen C,Atlanta (Ga),United States Politics and Government,Gingrich  Newt,Isakson  Johnny,Perdue  Sonny,Trump  Donald J,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Price  Thomas E (1954- ),Georgia
June 21, 2017
1801
ATLANTA — Karen Handel, a fixture in Georgia Republican politics, won surprisingly easily in Tuesday’s runoff to fill the House seat in suburban Atlanta vacated by Tom Price, the health and human services secretary. Ms. Handel turned back a well-funded Democratic challenger, Jon Ossoff, to keep a heavily conservative and affluent district in Republican hands.■ Ms. Handel, 55, is a former chairwoman of the Fulton County Commission, the governing body for the most populous county in Georgia, and was elected Georgia secretary of state in 2006, overseeing the state’s elections. She ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination for governor in 2010 and for the United States Senate in 2014.Democrats attacked her record, including increasing spending as secretary of state. But her frequent appearances on ballots in the Sixth District offered her an important name-identification advantage in the initial balloting in April. And in the runoff, Ms. Handel’s local reputation made it easier for her to forge a political identity separate from Mr. Trump.■ Ms. Handel rarely mentioned the president’s name without being asked. While Mr. Trump narrowly carried the district last year, polls show a majority of the district’s voters view him unfavorably. While she appeared with Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence at fund-raisers, on the campaign trail, she preferred highlighting the Republican lineage of the district: Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker; Johnny Isakson, now a senator; and, eventually, Mr. Price all held the seat. Even when she spoke at a final get-out-the-vote rally with two of Mr. Trump’s cabinet appointees — Mr. Price and Sonny Perdue, the agriculture secretary — Ms. Handel ignored the president.■ While Ms. Handel tried to keep her distance from the White House, she was the beneficiary of more than $12 million in spending from outside conservative groups during the runoff. And almost all of it was from House Republican-aligned organizations, which means that she owes her seat in no small part to Speaker Paul D. Ryan and his allies.■ Ms. Handel first gained national attention in 2012 when she was a senior official at the Susan G. Komen Foundation, a breast-cancer charity. With Ms. Handel serving as a senior vice president for policy, the foundation announced its intent to cut funding for screenings with Planned Parenthood. An uproar ensued, and Ms. Handel, who opposes abortion rights, quickly resigned from the group. The foundation swiftly restored Planned Parenthood’s eligibility for grants. She faced fierce attacks from Democrats during the runoff for her role with Komen.■ Though she has become well known in Georgia political circles, Ms. Handel grew up in modest circumstances in the Maryland suburbs of Washington. She moved to the Atlanta area in the 1990s when her husband got a job there, and she went on to hold a number of posts in the private sector and in government before turning to elected office. But she has not shed her allegiance to a onetime Maryland institution: Ms. Handel still cheers for the N.F.L.’s Colts, now of Indianapolis.