http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/15/upshot/why-shopping-is-so-important-in-health-enrollment.html
Updated: Why Shopping Is So Important in Health Enrollment - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),HealthCare.gov
Nov. 14, 2014
2939
This article was updated Nov. 20 with rate information from all 50 states.In September, we looked at early rate information and concluded that people who bought plans on the Affordable Care Act marketplaces this year should go back and shop again before renewing.Now final data from every state in the country makes that recommendation even stronger.The system is set up to make it easy for people who bought a plan last year to stay in that plan. People who don’t take active steps before Dec. 15 will be automatically renewed. But an Upshot analysis of rate data from the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform finds that many people who renew will face big price increases, while much better deals are available for similar plans.Of course, switching plans has its costs — in many cases, it means changing doctors and drug lists. It also may mean mastering new deductibles, co-payments and other benefit structures. But it’s clear that if price is the most important thing, most Americans who bought the most popular plan in 2014 would be better off switching to something new for 2015.The tough choice before consumers — between a price hike and the inconveniences of switching — is a consequence of the Affordable Care Act’s reliance on competition to control health insurance prices. The law encourages insurance companies to compete on price to keep premiums low.That competitive pressure appears to be working in many markets, and particularly in large cities. Over all, we found that if you compared the cheapest plan in the most popular category from 2014 with the cheapest plan in that same category for 2015, the price rose modestly, by 3.6 percent. For comparison, price increases in the individual market before the Affordable Care Act were in the neighborhood of 10 percent a year, and premiums for employer plans grew by 3 percent last year.But people who just stay in the plan that was cheapest — and most popular — in 2014 are looking at much bigger increases. The average rate increase for those plans across the country is 9.5 percent.Our map shows full prices for every state in the country for a 40-year-old single person who doesn’t smoke. Actual rates will vary by customers’ ages and family size, but the increases and decreases will be similar for every customer in a given area. Most customers won’t pay the full price, of course. The exchanges offer consumers subsidies on a sliding scale based on their income. In 2014, 85 percent of people who bought insurance in the new marketplaces qualified for some financial assistance.Even consumers who are sure that renewing their current plan is worth paying a higher premium should still consider returning to the marketplace website to update their information. The subsidies that middle-income shoppers receive to help them pay their premiums are based on their income and the price of a special plan in the marketplace, called the “benchmark.”People who don’t re-enter their information will receive the same subsidy as last year, regardless of what happens to their income and the benchmark. That means that it’s easy to end up underpaying and getting hit with a big bill at tax time — or paying too much and not realizing it.