https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/12/world/middleeast/persecuted-yazidis-again-caught-in-larger-struggle.html
Persecuted Yazidis Again Caught in Larger Struggle - The New York Times
Refugees and Displaced Persons,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Iraq,Yazidi (Religious Sect),Kurds,Muslims and Islam,Sinjar (Iraq)
Aug. 11, 2014
5859
The Yazidis are a religious minority of about 500,000 people whose ancient monotheistic faith has roots in Zoroastrianism and beliefs involving a 12th-century mystic and a peacock angel. Those characteristics make adherents, who are neither Muslim nor Christian, apostates in the eyes of Islamist fighters who are sweeping through villages across northern Iraq.Long stuck in the middle of an antagonistic relationship between Muslim Arabs and Muslim Kurds, the Yazidi people have been violently persecuted by both sides. After a particularly deadly crackdown in Iraq in 2007, the Yazidis were able to ensure a degree of security and influence through a carefully calculated alliance with the Kurds. Many Yazidis, who live in and around the region of northwestern Iraq known as Kurdistan, speak Kurdish, and some describe themselves as the original Kurds. The mostly Sunni Muslim Kurds say Yazidis are ethnic Kurds who simply follow a different religion.In 2009, the Yazidis exploited Iraq’s byzantine electoral rules to earn about a quarter of the seats in the government of Nineveh, one of the country’s largest provinces, and became political allies with the Kurds in an Iraq that was becoming increasingly fractured along sectarian lines.In recent days, as militants from the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, have advanced in northern Iraq, driving religious minorities from their homes and killing others, the Yazidis have fled west of Mosul to Mount Sinjar, where they have been stranded for a week.Their plight at the hands of Sunni fighters helped precipitate American airstrikes, authorized last week. The bombing of ISIS positions in the north appeared to alter the situation at Mount Sinjar. Four American airstrikes on the extremists surrounding the mountain on Saturday, along with airdrops of food, water and supplies, have helped Yazidi and Kurdish fighters beat back ISIS and have enabled thousands of Yazidis to escape the militants’ siege. The escapees made their way on Sunday through Syrian territory to Fishkhabour, an Iraqi border town under Kurdish control.Tens of thousands more remain trapped on the mountain, and American officials cautioned that the limited airstrikes alone could not open a corridor to safety for them. Many families were separated, some in their flight to the mountains, some when they decided to descend.Yazidis are now caught up in a larger disaster occurring across Iraq, but one that is hitting Iraqi Kurdistan, once the most stable part of the country, especially hard. Despite airdrops of aid from the Iraqi government and Americans, the humanitarian situation is worsening. Tens of thousands of Yazidis are trying to find refuge and relief in Kurdistan, near the borders with Syria and Turkey.There, a mass migration, set off by increasingly widespread fears about the Sunni militants’ advance, is underway. Christians fled Mosul earlier this summer as ISIS militants took over that city. And about 580,000 people displaced by fighting or the threat of violence have moved into the Kurdistan region, with about 200,000 having moved since last week when ISIS took Sinjar and its surrounding villages, according to David Swanson, a spokesman for the United Nations’ Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Iraq.