http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/10/world/europe/as-britain-contemplates-exit-boris-johnson-prepares-his-entrance.html
As Britain Contemplates Exit, Boris Johnson Prepares His Entrance - The New York Times
Great Britain,Johnson  Boris,Cameron  David,European Union,London (England),Conservative Party (Great Britain),Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit)
April 9, 2016
9622
LONDON — Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, was in full spat mode with the television journalist Andrew Marr on a prominent Sunday news program.Mr. Marr wanted to move on from an earlier question. Mr. Johnson, in a jolly, blustery mood, said: “Well, I’m going to tell you what I’m going to cover.” Mr. Marr responded: “It’s not ‘The Boris Johnson Show.’ It’s ‘The Andrew Marr Show.’ I get to ask the questions.”“All right, you have sovereignty,” Mr. Johnson conceded. “Unlike the U.K.”Mr. Johnson, who made an early reputation as a journalist mocking the European Union, has shaken up the debate over British membership in the bloc — and jolted British politics more generally — by spurning Prime Minister David Cameron, a fellow Conservative, and backing the campaign to leave the European Union.Mr. Johnson’s declaration was far and away the highest-profile defection from the prime minister’s campaign to keep Britain inside the bloc when the matter is put to a national referendum on June 23. But it also focused ever greater attention on his motives — cynical was a more popular judgment than brave — and his ambitions. Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson, 51, having been in a long and often dysfunctional relationship with Mr. Cameron, effectively used the drama of his choice to announce his intention to succeed him as prime minister.Not in so many words, of course, even for a clever man of oh so many words, who once said that “my chances of being P.M. are about as good as the chances of finding Elvis on Mars, or my being reincarnated as an olive.”Mr. Johnson professes loyalty to Mr. Cameron, his younger Eton and Oxford friend and rival, as prime minister no matter what happens in the referendum. Early opinion polls suggest the outcome is too close to call at this stage, with bookies saying the odds are narrowing but still favor Britain’s staying in the bloc.But Mr. Cameron has announced that he will not lead the Conservatives into the next election, in 2020, even if he escapes the immediate political peril that he would face if he lost the referendum. Mr. Johnson, who also holds a seat in Parliament, saw his opportunities and he took them. As he said in 2013, using a rugby metaphor about his prime ministerial chances, “If the ball came loose from the back of the scrum, which it won’t of course, it would be a great, great thing to have a crack at.”Mr. Johnson, a big man surprisingly agile for his size, is very fond of rugby, and very aggressive at it. In October, in what was supposed to be a fun exhibition of touch rugby in Japan, he flattened Toki Sekiguchi, an astonished 10-year-old, by charging him with his shoulder.Mr. Cameron, too, is feeling bruised, and more than a little betrayed, having offered Mr. Johnson any cabinet post he wanted except chancellor of the Exchequer if he would only support remaining in the European Union. In fact, just a few days before Mr. Johnson announced in February his decision to support British exit, or “Brexit,” he had told numerous people, including Roland Rudd, a longtime associate, that he would support the campaign to stay.Mr. Johnson “clearly changed his mind over a weekend,” said Mr. Rudd, the treasurer of the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign. He added: “Like a lot of people, I have conversations with him, pretty recent, and it was absolutely clear he was for ‘in.’ Absolutely clear. Not any shade of doubt at all.”Mr. Johnson said later that he was always leaning toward an exit, but his announcement was characteristically showy and managed. He emerged from his house and acted shocked to see every prominent political journalist in Britain, complete with camera crews, somehow waiting for him in the chill.His strategy is simple. Mr. Johnson, who has long been unpopular with other Conservative members of Parliament, many of whom see him as showy, insincere and narcissistic, has suddenly earned high marks among a large number of them. At least 140 of the 330 Tories in the House of Commons, including six cabinet ministers, favor leaving the bloc.The next Tory leader will be chosen in a two-part drama, first by a vote of legislators, with the top two finishers then going to a vote by grass-roots Conservative members, who as a group are more right wing than Mr. Cameron and temperamentally inclined to Mr. Johnson’s anti-Europe position. If Mr. Johnson makes the top two from the vote of the parliamentary party, he is considered likely to win, and thus lead the Conservatives into the next election against the Labour Party and its far-left leader, Jeremy Corbyn.Mr. Johnson “will have credit with half the Tory M.P.s and a lot of party activists whether they win or lose” the referendum, said Tony Travers, a professor of government at the London School of Economics. “He’s always been mildly euroskeptic, so his decision to join the ‘leave’ campaign will have been made with an element of long-term judgment and personal ambition.”“He’s presumably calculating that even if Britain stays, he’s the kind of election-winning politician that Cameron would want to embrace, to show that the Tories are a big happy family,” Prof. Travers added. “And if he’s leader of a winning campaign, he’ll be seen to have had excellent political judgment.”Mr. Johnson sees himself as Churchillian, having written a popular biography of the man. But he often presents himself more as Falstaff — vain, portly, joyful and lecherous, yet clever underneath it all.Ann Treneman, a former political writer for The Times of London and now its theater critic, said Mr. Johnson “has always loved playing the buffoon, but being mayor taught him that he can do that and also change people’s lives.”Mr. Johnson “used to be 98 percent show, 2 percent substance,” she said. “But being mayor taught him that substance makes everything possible, and whether he’s really responsible or not, London is a big success story.”The London job is not as powerful as that of an American mayor, but it does control the transport system. Mr. Johnson has banned drinking on the subways and is finally about to succeed in having 24-hour service on parts of the system despite fierce union opposition. He presided over a very successful Olympics in 2012 and has benefited from London’s dynamism at a time when much of Europe has been in an economic funk.Born in Manhattan, Mr. Johnson has retained dual nationality and grumpily has paid American taxes. But he often makes fun of American politicians, which the British enjoy. In 2003, he called President George W. Bush “the greatest threat to life on this planet.” He recently told the British press that President Obama should keep his nose out of British politics and the Brexit debate when he visits this month; Mr. Obama and numerous American officials have consistently urged Britain to remain inside the European Union.Mr. Johnson, who often rides his bicycle to work, manages to appeal to Britons of all classes. Although his friends call him Al, he is universally known as Boris, like a French movie star with one name. The BBC, in the interests of impartiality, has instructed journalists not to refer to him simply as “Boris.”He has had various scrapes and scandals, not least two well-publicized affairs, including one love child and a mistress who had an abortion. Petronella Wyatt, the mistress, wrote an article last month praising him as “a loner” who yearns to be loved and a man “whose character had more eddies than a whirlpool.” He is, Ms. Wyatt wrote, “a performer who is an introvert, veering between ebullience and self-doubt; a happy-looking man for whom happiness can be precarious.”While he is often accused of lying, Ms. Wyatt said, he is usually driven by a fear of confrontation. “Boris never sets out to lie,” she wrote. “It is just that he will do anything to avoid an argument, which leads to a degree of duplicity.”Matthew Parris, a former Tory legislator, urged the party to “end our affair with this dangerous charmer.” Mr. Johnson, he wrote in The Times of London, is a liar.“There’s a pattern to Boris’s life, and it isn’t the lust for office, or for applause, or for susceptible women, that mark out this pattern in red warning ink. It’s the casual dishonesty, the cruelty, the betrayal; and, beneath the betrayal, the emptiness of real ambition: the ambition to do anything useful with office once it is attained.”Ms. Wyatt is more forgiving. “If Boris is a phony, he is a real phony,” she wrote. “Besides, which of us, in our hearts, are content with the lot life has given us? We all play a part, as every poet since Shakespeare has noted — and as some of our greatest premiers have done, including Winston Churchill.”The June referendum, Ms. Treneman said, “is about the future of Britain and Europe, but it is also about the future of Boris — and they are now completely interlinked.”