http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/21/us/politics/republican-national-convention.html
G.O.P. Convention Day 4 Takeaways: It’s Donald Trump’s Party - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Republican National Convention,Trump  Donald J,Pence  Mike
July 21, 2016
5104
On the final night of a convention unlike any in memory, Donald J. Trump completed his unlikely envelopment of the Republican Party. His rule could last four months, or four years, or eight. All hail Trump. Our takeaways:Mr. Trump and his fellow speakers over four days and nights did not pivot, did not shift, did not seek the notional sweet center of American public life. With few exceptions, the convention was aimed at stirring up true believers and wedding them to his cause. The emotional and cultural core of Mr. Trump’s campaign — reversal of, and even revenge for, perceived slights, disrespect and loss — were undisturbed and at times amplified before a prime-time audience. In Mr. Trump’s telling, the most powerful nation in the history of the world was a victim. And Mr. Trump was its avenger.While his message was unchanged, the packaging was updated. Mr. Trump spoke almost entirely from a script, and his unmistakable voice had been sculpted into something resembling a traditional tone for a nomination acceptance speech. Only once did he break the mask — when Mr. Trump, grimacing theatrically, mocked those who had said he could never win. The result was a Trump packaged for prime time.Though the delegates represented only a slice of the Republican electorate, the pulse in the convention hall on Thursday night revealed what seemed like a new political topography for the party. Mr. Trump’s obligatory riffs on taxes and regulation were warmly but not passionately received. By far the biggest outpouring of energy came when Mr. Trump described killings by illegal immigrants, tapping into a deep well of anxiety and fear. A prominent technology entrepreneur, Peter Thiel, won applause for saying he was proud to be gay, and Mr. Trump earned ovations for promising to protect gay and lesbian Americans — not from discriminatory laws, but from Muslim terrorists bent on killing them.In biographical videos, Mr. Trump was introduced as an outer-borough Horatio Alger, peering across the East River at lands unconquered by his father, a real estate developer. Perhaps reflecting Mr. Trump’s own sensibility — a guy dismissed by the swells, who battered his way into the elite — the video narration also made Queens sound as far from Fifth Avenue as St. Louis.Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka delivered perhaps the only speech — other than the opening and closing prayers — shorn of partisan and ideological tones. Mr. Trump promised to make America win again, but only after an hourlong tour of despair and dishonor. The United States electorate has historically rewarded candidates who could seize a sense of optimism. November will test that trend.