http://www.nytimes.com/1996/01/13/arts/television-review-an-england-where-heart-and-purse-are-romantically-united.html
TELEVISION REVIEW;An England Where Heart and Purse Are Romantically United - The New York Times
ENGLAND (UK),REVIEWS,TELEVISION,PRIDE AND PREJUDICE (TV PROGRAM)

7277
The Jane Austen bandwagon barrels along. "Sense and Sensibility" and "Persuasion" are in movie theaters. Versions of "Emma," which was given a contemporary spin in "Clueless," are in the making (and an audiotape edition, produced for BBC Radio, can be found in bookshops). And tomorrow, after setting  ratings records in England, the best Austen of all, "Pride and Prejudice," begins a three-night, six-hour run on A&E.This splendid adaptation, with a remarkably faithful and sensitively nuanced  script by Andrew Davies, is a co-production of the BBC and A&E. One word of warning: this is not, as might be expected, a presentation of public television's "Masterpiece Theater." There will be commercial breaks.Opening with what Austen considered a universally acknowledged truth, "that  a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife," "Pride  and Prejudice" is a witty mix of love stories and social conniving, cleverly wrapped in the ambitions and illusions of a provincial gentry. The surface froth is deceptive. W. H. Auden claimed he was made most uncomfortable by seeing an English spinster of the middle class "reveal so frankly and with such sobriety the economic basis of society." Love was one thing; financial security through marriage was another, and perhaps even more important.And so we find Elizabeth Bennet (Jennifer Ehle), the practical and decidedly  virtuous narrator of this tale, casting a keenly sharp eye on anyone venturing into her vicinity. She realizes that Mrs. Bennet (Alison Steadman) is one of the silliest and most exasperating mothers in England, and that Mr. Bennet (Benjamin Whitrow) verges on being irresponsible with his protective cynicism. Of her four sisters, Elizabeth, or Lizzy, confides only in sweet-natured Jane (Susannah Harker). The others are empty-headed twits, especially Lydia (Julia Sawalha) who will drag the family into scandal.But for all her special insight, Lizzy is not beyond being duped herself, at  least in first impressions. She is only too willing to sympathize with the rotter Wickham (Adrian Lukis) when he bad-mouths Mr. Darcy (Colin Firth), whose  seeming arrogance greatly irritates Lizzy. But will the dashing Mr. Darcy, who does a lot of riding about on a white horse, turn out to be the true love of Lizzy's life, especially since he has a substantial annual income and a grand home that looks like something out of a fairy tale. The ending is never really in doubt, but Austen is positively ingenious in getting us there.Scattered portions of this handsome production might seem a bit slow for American viewers (British imports are often snipped and speeded up for consumption here). There are perhaps too many languorous walks across meadows, and one or two ornately choreographed dances seem to go on forever. But like the novel, the production overflows with memorable set pieces.There is, for instance, Mr. Collins (David Bamber), the fawning vicar whose marriage proposal is quickly rejected by a horrified Lizzy. Mr. Collins's scenes with his patroness, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, are hilarious as he obsequiously sings the praises of her condescension. And Barbara Leigh-Hunt turns Lady Catherine into a marvelously imperious witch.But the story never ventures far from Elizabeth and Mr. Darcy. Miss Ehle, daughter of the fine actress Rosemary Harris, manages to make Lizzy strikingly intelligent and authoritative without being overbearing. And Mr. Firth brilliantly captures Mr. Darcy's snobbish pride while conveying, largely through intense stares, that he is falling in love despite himself. There is an element  of wishful fantasy in "Pride and Prejudice." Austen died in 1817 at age 41. She  never married.PRIDE AND PREJUDICE A&E, Sunday at 8 P.M., Monday and Tuesday at 9 P.M.Screenplay by Andrew Davies, based on a novel by Jane Austen. Directed by Simon  Langton; produced by Sue Birtwisle; music by Carl Davis; photography by John Kenway; Peter Coulson, film editor; Susie Conklin, script editor; Julie Scott and Fiona McTavish, associate producers. from A&E and BBC-TV. Delia Fine, A&E executive in charge; Michael Wearing, executive producer.WITH: Colin Firth (Mr. Darcy), Jennifer Ehle (Elizabeth Bennet), Alison Steadman (Mrs. Bennet), Julia Sawalha (Lydia Bennet), Susannah Harker (Jane Bennet), Benjamin Whitrow (Mr. Bennet), David Bamber (Mr. Collins), Adrian Lukis (Wickham) and Barbara Leigh-Hunt (Lady Catherine de Bourgh).