https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/24/insider/how-times-obituary-comes-together-chuck-berry-jimmy-breslin.html
An Obituary Six Years in the Making for Jimmy Breslin - The New York Times
Newspapers,New York Times,Breslin  Jimmy,Berry  Chuck,Deaths (Obituaries)
March 24, 2017
5716
“People are always dying in The Times who don’t seem to die in other papers, and they die at greater length and maybe even with a little more grace,” the New York Times columnist James Reston wrote in 1962.To achieve this pre-eminence, The Times has long made a practice of keeping a deep reservoir of advance obits ready, so that no matter how prominent the subject — nor how close to deadline she might slip the bonds of the earth — The Times will be ready with a sweeping biography.So when word arrived on Friday, March 17, that Jimmy Breslin, the towering newspaper columnist, was in the hospital with pneumonia, the Obituaries team was prepared: The obit that ran on the front page of the paper on March 20 had been assigned six years ago.“Every couple of years we would double-check,” said Dan Barry, the Times reporter and columnist who wrote the obituary and who knew Mr. Breslin. “We’d hear back that Jimmy wasn’t doing so good.” He had thought that Mr. Breslin was through the worst of his latest bout — until he checked his phone during a Sunday morning basketball game at the gym. His 2,500-word article on Mr. Breslin was published later that day; one of the few holdups was confirming Mr. Breslin’s birth date. (“His stepdaughter had to text me a copy of his birth certificate,” Mr. Barry said.)Mr. Breslin’s was among nearly 1,700 advance obits in the system, said Bill McDonald, who has been the obituaries editor since 2006. Ideally, Mr. McDonald would like to have many more in hand. “I go to sleep sometimes thinking about who might surprise us overnight,” he said. “For rock musicians, 65 is the new 85.”Many of them sit in “the can,” as Mr. McDonald referred to it, for years. For example, the obituary for rock ‘n’ roll legend Chuck Berry (which appeared on the paper’s front page on March 19) was assigned in 2007 and periodically updated. The practice was gently lampooned in a Paul Noth cartoon in The New Yorker that depicts a woman introducing a wizened gentleman at a party. “Mr. Stephenson is the subject of a widely anticipated obituary,” she says.Obituaries are added at a rate of about three a week, and the reservoir is drained at roughly the same rate. (It is unusual, however, to have one on the front page three days in a row: In addition to Mr. Breslin and Mr. Berry, the poet and Nobel laureate Derek Walcott also died that week; his obituary ran on A1 of the March 18 paper.)The demands of the 24-hour digital news cycle have underlined the necessity of stockpiling, Mr. McDonald said.“The pressure on us to be ready has increased exponentially,” he explained. “You whet the appetite of readers with a news alert, and now they want more. But how do you reconstruct a life, in pieces, on deadline?”Web and mobile audiences also want news of celebrities, as well as substantive cultural, academic, intellectual, scientific and business leaders.But Mr. Breslin was not nearly so remote a figure to those involved in writing his obituary. Sam Roberts, another obit writer, also knew Mr. Breslin personally; he was at home in Manhattan when he received the call from Ronnie Eldridge, Mr. Breslin’s wife, with the news. Mr. Roberts’s email to Mr. McDonald was used to corroborate Mr. Breslin’s death.In fact, when Mr. Barry was first given the assignment in 2011, he demurred. “As an aspiring journalist in New York City, he was my ideal,” he said. “When you’re writing the obit, and you know someone, you don’t really want to consider the inevitable.”Once he began reporting, though, Mr. Barry regularly checked details with Ms. Eldridge. When asked if he believed she had told her husband about the obituary that was already in progress, Mr. Barry suggested that Mr. Breslin had probably figured it out himself.“We’re journalists,” he said. “He knew this is what we do.”This article is an adapted and updated version of a Times Insider post from Oct. 8, 2015.