http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/25/arts/television/death-comes-to-pemberley-on-pbs.html
‘Death Comes to Pemberley’ on PBS - The New York Times
Television,Public Broadcasting Service,Death Comes to Pemberley (TV Program)
Oct. 24, 2014
7278
Viewers of “Masterpiece” on Sunday can be forgiven if they forget they’re watching “Death Comes to Pemberley” and start tweeting about “Death Comes to Downton,” and wondering where Lady Mary is.It’s not that Pemberley, played by Castle Howard in North Yorkshire, England, and Downton Abbey, played by Highclere Castle in Hampshire, look all that much alike. But there’s something similar about the way each is a major character, lovingly photographed from every flattering angle. And in “Pemberley,” as in “Downton,” there is an emphasis on upstairs-downstairs relations and the responsibility of the gentry to their servants and tenants. None of this, you suspect, was lost on the executives at BBC, where the show originated, or at PBS, where it’s playing now.Amid the magnificence of the setting you can forget for a moment that this glossily produced, finely wrought, slightly dull two-night mini-series is actually connected to a piece of British storytelling of even higher standing — perhaps — than “Downton Abbey”: Jane Austen’s “Pride and Prejudice.” The exact source is P. D. James’s 2011 novel “Death Comes to Pemberley,” a “Pride and Prejudice” sequel that drops in on Elizabeth and Darcy six years after their marriage, when they are ensconced at his family estate, and embroils them in a murder mystery.The two most famous argumentative lovers of post-Shakespearean literature are played here by Anna Maxwell Martin and Matthew Rhys with skill, intelligence and a bit too much restraint — it’s as if they’ve been told that they need to be the parents. Mr. Rhys looks uncomfortable much of the time, as nervous as he does when he’s carrying out a particularly difficult feat of espionage on “The Americans.”More lively are some of the excellent supporting cast like Matthew Goode (of “The Good Wife”) as the invidious Wickham, who is the suspect in the killing that takes place on the Pemberley grounds, and Eleanor Tomlinson as Darcy’s sister, Georgiana. The most vivid performance is given by Jenna Coleman, the current companion on “Doctor Who”: She’s so squeally and broad as Lydia, Elizabeth’s youngest sister and Wickham’s wife, that she seems to be in a different, less distinguished and possibly more entertaining show.