https://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/05/us/05arizona.html
Ranchers Alarmed by Killing Near Border - The New York Times
Krentz  Robert N.,Smuggling,Illegal Immigrants,Murders and Attempted Murders,Border Patrol (US),Drug Abuse and Traffic,Arizona,Mexico,Ranches
April 4, 2010
7785
DOUGLAS, Ariz. — Sooner or later, they all feared, one of them would be killed.The ranchers, retirees and others who prefer to live off the grid in the vast desert near the Mexican border regularly confront the desperate and dehydrated illegal border crossers, who knock on their doors for directions and water, and lately more of the less innocent, who scurry across their land or lie low in the brush, stooped with marijuana and other drugs bundled on their backs.Now, according to the leading police theory, the inevitable has occurred, whipping up a political storm and sending a shiver through a community not easily shaken.Robert N. Krentz Jr., 58, the scion of one of the best-known and oldest ranching families here in southeast Arizona, was found shot to death March 27 on his vast, remote ranch north of here after radioing to his brother that he was aiding someone he believed to be an illegal immigrant.Mr. Krentz went missing shortly after that call, and the police found his body several hours later in his all-terrain vehicle, his guns untouched in the back, his dog shot and critically wounded. Fresh footprints led from the scene to the Mexican border 20 miles away.Given Mr. Krentz’s radio transmission, the footprints and heavy drug and illegal immigrant trafficking in that area, investigators are working on the assumption that he encountered a smuggler, possibly heading back to Mexico.“You never know who you’re dealing with out here because you get all kinds of traffic through here,” said William McDonald, a fellow rancher on the vast mesquite scrubland pocked with canyons and scattered mountain ranges floating on the horizon like islands.Mr. McDonald and other residents said that in the last year or two the traffic had taken a more sinister turn, with larger numbers of drug smugglers, many clad in black and led by armed scouts.“It was only a matter of time,” he said. “Everything was in place for something like this to happen.”Sheriff Larry A. Dever of Cochise County said if it was related to smuggling, it would be the first such killing of a rancher in more than three decades. But as local, state and federal investigators pore over the case, no motive has been ruled out, Sheriff Dever said.Mr. Krentz’s family, in a statement last week, said they had little doubt that the killing was related to smuggling. They went on to vent frustration at what they said was a lack of concern by federal leaders.“We hold no malice towards the Mexican people for this senseless act but do hold the political forces in this country and Mexico accountable for what has happened,” the family said. “Their disregard of our repeated pleas and warnings of impending violence towards our community fell on deaf ears shrouded in political correctness. As a result, we have paid the ultimate price for their negligence in credibly securing our borderlands.”Arizona, where the border authorities arrest more people and seize more drugs than in any other state, has long been a flashpoint for the immigration debate, and ranchers as a whole have been in the thick of it. Some have allowed armed civilian patrol groups to use their property to help catch border crossers.The mere possibility that a rancher died at the hands of a smuggler led a host of politicians facing election challenges this year — including Senator John McCain and Gov. Jan Brewer, both Republicans, as well as Representative Gabrielle Giffords, a Democrat who represents the area — to quickly condemn the killing and to call for tighter border enforcement.They demanded, among other things, that the federal government post National Guard troops on the border, a move that Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico made on his own last week, ordering his state Guard commander to send an untold number of troops there to help keep watch.Although as Arizona governor she supported a limited Guard deployment on the border and pleaded with the Bush administration to keep them there when the temporary deployment was up in 2008, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano has not backed the idea now.Instead, the department said it had increased its own resources at the border in the last year and had offered a $25,000 reward for information leading to the capture of Mr. Krentz’s killer.“We are carefully monitoring the situation, and will continue to ensure that we are doing everything necessary to keep communities along the Southwest border safe,” a spokesman, Matthew Chandler, said in a statement.Such assurances get a skeptical greetings here, where everybody has a story about an encounter with immigrants or smugglers.The parched man who still waited for the rancher to come home before using his water tap. The group of smugglers using a catapult to fling marijuana bundles over the fence. The community clean-up that yielded two pickup truck loads of burlap from smugglers who had unbundled marijuana packages. And more recently, the series of break-ins and thefts.Residents said they believed that the completion of a segment of the border wall near Douglas shifted smuggling traffic farther east in the last couple of years to more remote, rugged areas along the New Mexico border.The area is guarded by two divisions of the Border Patrol who use different types of radios and have had trouble communicating with each other, officials at the agency have acknowledged. In addition, ranchers said, many of the agents are newly hired and unfamiliar with the area, slowing response times.While some believe that the border wall completed in the last few years has slowed down large groups, many others have little faith in it.Bill Odle, who lives about 400 feet from the border, drove along the fence last week, pointing out spots where smugglers have cut it and scaled it, sometimes bringing ladders to speed their way.“It doesn’t work in stopping people, but it does stop wildlife,” Mr. Odle said.But another rancher, Richard Hodges, who said he had received threats from smugglers for reporting them to the Border Patrol, believes that the fence does at least slow down traffic, particularly the large groups.Mr. Hodges once let a civilian patrol group erect a fence near the border on his property, but the group, the Minuteman Civil Defense Corps recently disbanded and the fence is being taken down.By all accounts, Mr. Krentz never got caught up in border politics. A bear of a man with a reserved nature, he could seem imposing at first glance but almost always rendered help to those who needed it, friends and family said. He inherited the 35,000-acre ranch from his father — it has been in the family since 1907 — and in 2008 it was inducted into the Arizona Farming and Ranching Hall of Fame.“He was a typical ranch kid,” said Wendy Glenn, a neighbor and longtime friend who said she heard Mr. Krentz’s last transmission on her radio.Now, like others, Ms. Glenn said she planned to be more cautious. “Usually if somebody needs help, you walk up to them and help them,” she said. “We won’t just walk up and offer help anymore.”