http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/12/world/americas/12canada.html
‘Plane People’ From 9/11 Return to Newfoundland to Give Thanks - The New York Times
September 11 (2001),Airlines and Airplanes,Canada,New York City
Sept. 11, 2011
5338
GANDER, Newfoundland — They’re called “the plane people” here because on Sept. 11, 2001, some 6,700 passengers on 38 planes descended on this piney little town of about 10,000 people on the northeastern end of Newfoundland.When the United States airspace was closed that day, Canadian air traffic landed as many flights as possible as quickly as possible. Gander, as the first sizable airport on the continent, received more than their share.In Gander, buildings were hastily converted into makeshift shelters and townspeople opened up their homes, came out with food and gave up their own beds to strangers from almost 100 countries.Many of those “plane people” returned here on Sunday to reflect on that day and to thank the residents for their hospitality.Elaine Caiazzo and Jennie Asmussen, friends from Bethpage, N.Y., were on their way home from Germany on Sept. 11 when their flight was diverted to Gander.Ms. Caiazzo said she was given more than just a place to sleep.“I had no medication because I was going home,” she said on Sunday. “I had nothing left. They said, ‘You can go into this room and tell them what you need.’ And they gave it to me. And they didn’t charge me a thing.”Ms. Asmussen said she appreciated how the residents made them feel comfortable. She said she went to get her hair done in Gander on Sept. 12, the next day. The woman who did her hair said, “ ‘I have a friend. Let me call her up and see if she can take you in,’ ” Ms. Asmussen recalled on Sunday. “Her friend said, ‘Sure, bring her over.’ She took a complete stranger in, let me take a shower, use her bed.”The Long Island residents were carrying a carefully wrapped gift for Helen Ansley, who had helped them in Gander.“That’s why we came back,” said Ms. Caiazzo. “Because we wanted to say thank you.”Maureen Murray and Sue Riccardelli of Morris Plains, N.J., were returning from Paris on Sept. 11, 2001, when their flight was diverted. “We were the fourth plane to land,” Ms. Murray said Sunday. They were visiting with Mac Moss, a former administrator at the Gander campus of the College of the North Atlantic, a trade school. He had taken care of them for three days back then. “This is our fifth trip back,” Ms. Murray said. “We feel like it’s our second home.”It’s not clear how many “plane people” returned to Gander for the 10th anniversary of those days. The town is an intimate place, a scattering of houses, a few hotels, five stoplights, one high school and a strip of chain stores. This weekend, the hotels were booked up, and a ceremony held in a small auditorium in the town’s community center Sunday afternoon was nearly full.“I had to pick a place to be on 9/11,” said David C. Jacobson, the American ambassador to Canada, who had flown into town for the occasion. “I picked the best place to thank the Canadian people for what they did.”For some, being in Gander for the anniversary of the attacks was one more way of coming to terms with the attacks.“We feel like we’ve healed a little bit more,” Ms. Riccardelli said, “because we’ve had Gander.”