http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/13/fashion/torst-bar-in-greenpoint-brooklyn.html
Torst Bar in Greenpoint, Brooklyn - The New York Times
Restaurants,Bars and Nightclubs,Torst (Brooklyn  NY  Bar)
June 12, 2013
9556
Bars for beer geeks tend toward sober pedantry. But Torst, an ambitious bar that opened in March, doesn’t let its serious beer menu get in the way of the Brooklyn scene.Opened by Jeppe Jarnit-Bjergso, a noted Danish brewer, and Daniel Burns, the former head of Momofuku’s test kitchen, Torst cloaks its beer devotion in reclaimed wood, communal tables and an eclectic soundtrack.The PlaceTorst feels a bit out of place on Manhattan Avenue, on a block populated by cheap hair salons and Polish restaurants. Behind a plain white door, a vision of Danish classic modernism rules. The white marble bar dominates the room. On the wall behind it, 21 steel-and-wood taps are marshaled into a perfect line. Intricate barn-wood walls, an old street lamp from Copenhagen and chairs designed by Borge Mogensen complete the look.The CrowdNordic rusticity extends to the crowd. The men are the rugged, bookish type, with toggle jackets, thick-framed glasses and woolly beards. The women, too, seem to gravitate toward heavy knit sweaters, similarly toggled jackets, patterned tights for their legs and headbands.The PlaylistThe D.J., Martin Fernando Jakobsen, creates playlists that draw from a wide range, including Mongolian folk music, Caribbean calypso and Pakistani surf rock. But the soundtrack is drowned out by the clatter of voices, echoing off the marble, wood and glass.Getting InOn weekends, a steady swell begins at 6 p.m. and reaches capacity by 8. Tables are shared and passages wide, so even when crowded, the place is not unwelcoming.DrinksBeer is an art form here, and the ever-changing roster of 21 brews are served in delicate stemware. Among them are beers from Mr. Jarnit-Bjergso’s own brewery Evil Twin, including the Femme Fatale, a light I.P.A. ($6 for 8 ounces, $9 for 14 ounces) and an imperial stout called Even More Jesus ($7, $11). There is also a cellar of rare bottled beers including a blond Belgian ale called The End of History, which is packaged inside a taxidermied squirrel (not for sale).  