http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/22/upshot/oregon-health-study-the-surprises-in-a-randomized-trial.html
Oregon Health Study: The Surprises in a Randomized Trial - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Medicaid,Research,Hospitals,Emergency Medical Treatment
Nov. 21, 2014
3037
The Oregon Health Study upended a lot of conventional thinking about health insurance. The study made use of a 2008 state lottery that randomly assigned some low-income Oregon residents to get insurance from Medicaid and others to remain uninsured. Then it followed them for two years to see what happened.Among the study’s surprising findings: Patients who got insurance used the emergency room more often than their uninsured peers, undermining a common argument in favor of expanded insurance coverage. People who got Medicaid also had a much easier time finding doctors, countering views held by the programs’ critics that Medicaid can be worse than no insurance. There were some important questions the study never answered: It didn’t find any evidence that patients’ physical health improved over the two years.Managing the study involved gathering a lot of data about the participants — surveying them on their happiness and financial health, examining their health records and looking at whether they were getting calls from debt collectors. The researchers have published their empirical findings in medical and economics journals — there’s a summary with links here. More recently, Heidi Allen, a member of the team, has gone back and collected interviews with the study’s subjects. They’ve been struck by just how compelling individual stories can be — even now, when they know the “right” answer.“If you look at them, some people do say the exact opposite of what we found,” said Amy Finkelstein, a professor at M.I.T., who helped lead the Oregon study. “From a randomized controlled trial, you can see something that wasn’t at all what you were looking for.”The researchers shared some of these stories with The Upshot. Here are a few of the quotations from participants whose stories ran counter to the study’s main findings. The researchers have removed the people’s names and the counties where they live.Does Medicaid improve people’s ability to find a doctor?Study finding: Medicaid increased the probability of using outpatient care by 35 percent.This 31-year-old woman was enrolled in Medicaid in 2008, the first time she has had insurance since leaving her parents’ home 11 years before. She was disappointed that the services covered were so limited, mentioning that there was no vision or dental, no physical therapy, chiropractic or alternative modalities offered. She had had problems with low blood sugar since her teens. “The only complaint I have is that it’s kind of like they give you insurance but it’s so limited that it’s not always worth a lot to have it. There are so few places that I can go that if I don’t like my doctor, I’m kind of out of luck.” Did Medicaid reduce use of the emergency room?Study findings: Medicaid increases the probability of using the emergency department and the number of emergency room visits in an 18-month period.This 55-year-old woman enrolled in Medicaid and began to seek regular care for high blood pressure and emphysema: “I don’t like to use the emergency rooms because they cost so darn much. And it’s costing the Oregon Health Plan — and people need this. There’re a lot of people that really depend on this, so I won’t use emergency rooms unless I absolutely have to.”Did Medicaid patients see more doctors?Study finding: Medicaid increases the likelihood of using outpatient care by 35 percent.This 33-year-old woman was uninsured but sought treatment for severe depression from a free clinic: “I go to free counseling. And even the medication, they would just give me whatever samples they had lying around. There’s a little bit of money from the county to help people like me that just have nothing and without help would literally walk out of there and do something drastic. And so twice they picked up the tab — the county did — on a full month of Lexapro for me until my free meds kicked in.”Did Medicaid mean people got enough primary care that they stayed out of the hospital?Study finding: Medicaid increases the likelihood of being admitted to the hospital by 30 percent.This 40-year-old woman lost her job and insurance in 2007, two years before getting Medicaid through the lottery. She suffers from a schizoaffective disorder and requires counseling and medication to manage it: “In 2007, I don’t even know how many times I went to the hospital to try to get stabilized on my medication without insurance. So once I got the insurance, I was able to go see a doctor; I was able to let them know what was going on and try to get on the right medication and things like that. So having the Oregon Health Plan definitely moved me in the right direction as far as getting stabilized and getting hooked up with a physician and stuff.”Does Medicaid improve people’s financial security?Study findings: Medicaid virtually eliminated out-of-pocket catastrophic medical expenditures and reduced other measures of financial strain, such as reducing the probability of having to borrow money or skip paying other bills because of medical expenses by more than 50 percent.This 28-year-old man had been mostly uninsured since 2008: “I go to one of the county health clinics because of the sliding scale fee, and it’s actually surprisingly great. I have often said that living in [redacted] County without insurance is the best insurance that I’ve ever had because I paid practically nothing and I’d get anything I really need.”