https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/04/upshot/how-gorsuchs-influence-could-be-bigger-than-his-single-vote.html
How Gorsuch Could Pull the Eight Other Justices Rightward - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Gorsuch  Neil M,Courts and the Judiciary,Decisions and Verdicts
April 4, 2017
1699
If Judge Neil Gorsuch is confirmed to the Supreme Court, he will become not only the ninth vote in a divided court but also a colleague with the potential to move his eight peers in a conservative direction. A compelling new analysis suggests that this kind of peer effect may even be more consequential than a justice’s vote.This means that the stakes over who fills the vacancy left by the death of Antonin Scalia are higher than is widely understood.The finding that Supreme Court justices have a big effect on their colleagues comes from a recent working paper, “Peer Effects on the United States Supreme Court,” by three economists, Richard Holden of the University of New South Wales, Michael Keane of Oxford University, and Matthew Lilley, an Australian pursuing his doctorate at Harvard. Though not yet peer-reviewed, the paper is already making waves in academic circles.Social scientists have long been interested in peer effects — the idea that we influence and are influenced by those around us. In the judicial context, it means that whoever is seated in the vacant Supreme Court seat will influence the decisions made by other Supreme Court justices, just as the new nominee will be influenced by the existing eight justices.But measuring these peer effects is a tricky business.When one judge influences another, the result is that they’re more likely to make a similar ruling. But there are many other reasons judges may come to similar decisions. A judge might issue similar decisions to his or her colleagues because they subscribe to a similar judicial philosophy. Or they may often agree because the cases they’re hearing are so straightforward that there’s no reason to disagree. Or they’ll appear to agree, signing on to the majority opinion rather than writing a dissent so as to minimize the appearance of disagreement.Uncovering the actual peer effect — those cases in which one judges influences another to change a decision — requires some ingenuity.For the Supreme Court, an obscure detail provides the key. In about a quarter of Supreme Court cases, at least one justice is absent, typically because of ill health or recusal. If peers matter, then so should the absence of a peer.The researchers uncovered a stark pattern: When a liberal justice is absent, colleagues are relatively more likely to vote to make a conservative decision. And when a conservative justice is absent, colleagues are relatively more likely to vote to make a liberal decision.It’s equivalent — and perhaps more intuitive — to say that the presence of a liberal justice causes fellow justices to vote in a more liberal direction (just as the presence of a conservative one pushes colleagues to vote conservatively).This pattern of peer effects holds up in the analysis of nearly all of the more than 100,000 Supreme Court decisions since 1946.The implication is that the appointment of a conservative jurist like Judge Gorsuch rather than a centrist-liberal like Merrick Garland would lead the other eight justices to vote in a relatively more conservative direction.It’s a remarkably large effect. Court watchers expect that Judge Gorsuch would follow in the mold of Justice Scalia, who voted for the more conservative outcome 68 percent of the time. (In many of the remaining cases, the court didn’t divide along ideological lines — indeed, it issues unanimous decisions about a third of the time.) By contrast, Judge Garland is roughly as liberal as the Court’s most recent retiree, Justice John Paul Stevens, who voted for the more conservative outcome 39 percent of the time.The difference suggests that giving the ninth vote to Judge Gorsuch rather than Judge Garland would yield a conservative vote in 29 percent more cases. Let’s call this direct effect 0.29 more conservative votes per case.But the peer effects are even larger. The Gorsuch appointment would lead each of the other eight justices to vote in a conservative direction in 5 percent more cases than if Judge Garland were their colleague. This peer effect is roughly one-sixth as big as the direct effect, which makes it sound small. But it applies to all eight of his colleagues, multiplying its effect.Do the math, and it turns out Judge Gorsuch’s effect on his peers would add 0.4 conservative votes per case (that’s a five-percentage-point effect, eight times over), a total impact that is actually a third larger than the direct effect (which was 0.29) of his casting the ninth vote.This probably understates the true peer effect. After all, temporary absences reveal only how the peers of a justice respond when he or she is not around during a specific case. It’s likely that justices shape peers’ decisions more broadly.These peer effects also extend beyond purely partisan differences, and even idiosyncratic reasons for a justice leaning one way will lead some of their peers to follow.To see this, focus on the cases where justices rule on an opinion from a circuit court they previously served on. It turns out that this makes them less likely to vote to overturn that circuit court’s opinion (although this effect diminishes the longer they served on that court). You might normally think this has no further implications. But because of peer effects, it does. Their fellow justices — including those who have no relationship to that circuit court — are also less likely to vote to overturn the circuit court decision.All of this says that the current battle in the Senate goes far beyond the current Supreme Court nominee. It is likely to alter how the other eight justice will lean as well.