https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/world/middleeast/iran-khomeini-elections.html
Ayatollah Khomeini’s Grandson Is Disqualified From Elections - The New York Times
Iran,Khomeini  Hassan,Khomeini  Ruhollah,Guardian Council (Iran),Elections,Assembly of Experts,Muslims and Islam
Feb. 10, 2016
9116
TEHRAN —  After months of political maneuvering, the scion of the powerful Khomeini family and the projected figurehead of Iran’s ailing reform movement was definitively barred Wednesday from participating in parliamentary elections this month, the semiofficial news agency ILNA reported.Hassan Khomeini, 43, a Shiite Muslim cleric like his grandfather, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic, lost his appeal before the Guardian Council, a powerful vetting group dominated by hard-liners.Mr. Khomeini was among the thousands of candidates, most of them reformists, who were barred from the parliamentary elections and from the vote for the 88-member Assembly of Experts, which is charged with electing the supreme leader. Iran’s current supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, is 76 and has had some health problems in the past year.The disqualification sent an unmistakable message to Mr. Khomeini and to the reformist bloc he aspires to lead, one analyst said.“That message is: We do not share any power with you,” said Nader Karimi Joni, a journalist with close ties to the reformist faction. “The more reformists in the assembly, the more chance they will get to pick a new leader closer to their line of thinking.”The Khomeini name carries special power in Iran, where Ayatollah Khomeini, who died in 1989, is still revered as the leader of the 1979 Islamic revolution. His grandchildren make a point of living a different life from that of their famous forebear, who spent his last eight years ruling the nation out of a one-bedroom apartment.From the moment Mr. Khomeini emerged as a potential leader of the reformists, he has been attacked by hard-liners for living an existence that is not austere. Mr. Khomeini has presented himself as a modern cleric, sharing pictures of his family on his popular Instagram account, driving a BMW and playing indoor soccer with news photographers and cultural figures.In many ways, Mr. Khomeini represents an updated version of Iran, where society has become more urban and where most people have middle-class, rather than revolutionary, ambitions, said Fazel Meybodi, a reformist cleric in the Shiite theological center of Qum.“He is known as a moderate person, handsome, charismatic, articulate and open-minded,” Mr. Meybodi said, adding that Mr. Khomeini was someone people could relate to and that he might make a stronger candidate in the next election for the assembly. “At least now he has eight more years to be more popular,” Mr. Meybodi said.It is not easy to gauge the depth and breadth of Mr. Khomeini’s appeal. There are no reliable polls in Iran, and no one has taken to the streets to protest his disqualification.Not that Mr. Khomeini would encourage such a thing. In the mass protests of 2009 over suspicions of fraud in the re-election of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Mr. Khomeini remained quiet, concerned about maintaining his place in Iran’s ever-shrinking circle of political insiders.Iran’s hard-liners denied that politics had figured in the Guardian Council’s decision, saying that Mr. Khomeini was simply too young and inexperienced for the Assembly of Experts, where he would have been the youngest member in history.“Let’s face it,” said Hamidreza Taraghi, a political analyst close to the highest levels of Iran’s leadership, “he is a kid.” Many of the 88 assembly members are over 80 years old.The Guardian Council, the vetting body that disqualified Mr. Khomeini, said Mr. Khomeini’s level of religious jurisprudence could not be established because he had failed to participate in a test in December. Mr. Khomeini has said that he never received an invitation to take the exam.“All my support from top clerics has been ignored, as have been my religious publications,” Mr. Khomeini said in a post on a messaging service widely believed to be controlled by his office. “I never expected they would reverse their decision,” he added. “I made the appeal because people asked me to do so.”