https://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/sports/down-for-the-count-after-a-hard-workout.html
Down for the Count After a Hard Workout - The New York Times
Rhabdomyolysis (Muscle Disease),Oudin  Melanie,Exercise
Jan. 4, 2014
4248
Melanie Oudin has played in the quarterfinals of a United States Open.On a quiet Monday in late November, though, she had something in common with the weekend warrior who makes a New Year’s resolution to get fit. Oudin, who had not seriously lifted weights in two months, was pushing through an intense session.She wound up in a hospital.Oudin, 22, was found to have rhabdomyolysis, a result of muscles breaking down and releasing proteins into the bloodstream, which in severe cases can cause kidney failure. It is the ailment that hospitalized 13 Iowa football players in January 2011.Athletes, elite and recreational, are susceptible, but doctors are not exactly sure why some grueling workouts lead to the disorder while similar ones do not.Speaking to The Associated Press last month, Oudin said athletes need to trust their bodies and “realize if you feel something that you’ve never felt before and it’s something new and worse, there might be something wrong.”Dehydration is a risk factor for rhabdomyolysis, and doctors said that contributed to Oudin’s problems. That did not appear to be an issue for the Iowa players, but they had something else in common with Oudin: an intense workout immediately after a long break.The Hawkeyes took three weeks off after their bowl game, then returned with a session that included 100 back squats at half of the maximum weight each player could manage for one lift. The set had been done in 2004 and 2007 but with one major difference: the players were not coming off a rest period.An investigative committee report commissioned by the university called the workout a test of stamina, mental toughness and who “wanted to be on the team.” Shaun Prater, an Iowa defensive back at the time, described an outlook that can elevate athletes to lofty achievements but can also put them in a hospital.He was going to be a senior, a player who had considered turning professional but stayed to try to win a championship. As miserable as he felt during those squats, he said he kept thinking: “I can’t throw up in front of these guys; I’ve got to be strong.”Prater added: “There were plenty of times when I wanted to say, ‘I’m not doing this.’ But I couldn’t. I’m a senior. I wanted to lead.”He was in so much pain the next few days that he could not bend to take off his shoes. After four players told trainers about symptoms that included dark urine and muscle swelling, the medical staff sent a text message to the entire team to see who else might be having similar problems.Prater was among those who responded. He went to a hospital that night expecting to go through a few tests and then head home.He was there a week.When his results came back with dangerously high levels of a protein called creatine kinase in his blood, Prater recalled: “The lady was freaking out. She was in tears.”He added, “She was like, ‘Yeah, one more workout and you could’ve fallen into a coma.’ ”He played for Iowa in the fall was drafted in the fifth round in 2012 by the Cincinnati Bengals. Prater started three games for the Minnesota Vikings this season.The investigative committee cleared trainers and coaches of wrongdoing and made several recommendations to prevent a recurrence, including scrapping the workout with the back squats. University officials said they had adopted those recommendations but declined to discuss what protocols were changed.Researchers at the university published a report on the cases in the September issue of The Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine. Among the findings: Players who were affected were significantly more likely than their teammates to report muscle failure and that they did not believe they could complete the workout.In other words, their bodies were telling them something was wrong.Dr. Corey Slovis, the chairman of Vanderbilt’s department of emergency medicine, put it this way, “Doing anything to true exhaustion is not smart.”He added: “I’m not against no pain, no gain. But minor or moderate pain; it shouldn’t be severe pain.”He said he believed athletes at all levels had become wiser in recent years about the importance of staying hydrated and taking breaks. The dangers of rhabdomyolysis have been raised recently in connection to CrossFit workouts, but Slovis said cross-training that includes multiple types of exercises was generally less of a risk factor than regimens that require repeating a particular motion over and over.Oudin now knows to listen to her body. A day after the weight-lifting session, she could not straighten her arms. At one point, another player said, “Whoa, Melanie, you’re so jacked after one day of lifting.”But her biceps were not bulging, they were swelling.Oudin is expected to make a full recovery, though it is uncertain if she will play in the Australian Open, which starts Jan. 13.She reached the United States Open quarterfinals as a 17-year-old in 2009, and in her drive to try to return to that level, she learned that pushing herself to the limit can easily turn into pushing herself past the limit.“There’s a fine line of knowing when too much is enough,” Oudin said.