https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/books/review/the-hue-and-cry-at-our-house-memoir-benjamin-taylor.html
A Handshake With Kennedy, and a Boy’s Tumultuous Year - The New York Times
Books and Literature,The Hue and Cry at Our House: A Year Remembered (Book),Taylor  Benjamin (1952- ),Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations,Kennedy  John Fitzgerald
July 4, 2017
4592
THE HUE AND CRY AT OUR HOUSE A Year Remembered By Benjamin Taylor Illustrated. 182 pp. Penguin Books. Paper, $16.On the morning of Friday, Nov. 22, 1963, 11-year-old Benjamin Taylor — “A repellently good boy like most of my kind, Jewish and going-to-be-homosexual” — shook hands with John F. Kennedy in front of the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth. Afterward the president flew on to Dallas, 30 miles away, and Benjamin returned to school. That afternoon he heard the news from his sixth-grade teacher, Mrs. Westbrook. “But I had shaken John F. Kennedy’s hand that morning and seen for myself that he was indestructible,” Taylor writes in this brief, ricocheting memoir. “And the words from Mrs. Westbrook’s mouth made no sense.”“The Hue and Cry at Our House” is billed in its subtitle as “A Year Remembered,” though the book is more of an expanding-and-contracting autobiography than a bracketed memoir of a single earth-rattling year. The author himself admits to a kind of arbitrariness of design in the first paragraph of his preface: “Any 12 months could stand for the whole. Our years are so implicated in one another that the least important is important enough.”I was a few years older than Benjamin Taylor and living in Texas when Kennedy was killed. Perhaps because of my own background and the way the jacket copy of “Hue and Cry” deploys words like “tumult” and “impact” and “tears,” I was primed for a different kind of book, a more front-and-center grappling with what it was like to be a young Texan during the most vilified hour in our state’s history.But Taylor, a biographer of Proust, is less concerned with a moment in time than with the mystery of time itself. His narrative is elusive and elastic, ranging widely before and beyond that handshake. Ruminations and reminiscences drift into place like the fluttering contents of a snow globe. We learn about the Taylors’ refugee ancestors, who left the Pale of Settlement in Poland and Belarus to find strange new lives in Fort Worth and Shreveport; the four family members who died in 1961 in a catastrophic house fire; the author’s childhood fascination with the 1924 Leopold and Loeb murder case. (“I made my own map. … X marked the spot where Loeb and Leopold had enticed Bobby into a rented car, and another X indicated where they disposed of his body.”)Taylor’s self-portrait of an odd, bewildered boy born into the frightening middle of the 20th century is touching, and a little shattering. Sometimes his prose can be fuzzily poetic, but more often it’s precision-guided, as in these sentences that nail the shifting mother-and-father atmosphere of the Taylor household: “The sound of her shoes in the front hall was happiness. The sound of his was, often as not, a warning.”Even though Benjamin’s handshake with the president is only a moment in a time loop, “The Hue and Cry at Our House” adds something meaningful to the literature of the Kennedy assassination. Books like “Dallas 1963,” by Bill Minutaglio and Steven L. Davis, and “Nut Country: Right-Wing Dallas and the Birth of the Southern Strategy,” by Edward H. Miller, have portrayed — not inaccurately — the witch’s caldron of intolerance and hate speech that bubbled over in Texas during those years. But Taylor’s memoir reminds us that Texas then, just like Texas now, was too big a state to paint one toxic shade of red. It was also a worldly place where a secular family like the Taylors would comply with Jewish dietary law by abstaining from only one thing — catfish; where a woman like Mrs. Taylor might proudly display a copy of “Profiles in Courage” on her desk; where her gay son, with his Leopold and Loeb obsession, would be inspired to tape President Kennedy’s Inaugural Address to his bedroom door.“The future is dark,” Taylor writes, “the present a knife’s edge. It’s the past that is knowable, incandescent, real.” It’s an arguable premise, I suppose, but Taylor’s remembering is fierce enough to sell it. His brush with history has the breath of life.