https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/02/nyregion/new-yorks-path-to-15-minimum-wage-uneven-and-bumpy.html
New York’s Path to $15 Minimum Wage: Uneven, and Bumpy - The New York Times
Minimum Wage,New York State,Cuomo  Andrew M,Fast Food Industry,New York City
April 1, 2016
577
With the budget agreement worked out in Albany this week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo can say he has steered New York onto the road to a statewide minimum wage of $15 an hour. But the trip will be uneven, probably quite bumpy in spots, and its duration remains uncertain.New York is not the first place in the country, or even the first state, to embark on a plan to raise the base wage to $15. It is taking a different route, though, than those charted in San Francisco, Seattle and, earlier this week, the entire state of California.Last year, New York had one minimum wage ($8.75 an hour) for all workers in the state, except waiters and others who depended on tips. Under the plan approved by legislators, Mr. Cuomo hopes that the state will again have a unified minimum wage — $15 — by 2022.But between here and there, things will get complicated for workers and their employers. Nine months from now, there will be six different hourly minimum wages in the state: one for fast-food workers in New York City ($12), and one for fast-food workers in the rest of the state ($10.75); one for other workers in the city who have at least 10 co-workers ($11), and one for those in smaller workplaces ($10.50); one for non-fast-food workers in Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester Counties ($10), and one for that group in the rest of the state ($9.70).“It will be a little confusing,” said Michael Reich, a professor of economics at the University of California, Berkeley. “When you have one minimum wage, it’s sort of simple because everyone knows the number. When you have many, it’s more complex.”Mr. Reich was a co-author of a recent brief on a $15 minimum wage in New York that supporters of Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, used to bolster their argument for the idea. The brief concluded that raising the minimum wage by $6 an hour over six years would have only a “small effect” on employment, and that the improvements in living standards for millions of workers would “greatly outweigh” any job losses.The conservative view of the likely effects of such a rapid increase in wages is starkly different. Citing a different study, the Empire Center for Public Policy said the increase to $15 would eliminate 200,000 jobs in the state.Business leaders were relieved that Republicans lawmakers were able to set a different pace for wage increases upstate than in New York City and its suburbs. While the minimum wage will rise in $2 increments over the next three years for employers in the city with more than 10 workers, it will rise much slower in the rest of the state.It was not clear when the minimum wage would reach $15 an hour for workers in the rest of the state outside of the fast-food industry. Their minimum is scheduled to rise in annual increments of 70 cents until it reaches $12.50 at the end of 2020. After that, state officials will analyze the economic effects of the increases before scheduling any more.The agreement in Albany came just days after Gov. Jerry Brown of California, a Democrat, announced a plan to raise that state’s minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2022. That plan, like New York’s, contains a provision for slowing the pace of the increases in the event of an economic downturn.The two states are racing well ahead of the rest of the country, leaving many economists uncertain as to how employers will react. Some note that the neighboring states of New Jersey and Pennsylvania have lower minimum wages, which could draw businesses to move across borders. New Jersey’s minimum wage, which is linked to inflation, did not rise this year, remaining at $8.38 an hour.“You can’t study what hasn’t happened yet,” said Ken Pokalsky, an executive with the Business Council of New York State, which lobbied against the increase to $15. “All you can do is guess.”Mr. Reich said he believed some workers could move or change jobs to take advantage of higher wages in other parts of the state, but he doubted that many companies would relocate. More likely, he said, they would introduce more automation, press workers to be more efficient and raise prices to cover their increased labor costs. He estimated that businesses would have to raise prices about 1 percent, on average, over five years.But Patrick Pipino, who owns a Ben & Jerry’s ice cream shop in Saratoga Springs, said he was under more pressure than that.Although he owns a single shop that he runs with a staff of young, mostly part-time workers, his is considered a fast-food business under the minimum wage change Mr. Cuomo engineered last year. The governor convened a wage board that set a schedule for restaurants that are part of a chain with at least 30 outlets nationwide to raise minimum wages to $15 an hour by the end of 2020.Mr. Pipino, who lobbied against the increases, said he responded by raising the wages of all of his employees by $1 an hour on Dec. 31. He has begun the process of hiring an additional 30 workers for the summer season, but he said he would cut back the average weekly hours they work, to about 17 from about 23.He said he would have to raise prices too, but was unsure how much more than $3.95 people would pay for an ice cream cone. Furthermore, he said, he now bears the burden of having to pay higher wages than a competitor that is not affiliated with a chain, leaving him at a competitive disadvantage.Increasing fast-food wages was Mr. Cuomo’s first push for the momentum he needed to pave the way in Albany toward a broader minimum wage of $15 an hour. “At this point I should be rooting for it to go to $15 an hour, then it levels the playing field for me,” Mr. Pipino said.