http://www.nytimes.com/1998/11/19/us/vermont-supreme-court-takes-up-gay-marriage.html
Vermont Supreme Court Takes Up Gay Marriage - The New York Times
VERMONT,MARRIAGES,SUITS AND CLAIMS AGAINST GOVERNMENT,HOMOSEXUALITY
Nov. 19, 1998
5598
When Nina Beck went into labor and frightening complications developed, her lesbian partner, Stacy Jolles, tried to go into the emergency room with her. But she was stopped at the door, she said, and asked, ''Who are you? Do you have legal papers to be there?''Ms. Beck's son, Noah, was born with a heart defect, and died last year at age 2 1/2. But, Ms. Jolles said today, ''Noah is very much here with us today. He would want us very much to be married, and he would want us to pursue this to the end.''She spoke in the lobby of the Vermont Supreme Court on the day that Vermont became the central arena in the United States for the push for marriage between people of the same sex.Hawaii seemed positioned to become the first state to legalize same-sex marriage after a 1993 state Supreme Court preliminary decision leaning in its favor; then an Alaska court case seemed to put that state next in line. But in this month's elections, Alaskan and Hawaiian voters rejected the idea in ballot initiatives.So now, it is Vermont's turn. The state Supreme Court heard oral arguments this morning in Baker v. State of Vermont, a lawsuit filed by Ms. Beck and Ms. Jolles, another lesbian couple and a gay male couple seeking the right to marry. The court is expected to rule within months.''At least in the gay community, the eyes of the world are on Vermont right now,'' said Greg Johnson, a Vermont Law School professor who helped represent the gay couples in the Alaska case.The lesson of Alaska and Hawaii, Mr. Johnson said, was that work in the courts was not enough. ''The reason we have some hope here in Vermont is not just because the jurisprudence is good but the body politic is markedly different than in Alaska and Hawaii,'' he said.Vermont's legislature has passed extensive laws protecting gay men and lesbians from discrimination, and the state has been in the vanguard on recognizing ''second-parent adoptions'': allowing the member of a gay or lesbian couple who is not the biological parent of a child to officially become its second parent.But Vermont's Supreme Court has not been easily categorized as liberal or conservative. And the state,  though known as home to a liberal, back-to-the-land contingent, also has a strong streak of traditionalism. So no one is making confident predictions about when, if ever, same-sex marriage will be allowed here.In questioning lawyers today, some of the justices seemed to challenge the ban on same-sex marriage more than the proposal to lift it.''Why isn't that gender discrimination?'' Justice Denise R. Johnson asked. ''A man can't marry another man because he's a man.'' Another justice questioned the argument that  marriage should be linked to procreation by noting that given recent advances in biology, it may eventually be possible for a homosexual couple to procreate.But such questions can never be relied on to presage a court's decision.Arguing on behalf of the couples today, their lawyer, Beth Robinson, recalled the California Supreme Court's decision 50 years ago to overturn the law against interracial marriage, and urged the court to emulate it. She compared the popular disapproval of interracial marriage then to attitudes toward same-sex marriage today. The California decision  ''was controversial, it was courageous and it was correct,'' Ms. Robinson said.Speaking for the State of Vermont, which is defending a law that includes a definition of marriage as being between a man and a woman, Eve Jacobs-Carnahan argued that ''the state has an interest in supporting marriage and protecting it from potentially destabilizing changes.''Asked by Justice Johnson if the state saw marriage as a fundamental right, Ms. Jacobs-Carnahan said, ''Yes, but it's a fundamental right between a man and a woman.''The state, in its brief, also argues that such decisions concerning social policy should be left to the legislature and defends the state's interest in ''furthering the link between procreation and child rearing.''Legal experts said the arguments on both sides did not differ significantly from those in Hawaii and Alaska.Dozens of spectators clustered in the Montpelier courthouse lobby, in what local officials said was the biggest hubbub at the court in recent memory. But there was not a hint of nastiness between partisans.That calm may be tested over what both sides predict could be a long haul. Whichever way the court rules, both sides said, it is likely that the losing side will seek a state referendum to overturn the decision, and under Vermont's arcane laws, the earliest such a referendum could be held would be 2002.Take it to the People, a Vermont group that advocates such a referendum, recently sponsored a poll on the question, said a board member, Robert Garvey, who attended the arguments today to show support for ''traditional marriage.'' It found, he said, that 53 percent of respondents opposed same-sex marriage, while 38 percent supported it.California's Secretary of State announced on Tuesday that a ''definition of marriage'' initiative, limiting marriage to a union between a man and a woman, had qualified for the 2000 ballot.But the greatest optimists among advocates of same-sex marriage see a possibility that the Vermont Supreme Court could rule in its favor within months, making it legal during the period before any referendum.If that happens, said Lois Farnham, who is one of the plaintiffs in the suit and has been with her partner, Holly Puterbaugh, for 26 years, ''I guarantee you we'll make a beeline back to the town clerk's office.''Third couple in the suit is Stan Baker and Peter Harrigan.