https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/02/us/police-shooting-victims-reaction.html
‘He Was Not a Thug’: Questions of Language Trail Police Killings - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Blacks,Race and Ethnicity
May 2, 2017
8434
Labeling a high school freshman a “great kid” with “awesome parents” and a 3.5 grade point average would usually be the ultimate compliment.But when it comes to an unarmed black teenager who died at the hands of the police, such remembrances become fraught with questions over how black victims are perceived.That is what happened after a police officer in suburban Dallas fatally shot Jordan Edwards, 15, late Saturday night. Jordan was sitting in the passenger’s seat of a car that was driving away from the officer who fired at it, Chief Jonathan Haber of Balch Springs said, adding that the shooting “did not meet our core values.”In the aftermath, those who knew Jordan well were quick to laud the person he was.“Awesome parents,” Chris Cano, the father of a friend, told a local television station, WFAA. “He was not a thug. This shouldn’t happen to him.”Those comments were published in a New York Times article, and readers were critical of the narrative that such a quotation painted.“It implies that there could be a scenario in which police killing a person without cause is justifiable based on the victim’s past experiences,” Cassidy Fogg wrote on The Times’s Facebook page. “It’s also a sentence that probably wouldn’t appear in an article about a white victim.”Activists for police accountability have long argued that black people killed by the police are too often the ones put on trial afterward, rather than the officers who shot them. If the shooting was unjustified, does it matter whether the victim had accumulated accolades?“And besides, how the hell do the police know his past when they arrive on a scene and start shooting,” another reader, Elizabeth Anderson, wrote on The Times’s Facebook page.Although an array of studies have shown racial disparities in the criminal justice system, the default thinking among many Americans is often to assume that black people killed by the police were up to no good, and that their pasts somehow contributed to their fatal interactions with the authorities, activists and academics say.That is a much easier narrative to swallow than the alternative — “that we’re looking at faulty policing,” said Mark Anthony Neal, a professor of African-American Studies and English at Duke University.“There’s a narrative about the kind of activities that young black men engage in,” Mr. Neal said.And the death of black people at the hands of police officers can often set off a defense mechanism among the deceased’s family and friends. They emphasize that those killed were not bad people, that they did not play into society’s jaded expectations.A lawyer for Jordan’s family, S. Lee Merritt, told The Dallas Morning News: “We’ve heard excuses before in the past: You know why it happens, because the dads aren’t present. That excuse isn’t here. Or the kid was violent. That excuse isn’t present here.”