https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/world/what-in-the-world/to-fight-smog-how-about-rooftop-bus-gardens.html
To Fight Smog, How About Rooftop Bus Gardens? - The New York Times
Contests and Prizes,Air Pollution,University of Chicago,Delhi (India)
Jan. 6, 2017
4806
Indians have long practiced the willfully inexact science — some would call it an art — of jugaad.It is a Hindi word whose specific meaning is a trucklike vehicle mashed together from whatever is available — scraps of an old bus, perhaps, with some wooden beams and maybe a tractor engine. But broadly, it can refer to any kind of slapdash solution, innovation in the face of scarcity.Now, that ingenuity is focused on one of the country’s most intractable modern problems: Delhi’s toxic air.A dense blanket of smog descends over Delhi each autumn, pushing air pollution readings to nearly unbearable levels. And when an outpost of the University of Chicago in New Delhi held a competition for new ideas to solve the pollution problem, many of the entries drew on good old jugaad.Some submissions were questionable, to say the least. One contestant proposed planting gardens on top of buses to create natural mobile air filters. Another resident suggested fitting automobile exhaust pipes with a device that could suck up pollution particles, but failed to explain how the technology would actually work.Closer to the mark were ideas like vertical gardens, with walls of hydroponic greenery planted in the city’s slums to absorb some of the pollution from open-air stoves and car exhaust. That one was a finalist. So was a suggestion to provide insulated kiosks for the guards who keep watch outside the gated houses of the wealthy, so the guards can stop burning garbage all night to keep warm.In the end, the winners, announced in October, were plans that seemed to be the most sustainable and achievable. They included a machine that converts rice straw into fertilizer, so that farmers around the capital would no longer burn their fields after each harvest.Another winning idea would capture some of the emissions from diesel generators and turn the soot particles into black ink and paint.The chosen projects will be put into action this year as small pilot programs, but Anna Agarwal, a senior manager at the university’s Energy and Environment Lab, said they could eventually be scaled up.