https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/31/world/asia/park-geun-hye-arrest-jail-south-korea.html
Park Geun-hye’s Life in Jail: Cheap Meals and a Mattress on the Floor - The New York Times
South Korea,Park Geun-hye,Politics and Government,Extortion and Blackmail
March 31, 2017
3473
SEOUL, South Korea — As president of South Korea, Park Geun-hye never appeared in public until stylists had arranged her hair in the trademark updo of her mother, a popular first lady who was killed by an assassin in 1974.On Friday, Ms. Park was required to remove the hairpins she uses to maintain that style before entering the jail where she now resides. Inmates at the Seoul Detention Center cannot have metal hairpins, because they could use them to hurt themselves, officials said.“When she wakes up in the morning and realizes that she can’t do her hair anymore, she will be faced with the stark new reality,” Lee Yong-ju, a former prosecutor who is now an opposition lawmaker, said in a radio interview on Thursday.Ms. Park, who was jailed before dawn Friday on charges stemming from the corruption scandal that ended her presidency three weeks ago, now lives alone in a cell, eating $1.30 meals, washing her own tray and sleeping on a foldable mattress on the floor. It is a stark comedown for someone who spent more years living at the Blue House, South Korea’s sprawling presidential palace, than anyone else — first as daughter of the long-ruling dictator Park Chung-hee, and later for four years as president herself.If convicted of the charges on which she was arrested Friday, including bribery, Ms. Park would face between 10 years and life in prison.Because of her father, many South Koreans long derided Ms. Park as a princess. She was known to be fastidious; when she once visited the port city of Incheon as president, officials had to install a new toilet specifically for her, according to a former mayor of the city.Many South Koreans stayed up late to watch the live coverage of prosecutors escorting Ms. Park to the detention center in Uiwang, south of Seoul. She was the most prominent inmate to arrive at the center since at least 1995, when Roh Tae-woo, a former military dictator, was detained there.Hundreds of her supporters chanted “Park Geun-hye, our president!” as her motorcade pulled in. But others celebrated her arrival. “It’s time to pay dearly for what you have done!” one woman shouted as Ms. Park’s car passed through the steel gate.At the gate, Ms. Park’s government-provided bodyguards, the only official privilege she still enjoyed, turned around. Since her formal removal from office on March 10 by the Constitutional Court, she had lost most of the other perks provided to an ex-president, like an office, a personal staff and a pension. The court unanimously upheld the National Assembly’s vote in December to impeach her, on charges that included abusing her power to help a longtime confidante, Choi Soon-sil, extort tens of millions of dollars from businesses.Once inside the detention center, ringed by a high wall interspersed with watchtowers, Ms. Park changed into a pea-green jumpsuit required for all inmates and was assigned an inmate number, according to jail officials who briefed reporters on procedures at the center. Her photograph was taken, she underwent a quick medical checkup, and she was taken to a solitary cell, of a kind used to hold prominent politicians and business tycoons, to ensure their safety. Most inmates are held in 129-square-foot cells, with six inmates to each.Detention center officials would not reveal the size of Ms. Park’s cell but said the usual solitary cell was 71 square feet. They added that Mr. Roh, the former president, had been allowed a larger cell, of 118 square feet, and his own shower. Most inmates are allowed to use communal bathing facilities twice a week.Each cell has a TV set, a sink, a small cupboard and a reading desk that doubles as a dinner table, officials said. The TVs show only programs authorized by the Justice Ministry.There are roll calls at 6 a.m. and 8 p.m. Forty-five minutes of outdoor exercise are allowed per day. Because no time limit is imposed on lawyers’ visits, inmates wealthy enough to be unconcerned with their fees will often take advantage of the rule to spend several hours a day in a visiting area with their attorneys, rather than alone in their cells. Ms. Park is expected to meet frequently with hers to prepare for her trial.On Friday, Ms. Park would have been served bread, ketchup, cheese, soup, salad and soybean milk for breakfast, according to the jail menu for the day. Lunch was to be a bone-marrow and vegetable stew with rice, bean sprouts, kimchi and seaweed.Each meal costs $1.30, though a limited supply of private snacks can be bought from a jail cafeteria. The government pays for inmates’ regular meals.Ms. Park will have access to none of the stylists, personal chefs, plastic surgeons, skin-care specialists or physical therapists who used to visit her regularly at the Blue House, prosecutors said.Ms. Park knows a number of inmates at the center, including her former chief of staff and several other senior aides who have been indicted in connection with the scandal that brought her down. Also there are Ms. Choi, the friend of Ms. Park who is at the center of the scandal, and Lee Jae-yong, the de facto head of Samsung, South Korea’s largest and most powerful conglomerate, who is charged with giving $38 million in bribes to Ms. Choi and Ms. Park.But officials said it was unlikely Ms. Park would interact with any of her former associates in jail. Male and female inmates are segregated, and inmates involved in related legal cases are kept separate.Jeong Jun-gil, a spokesman for Ms. Park’s conservative Liberty Korea Party, expressed hope Friday that she would be the country’s last former president to be jailed, even if she was not the first.“It’s really sad,” Mr. Jeong said. “We hope that the painful history of former presidents being arrested will not be repeated again in this country.”