https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/books/review/there-your-heart-lies-mary-gordon-.html
A Novel Looks Back at a Woman’s Idealistic Days in the Spanish Civil War - The New York Times
Spanish Civil War (1936-39),There Your Heart Lies (Book),Gordon  Mary
July 18, 2017
1317
THERE YOUR HEART LIES By Mary Gordon 320 pp. Pantheon Books. $26.95.Mary Gordon is the bard of the American Catholic experience. She’s preternaturally talented, but her reputation has been unfairly shadowed by certain assumptions about Catholicism — in other words, that Philip Larkin was right about religion being a “vast moth-eaten musical brocade.”I’ve felt a kinship with Larkin ever since I stumbled on his 1974 collection “High Windows” in my high school library and sat transfixed, reading the title poem. As a cradle Catholic who has lapsed and returned more times than I care to consider, I have a special need for his elegiac asperity when it comes to lost faith. Yet I also learned that Catholicism was nothing to be ashamed of from the avant-garde film critic P. Adams Sitney, the first intellectual Catholic I had the great luck to study with. If a man who helped found the Anthology Film Archives and counted the groundbreaking director Jonas Mekas as a friend sincerely believed that Christ rose from the dead, maybe I could watch the resurrection of the wife in Carl Dreyer’s “Ordet” with credulous wonder after all.Gordon has managed to write from Larkin’s and Sitney’s perspectives at the same time. Like Larkin, she’s an ironic progressive. Like Sitney, she’s a practicing Catholic. But her vantage point is a lonely one. Pope Francis seems to act like a liberal believer, and his adoring crowds seem to want that too. Yet the church hasn’t reformed its positions on abortion, homosexuality or celibacy. Forgiveness is wonderful, but did Francis have to shake hands with Bill O’Reilly at the Vatican?Gordon’s fiction traverses the Catholic world like a submarine, diving to the depths of its monstrosities and surfacing into the secular world to reveal intimate knowledge of what lies beneath. Many of her novels and stories face the risk that’s encountered by all philosophically and politically inclined literary endeavors — a feeling that the characters are stand-ins for particular ideas, that plots are schematic frameworks for particular arguments. Yet in her exceptional new novel, Gordon animates the contradictions and subtleties of her outsider Catholicism, setting them within a dramatic panorama that reads — improbably — as swiftly as an airport paperback.“There Your Heart Lies” is partly set during the Spanish Civil War and later in Franco’s Spain. Its central character is a 92-year-old widow who puts me in mind of the 100-year-old protagonist of Sebastian Barry’s “The Secret Scripture,” a Protestant inmate of a mental asylum recounting her perilous life in Catholic Sligo, Ireland. Both women are riveting creations. Marian Rabinowitz’s story opens on board the S.S. Normandie in 1937, when, as a young woman, she is on her way to Europe to serve the Republican cause, intent on volunteering in Spanish hospitals. Within pages, though, we’re flashing back to 1936 and Greenwich Village, where we learn that she is a Vassar student, the one with “guts” and “brains” in her overbearing, conservative Catholic family. And that she has defied her family by marrying a Jew.Marian’s headlong fierceness echoes that of Mary McCarthy, who graduated from Vassar in 1933 and was a literary beacon for Gordon. Growing up in an Irish Catholic ghetto in Queens, Gordon felt McCarthy “was so glamorous, and so smart, yet Catholic. I’d always thought only Protestants were.” The heroine of Gordon’s novel shares McCarthy’s atheism. She has made up her mind that Catholics are on the wrong side of history.In the Spanish Civil War, and in Franco’s reign, they certainly seem to be. Marian’s worldview is easily reinforced until reality breaks through her preconceptions in a series of magnetically realized plot developments. Throughout, Gordon illuminates her scenes with kinetic precision. Government surveillance “is in the air: The lungs take it in like silicate.” “Cancer. The word hangs over their heads like a vicious, shining hook.” A woman fights hunger by eating carob pods and “grass boiled in salt water.” A famished nurse hides two eggs and cooks them in wine to avoid having to share them if she’s seen taking scarce water from jugs in the center of the ward.Alternating with the story in Spain are sections set in Avondale, R.I., in 2009. Here Marian’s granddaughter, 24-year-old Amelia, is front and center. Although she has come to live with her ailing grandmother after graduating from college and the bond between them is strong, at the outset it is unexamined. To Marian, the young woman seems naïve, little more than a “lovely face, always with a hint of puzzlement or surprise, like an animal lifting its head after drinking in a stream, startled, confused by the arrival of a stranger.” The granddaughter has similar misapprehensions, imagining that the older woman’s past, about which she has said little, is filled only with “unalarming relics: a snood, antimacassars, finger bowls.”Gordon avoids the obvious problems of the political novel by making the two women’s re-education the book’s emotional spine — and by populating it with vivid, unpredictable secondary characters. Yes, one of them is a priest. He navigates the world with humility, a raucous sense of humor and an uncanny understanding of the motives of people committed to violence. Through him, we begin to see how the unthinkable evolves into the partially reasonable and then the purely necessary. He’s also the source of one of the novel’s most pointed insights about violence: “Mostly, people are in impossible positions, and they act impossibly.”