https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/29/world/middleeast/new-details-of-iran-ordeal-emerge-from-former-prisoners.html
New Details of Iran Ordeal Emerge From Former Prisoners - The New York Times
Rezaian  Jason,Trevithick  Matthew (1985- ),Iran,Political Prisoners,United States International Relations,Embargoes and Sanctions,Evin Prison,Washington Post,Kerry  John,Abedini  Saeed,Hekmati  Amir Mirzaei,United States,Zarif  Mohammad Javad
Jan. 28, 2016
9147
Two of the Americans freed by Iran this month in a prisoner deal have provided new detail about their time in captivity, saying they were told by Iranian interrogators that the United States had abandoned them and that they would never leave. One said he had been accused of plotting armed revolution.The remarks in recent days by the Americans, Jason Rezaian, 39, The Washington Post’s Tehran bureau chief, imprisoned for 18 months, and Matthew Trevithick, 30, a scholar from Hingham, Mass., imprisoned for 41 days, added to the picture that has been emerging about the prisoner ordeal and the behind-the-scenes diplomacy that led to their release less than two weeks ago.Iran released five Americans, including four dual citizens. The United States released seven people — six dual citizens and one Iranian. The deal was announced on the same day that a nuclear agreement between the big world powers and Iran greatly eased economic sanctions on the country.In an emotional appearance on Thursday at The Washington Post’s new headquarters, televised live by CNN, Mr. Rezaian extolled his bosses and colleagues for their work to free him. He also expressed gratitude to Secretary of State John Kerry, who also made an appearance there, for having helped ensure that Iran allowed Mr. Rezaian’s wife, an Iranian citizen, to leave the country with him.“For much of the 18 months I was in prison, my Iranian interrogators told me The Washington Post did not exist, that no one knew of my plight and that the United States government would not lift a finger for my release,” Mr. Rezaian said. “Today, I’m here in this room with the very people who helped prove the Iranians wrong in so many ways.”Mr. Kerry, recounting the tensions on Jan. 16 when trying to complete the implementation of the nuclear agreement and smooth the way for the prisoner release, called it “one of the days that I enjoyed the most as secretary of state.”“It was also perhaps the most nerve-racking,” he said.Mr. Kerry also thanked his Iranian counterpart, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, who he said had “moved and moved rapidly” to expedite the prisoner release, including rousting an Iranian judge in the middle of the night to sign papers.Mr. Trevithick — whose incarceration in Iran was not even publicly known until the prisoner deal was announced — spoke in detail for the first time about his confinement in an interview Wednesday night on CNN’s “Anderson Cooper 360.” Mr. Trevithick, who had been studying Farsi and staying at Tehran University, said he was arrested in December by three people in an unmarked car while “walking down the street on my way to buy my ticket to come home.”Fifteen minutes later, he said, he was inside a cell at Tehran’s Evin Prison, and was asked by an interrogator who was fondling prayer beads if he knew Mr. Rezaian. Mr. Trevithick said he responded that “the whole world” knew him.“He’s never leaving and neither are you,” Mr. Trevithick quoted the interrogator as saying.Mr. Trevithick said he was told he was a suspect in a conspiracy to topple the government. “I was accused of having access to bank accounts of millions of dollars. And I was accused of knowing the locations of weapons caches that had been secretly planted around the country to prepare for my work,” he said.Fleshing out another new detail of the five former captives, the family of Amir Hekmati, 32, confirmed in a statement that he had spent 60 days as a cellmate of Saeed Abedini, 35. Mr. Hekmati, a Marine veteran from Flint, Mich., was held for four-and-a-half years, the longest imprisonment of all five. Mr. Abedini, a pastor from Boise, Idaho, was held for more than three years.Mr. Abedini first spoke of his time with Mr. Hekmati in an interview on Fox’s “On the Record with Greta Van Susteren” broadcast on Monday.After he refused to sign papers implicating him in crimes he did not commit, Mr. Abedini said, he was abused. Later he was blindfolded and moved into a cell with Mr. Hekmati.“First, when I removed my eye band, and I saw Amir, I got very heartbroken to see what they did to our Marine,” Mr. Abedini said, describing Mr. Hekmati as having looked thin, weak and beaten, with two black eyes.