https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/books/review/the-adventures-of-john-blake-philip-pullman.html
In Philip Pullman’s First Graphic Novel, a Ghost Ship Travels Through Time - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Pullman  Philip,The Adventures of John Blake: Mystery of the Ghost Ship (Book)
June 16, 2017
4612
THE ADVENTURES OF JOHN BLAKE Mystery of the Ghost Ship By Philip Pullman Illustrated by Fred Fordham 159 pp. Scholastic. $19.99. (Graphic novel; ages 10 and up)“The Adventures of John Blake: Mystery of the Ghost Ship,” the first graphic novel written by Philip Pullman, opens with the sort of cinematic flourish fans of the author’s “His Dark Materials” series have come to expect. A solitary tanker floats in a darkened sea. We slowly zoom in on a single figure on the deck, staring out into the blackness, scanning for …something. Don’t look in his eyes, another sailor tells him: “They say you’ll be dead in a month if you look in his eyes!” The tension mounts over the next few pages as a battered schooner emerges from the mist, finally revealing the form of our hero, standing atop the mast and glaring, red-eyed and fierce, from the haze. He and the ghost ship disappear into the gloom once more, and the sailors are left shaken.It’s a hell of an opening scene, and Pullman and Fred Fordham, who has done the illustrations, do not disappoint from there. “The Adventures of John Blake” was originally serialized in the British comics weekly The Phoenix, but there is no sense of its being a disjointed episodic story. Pullman never writes down to his readers. In fact it’s really only because he focuses his tales on young protagonists that his books are marked as intended for children. His dialogue here is sharp and smart and, yes, adult. The story propels along naturalistically, no small feat given the fantastic world we are entering.The ghost ship of the title is the Mary Alice, a time-lost schooner from the 1920s. The ship became unmoored in time following an experiment gone awry involving Albert Einstein and a mysterious floating device that looks like a cross between an impossible trident and the Antikythera mechanism. In the present, descendants of the missing crew track reports of the ship as it reappears throughout history, while they themselves are tracked by an all-seeing enemy with sinister designs on the Mary Alice.John Blake seems preternaturally formidable, a young man of an indeterminate age cut from the same cloth as Will Parry from Pullman’s “Subtle Knife.” The rest of the characters are a motley crew plucked from throughout history — a Chinese merchant from 1913, a former Barbary slave from 1614, an ancient Roman who serves as the mechanic of the ship’s diesel engine (“The Romans were great engineers”). They’re joined by Serena, a teenage castaway from the present day who serves as the reader’s proxy. The cast is sprawling, and in typical Pullman fashion, there are hints of greater depths to each of them.Fordham sometimes has trouble drawing facial expressions that show strong emotion, and his action sequences can be stiff and hard to follow, but it’s difficult to fault him when he renders the settings of John Blake’s world in such painstaking and loving detail. And the settings are myriad — London, San Francisco, Fiji, not to mention the Mary Alice and the sea itself. The palette he uses for the sea at times evokes the seascapes of Winslow Homer.The mystery alluded to in the title is surprisingly straightforward, given that we’re dealing with a time-traveling boat. “The Adventures of John Blake: Mystery of the Ghost Ship” feels like the equivalent of a superhero origin-story film — there’s a lot of setup to get out of the way before we can embark on more fantastic adventures to come, in subsequent volumes said to be in the works. A sequence near the end gives us a tantalizing glimpse, when a fog embraces the Mary Alice as it sails into the mists of time. Serena and John listen as disembodied voices emanate from the gloom — a sea serpent from the South Atlantic, a man being flayed by pirates, the siren-song from the “Odyssey.” I want to see these adventures that have been and will yet be, and I’m confident that readers of all ages will want to as well.