https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/arts/music/review-renee-fleming-a-voice-with-wardrobe-changes.html
Review: Renée Fleming, a Voice With Wardrobe Changes - The New York Times
Music,Classical Music,Opera,Carnegie Hall,Fleming  Renee
March 10, 2016
5350
Renée Fleming’s song recital at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening, with the pianist Olga Kern, promised to be a big event, in ways both good and possibly less good. Ms. Fleming recently made known that she intends to phase out her operatic career, but her voice is still in excellent shape, and this program could indicate that she will invest more heavily in the song repertory.That it was happening at Carnegie Hall made it an even bigger deal, but also, in a way, diminished it. The hall, though ideal for many things, resists intimacy on the scale of, say, Schumann lieder. And the performers dismissed intimacy altogether, turning the evening into a bit of a fashion show, both wearing a different fancy-to-overfancy gown in each half.This would ordinarily not demand much comment — and a good thing, since I’m not qualified to provide it — but the lavish black confection that Ms. Fleming wore in the first half seemed downright dangerous, catching on the stage door at her entrance and causing a misstep as she walked on. She addressed the matter in opening remarks, expressing the hope that it might all somehow bring her luck.She didn’t need much luck, of course, given her great artistry and winning personality. She did hold her big, beautiful voice in check a bit in Schumann’s song cycle “Frauenliebe und -Leben” (“Woman’s Love and Life”), with its deeply personal if somewhat dated meanings, as a woman subsumes her character into that of her husband, to bad effect in the end.Assorted numbers by Rachmaninoff and Debussy’s “Ariettes Oubliées” (“Forgotten Songs”), with their assertive piano parts, suffered less from the grand treatment, and Ms. Fleming and Ms. Kern shaped them beautifully.Coming off Debussy’s rarefied settings of poetry by Verlaine, Ms. Fleming finished altogether more down to earth, with a set of jazz-and-blues-tinged songs by the Chicago singer and composer Patricia Barber. A longtime lover and practitioner of jazz, Ms. Fleming gave fine, funky turns to numbers like “Hunger,” “Scream” (“My anthem for this election,” she called it) and “Morpheus.”Ms. Kern, an established solo artist in her own right, was a strong collaborator throughout, and she had additional moments to shine. Schumann rewards the pianist with a touching piano postlude to his cycle, reworking material from the opening song.In a nice touch in the Rachmaninoff group, Ms. Fleming stepped aside from the lovely song “Lilacs” (Op. 21, No. 5), allowing Ms. Kern to play Rachmaninoff’s arrangement of it for solo piano. And Ms. Kern opened the second half, setting the stage brilliantly for the Debussy set with “Feu d’Artifices” (“Fireworks”) from the composer’s second book of “Préludes.”“You Gotta Go Home,” the final Barber song, commanded. (If you must know, “A sexy month or two/And now I’m stuck with you.”) But everyone knew that the audience was not going anywhere without an encore or two, and the performers complied.Ms. Fleming offered a slightly maudlin rendition of “Danny Boy” and a kicky version of “Shall We Dance,” from “The King and I,” with just a touch of the light fantastic. (But no tripping, in the sensibly elegant — and safe — red gown she wore for the second half.)She ended with a beautiful account of “O mio babbino caro” from Puccini’s “Gianni Schicchi,” and at last, singer, space and occasion all seemed in proper alignment.If Ms. Fleming is intending to move more heavily into the song literature, you have to hope that she will do it in a smaller hall and tone down the flash.