http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/16/world/middleeast/addressing-critics-white-house-cites-diplomacy-in-release-of-sailors-by-iran.html
Addressing Critics, White House Cites Diplomacy in Release of Sailors by Iran - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Iran,Obama  Barack,United States International Relations,Ships and Shipping,Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps,United States Navy,Republican Party,Kerry  John,Zarif  Mohammad Javad,Trump  Donald J,Cruz  Ted,Persian Gulf
Jan. 15, 2016
9170
WASHINGTON — The White House on Friday sought to defuse attempts by President Obama’s critics to turn this week’s overnight seizure of two American patrol boats and their crews into a symbol of what they say are the administration’s foreign policy failures and feckless relations with Iran.The images of the 10 sailors, kneeling on the deck of one of the boats under the watchful eye of gun-toting Iranian captors, quickly became a talking point for Republicans, especially in their presidential debate on Thursday night. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas opened the debate assailing Mr. Obama for tolerating such treatment, and both he and Donald J. Trump called it a humiliation for the United States.But the White House countered that the swift release of the sailors was a testament to the diplomatic channels that the United States had established with the Iranian government in the course of negotiating a nuclear agreement. That deal is scheduled to go into effect next week.“I don’t think there’s any reason for anybody to be embarrassed,” the White House spokesman, Josh Earnest, said. “I think there’s a reason for us certainly to be relieved that our servicemen and women, who are protecting America in a very dangerous part of the world, were released pretty shortly after they were taken into custody.”“The only people that are unhappy about it are the Republicans,” he added.Iran let the sailors go, unharmed, after 14 hours, but not before using them for propaganda purposes. They issued several photographs of the crew, kneeling in captivity, their hands clasped behind their heads, as well as a video of their commander apologizing for trespassing. Mr. Earnest said it was possible he was acting under duress, but that did not mean Iran had violated the Geneva Conventions on the treatment of prisoners of war because the United States is not at war with Iran.The White House’s defense of the episode has been hampered by the lack of a detailed account of what happened in the Persian Gulf that night. The Pentagon offered few specifics on Friday, citing its investigation of the episode. Pentagon officials who have been briefed on the investigation insisted that the patrol boats were not spying on the Iranians. They are 50-foot crafts typically used to navigate “brown waters” — a term the Navy uses to describe rivers and shallow areas around the coast.Unlike larger ships, the vessels — known as riverine boats — are not equipped with sensitive equipment to conduct espionage, an official said. The sailors were “Regular Joes,” an official said, on a routine mission to sail from Kuwait to Bahrain after completing an exercise.The distance between Kuwait and Bahrain — about 300 miles — is too far for boats that cruise at speeds over 40 miles per hour to make without stopping to refuel en route. So the boats were scheduled to veer away from the coast and farther into the Persian Gulf to meet a Coast Guard refueling vessel.What happened next is still unclear, but Navy officials said that the crew could have keyed in the wrong GPS coordinates, unwittingly putting them on a course that quickly brought them inside Iranian territorial waters off Farsi Island, an Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps naval base.Another theory is that the crew was trying to take a shortcut and this is what led them inadvertently into Iranian waters. On Thursday, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter attributed the episode to a “navigational error,” though he did not offer any details.The Navy lost contact with the boats about 8 p.m. local time (about noon in Washington) — the Pentagon still has not explained why — prompting American officials to launch search-and-rescue helicopters from the aircraft carrier Harry S. Truman, sailing nearby. It is still unclear why the boat crews did not radio back to headquarters to alert commanders of their plight.Military officials have said that one of the patrol boats experienced engine problems when it sought to speed out of the Iranian waters — but the Pentagon has not provided any timeline yet of precisely what happened. It was several hours later when Iranian officials confirmed that the two boats and the 10 sailors were in custody.The episode has given rise to competing political narratives. The White House portrayed its quick resolution as an unintended benefit of the nuclear diplomacy pursued by Secretary of State John Kerry. Mr. Kerry made multiple phone calls to the Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, who was said to be worried that a standoff with the United States could unravel the nuclear deal just as the West was scheduled to free up $100 billion in Iranian funds.Republicans have seized on the images to argue that the administration was so determined to protect the nuclear deal that Mr. Obama did not raise the episode during his State of the Union address on Tuesday, nor did the United States criticize Iran for its treatment of the sailors.“We were horrified to see the sight of 10 American sailors on their knees with their hands on their head,” Mr. Cruz said at Thursday’s debate. “It was heartbreaking. But the good news is the next commander in chief is standing on this stage.”Mr. Trump referred to the “humiliation of our young 10 sailors sitting on the floor with their knees in a begging position.” The sailors were let go, he said, only because Iran wanted access to billions of dollars in frozen funds that will be released when the nuclear deal is implemented.The episode will provide grist for more Republican attacks on the deal, political analysts said, though the images of the sailors are unlikely to turn up in attack ads. “Using visuals like that for a political gain is not something the American public will tolerate,” said David Winston, a Republican political consultant.Still, Mr. Winston said, the pictures undercut Mr. Kerry’s argument that this was a diplomatic triumph, and raised broader questions about the compromises the United States had made. The White House appeared eager to counter suggestions it would lift the Iran sanctions without any further review. Mr. Earnest said on Friday that the United States would wait for independent verification by the International Atomic Energy Agency that Iran had met its obligations under the deal, which included mothballing thousands of centrifuges and shipping out the vast majority of its supply of enriched uranium.“We’re not going to take their word for it,” he said.