https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/15/us/politics/trump-russia-inquiry.html
Despite Democrats’ Demands, Broad Inquiry on Russia Ties Isn’t Assured - The New York Times
Russia,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Democratic Party,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Senate
Feb. 15, 2017
6254
WASHINGTON — Democrats see a scandal “bigger than Watergate.” Republicans see a Russia-size obstacle to conservative legislation.The result, so far, is that aggressive oversight of ties between President Trump’s campaign associates and Russian intelligence is far from assured on Capitol Hill.While a handful of leading Republicans on Wednesday acknowledged growing concerns about the Trump team’s connections to Russia, most declined to embrace the kind of wide-scale investigation that their Democratic counterparts are demanding, leaving the minority party with few clear recourses as the controversy escalates.“I’ve been in Congress for a long time; I’ve never seen anything like this,” Senator Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader from New York, said after an emergency caucus meeting on Wednesday. “Nothing less than our system of checks and balances, democratic institutions, the rule of law and our national security is at stake.”Mr. Schumer and Democrats called on their former Senate colleague, Jeff Sessions, the new attorney general and a top Trump campaign supporter, to recuse himself from any review. (Advisers to Mr. Sessions have said he sees no need to do so.) They demanded that any relevant records from the administration, transition or campaign be preserved. And they asked that former campaign and transition associates testify “in public, under oath,” a request Republicans have not echoed.Pressed on how he hoped to proceed if Republicans declined to join his calls, Mr. Schumer demurred. “Let me just say, it’s the right thing to do,” he said. Throughout his news conference, the tone seemed telling, signaling Democrats’ reliance on at least some Republican support for their efforts: Absent were any taunting attacks on Republicans — as have been common in the fight over Mr. Trump’s cabinet selections — replaced by earnest-sounding pleas for collaboration.At the same time, other Democrats seethed over what they saw as a double standard at the F.B.I. before the election, when the Trump campaign’s possible ties to Russia first received attention.Last summer, James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, broke with protocol and tradition when he held a news conference to discuss the agency’s decision not to bring criminal charges against Hillary Clinton for keeping classified information on a private email server. Then, days before the election, he informed Congress — and by extension the public — that the F.B.I. was investigating newly discovered emails related to that case.Those decisions entangled the bureau in the presidential campaign in a way that made many agents deeply uncomfortable. But there are differences between the Clinton case and the investigation into Trump’s advisers. Most important, Mr. Comey spoke about the Clinton case only after it was closed. The Trump-related investigation is open, and it involves matters involving continuing classified surveillance.Mrs. Clinton’s allies have been unmoved.“I’d like the FBI to explain why they sent a letter about Clinton but not this,” Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager, wrote on Twitter.The remarks followed a New York Times article on Tuesday that said that members of Mr. Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign and other Trump associates had repeated contacts with senior Russian intelligence officials before the election.This week, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, resigned after reports that he had discussed Obama administration sanctions with Russia’s ambassador to the United States before Mr. Trump took office.On Wednesday, the leaders of the Senate Judiciary Committee — Senator Chuck Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California — issued a letter requesting a Justice Department briefing and access to relevant documents concerning Mr. Flynn’s resignation.Across Washington, Democrats marveled at the pace of revelations. “This is already bigger than Watergate,” Zac Petkanas, a senior adviser to the Democratic National Committee and a former Clinton campaign aide, said of the most recent reports on Wednesday. “Nothing short of a special select committee with open hearings, a bipartisan 9/11-style commission and the appointment of a special counsel at the Department of Justice is remotely acceptable.”Before the latest report, most Republicans deflected questions about the Trump White House, supporting efforts to investigate Russian interference in the 2016 election but taking care not to antagonize a sitting Republican president.On Wednesday, some top Republicans allowed that the episode threatened to upend their legislative agenda, which includes dismantling the Affordable Care Act and pursuing tax overhaul.“This is disruptive,” said Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee. He said lawmakers had to “figure out a way to get all this out and known and behind us,” adding that the latest reports had “influenced my thinking as to how we need to get it out there” but declining to offer more specifics.On Tuesday, Republican leaders in the Senate said that it was likely that Mr. Flynn would be asked to speak to the Intelligence Committee, which is looking into Russian interference in the election.On Wednesday, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina was the rare Republican to announce even conditional support for a select committee to investigate “all things related to Russia,” provided he could verify for himself that there had been contacts between the campaign and Russia.“The accusations regarding the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia are creating a cloud over the White House,” Mr. Graham said in a statement. “They should be fairly investigated by the Congress in a bipartisan manner. It would serve the president’s interests to get to the bottom of this so he can move forward with his agenda.”Democrats echoed this point, suggesting that the legislative body could be stymied in perpetuity without a satisfactory plan to investigate.“There’s only one or two times in your political career where you face a moment like this,” Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut, said of Republicans, urging them to put country ahead of party. “I don’t want a completely dysfunctional legislative process here, but so long as there’s no process to unfold the rest of the story, it’s hard to figure out how anything gets done.”One area of bipartisan agreement appears to be Russian sanctions. Six senators — three from each party — announced legislation last week that would require congressional approval for Mr. Trump to lift sanctions against Russia.The House has also taken up the cause, and Democrats say at least a handful of House Republicans are supportive. Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 House Democrat, and the senior Democrats on two crucial committees, said the bill would ensure Russia would not receive sanctions relief “until it earns it.”But unlike her counterparts in the Senate, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, seemed eager to needle Republicans who had not yet committed to a robust investigation of ties to Russia in the Trump orbit.Such lawmakers would be “complicit with an endangerment of our national security,” she said. “They will be stonewalling. And they’re going to have to answer for that.”