https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/23/upshot/but-what-does-the-trade-deal-mean-if-youre-not-a-cheesemaker.html
But What Does the Trade Deal Mean if You’re Not a Cheesemaker? - The New York Times
Trans-Pacific Partnership,International Trade and World Market,United States Economy,Copyrights and Copyright Violations,Customs (Tariff),Dairy Products,Intellectual Property
May 22, 2015
6774
I have spent the past few months trying, and failing, to reach a clear assessment of the upsides and downsides of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the proposed economic agreement among the United States and 11 other countries. This might be because I don’t own a dairy farm.You see, Canada, Japan and Peru all impose high tariffs on dairy products, especially cheese. Because it would require other countries to cut tariffs and raise import quotas, the T.P.P. would drive an 0.5 percent increase in American dairy production over 10 years, the U.S.D.A. estimates. It would increase international trade in cheese alone by $250 million a year. That would be a good thing for dairy farmers and people who work on dairy farms, but it would also grow G.D.P. a little bit and have a tiny positive effect for Americans as a whole.But cheese is an exception.The United States imposes an average import tariff of 1.4 percent on goods over all, according to the White House, and our proposed trading partners are mostly charging tariffs in the single digits. So, while I buy into the Econ 101 argument about tariffs being bad, I’m not sure they’re very important. Several decades of tariff-reduction agreements have already succeeded at getting most tariffs very low, and the United States does not have a cheese-based economy.So, if tariffs don’t matter very much anymore, why are people freaking out on either side of the debate over a trade agreement? A vote to end debate on a law to give the president authority to negotiate the 12-nation pact and present it for an up-or-down vote in Congress barely squeaked through the Senate on Thursday, after a roadblock last week. The Senate will vote on a series of amendments before a final vote on the so-called fast track legislation, probably on Friday.Much of the controversy is because the T.P.P. isn’t really (just) a trade agreement. (There’s a reason I called it an “economic agreement” at the top.) A lot of it is about labor, environmental standards, intellectual property and access to markets for services like banking and accounting. And in contrast with the tariff cuts, there’s a lot more reason to worry that some of the agreement’s non-trade provisions would hurt the world economy even as they benefited specific industries.In particular, strengthening already overly strong protections for intellectual property could harm consumers and shrink the world economy over all. The agreement would reinforce copyright and patent protections around the world, which is great for you if you own a movie studio or a pharmaceutical company. It would do this both by pushing countries to offer more generous protection to certain copyrights and patents, and by doing more to enforce the rules that already exist.Well-designed patent and copyright laws encourage innovation and expand the economy. But protections that are too strong just transfer wealth from consumers to owners of the works. It’s not obvious what copyrights that persist decades after an author’s death are doing to promote the creation of excellent literary works, rather than just to enrich owners of capital at the expense of readers and viewers. If these rules are already poorly designed in the United States, spreading them abroad will simply spread the harm.All that said, not all these non-tariff rules are a negative. America leads in lots of service industries, like banking and insurance, and guaranteeing access for American services companies in foreign markets should create American jobs and give residents of foreign countries access to better, cheaper services.If you don’t see a convergence toward a “T.P.P., Good or Bad for Americans?” takeaway, that’s not an accident. Congress is essentially debating Schrödinger’s trade deal: The partnership’s broad outlines are known, but its specific provisions remain unknown for the valid reason that multilateral deals can’t be effectively negotiated with every member of Congress in the room. Even if we knew exactly what was in the deal, the actual economic effects of its provisions wouldn’t necessarily be known until after implementation. (For example, the economist Brad DeLong, who helped to negotiate Nafta as a Clinton administration official in the 1990s, now argues that one of its effects helped lead to Mexico’s financial crisis of 1994-95, in which an international bailout was required.)A 2013 Congressional Research Service report by James Jackson estimated that bilateral and multilateral trade agreements, such as T.P.P., would have small positive effects on the size of the American economy and mixed effects on employment, with some sectors gaining jobs and others losing them. But he also noted the uncertainty of trade deals’ economic effects: changes in the services sector (one of the areas that is supposed to be most promising in this deal) are especially difficult to estimate, he said.He noted that economic models may also underestimate the one-time transition costs that come with the economic changes spurred by trade deals. “Policy makers will weigh the benefits of greater trade liberalization against the anticipated dislocations for workers and industries and determine whether to accept or reject each agreement on the basis of a broad set of factors,” he concluded, which probably will not help you draw a conclusion about a trade agreement whose language is not publicly known.That said, fast-track passage will set in motion a process whereby Congress and the public will get to see the full terms of the deal before Congress decides whether or not to approve it. That will make it possible for observers to reach firmer conclusions on whether the deal is good or bad on net, and should also make for a more substantive debate within Congress.T.P.P. opponents seem afraid of getting to this step in the process, but it’s not obvious why; if this were a must-pass agreement, it would have been passed long ago. Fast-track passage will make it possible for United States negotiators to make take-it-or-leave-it offers to other nations; it will then be up to Congress to decide whether to take or leave the deal.