http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/05/fashion/05upclose.html
Randy Weiner’s Contempt for Theater Leads to a Theater Success Story: Up Close - The New York Times
Theater,Weiner  Randy
May 4, 2011
5353
RANDY WEINER, the playwright and theater producer, is terrified of boring his audiences. So he was noticeably nervous before a new production of his play “Caligula Maximus,” a campy extravaganza that made its debut in early April at the House of Yes in Bushwick, Brooklyn.He needn’t have worried. The show’s male go-go dancers, topless aerialists and drag performers kept the audience enthralled. Even Mr. Weiner seemed impressed when Stormy Leather, wearing only a scorpion tattoo on her rib cage, jumped into the crowd and pinched his backside.“Now that’s how you can tell you’re at a great show,” said Mr. Weiner, who looked out of place in a North Face windbreaker and bookish glasses.As the leading impresario of nontraditional theater in New York, Mr. Weiner has become an authority on what makes a great show. He’s been creating them since the early 1990s, when he cast the then-unknown Wyclef Jean and Lauryn Hill in “Club 12,” a hip-hop version of Shakespeare’s “Twelfth Night.”Since then, Mr. Weiner has pioneered a hybrid form of entertainment that unites experimental theater with the boozy energy of a nightclub. In 1999, he was a creator of “The Donkey Show,” a disco adaptation of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” that ran Off Broadway for six years. More recently he was a founder of the Box, a risqué cabaret lounge on the Lower East Side.But at the moment, he is the man responsible for bringing “Sleep No More,” an immersive theatrical experience by the British troupe Punchdrunk, to New York. Recently extended through June 25, it has become a critical and popular hit.The show, loosely based on the plot of “Macbeth” with 1930s noir overtones, takes up six floors in three adjacent warehouses on West 27th Street. Visitors are given masks and allowed to wander through the 93 obsessively detailed rooms, encountering characters and pivotal scenes along the way.“A friend told me he found ‘Sleep No More’ relaxing, because it frees you from the anxiety of being bored at the theater,” Mr. Weiner, 46, said recently, sitting on an antique couch inside Lady Macduff’s living room. Lean and hyper-energetic, he was wearing running gear in anticipation of his daily jog.But it was Mr. Weiner’s ability to recruit high-profile investors, like the real estate developer Arthur Karpati, that brought the multimillion-dollar show to life.Mr. Weiner’s powers of persuasion have been evident since his undergraduate days at Harvard, when he persuaded the head of the art department to finance a large-scale “art happening” on campus. The show featured, among other things, a re-enactment of the Sisyphus myth by the school’s tae kwon do club.The key to his loopy dramaturgical run, however, seems to lie in his longstanding contempt for theater.Growing up on the Upper East Side, his father, a lawyer, was forever dragging him to shows. “He’s the world’s greatest straight theater queen,” Mr. Weiner said. “We saw everything, from Broadway musicals to avant-garde versions of Eugene O’Neill’s ‘The Emperor Jones.’ And I hated it all.”Nevertheless, it gave him a taste for the stage. After graduating from college in the late ’80s, he staged “Club 12” at the Red Zone, a legendary club on West 54th Street, which drew praise from the likes of Quincy Jones and the Shubert Organization.Mr. Weiner also tried his hand in Hollywood. “I was playing basketball with the Baldwin brothers, living the little Jewish screenwriter’s dream,” he said.But he soon returned to New York to be with his girlfriend, Diane Paulus, now his wife and the director of the American Repertory Theater. Together they established a theater troupe called Project 400, an attempt to make classical theater appeal to a new generation of theatergoers.ON the side, Mr. Weiner helped conceive Barnum-esque spectacles like “Beacher’s Madhouse,” a variety show starring the comedian Jeff Beacher and a retinue of Russian jugglers, fire-breathers and flying midgets. Considering Mr. Weiner’s nightclub fixation, it was inevitable that he would own one himself. In 2007, he founded the Box with the theater directors Richard Kimmel and Simon Hammerstein.“The performances are so real and alive that people assume we’re all having sex backstage,” Mr. Weiner said, referring to the Box’s racy burlesque and drag acts. “They think the guys behind it must be crazy monsters.”In Mr. Weiner’s case, at least, the opposite is true. A family man with two young daughters, he does not drink or smoke and views his rare late-night appearances at the Box as empirical research into what drives an audience wild.“I’m actually a pretty boring person,” Mr. Weiner said.Which is not to say he isn’t fascinated by the extremes of human nature. At the House of Yes, Mr. Weiner admitted to envying Caligula. “He was an outrageous man who inspires people to be less frightened of their desires,” he said. “I’m frightened by my desires, too. I just deal with it by creating shows like this.”