https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/books/review/speed-of-life-carol-weston.html
A Teenager’s Life in the Aftermath of Her Mother’s Sudden Death - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Speed of Life (Book),Weston  Carol
June 16, 2017
4611
SPEED OF LIFE By Carol Weston 329 pp. Sourcebooks Jabberwocky. $16.99. (Middle grade; ages 11 and up)In his autobiographical novel, “So Long, See You Tomorrow,” William Maxwell described the aftermath of his mother’s sudden death when he was a child as being as if “I had inadvertently walked through a door that I shouldn’t have gone through.” In Carol Weston’s perceptive, funny and moving new novel, “Speed of Life,” 14-year-old Sofia Wolfe has walked through that same door, and she longs to find a way back to her previous life. Nearly nine months earlier, Sofia had come home from school and found her mother “slumped unnaturally on the sofa,” dead at 42 from an aneurysm, a word Sofia had never even heard before.As the novel begins, it’s January and Sofia and her father are “undecorating” their Christmas tree, “as if in a home movie playing in the wrong direction.” The novel charts a year of Sofia’s life as she shifts from “grieving in slow motion” to facing dramatic inward and outward changes — especially when her father starts dating an advice columnist for Fifteen magazine known as “Dear Kate.” Sofia herself had confided in Dear Kate, and now she must spend time with Kate and her bellicose 16-year-old daughter, Alexa, who refers to her mother as “Dear Kate, patron saint of losers.”I found myself nodding with recognition and scribbling “exactly” in the margins as Sofia struggles to make sense of her abiding grief in a culture that isn’t exactly at peace with death. I also lost my mother suddenly, when I was in my teens — she learned she had a metastatic cancer on a Thursday night, and died nine days later. One particularly resonant moment occurs when Sofia meets a boy named Sam, who asks about her mother. “There was no ideal response to ‘My mother died,’” Sofia thinks. “Nothing anybody could say was right, yet saying nothing was wrong.” She realizes that what she most wants is for people to ask “‘What was she like?’ instead of ‘How did she die?’” Exactly.But her losses also give her a strength of character she wouldn’t have otherwise. Her mother’s death lends special meaning to her first real kiss, for example. “No matter what happened, I would keep that hour inside me,” she says. “I knew this because I’d learned how strange time and memory could be.”Occasionally, the voice Weston — who has written many books for children including “Ava and Pip,” and is herself an advice columnist for Girls’ Life magazine — has created for “Dear Kate” sounds platitudinous. (“Listen to your head not just your heart.”) Here and there, her writing can feel overstated (“You can’t mourn forever. When you’re alive, you have to live”). But Sofia’s thoughtful, searching voice compensates for those flaws. And Weston also captures beautifully Sofia’s New York City childhood — living in a “vertical village,” squashing all the figures into the top floor of her dollhouse because she “couldn’t imagine a family taking up two floors.”Toward the end of “Speed of Life,” Sofia knows she can’t walk back through that door, and yet she’s able to face her uprooted life head-on. Reading “Speed of Life” made me think of a passage in another well-thumbed book on my shelf of books about loss, Elizabeth McCracken’s “An Exact Replica of a Figment of My Imagination.” McCracken writes of a woman who’d lost a son, who longs “to remember that he was dead, but to remember him without pain: He’s dead but of course she still loves him, and that love isn’t morbid or bloodstained or unsightly, it doesn’t need to be shoved away.” That’s all Sofia wants, too: to remember her mother without pain, and with a love that’s not shoved away, but is celebrated. I laughed out loud and I teared up while reading this novel. I will eagerly place it on my daughter’s bookshelf, so that she, like Sofia, can find her own resilience and voice in our painful, joyful, speeding world.