https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/09/us/politics/with-marco-rubio-on-the-rise-competitors-go-on-the-attack.html
Marco Rubio Campaign Delivers a Mixed Report on Its Latest Fund-Raising - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Rubio  Marco,Campaign Finance,Republican Party,Trump  Donald J,Bush  Jeb
Oct. 8, 2015
7292
LAS VEGAS —  Marco Rubio’s presidential campaign delivered mixed news to its top donors Thursday in what was intended to be a celebration here of their sudden good fortune: Mr. Rubio had raised a disappointingly small amount of money the last few months but was on track to have his best single fund-raising month so far in October.The campaign reported raising about $6 million in the third quarter, much less than it had raised in his first quarter on the campaign trail, though it said that it still had a healthy $11 million on hand.Its senior strategists told donors that Mr. Rubio’s two strong debate performances and his climb in national polls were already helping them recruit new donors. And they set an ambitious fund-raising target for the next quarter of about $15 million. In perhaps the biggest validation of Mr. Rubio’s growing popularity, two of his biggest competitors are swooping in to attack. Jeb Bush, who was governor of Florida when Mr. Rubio was the speaker of the State House, has been disparaging his attendance record in the Senate, and even his leadership abilities. On Thursday, Donald J. Trump rallied a lunchtime crowd here just a few hours before a nearby appearance by Mr. Rubio, whom he has mocked as too young, too inexperienced and even too sweaty to be presidential material.“A lightweight,” Mr. Trump scoffed as he pantomimed someone sweating profusely and guzzling water.Mr. Rubio’s three-day trip to Las Vegas is more than just a series of public rallies and town hall meetings in a state with one of the earliest nominating contests. It is an important gathering of his top advisers and his biggest financial backers for two days of strategizing, campaigning — and touch football, a Rubio leitmotif. All of it is aimed at projecting a swelling sense of confidence, even if the candidate himself has been careful not to seem too cocky.“I need you to make this happen,” he told a crowd of close to 1,000 people here on Thursday night. And he reminded them of the long odds he has always faced, with people repeatedly telling him not to run for president.“It’s not your turn. It’s someone else’s turn. You’ve got to wait in line,” he recalled them saying. “Wait for what?”Now that he is having his turn on the national stage, Mr. Rubio and his campaign are confronting what was always one of their worst fears: peaking too early and losing their shot at the nomination.The notion might seem counterintuitive, but Mr. Rubio and his team actually hate the idea of his becoming a front-runner.“There’d be nothing worse in my mind,” his campaign manager, Terry Sullivan, said recently. “It’s terrible.”Mr. Rubio is not in first place in the polls, or second for that matter.But his emerging position as a safe and reliable choice in a field of candidates that many Republicans worry is too unsteady and unpredictable puts his next moves under a microscopeAnd how he navigates the next few weeks — whether he can raise more money, fend off attacks that will only grow harsher, and convert his mounting popularity into votes in other early states, like Iowa, where he has yet to make much of a mark — will be the biggest test Mr. Rubio has faced as a presidential candidate.“No one wants to be in first place at this point because when you’re in first place, there’s only one place to go,” said Rick Harrison, a wealthy Las Vegas pawnshop owner and television celebrity who will host Mr. Rubio at one of his businesses. Repeating a mantra of the Rubio campaign, Mr. Harrison added, “It’s slow and steady.”Of all the slights made against him by rivals lately — that he is too young, lacks the preparedness to lead and has racked up the worst attendance record in the Senate while he was off campaigning and fund-raising — Mr. Trump’s are the most relentless.His Twitter feed and public appearances have been filled with taunts about Mr. Rubio’s age (“just a kid,” “li’l Marco,” “lamb chop”) and even his tendency to drink a lot of water (“They bring it in in buckets for this guy.”).Some have veered into ugly territory. Mr. Trump quoted a Twitter post that included a graphic this week made by one of his supporters that showed a picture of Mr. Rubio as a boy and said, “Never hire a boy to do a man’s job,” adding, “Now drink your milk and eat your cookies.” (A Trump spokeswoman said the campaign had nothing to do with creating the image.)Mr. Rubio, reared in the gritty politics of Miami, is no stranger to personal attacks and has faced some bizarre ones before. When he was still in his 20s, an opponent in a state legislative race spread rumors that he was gay. And when he ran for the Senate in 2010, Charlie Crist, governor at the time and his primary challenger, accused him of charging a back wax to a Republican Party credit card.But it is not Mr. Trump’s barbs, which Mr. Rubio’s campaign believes he has largely deflected with a confident shrug, that bother his supporters the most.Mr. Rubio’s campaign is keenly aware that Mr. Bush’s sophisticated and well-financed opposition research operation is just getting started with its attacks.Mr. Bush is adding fuel to the fire: This week, he has repeatedly expressed disapproval of lawmakers who skip votes, starting with an op-ed article in The Des Moines Register saying that their pay should be cut if they do not bother to show up for work. “They should go to the committee hearings,” Mr. Bush said of lawmakers in a speech on Tuesday night in Bettendorf, Iowa. “They should vote.”And on Thursday, Mr. Bush slighted Mr. Rubio by name. While Mr. Rubio is “an incredible talent,” he said in Des Moines, “we’re in times right now that I think requires leadership. And that’s my case.”With Mr. Bush aiming at him, Mr. Rubio cannot afford any mistakes. “Jeb has $100 million in the bank, and you can’t dismiss the fact that he has superior resources at a time when voters are pivoting from who’s on the cover of People magazine one week to who has the right ideas about the future the next,” said Scott Reed, a veteran strategist of Republican presidential campaigns. “That’s the fight that Jeb and Rubio are in. They’re forward looking, both men of ideas, and that will probably be the final fight for the nomination.”They must also reckon with the success of candidates who claim to be outsiders, like Ben Carson, who raised $20 million in the third quarter and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, whose campaign announced on Thursday that it had raised more than $12 million.To ensure that his recent success is not fleeting, Mr. Rubio has been beefing up his staff in Iowa, people familiar with those efforts said. His advisers have been working aggressively to recruit people who worked there for Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, who last month dropped out. They also plan to announce soon that they have won the backing of some of Mr. Walker’s big donors.In addition, the Conservative Solutions Project, a political nonprofit aligned with his campaign, is scheduling new fund-raisers. And its supporters are making a new push to peel away supporters of Mr. Bush’s by reminding them that campaign finance law allows them to give to the group anonymously.As Mr. Rubio’s top donors checked into the Bellagio here for their retreat — a football-themed event complete with strategy “huddles,” a discussion about “quarterbacking victory” and even a game of touch — advisers said they had no plans to adjust anything. In the words of one, they will stay the course now that they are on the upswing, just as they did when they were down.“I like our chances and I like our guy a lot,” said George Seay, a donor from Dallas.