http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/nyregion/governor-andrew-cuomo-new-york-transgender-rights.html
Cuomo Planning Discrimination Protections for Transgender New Yorkers - The New York Times
Transgender and Transsexuals,Cuomo  Andrew M,New York State,Discrimination,Empire State Pride Agenda
Oct. 22, 2015
7481
Taking action on a political issue that has long been stalled in Albany, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Thursday announced executive action intended to protect transgender people from discrimination in housing, employment and other areas.Mr. Cuomo announced the action at a dinner held by Empire State Pride Agenda, a prominent group that advocates for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people.The governor, addressing the crowd at the Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel, said he would direct the  State Division of Human Rights to issue regulations that extend protections against discrimination found in a 1945 law to cover gender identity, transgender status and gender dysphoria.Mr. Cuomo said the move was overdue, noting that transgender people had been left out of previous antidiscrimination laws protecting gay and bisexual men and women. “The law left out the T, so to speak,” he said, adding, “That was not right, it was not fair, and it was not legal.“Transgendered individuals deserve the same civil right that protects them from discrimination.”The move by Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, follows years of frustration among those who advocate on behalf of transgender people in Albany, where the State Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats, has repeatedly passed legislation to address such issues, only to find it stymied in the State Senate, where Republicans are in charge.In June, after another unsuccessful campaign to pass an antidiscrimination bill — the Gender Expression Nondiscrimination Act, or Genda — Nathan M. Schaefer, executive director of Empire State Pride, criticized the “abominable failure” of legislators to act.“With this shameful betrayal,” Mr. Schaefer said in a statement, “it’s clear that dysfunction still reigns in Albany.”On Thursday, that harsh tone had been replaced by a sense of triumph within his organization and other gay rights groups.“This is a tremendous step forward,” Mr. Schaefer said before the dinner, after being told by members of the governor’s staff about the plans, adding, “It goes a really long way towards extending nondiscrimination protections for transgender New Yorkers.”Nearly 20 states have adopted protections for transgender people, according to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights advocacy organization based in Washington. On Thursday, Chad Griffin, the group’s president, also lauded Mr. Cuomo for “his leadership and vision” on equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.The Cuomo administration said the plan would be comprehensive, covering all New Yorkers, not just state workers, and would include so-called public accommodation, a broad legal catchall that includes such places as ice cream parlors, hospitals and golf courses.The executive action signifies an apparent tilt to the left for Mr. Cuomo, a centrist Democrat sometimes faulted within his own party for working too closely with Republicans. And it serves as another example of the governor’s wielding executive power to tackle politically contentious issues, such as ordering the creation of a state wage board to raise the minimum wage for fast-food workers and empowering the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, as a special prosecutor in police-related killings.The increased transgender protections are likely to solidify Mr. Cuomo’s reputation with gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender New Yorkers, who hailed his successful push in 2011 to legalize same-sex marriage in New York.It also comes as the influence of transgender people has surged, in both the political and cultural realms. President Obama and other leading Democrats have lent their support to improving transgender rights, while Caitlyn Jenner’s high-profile transition this year and continuing advocacy for transgender issues has helped push the campaign for equality forward. Activists, however, still report  mistreatment.Mr. Cuomo’s heightened interest in the issue apparently emerged in late August, when he directed his staff to devise a way to extend the rights that did not require a bill passing the divided Legislature.On Thursday, the governor said that the transgender protections would be extended from provisions in the 1945 New York State Human Rights Law, which protects against discrimination on the basis of sex. “In 2015, it is clear that the fair legal interpretation and definition of a person’s sex includes gender identity and gender expression,” he said at the Sheraton.The regulations are likely to be published in the state registry by next week, and will be subject to a 45-day comment period before taking effect.After that, people who feel they have been discriminated against because they are transgender will be able to file complaints with the division or the state attorney general or through the courts, seeking injunctions, monetary damages or other legal relief.New York already had some protections in place on education issues, Sarah Warbelow, the Human Rights Campaign’s legal director, said. And while she said “it always is valuable to have a legislative body to affirm protections,” she added that Mr. Cuomo’s action was unique in its use of executive authority.On Thursday, the governor called transgender people members of “one of the most abused” groups in society, but said the new safeguards would be sweeping.“Our law,” he said, “covers it all.”