https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/21/us/politics/ivanka-trump-parental-leave-plan.html
Ivanka Trump Swayed the President on Family Leave. Congress Is a Tougher Sell. - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Family Leaves,Law and Legislation,Republican Party,Trump  Ivanka,King  Peter T,Trump  Donald J,Democratic Party,House of Representatives,Senate
May 21, 2017
9396
Ivanka Trump has largely cast herself as a behind-the-scenes force for moderation in the West Wing, but this week she will take her first real political risk when her signature parental leave plan is presented to a conservative House majority hostile to any new government mandates.Her proposal for a $25 billion federal paid leave program, part of the budget plan that President Trump will release Tuesday, is a reflection of Ms. Trump’s influence in her father’s inner circle. The plan has been her primary area of interest since the 2016 campaign, when she pushed her father to introduce a version of it on the stump.While she has become a popular figure with some Republicans on Capitol Hill, she will discover how far her sway extends. As she tries to leave her first tangible imprint on the government with a plan that cuts against Republican orthodoxy, a buzz saw will surely await. The question is just how big it will be.“If it is going to be a buzz saw, I hope it’s going to be an intelligent buzz saw,” said Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York. “I think we have to realize that the ground has shifted. I don’t mean the political ground, I mean the family ground.”Ms. Trump, who serves a dual role as one of her father’s closest confidantes and as an assistant to the president in the West Wing, has presented herself as a champion of families, especially working mothers. She told The New York Times in a recent interview that she was trying to pick discrete policy areas to work on in an administration that was swept into power on anti-trade, nationalist sentiment.The plan calls for a new benefit carved out of the unemployment insurance program; the administration would work with states to find ways to pay for it. Aides to Ms. Trump said the goal was a program that did not add to the deficit.For supporters of the plan, it is a point of pride that the Trump administration will be the first Republican administration to put forth such a proposal. It was put together by a working group that included representatives of the Office of Management and Budget and the Labor Department.The plan is not fully fleshed out, which White House aides said would provide some wiggle room to hammer out the details during negotiations.But how far those talks get remains to be seen. The plan is likely to run into trouble with the House Freedom Caucus, which is made up of ultraconservatives who believe in a limited role for government.Mr. King, who has represented a swing suburban district on Long Island for decades, said the Republican Party had to recognize that the contours of families had changed after the recession.“This is more and more becoming absolutely essential,” he said of programs creating options for parents.Ms. Trump might find her plan to be a tough sell in Congress not only with hard-line Republicans, but also with Democrats. A senior aide to a Democratic congressman said that there was deep reluctance in the party to approve anything that would let Mr. Trump paint his administration as moderate.At one point, the top Democrat in the House, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, offered to introduce Ms. Trump to the bipartisan Women’s Caucus.But despite a cordial discussion between Ms. Pelosi and Ms. Trump on election night, the White House has not reached out to Democrats since.An aide to the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, when asked about the Trump budget program, pointed to a bill recently passed by the chamber — sponsored by Representative Martha Roby, Republican of Alabama — that would create a bank of flexible compensatory hours that parents could use for leave.But that plan falls far short of what advocates have sought for years.Mr. Trump’s original plan for six weeks of maternity leave, released during the campaign when he was struggling to gain support among women, excluded fathers, adoptive parents and gay couples. The new plan, which also offers six weeks of paid leave, covers adoptive parents and fathers. Officials did not immediately say whether it would include gay or lesbian couples. The plan also falls short of the amount of paid leave that Democratic activists have said is needed.Business leaders have often criticized paid-leave legislation, calling its costs prohibitive.Still, Mr. King argued that Republicans must adjust to the new economic reality for families. Even if the details of the plan are debated, some version of it is necessary, he said.“We’re supposed to stand for traditional values,” Mr. King said of his party. “Well, the traditional family now is a working mother with kids. I just hope Republicans don’t just jump into this lock-step, knee-jerk reaction of ‘another crazy program.’”