https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/world/europe/soros-orban-hungary-eu-central-european-university.html
Chided by Brussels, Hungary’s Leader Attacks George Soros - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Central European University,European Commission,European Union,Orban  Viktor,Soros  George,Stone  Christopher
April 26, 2017
5133
LONDON — Hungary’s leader issued a blistering attack against the American billionaire and philanthropist George Soros on Wednesday, after the European Union criticized a new Hungarian law that threatens to shut a university founded by Mr. Soros.“I know that the power, size and weight of Hungary is much smaller than that of the financial speculator, George Soros, who is now attacking Hungary,” Prime Minister Viktor Orban told members of the European Parliament in Brussels, in a sarcastic but methodical speech. He called Mr. Soros “an open enemy of the euro,” a reference to the role  currency speculation played in building Mr. Soros’s fortune.It was an exceptional attack by a head of government against a private citizen, albeit a wealthy and powerful one. Mr. Soros has been a frequent target of criticism from right-wing news media organizations like Breitbart and Infowars, which deplore his affinity for Democratic and liberal causes. Supporters of Mr. Soros, who is 86, a native of Hungary and a Holocaust survivor, have detected a whiff of anti-Semitism in the attacks in the United States.In 1991, after the fall of Communism, Mr. Soros founded Central European University, which is based in Budapest and accredited in Hungary and the United States. A law recently rushed through Hungary’s Parliament would force the university to close if it did not open an American campus.American and European officials have condemned the law, which sent a chill through academic circles in Hungary and resulted in protests by tens of thousands of people against Mr. Orban and his embrace of “illiberal democracy,” which puts majority rule over pluralist expression and minority rights.In a letter to Hungary on Wednesday, the European Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, raised objections.“Recent developments in Hungary have got many people worried in the E.U. but also in the outside world. We share those worries and concerns,” Frans Timmermans, the commission’s first vice president, told lawmakers in Brussels, summarizing the letter as Mr. Orban looked on with a stony expression.Mr. Timmermans said the commission was also monitoring Hungary’s harsh new asylum law and a proposal that would intensify scrutiny of nongovernmental organizations that get foreign funding.The commission also criticized what it called false and misleading claims by the Hungarian government, which — like other right-wing populist groups across Europe — has railed against Brussels.“The European Union is a project driven and designed by its member states,” Mr. Timmermans said, reminding Hungary that it had signed on to “the rules of the club.”Mr. Orban insisted on Wednesday that he had not abandoned Europe. He said the law affecting universities was a “small amendment” that merely “unifies the rules that apply to them, closes the possibility of speculations and abuses, demands transparency, and eliminates the privileged position these institutions enjoyed over European universities.” (Observers say the law, while crafted to appear neutral, in reality mostly targets Central European University.)Mr. Orban also tried to portray himself as a victim. “It is like when someone is accused of murder and convicted, while the victim of the alleged crime is alive and well,” he said. “And pointing and shouting ‘murderer’ at the convict himself.”Central European University’s president, Michael Ignatieff, visited Brussels on Tuesday to plead the school’s case. He said he was cautiously optimistic that the European Commission would take action on Wednesday.In a statement, Christopher Stone, the president of the Open Society Foundations, Mr. Soros’s philanthropy, called Mr. Orban’s allegations “patently false.”“Over the past three decades George Soros and the Open Society Foundations have given $400 million to help support justice, education and human rights in Hungary, benefiting hundreds of thousands of Hungarians,” Mr. Stone said.The commission’s action, known as a “letter of formal notice,” is unlikely to yield immediate results. It is essentially a warning to Hungary not to infringe on rights including academic freedom and the right to conduct business or provide services.Hungary’s government has a month to respond.If a member state fails to uphold the rule of law, the commission could in principle invoke sanctions — including what is known in Brussels as the “nuclear option,” the suspension of voting rights.But in reality, any such action would be vulnerable to veto from governments like that of Poland, which has often sided with Mr. Orban.Jan Komarek, a lecturer in the European Institute at the London School of Economics, said in a phone interview from Prague that Mr. Orban’s hard-line stance against the European Union might have little downside at home.Mr. Komarek noted that in 2012, the European Commission warned Hungary over its increasing control of the judiciary, which included a compulsory retirement age for judges. Hungary eventually settled the matter, but by then, several senior judges had been purged from the judiciary, never to return.Mark Dawson, professor of European law and governance at the Hertie School of Governance, said the European Commission’s procedures were too weak, and highly legalistic.“If we have an E.U. that is based on an idea of a political union,” he added, “it has to mean something at the end of the day.”