https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/song-from-somewhere-else-af-harrold-apprentice-witch-james-nicol.html
Two New Novels Evoke the Past and the Future of Fantasy Stories - The New York Times
Books and Literature,The Song From Somewhere Else (Book),Harrold  A F,The Apprentice Witch (Book),Nicol  James (Author)
July 14, 2017
1332
THE SONG FROM SOMEWHERE ELSE By A.F. Harrold Illustrated by Levi Pinfold 217 pp. Bloomsbury. $16.99. (Middle grade; ages 8 to 12)THE APPRENTICE WITCH By James Nicol 318 pp. Chicken House. $16.99. (Middle grade; ages 8 to 12)The landscape of fantasy storytelling is changing rapidly. “World-building,” once the exclusive domain of fantasy novelists, is now a term more closely associated with movie and video game franchises. Special effects now rival anything we could imagine while reading on our own. And so perhaps fantasy literature will be forced to do what every medium must when challenged by something new: adapt. Just as the still camera set painting on a path toward abstraction, fantasy literature seems poised to move away from virtuosic world-building toward more interior and language-based storytelling — the sorts of things books do best.In this context, A. F. Harrold’s new novel, “The Song From Somewhere Else,” seems like a product of both the past and the future.Francesca (Frank) Patel is rescued from bullies one summer afternoon by an unlikely hero: an enormous boy named Nicholas Underbridge. Nicholas is a social pariah, mocked for his strange features and odd manner. Frank accepts an invitation to Nicholas’s home — an inviting refuge full of artwork, cookies and earthy smells — where she hears an otherworldly song echoing from his basement. “It was like overhearing a conversation between your mum and dad about your birthday presents,” Harrold writes. “One you’ve hidden at the top of the stairs to listen in on, purely by accident.”This passage highlights the great strength of Harrold’s book: using language to evoke more than the thing itself. Music pours into ears “like fresh orange juice, sharp and cold and full of vitamins.” Shadowy creatures appear as “scribbled black lines of limbs.” These are the touches of a poet, and they shine.Still, it can be difficult to shed the older obligations of children’s fantasy, and Harrold’s delicate touches are somewhat overwhelmed by the scope of his plot. The otherworldly song draws Frank into a mystery involving, among other things, dimensional rifts, trolls, shape-shifting monsters, talking cats and a shadowy agency dedicated to protecting the fabric of the universe(s). At times, these fantastical conceits are more confusing than compelling. This is unfortunate, because beneath lies a moving story about an outcast child, Nicholas, who has been tragically separated from his mother. Harrold, the author of several novels and poetry books, was himself an orphan, and he writes about parental loss in a way that moves beyond the hackneyed tropes often found in children’s literature. (His “A Poem for My Mum” is at once delightful and devastating.)If Harrold’s book approaches a new frontier in children’s fantasy, James Nicol’s debut, “The Apprentice Witch,” does the opposite: It takes readers on a pleasant trip back to a simpler age. Nicol’s magical world is familiar — full of witches and broomsticks and spells and frightened villagers. Arianwyn Gribble is a young witch who has just come into service under the Civil Witchcraft Authority. The setting is something like wartime England, with witches acting as public servants, dispatched to counties around the “Four Kingdoms” to handle infestations of magical pests.After a disastrous evaluation ceremony, Arianwyn is sent to the far-flung town of Lull — an unglamorous assignment. Arianwyn sets up shop in her “spellorium” and struggles to win over suspicious locals. The book works best when it focuses on the workaday challenges of witchcraft. This includes exterminating a nest of “snotlings,” cleaning up stray hexes and rehabilitating an injured “moon hare.” All the while, a darker threat from the Great Wood lurks just beyond the border.Arianwyn is a likable hero, with well-drawn struggles — both professional and personal. The novel wears its conventions like a cozy sweater, adding little new to a conversation that has begun to move on. Adult readers may not find the mystery plot terribly mysterious, but younger readers should be too busy enjoying the world to mind.