https://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/09/us/politics/richard-mourdocks-many-pursuits-dont-include-bipartisanship.html
Richard Mourdock’s Many Pursuits Don’t Include Bipartisanship - The New York Times
Mourdock  Richard E,Lugar  Richard G,United States Politics and Government,Tea Party Movement,Republican Party,Primaries and Caucuses,Indiana,Elections  Senate
May 8, 2012
4965
The man who deposed the Republican foreign policy conscience of the Senate is a 60-year-old homebody and former geologist who loves riding motorcycles, running marathons and thumbing through history books in bed. He is best known in political circles for trying — unsuccessfully — to block the auto bailout that saved thousands of jobs in Indiana, the state he seeks to represent in Congress.Should he prevail in November, Richard Earl Mourdock, who defeated Senator Richard G. Lugar in Indiana’s Republican primary on Tuesday, might also replace Speaker John A. Boehner as the man most likely to cry during a floor speech.“It’s a beautiful thing at 60 to know who you are,” Mr. Mourdock said in a telephone interview, referring to his propensity for tearing up on the stump when he talks about the nation’s debt. “There are things that touch me deeply. And there’s a part of me that wishes I wasn’t doing this. I love nothing more than riding a motorcycle around southern Indiana on a Sunday afternoon, and now I won’t be doing that for a while. But I am doing this for a reason.”That reason, Mr. Mourdock said, is to cease the efforts at bipartisanship that defined the six-term tenure of Mr. Lugar and push for a more conservative agenda among Republicans on Capitol Hill.Mr. Mourdock’s support from Tea Party groups — which helped frame Mr. Lugar, 80, as an out-of-touch Methuselah who does not even live in their state — is deep.But Democrats who try to portray Mr. Mourdock, a two-term state treasurer, as Christine O’Donnell in a necktie may fall short. He is a far more seasoned politician than Ms. O’Donnell, whose Tea Party candidacy cost Republicans a Senate seat in Delaware in 2010. He has run for office numerous times, including three races for the House; easily won his last election; and methodically campaigned to oust Mr. Lugar, who a year ago seemed untouchable.A more apt comparison may be Senator Mike Lee of Utah, a conservative Republican who picked off Robert F. Bennett in the 2010 primary with the heft of grass-roots supporters. Mr. Mourdock said Mr. Lee, though young enough, at 40, to be his son, was his role model in the Senate.Mr. Mourdock, whose Democratic opponent is Representative Joe Donnelly, is decidedly to the right of the man he bested. He is strongly opposed to the Dream Act, for instance, a measure that would pave a path to citizenship for some immigrants brought to the United States illegally as minors, and one that Mr. Lugar once supported. Nor would he have supported the bank bailout, which Mr. Lugar voted for, or given nods to judges Mr. Lugar helped confirm.He constantly attacked Mr. Lugar’s willingness to work with Democrats on foreign policy and other matters.“I’ve said it many times,” Mr. Mourdock said. “This is a historic time, and the most powerful people in both parties are so opposed to one another that one side simply has to win out over the other.”That sort of talk has Democrats seething. “He says there’s a problem, Mourdock does, of too much bipartisanship and he can be counted on to obstruct,” Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York said on Tuesday. “Well, there are a lot of things wrong in Washington, but too much compromise is certainly not one of them.”Mr. Mourdock said a pair of his earliest memories from his childhood in Ohio involved episodes that presaged his two careers. “I used to dig around the sandbox and pull out pieces of coal and show them to my mother,” he said, “and she used to say that’s how I must have known I was going to be a geologist.” The second, he said, was going to an elementary school in 1956 with his mother, “who held my hand and took me into a booth and pulled a lever for the president,” sparking an interest in politics.He moved to Indiana for graduate school, and after receiving his master’s of science degree at Ball State University in 1975, he pursued geology, rising to vice president at the Koester Companies, a mining business in Evansville. But his interest in politics could not be contained.Mr. Mourdock ran for the House in 1988, 1990 and 1992; he also failed in his 2002 bid for the nomination for Indiana secretary of state and in a 2004 race for the Vanderburgh County Council, the county’s fiscal body. He did get elected to the Vanderburgh County Commission, the executive branch, in 1994 and 1998, and won the state treasurer’s job in 2006. He was re-elected in 2010.His name entered the national Republican discussion in 2009 when he became the country’s only government official to push back against the Obama administration’s auto bailout in court. Secured bondholders were forced to accept 29 cents on the dollar for their investments, which outraged Mr. Mourdock because three state funds — two managed by him — owned $42.5 million in Chrysler bonds.Many lawmakers and business owners, some of them Republican, saw the challenge as folly since Indiana has so many autoworkers, the legal action was costly and a federal bankruptcy court and an appeals court rejected it.Does he regret it now? “Absolutely not,” Mr. Mourdock said. “The law matters. And the fact was our retirees and teachers had their property stolen.”