https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/15/business/mutfund/travis-kalanick-william-ackman-apologies.html
Apologies. Really. And I Will Definitely Grow Up. - The New York Times
Ackman  William A,Kalanick  Travis,Apologies,Stocks and Bonds
April 15, 2017
3643
Everybody loves getting an apology. Nobody enjoys making one, especially in public life, where leaders tend to see admitting an error as a sign of weakness.That’s why I’m amazed by what has happened in the last couple of months: A captain of industry apologized for something. No, wait — two of them did! And then an epidemic of apologies started spreading.One C.E.O., Travis Kalanick of Uber, apologized for — well, basically building an “always be hustlin’” business culture that looked less like a responsible multibillion-dollar corporation than a frat kegger. (Honest, “always be hustlin’” is one of the company’s 14 core values. You tell me what it means.) As my colleague Mike Isaac has reported, Mr. Kalanick promised to “grow up,” which at 40 is not a terrible idea.But that apology wasn’t nearly as startling as the one from William A. Ackman, a contentious hedge-fund owner who issued a heavy-duty mea culpa to his investors after losing $4 billion.Let’s slow down a moment. That was dollars: four billion of them.And that’s how much Mr. Ackman lost on one investment, in Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, also known as “troubled drug company Valeant.” Previously, he had lost quite a bundle (at least on paper) on his efforts to bet against Herbalife, a supplements company he compared to a pyramid scheme.Herbalife denied Mr. Ackman’s allegations and fought back, hard; last year, the company signed a $200 million settlement with the Federal Trade Commission and agreed to restructure its business. The company declined to talk with me about Mr. Ackman, who continues to maintain a short position in the company — meaning he continues to bet against Herbalife.As he told shareholders last month, “We remain short Herbalife because we believe its intrinsic value is meaningfully below the current share price, and we believe the stock should eventually decline to zero.”Fortune Magazine estimates Mr. Ackman’s losses in the Herbalife mess range into the hundreds of millions of dollars.That used to seem like a lot of money, but the Valeant debacle makes the problems with Herbalife look sort of puny.Today, Mr. Ackman is a true Wall Street titan, one whose investment went down like the Titanic. It makes you wonder: What does it take to lose $4 billion on a single company, anyway?I’ve lost money in my time (lost a fair bit of change through a hole in my pocket, got out of a co-op apartment at a loss), but this is in such a different league that he’s making me feel good about myself. You could call it shekelfreude, if you will.In the days after the Valeant loss became known, Mr. Ackman tried to make it clear that under no circumstances was any of this Mr. Ackman’s fault. His company issued a statement saying that his firm, Pershing Square, “has generated billions of dollars of profits for its investors and double the stock market returns since the inception of the firm inclusive of our large loss on Valeant.”“Unfortunately,” the statement continued, “we cannot guarantee that every one of our investments will be successful. We regret the loss which occurred due to Valeant board and management decisions made prior to our active engagement with the company.”Mr. Ackman was so good at deflecting blame that I thought he might be in the wrong line of work. With that attitude, he’s a natural for politics. After all, in politics, all mistakes are made by overzealous aides. But then he spoiled it by actually apologizing. In March, he called the stake in Valeant “a huge mistake,” and told investors, “I deeply and profoundly apologize.”Even so, he seemed to turn his mea culpa into a they-a culpa, writing, “In retrospect, we misjudged the prior management team, and this contributed to our loss.”Was that enough? I called Lanny J. Davis, a former White House special counsel during the Clinton administration who has founded a law firm, Davis Goldberg & Galper, that specializes in crisis response.He said he has no inside knowledge of Mr. Ackman’s business or of what led to Mr. Ackman bringing out the scourge, but said: “The apology is too little too late. If you’re doing crisis management, it’s not enough to say ‘I’m sorry’ — though that is a good first step.” Instead, he said, the apology has to move things forward. “Here are the facts, here is why I’m apologizing, and here is what I learned so it won’t happen again.”He added, “If you attack one week and apologize the next week, you’ve got to fill in the gap and be more transparent.”Mr. Davis had helped me understand why an apology that seemed so strong on the surface felt a little hollow on a second reading. I decided to delve further and got in touch with Susan McCarthy, a writer and co-founder of a great blog that’s all about apologies, SorryWatch.Ms. McCarthy read through Mr. Ackman’s apology. She, too, found it at war with itself: the boasting about past success and then the mea culpa for the losses.“A sort of bragpology,” she said. She cited the line stating: “My approach to mistakes is that I personally assume 100 percent of the responsibility on behalf of the firm while sharing the credit for our success.” Ms. McCarthy said, “The wriggling around on I/we, and the repeated blaming of the prior management team make it look like he’s having a hard time taking that 100 percent responsibility.”We can all learn from captains of industry, from their achievements but especially from their colossal mistakes. (Entire college classes will be devoted someday to the debacle at United, when the airline removed a passenger from a plane by force. The apologies for that one keep coming. And then there’s Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, who is getting plenty of practice saying, “I’m sorry.” )Those of us who are not great must also know how to apologize. I intend to do so frequently. And I’ll start with you, dear reader:Please let me apologize for this article, if it did not make you laugh out loud at least once. Of course, if it did not, this is undoubtedly your fault as a reader without a sense of humor.However, it does not absolve me of my responsibility. The yuck stops here. Just as long as there aren’t any real consequences.I hope to do better in the future. I have a plan in place to be 10 percent funnier in every column on the world of investing, quarter over quarter. How? By being funnier. If you are smart, you will see.And I will grow up. I’m not saying when.