https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/20/us/politics/republican-freedom-caucuss-revolt-in-house-is-stoked-back-home.html
Republican Freedom Caucus’s Revolt in House Is Stoked Back Home - The New York Times
United States,United States Politics and Government,Brat  David A,Harris  Andrew P,Hice  Jody (1960- ),Schweikert  David (1962- ),Amash  Justin (1980- ),Tea Party Movement,House Freedom Caucus,House of Representatives,Republican Party,Congress
Oct. 19, 2015
3835
When 87 Republican freshmen arrived in the House of Representatives in 2011 after an election swayed by the Tea Party movement swept Republicans back into the majority, the question was simple: Would they change Washington, or would Washington change them?Four years later, the answer seems clear. Buoyed by a vastly increased majority — Republicans now hold 247 House seats — highly gerrymandered districts and the rise of an intricately coordinated web of conservative media, the new right has had a significant impact on public policy and the ways of Washington.Discretionary government spending, the original target of the group, has dropped to 6.5 percent of the economy in 2015, from 9.1 percent in 2010, according to the Congressional Budget Office. Social issues, which had seemed to be receding in legislative fights, have returned full force.It is also much harder to get things done. The group set off a government shutdown in 2013, came within hours of shuttering the Department of Homeland Security last winter, recently pushed Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio to announce his resignation and blocked his preferred replacement.But the agenda of the most conservative wing of the House, as personified by the roughly 40 members of the Freedom Caucus, has evolved substantially since 2011.Once unified almost solely around the goal of reducing government spending, the group has expanded its targets to an array of Obama administration policies, most notably immigration this year. At first libertarian — the group early on torpedoed a routine vote on the Patriot Act — it has become more interventionist. While Planned Parenthood has long been in the cross hairs of conservatives, its funding has become a central point of conflict.But it is increasingly clear that what the Freedom Caucus wants more than specific legislation is power.Its members want a greater voice in how legislation comes together and how the House functions, areas traditionally directed by a leadership team of seasoned lawmakers.They have endorsed a candidate for speaker, Representative Daniel Webster of Florida, who, while not as conservative as many of them, seems attractive largely because of his willingness to do as they say. Their long list of demands of a new speaker has few legislative goals, and focuses instead on getting more authority by changing the rules of the House.The fury with which they have challenged their own leaders has largely been embraced by their constituents. Those views poured forth in interviews during last week’s congressional recess in five districts represented by members of the Freedom Caucus.“The activists, the hard-core folks who come to everything, that represent that small percentage of the base — they are just very excited,” said Representative Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, an original leader of the new right. “They feel like for the first time something has changed in Washington, D.C.”The hard-liners come from all over the country, but they are concentrated in more exurban and rural areas in the South and Rocky Mountain West. But their unity so far has been unstinting in wanting change.ASHLAND, Va. — The potency of the hard-line Republican revolt revealed itself here a little more than a year ago when Dave Brat, an obscure economics professor in this sleepy college town, toppled Eric Cantor, the second-ranking member of the House, in a primary. But to talk to Mr. Brat’s supporters, the campaign has never stopped.“A.B.C.” — Anyone but Cantor — Mr. Brat’s backers said last year. Now, they say, that was only a start: Republicans need to purge any career politician who capitulates to the Democrats if the party wants to address issues like the federal debt, the treatment of veterans and abortion.“I think something is needed to shake up the Republican Party,” said Lynda Sprouse, who owns an insulation company. “It’s typical of all politicians that they get to Washington and they join the old boys’ club.”Mr. Brat, 51, who taught at Randolph-Macon College here for almost two decades, campaigned far to Mr. Cantor’s right. He leveraged the debate in Congress over immigration to argue that Mr. Cantor had become captive to the Washington political establishment and had forgotten about his constituents in Virginia’s Seventh Congressional District.The message found ready purchase among voters in the district, which runs from Richmond and its suburbs to the rural reaches of Washington, an expanse that is largely white, deeply Republican and mostly exurban. The area, a cradle of the American Revolution and then of the Civil War, has evolved into a Republican stronghold embedded in a swing state.The uprising that ousted Mr. Cantor was born of anger from voters like Randy Wingfield, 54, who owns a painting contracting business. He said he had written to Mr. Cantor several times asking for help and had not received a reply.Mr. Brat, he said, could not be more different from the man he replaced.“He’s standing up for what we want here,” Mr. Wingfield said as he walked up to an “OktoBRATfest” fund-raiser for the congressman.And if it required a government debt default or shutdown, it was all right by him.Mr. Brat has made his views vivid, putting out a list of 10 commitments he expects any potential speaker to make, including opposing amnesty for illegal immigrants and overhauling House rules to reduce the power of the speaker.Mr. Brat declined several requests to be interviewed, saying he was too busy.Between constituent events last week, he did attend a rally for Donald J. Trump in Richmond, where he got a shout-out from the stage.“There’s a guy — he shows you can do things,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s never happened before, what he did! I just give him, just a lot of credit.”— Nicholas FandosMONTICELLO, Ga. – A lot of people in this small town, an hour’s drive from Atlanta, get their news from talk radio.“We all listen to WSB,” said Marion Pearson, the owner of a photo studio, who was at a “Coffee and Conversation” recently with Representative Jody Hice at the local Chamber of Commerce.“In the morning we have Herman Cain out of Atlanta,” Ms. Pearson said. “Then we have Rush from noon to 3, and then Hannity from 3 to 5, and then — oh, what’s that guy’s name? — the RedState guy, Erick Erickson, from 5 to 7.”Georgia’s 10th District got Mr. Hice, 55, from talk radio, too. Before seeking office in 2014, Mr. Hice, a Southern Baptist minister, had his own show, syndicated on 400 stations, on which listeners heard him weigh in against Islam and homosexuality and for gun rights and traditional Christian values.Constituents say they do not agree with Mr. Hice on everything but trust him to represent them.“He represents my values,” said Bruce Henry, a Jasper County commissioner. “We’re a rural community. He’s a Bible-believing man. He believes in the Second Amendment. He’s honest.”As for the willingness of Mr. Hice and the Freedom Caucus to shut down the government, Mr. Henry said: “I just think we need to be firmer, put our foot down and not do so much deal-making. Sometimes, you have to take it to that point, especially if it was over the funding of Planned Parenthood.”Like Georgia itself, the 10th District was long a Democratic stronghold. “When we moved here 40 years ago, the Democratic primary was the election,” said Kathy Mudd, the editor of The Monticello News.Since 1994, it has been the reverse. While the demographics of much of Georgia are rapidly changing, the district remains more than 70 percent white, and the politics have moved further right. Last year, Mr. Hice was the most conservative of seven Republican primary candidates.At the Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Hice stood amid a small herd of stuffed deer and told an approving audience that he was still fighting to block the Iran nuclear deal, cut funding for Planned Parenthood and keep federal spending caps in place.In an interview later, he also said he would not vote to raise the debt ceiling, no matter the economic consequences. “Where does the insanity stop?” he asked. “We have got to cut spending and live within our means.”Mr. Hice’s positions add up to a larger view of the country he would like to see, which he painted for constituents in Flovilla, Ga., where he met with wounded veterans.“Our constitutional principles, freedom and liberty, respect, tolerance for one another,” Mr. Hice said, “but where we have a government of the people, for the people, where government is limited in its intrusiveness in our lives, and freedom is able to flourish and businesses are able to do what they do without being suffocated through regulations and taxation — the America that you and I grew up in.”— David M. HerszenhornSCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The Tea Party Scottsdale meeting began with a prayer intoned by the group’s secretary, Sunny Forrest-Brown, to about 30 people gathered before an American flag — hands clasped, heads bowed. “Confer wisdom on our lawmakers that they remember their duties to everyday citizens like us as they push for the changes necessary to protect our freedoms,” she said.Her words resonated with Dan Farley, a real estate broker and organic farmer, who heartily agreed. “The decisions on the federal level just don’t represent the will of the people,” he said. And with Jay Lawrence, a longtime radio talk show host serving his first term as state representative, who said that he kept his focus on his district and that there was “no point worrying about what happens in Washington.”They were part of a welcoming crowd for Representative David Schweikert, a member of the Freedom Caucus who has been waging war with his own Republican leadership in the House. Running on his 12th cup of cappuccino, Mr. Schweikert bounded to the front of the room.First elected to Congress in the Tea Party wave of 2010, Mr. Schweikert represents a district, the Sixth, that spills from the northern edge of Scottsdale into a clump of conservative suburbs. They include Paradise Valley, which was home to Barry Goldwater, and Fountain Hills, home to Sheriff Joe Arpaio.The questions from his constituents were tinged with hostility, but the animus was not directed at him. “Instead of calling them liberals, progressives, why not call them socialists?” one man asked. How could he “prevent more damage,” another man put it, “until Obama leaves office?”“Here in Arizona, there are four of us looking to change the process,” said Mr. Schweikert, 53, referring to three other representatives from Arizona who have joined the Freedom Caucus. “When other Republicans come shooting at us,” he continued, “we need you to back us up.”He was unsparing in his criticism of House Republican leaders, who, Mr. Schweikert said, suffered from “an incredible void of creativity” and exercised their power “only for power’s sake.”The contest for House speaker “is not about an individual, but about the policies and procedures we live under,” he said. “We have to push and push and push to make sure the House is an institution that does its job well.”Legislation, he said, should stall or advance based on merit. The crowd cheered.Then Mr. Schweikert jauntily said his goodbyes and walked outside.“That genuflecting thing gets a little old,” he said, quick-stepping across the parking lot to his pickup truck. “We need a disrupter.”— Fernanda SantosGRAND RAPIDS, Mich. — Tucked away in a local government building, the town-hall-style meeting offered constituents of Representative Justin Amash a chance to share what was on their minds: gratitude.“First I want to say thank you for the great job you’re doing, and thank you for helping ease Boehner out of there,” said a man sitting in the first row.Mr. Amash, a Republican easily re-elected last year, soaked in the praise, a welcome departure from the accusations of obstructionism that dog him and others in the Freedom Caucus in Washington.“I don’t know if he’d describe it as ‘easing him out of there,’” he said. “But thanks.”Mr. Amash represents Michigan’s Third District, which is anchored in the state’s most prosperous metropolitan area, yet many of his constituents fret that Congress is stalled as the Obama administration rolls along unchecked.Constituents placed little blame on Mr. Amash, 35, who has spent most of his nearly five years in Congress fighting his own party’s leadership. He criticized Mr. Boehner for using “intimidation and coercion” to compel members to vote his way.“The problem isn’t that he wasn’t conservative enough,” Mr. Amash said. “It’s that he doesn’t follow the process.”Not everyone was buying Mr. Amash’s answer. To Robin Daning, 65, a Grand Rapids resident who voted for Mr. Amash in 2010, the grievances sounded slight.“What did he really do that’s wrong that hasn’t been done ever since I’ve been alive?” Mr. Daning said of Mr. Boehner. “The sausage is ugly, and that’s the way it works.”Describing himself as a former Republican, Mr. Daning acknowledged that he might be in the minority in his frustrations with the Freedom Caucus.“On my block of 17 houses, I cannot find one person that agrees with what they’re doing,” he said. “But I come to these meetings, and then I’ll find them. That’s one of the reasons that I come, because I want to look around and say, ‘Who are these people?’”Nearly 85 percent white and encompassing part of southwest Michigan, Mr. Amash’s district has long leaned Republican. The airport is one of many local institutions that bear the name of its most famous former resident, President Gerald R. Ford.While defying tidy characterizations — Grand Rapids is strongly Democratic, but its suburbs and exurbs are heavily Republican — constituents at the meeting were unified in the belief that Congress could not get things done.And Dave Zondervan, 71, said he hoped the Freedom Caucus would continue to grow.“We’d all sail along smoothly if we didn’t have any obstructionists, but then again, where have we gone the last 50 years?” he said. “So maybe it’s time that we do have an obstructionist.”— Emmarie HuettemanSTEVENSVILLE, Md. — Representative Andy Harris has the one attribute that matters to Larry Cate. “He’s a Republican,” Mr. Cate said, unfurling a smile as long as the nearby Chesapeake Bay Bridge.And that was really enough. Mr. Cate did not delve into Mr. Harris’s legislative agenda — revising regulations for temporary work visas, undoing environmental regulations, increasing military spending and keeping residents of the District of Columbia from obtaining marijuana.Mr. Cate, a 49-year-old builder, is satisfied simply to be represented by a Republican in a heavily Democratic state. And in many respects, Mr. Harris has Democrats, who drew his heavily gerrymandered district, to thank for the office that he holds.That is the story of many of the members of the Freedom Caucus who have muscled their way into outsize power in Congress: Their districts have been drawn in such a way as to almost ensure a hard-line conservative winner.Democrats put the state’s most Republican areas in Mr. Harris’s district, which includes the entire Eastern Shore, dominated by seafood, tourism and agriculture, and the working-class and suburban areas that hug the Pennsylvania border. The district, the First, stretches from the elegant boating town of St. Michaels to the hardened suburbs of Baltimore. This made some Democrats safer but gave Mr. Harris a district in which Republicans hold a 14-percentage-point advantage over Democrats among registered voters.But, like many Republicans in heavily Republican districts, Mr. Harris, 58, feels the pressure to move to the right with each primary.“I was pretty conservative before I came to Congress,” said Mr. Harris, a former state senator and an anesthesiologist. “The current challenger I have is someone being more conservative who criticizes my vote for John Boehner as speaker.”He added: “I feel strongly that we should go to nonpartisan redistricting. Gerrymandering clearly creates hyperpartisan districts.”Mr. Harris insists that he does not want a more conservative nation, simply a greater voice in how bills are put together in Congress.“I think people have misinterpreted what our goal is,” he said. “We proved it when we endorsed for speaker the most liberal of the three candidates. I personally believe since the House is right of center overall, the result will be right-of-center legislation, but occasionally there will be Democrats who get to offer their ideas, too.”— Jennifer Steinhauer