https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/29/sunday-review/the-women-who-still-like-trump.html
The Women Who Still Like Trump - The New York Times
Women and Girls,United States Politics and Government,Polls and Public Opinion,Trump  Donald J
April 29, 2017
7900
After the election, exit polls suggested that 53 percent of white women had voted for Donald Trump. I interviewed about a dozen white women who explained why they voted for him. At the 100-day mark, most pronounce themselves pleased and believe the country is moving in the right direction.Not one expressed concern that his administration might hurt women’s rights — most dismissed objections of those on the left about how few women he had appointed to his cabinet; the potential defunding of Planned Parenthood, which several mistakenly believed received federal funding for abortions; and even the viral photos showing roomfuls of men proposing to remove maternity care and mammogram screenings from required health insurance benefits.They are willing to give President Trump time to deliver results, and uniformly blame Congress and out-of-line judges for blocking him on health care, immigration and other initiatives. Some are critical of his travel ban, his tweets and his impulsivity, and some worry about entanglements in foreign wars, but their biggest plea is that he remember they elected him to be an unconventional politician.Here are excerpts, condensed and edited, from their comments.Voter: Pam Cornett, 46 as of December. Formerly self-employed, now working in customer service.Home: Chattanooga, Tenn.I think it’s going great. He’s done exactly what he said he’s going to do. I think that’s amazing. I think we actually have a president who has balls. I feel like America’s safer with him as president. I feel that he actually cares about America and will do what he says.I think our economy is making a turnaround. People are more confident because of him being president. The stock market’s going up as well.I don’t think that he’s out for popular opinion. I think that he’s going to do what he thinks is best. He doesn’t care what you think. I’m kind of that way, too, so I can respect that.Voter: Deb Alighire, 44. Engineer and program manager at Mopar, a subsidiary of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles.Home: Clarkston, Mich.Right away he was meeting with the Big Three; I remember feeling like my heart warmed. Somebody cares about us. Then I see him getting on the helicopter with his grandkids and that’s very endearing.I’m happy with the H-1B visa reform. A friend got laid off, he was watching all his co-workers get laid off sequentially; they’re being replaced by H-1B visa people.We got to be able to get birth control if we don’t have money. That was my love of Obama, my birth control was free. We need to care about 50 percent of the population and what they’re going to do. Especially the group of women that don’t have the means to pay for it. Jesus, say you’re working at Walmart and then you have a baby, what are you going to do? You’ve got to have the care.On his tweeting, it’s almost like the sell talk — we’re going to win. Trying to rally the troops. I think that’s why he acts the way he does, the phrases he repeats, that’s how he managed his companies. It makes sense, it’s more of a corporate thing to do.Voter: Taylor Davis, 28. Works in a small business.Home: Enfield, Conn.Feminism feels very exclusive — if you don’t vote the same or feel the same on these platform issues like pro-choice, you can’t be part of their club. We have to give women voice and weave them into politics. We can have equality with men, and it doesn’t have to be equal balance. I’m all for women getting ahead in politics or business. I’m not a self-hating woman.Now that I’ve become a Republican, I’ve heard a lot of outrageously racist things, from both sides, and I’m not happy about that. I am very disappointed that there is so much of a divide. He’s focusing a lot on crimes and gangs, law and order, but that’s not the only facet when it comes to minorities in this country, specifically African-Americans. I’m worried about mass incarceration rates and so on. A huge reason I didn’t vote for Hillary Clinton: incarceration of minorities went up under Bill Clinton.Voter: Robin Mueller, 42 as of December. Preschool teacher.Home: Sterling Heights, Mich.I like how he’s handling Syria, North Korea and China. I agree with the peace-through-strength idea. The gassing of innocent women and children is very disturbing to me.Especially after seeing what is going on in Syria, to turn them away, especially the women and the children, we’ve got to figure out something. This area has a lot of Syrian refugees. I met a little girl. She was just a sweet beautiful child, you could tell by her face, she did not have it good where she came from. She just kept hugging me and grabbing on to me.I’m not delusional to think that terrorist groups won’t send in people with these large groups of refugees here. You have to figure out a good way to fix this and keep America safe as well. Why wasn’t Saudi Arabia on that list? I know why they weren’t. We all know why. There are countries that we don’t want to upset or make angry because we think we need them. I was not a fan of the executive order, the way it was done.Voter: Katie Holder, 39. Owns a weight-loss business.Home: Gulf Shores, Ala.Well, I’ve been pretty pleased. Kind of disappointed that we haven’t really come together as a country yet.If they’re sitting here spying on us in our homes, then why wouldn’t they spy on a major candidate? They were spying on Hillary, why wouldn’t they spy on him? I’m saying it wouldn’t shock me. Not one bit.I think, unfortunately, somebody needs to take away the Twitter. I like that he’s able to talk to us, but for the love of God, somebody take away the phone. He would be a lot more effective that way. I don’t have a filter, but I’m not the president of the freaking United States.I would like to see, as far as talking about Ivanka’s business, cut that out. Talking about “The Apprentice,” that kind of stuff, you’re done with that, at least for the next four years. Stop. You got much bigger fish to fry. It doesn’t help your case any at all. Of course, he’s new to being president and he’s new to politics. That just comes with learning a job, any job.Voter: Rebecca Gregory, 47. Nurse.Home: Roseville, Mich.He’s allowing the states to do what they want on Planned Parenthood, not defunding it on a federal level. I would like Planned Parenthood to be funded, and I’m sure in some states it won’t be because of that. Being a Republican candidate, I don’t see he has much choice on that.It’s at least nice to see law enforcement given props during speeches and being supported — that’s a nice change.I’m disappointed in the fact that he’s getting so much pushback on everything he tries to pass. He’s good at wheeling and dealing and offering things, if that’s what it takes. I’d like to see him reach out to Democrats, and I’d like to see them listening. There’s got to be compromise on both sides. We don’t have to like each other, but we have to work together. I’d want to see something happen and quick with the A.C.A. — it’s not going well. When that falters, people will be without insurance and without health care. I’m concerned about that.Voter: Guzin Karides, 50. Former lawyer, homemaker.Home: Virginia BeachWhat is Congress doing? They have failed on the health care bill. And they couldn’t get one voted on when they had a majority. It’s a little disgusting.Why people like me love Trump so much — he doesn’t stand for it. We put someone in who’s not necessarily so Republican, it was more that he was for common-sense government.I agree with what he did with the travel ban. I don’t think it’s a Muslim ban. He’s fulfilling his promise to protect the border and build a wall. Hopefully he’s learned who to count on, who not to count on in the last 100 days.I love his tweets. He’s holding the media’s feet to the fire. He has a way to get his point of view out. I think Trump sometimes exaggerates things, but I don’t think he outright lies. Most rational people know what he means.He wanted to prove he was different than Obama with one big mother bomb. But don’t get us dragged into these wars. I hope he stays an American president, not trying to become a world president, just because McCain and neocons would praise him. I hope he’s strong enough and stays thick-skinned enough. I imagine it’s very difficult for him to stick true to what he promises. He doesn’t always hear from us, the people.I really do want him to spend more time in the White House and not to go to Florida so much. The people that put him in office need him to be there, and not travel so much to where he’s probably more comfortable. You’ve got to suck it up. If that’s my worst criticism, that’s not so bad.I’d give him an A-, B+, Congress a failing grade.