http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/10/world/americas/mexican-tied-to-killing-of-dea-agent-is-freed.html
Mexican Tied to Killing of D.E.A. Agent Is Freed - The New York Times
Caro Quintero  Rafael,Quintero  Rafael Caro,Murders and Attempted Murders,Kidnapping,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Mexico,Camarena  Enrique,Drug Enforcement Administration
Aug. 9, 2013
8308
MEXICO CITY —  A drug kingpin convicted of masterminding the murder of an American drug agent in 1985 — a killing that helped accelerate the modern drug war and that remains an emotional touchstone for law enforcement agents — was unexpectedly released from prison on Friday after his conviction was overturned.The decision caught the American authorities by surprise. A Mexican federal judge freed the drug lord, Rafael Caro Quintero, after ruling that he had been improperly tried in federal court rather than state court for the murder of Enrique Camarena, known as Kiki, a Drug Enforcement Administration agent who was abducted, tortured and killed.Mr. Caro Quintero, a pioneer in mass producing and distributing marijuana and transporting South American cocaine, had 12 years left on his 40-year sentence. He was notified of his release at 2 a.m. Friday and promptly disappeared sometime after.It was among the head-scratching developments in a case that could inject new tension between American and Mexican authorities, who are still working out how to cooperate under a new Mexican president wary of deep American involvement in Mexican drug cases.The Drug Enforcement Administration “is deeply troubled” and “will vigorously continue its efforts to ensure Caro-Quintero faces charges in the United States for the crimes he committed,” the agency said in a statement, though it was unclear if an extradition request was pending.The Justice Department filed conspiracy and racketeering charges against Mr. Caro Quintero in May 1987 related to the killing, and “in the years since, the Department of Justice has continued to make clear to Mexican authorities the continued interest of the United States in securing Caro Quintero’s extradition so that he might face justice in the United States,” it said in a statement.Current and former drug agents recall the death of Mr. Camarena, which galvanized antidrug campaigns, as if it had occurred yesterday. The D.E.A. office in San Diego is named after Mr. Camarena, as is a school there and a conference room in the American Embassy in Mexico City. The story was the subject of a popular 1990 television mini-series, “Drug Wars: The Camarena Story,” starring Benicio Del Toro. Red Ribbon Week, a popular drug prevention campaign, originated as a commemoration of him.“At no time should Rafael Caro Quintero see the light of day as a free man,” said Joel Gutensohn, a former D.E.A. agent and president of the Association of Former Federal Narcotics Agents. “We find it astounding that after 28 years his guilt should still be at issue. The release of this violent butcher is but another example of how good-faith efforts by the U.S. to work with the Mexican government can be frustrated by those powerful dark forces that work in the shadows of the Mexican ‘justice’ system.”Although Mr. Caro Quintero had other charges pending, the judge ruled that his 28 years in prison would count toward any sentence for those charges.The release followed a series of other such cases, as Mexican courts strive to enforce due process more strictly in a country where forced confessions, torture and prolonged detention on trumped-up charges are common.But Mr. Camarena’s case has long stood out on both sides of the border as a rare, deliberate murder of an American drug agent on foreign soil that shifted the ground in the drug war and for a time plunged United States-Mexico relations to a low. In the aftermath, Mexico and the United States agreed to work more closely on drug enforcement, ultimately increasing cooperation to unprecedented levels under the previous Mexican president.After the murder, the United States was determined to find the killers, accusing Mexican officials of botching the case and going as far as to pay bounty hunters in Mexico to abduct a doctor believed to have been involved in Mr. Camarena’s torture. He was later absolved of the crime and returned to Mexico, though several others associated with the case were convicted in the United States on drug and other charges.Mr. Caro Quintero, head of a drug-trafficking empire based in Jalisco State, where Mr. Camarena worked and had uncovered a large marijuana plantation, was believed to have ordered the killing. He fled to Costa Rica but was detained there, returned to Mexico in 1985, and convicted and sentenced in 1989.The governor of Jalisco State, Aristóteles Sandoval, said Friday that Mr. Caro Quintero had the right to resume his life there, like any citizen.