http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/09/nyregion/scrutiny-for-suffolk-countys-district-attorney-amid-a-us-inquiry.html
Scrutiny for Suffolk County’s District Attorney Amid a U.S. Inquiry - The New York Times
Suffolk County (NY),District Attorneys,Spota  Thomas J,Burke  James (1964- ),McPartland  Christopher,Justice Department,Ethics and Official Misconduct
Feb. 8, 2016
8447
There are few elected government officials alive with the ignoble distinction of having violated the 13th Amendment.But Thomas J. Spota, the district attorney for Suffolk County, N.Y., was once found to have offended the constitutional prohibition against slavery by prosecuting a group of nurses for quitting their jobs at a nursing home. An appeals court ordered Mr. Spota to drop the charges, which interfered with “the nurses’ constitutional right to be free from involuntary service.”If the case seems a bizarre bit of overreaching, it is not the only one that has raised questions about how Mr. Spota, a Democrat, has wielded prosecutorial power since he took over as the chief prosecutor on eastern Long Island in 2002. Lately, he has found his office faced with accusations of employing strong-arm tactics, using questionable surveillance methods and making prosecutorial decisions colored by local political considerations.Over the past two months, Mr. Spota’s office has come under the scrutiny of the Justice Department. It is investigating the conduct of two of his protégés — the county’s former police chief and the district attorney’s top anticorruption prosecutor — and any role they may have had in what the department has described as a conspiracy to obstruct justice, three officials familiar with the investigation said.The federal investigation began in 2013 with a narrow focus: to determine whether the police chief, James Burke, had roughed up a thief for stealing a duffel bag full of pornographic DVDs, sex toys and cigars that belonged to the chief.In December, Mr. Burke was arrested on federal charges related to that assault, as well as what federal authorities describe as a conspiracy to cover it up by persuading detectives and other officers to lie about it. He has pleaded not guilty, and is being held without bail.The federal investigation has since widened to include Mr. Spota’s office, where Mr. Burke worked for a decade as a top investigator before being named the county’s police chief. The inquiry appears to be examining whether anyone in the district attorney’s office engaged in misconduct to protect Mr. Burke’s career, according to four Suffolk County officials, including two who have talked with federal investigators and others who are aware of a number of recent subpoenas.Mr. Spota declined repeated requests for an interview.Investigators working for the district attorney’s office have received federal grand jury subpoenas in recent weeks, according to four officials who, like others, spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss matters under review by a federal grand jury.At least two people working for the district attorney’s office — Mr. Spota’s top anticorruption prosecutor and a contractor who specialized in electronic surveillance — have retained criminal defense lawyers.While police departments are often the subject of federal inquiries, it is rare for the Justice Department to investigate state district attorney’s offices for misconduct, as is now happening in Suffolk County.Already the inquiry appears to be roiling the criminal justice system in a way not seen since a quarter-century ago, when a state commission accused the police of careless homicide investigations, brutal interrogations, forced confessions and illegal wiretapping, and said the district attorney’s office condoned much of the misconduct.A number of defense lawyers, and a few public officials, say that the sense of impunity was never quite stamped out.To this day, Suffolk remains a place where public officials, particularly those on the wrong side of the political machine, have been known to wonder whether the district attorney’s office is surveilling them.Rob Trotta, a former Suffolk police detective who is now a member of the County Legislature, said that whenever he got an oil change, he used to “get down there and look for tracking devices” under his car.If that sounds excessive, the revelations of the past few months suggest otherwise.In federal court last month, an assistant United States attorney described how, in an attempt “to dig up blackmail dirt,” Mr. Burke, then the police chief, had ordered a contractor for the district attorney’s office to place a tracking device on a deputy police commissioner’s car.“My paranoia was correct: They were doing it,” Mr. Trotta, a Republican, said.For Mr. Spota, 74, the unfolding investigation is striking because until now, his tenure has been marked by little public controversy.Early on, he drew accolades for rooting out corrupt officials in local towns, as well as spearheading an inquiry that examined how Roman Catholic Church officials on Long Island had protected pedophile priests. That inquiry, in 2002 and 2003, resulted in one of the most comprehensive accounts of such abuse to have appeared at the time.In his last two races, in 2009 and 2013, Mr. Spota was unopposed in the general election, having received the endorsement or nomination of the Democratic, Republican and Conservative Parties.Still, over the years, a number of his office’s decisions have prompted questions about his judgment.The indictment of the nurses that was found to have violated the 13th Amendment came after an investigation requested by a politically connected Long Island lawyer who represented the nursing home, according to depositions and affidavits. The nurses, in a lawsuit that is pending, claim that the nursing home had sought a criminal investigation in order to coerce other nurses into remaining at their jobs, rather than quit, as many were contemplating.After the discovery in 2011 that a serial killer was stalking prostitutes and dumping their bodies on a desolate stretch called Gilgo Beach, Mr. Spota appears to have limited the involvement of agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the case. By late 2012, police detectives invited agents from the bureau’s Behavioral Analysis Unit to review the murders.“The Suffolk County district attorney’s office was notified of this, and at that time, objected to this analysis being conducted,” a county detective wrote in a December 2012 police memorandum obtained by The New York Times. As a result, the meeting with the F.B.I. profilers was canceled, according to the memo.The spokesman for the district attorney, Robert Clifford, said that before December 2012, the F.B.I.’s Behavioral Analysis Unit had previously provided their “perspective on the case” and that “a further request that they return was deemed to be duplicative of the work already completed, and therefore unnecessary.”But the district attorney’s opposition to that meeting appeared to have lasting consequences: The F.B.I.’s analysts would have little involvement in the case for the next three years, until a new Suffolk police commissioner sought their help. The case remains unsolved.Mr. Spota himself has not been accused of any wrongdoing in the current Justice Department inquiry. But it has cut close to him, given his close relationship with Mr. Burke.Their association goes back more than three decades, to when Mr. Spota was an assistant district attorney and Mr. Burke was his teenage witness in a blockbuster murder trial. After Mr. Burke became a police officer, Mr. Spota brought him to the district attorney’s office and gave him the job of chief investigator. And it was Mr. Spota who again helped him, in 2012, to secure the job as chief.Within two years of taking the post, Mr. Burke was facing scrutiny, from federal investigators looking into whether he had beaten up the thief, and from Newsday, which reported how as a young officer Mr. Burke had been investigated for his relationship with a drug-using prostitute.Recently, federal investigators began to examine the unusual circumstances surrounding the district attorney’s wiretap of a detective’s phone in 2014, according to two Suffolk officials who are familiar with several recently issued subpoenas. While Mr. Spota has said the investigation was an urgent action in a leak case, people familiar with the wiretap described numerous problems with the way it was conducted and called it part of an effort to keep track of who was saying damaging things about Mr. Burke.“They let it run wild,” one of the people said, noting that prosecutors and investigators largely ignored rules that require them to stop eavesdropping during calls deemed irrelevant to the investigation.The detective whose calls were being intercepted, John Oliva, was in contact with the Newsday reporter who wrote about Mr. Burke and the prostitute, as well as several F.B.I. agents, and the discussions sometimes revolved around Mr. Burke, several people who have spoken with Mr. Oliva said.Within the district attorney’s office, Mr. Oliva’s phone activity was perceived as being something of a clearinghouse for potentially damaging information about Mr. Burke, raising the question of whether one purpose of the surveillance was to stay abreast of threats to Mr. Burke’s reputation and career, the person familiar with the wiretap said.That wiretap fell under the purview of Mr. Spota’s top anticorruption prosecutor, Christopher McPartland, who is a close friend of Mr. Burke’s.“Spota’s dearest bureau, to him, is McPartland’s bureau,” said Leonard Lato, a former prosecutor in Mr. Spota’s office as well as in the United States attorney’s office. “It’s a safe bet that whatever McPartland knows, Spota knows.”The federal investigation is casting a spotlight on Mr. McPartland and his aggressive, even unusual methods, as an anticorruption prosecutor.Mr. McPartland often runs investigations from an off-site location along a strip of office buildings in Hauppauge. County employees have been brought there for questioning on his orders, at times after being intercepted on the way home.Mr. McPartland declined to comment, as did his lawyer. A spokesman for the district attorney’s office, Robert Clifford, wrote, in response to several questions, that “the district attorney’s office and Mr. Spota are confident that Mr. McPartland has discharged his public duties in an ethical and proper manner.”“This office has consistently conducted corruption investigations in a cautious manner, mindful of the impact of false allegations upon the reputation of public officials,” Mr. Clifford wrote.Still, some public officials say their interactions with Mr. McPartland had a menacing air.In a recent interview, the county executive, Steve Bellone, said, “My first sense of problems in the D.A.’s office came before I was even elected, when McPartland visited my home to give me ‘advice’ on how things work in the county.“It seemed bizarre to me,” Mr. Bellone, a Democrat, added. “He talked about how government employees come and talk to him and tell him things that are going on, so you should be careful how you act. I took it for what it was, which was a veiled threat.”In interviews, three people, each independently, said the district attorney’s office sought to leverage information about people’s extramarital affairs.One defendant, then a county official, who insisted on anonymity, said that during questioning at the district attorney’s office he was taken aback to hear one of the prosecutors mention the name of a woman he had been involved with. “When they bring me in, they mention her name,” the person said, in what he concluded was an effort to pressure him to quickly cooperate or plead guilty.