https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/realestate/15-million-homes-in-nantucket-massachusetts-franklin-tennessee-and-chicago-illinois.html
$1.5 Million Homes in Massachusetts, Tennessee and Illinois - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Nantucket (Mass),Franklin (Tenn),Chicago (Ill)
June 21, 2017
10000
WHAT A three-story house built in 2000 with five bedrooms and four and a half bathrooms.HOW MUCH $1.495 millionSIZE 3,859 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $387SETTING This house is in Naushop, a planned residential community of white picket fences and traditional-style houses. The community’s tennis courts, pool and clubhouse are just across the street. The center of Nantucket, with its many stores and restaurants, is less than three miles away. A string of beaches along the south shore of the island is about the same distance away, and the airport is about a mile.INDOORS A brick walkway leads under an arbor and past gardens to the front door of the house. Inside, there are oak floors and a central staircase. To one side is a living room centered on a wood-burning fireplace, with two doors with glass panes that open into a bright sunroom with a vaulted ceiling. To the other side is a study. A large kitchen at the back has painted wood cabinets, black granite counters, stainless steel appliances and a connected wooden bar.Downstairs is a finished basement, including a recreation room with built-in cabinetry and carpeting, a storage room and a full bathroom. The master suite is upstairs, on the second floor, and has a walk-in closet and bathroom with double vanity. There are three additional bedrooms on the second floor, which share a full bathroom. The third floor has another bedroom suite under sloped ceilings, including a full bathroom with wainscoting and a claw foot tub.OUTDOOR SPACE The 0.14-acre lot has attractive landscaping with mature gardens and a backyard brick patio with multiple seating areas. There is an attached one-car garage, which has a staircase leading to the basement of the house, as well as space for off-street parking.TAXES $3,713 a year; homeowners association fee: $2,000 a yearCONTACT Kenny Hilbig, Windwalker William Raveis, 508-228-9117; windwalkerrealestate.com•WHAT A 2012 house with four bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms.HOW MUCH $1.5 millionSIZE 5,664 square feetSIZE PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $265SETTING This house is in a landscape of gently rolling hills about six miles southeast of downtown Franklin, a rapidly growing city founded in 1799 with many charming historic buildings. CoolSprings Galleria, a large mall anchoring a broader shopping area, is about seven miles north, and downtown Nashville is about 16 miles farther.INDOORS This poplar-clad, barnlike house was designed by its current owner. A glass garage door and standard entrance doors open into an enormous double-height wood-paneled room with polished concrete floors and radiant heating at the front of the house. This room is currently used as a massive mudroom and storage area for motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles, but could also serve as a playroom or gym.A wall at the back of this space has a door and two more glass garage doors that provide access to the cozier areas of the house, where there is a mix of brick and shiplap-paneled walls. The living room, dining area and kitchen are open to each other in a double-height space with a fireplace at one end. The kitchen has concrete counters, a large central island and premium stainless steel appliances.An open wood staircase leads upstairs where there is a hobby room open to below, a media room with a reading loft, and four bedrooms, including three with sleeping lofts. The master bedroom has an en suite bathroom with two vanities and a tiled, glass-enclosed double shower.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a private 20.84-acre lot with grassy berms, trees and its own pond, and is reached by a winding gravel driveway. There is a long porch running along one side of the building.TAXES $2,258 a yearCONTACT Tim Thompson, Tim Thompson Premier Realtors, 615-207-3295; thimthompsonpremierrealtors.com•WHAT A 2015 house with four bedrooms and three and a half bathrooms.HOW MUCH $1.5 millionSIZE 3,700 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $405SETTING This brick house is in the Wicker Park neighborhood, a few blocks from the green space that gives the area its name. It is one block away from West Division Street, with its restaurants, bars and stores, and a few blocks more from North Milwaukee Avenue, which has many more businesses.INDOORS The house has white oak floors and a home automation system that includes integrated wall speakers, wireless dimmers and wiring and antennas for high-speed internet. A gated walkway leads from the street to the entrance, which opens into a foyer by the dining area. The dining area is open to the living room, which ends at a wall with a double-sided fireplace and a television. Beyond is the kitchen, which has an island with integrated table, a built-in bench seat, three-inch-thick Corian counters and Wolf, Sub-Zero and Miele appliances, including a full-height wine cooler. Sliding glass doors provide access to stairs leading down to the backyard.The basement has a carpeted recreation room with built-in cabinetry, an undercounter refrigerator and a sink, as well as a bedroom and a full bathroom. The other bedrooms are on the second floor, including a master suite with a walk-in closet and a bathroom with a double marble vanity, heated floor, and marble-tiled steam shower with built-in bench, Jacuzzi tub and body sprays.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 25-foot-wide, 0.06-acre lot and has an integrated two-car garage reached by a heated driveway that eliminates the need for winter snow shoveling. The backyard has a composite deck with built-in bench seating surrounded by a garden as well as a grilling station. A steel spiral staircase climbs to a large roof deck that occupies the whole top of the house, which can also be reached by an indoor staircase.TAXES $9,051 a yearCONTACT Ryan Preuett, Jameson Sotheby’s International Realty, 312-371-5951; jamesonsir.com