http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/us/politics/bluntness-and-an-r-rating-in-bill-clinton-transcripts.html
Blunt Political Assessments in Bill Clinton Transcripts - The New York Times
Clinton  Bill,Presidents and Presidency (US),Blair  Tony,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Democratic Party
Jan. 7, 2016
8995
WASHINGTON —  He thought George W. Bush was perpetrating “a fraud” on America as a presidential candidate, Vladimir V. Putin had “enormous potential,” and the people of Wyoming would be “shooting at me” if he visited.He railed about “reactionaries in Congress,” ruled out assassinating Saddam Hussein or Slobodan Milosevic and fretted about becoming “a meandering old man.” At one point, he felt so beaten up by world events that he jokingly suggested becoming a British citizen.Fifteen years almost to the day since former President Bill Clinton left office, a newly released batch of documents from his library offers a fresh look at his later years in the White House even as his wife, Hillary Clinton, seeks to win the post for herself. The documents transcribed phone calls and meetings between Mr. Clinton and Tony Blair, then the British prime minister and perhaps Mr. Clinton’s best friend among foreign leaders.With bracing bluntness and a smattering of R-rated language, the private conversations reveal a president sometimes unseen by the general public, one who veered from wonky discussions of the Northern Ireland peace process to serrated assessments of his American political opposition. Like a time capsule, the transcripts capture the priorities and perceptions of the moment that, judged with the harsh certainty of hindsight, look prescient or wildly off base.The release of the transcripts also emphasized the complications for Mrs. Clinton in her second campaign for the White House. Not only does she have her own record as senator and secretary of state to promote or defend, she is also campaigning against the backdrop of her husband’s record — often to her advantage but sometimes not, as in the last few days when Republicans focused attention on Mr. Clinton’s sexual misconduct.The phone calls with Mr. Blair, from May 1, 1997, to Dec. 13, 2000, cover the period when scandal led to Mr. Clinton’s impeachment by the House and acquittal by the Senate, but there is little hint of that in their conversations. Mr. Clinton prided himself on “compartmentalizing,” or walling off the furor stemming from his attempts to cover up an affair with Monica Lewinsky, a young White House aide.Some of the conversations, released in response to a request by the BBC, were redacted according to exceptions in federal law. But in 532 pages of transcripts, Ms. Lewinsky’s name was never mentioned. Kenneth W. Starr, the independent counsel, was cited only once in passing, as evidence that American leaders do not control law enforcement.The crisis that rocked Mr. Clinton’s presidency was only alluded to, as when Mr. Blair asked how he was doing or Mr. Clinton looked forward to when “I get all this crap behind me.” At another point in 1998, Mr. Clinton mentioned that he had just made a speech in Massachusetts. He did not note that it was part of his effort to apologize to the nation for not telling the truth about his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky.“This is my best state,” Mr. Clinton said of Massachusetts on Aug. 27, 1998. “You know, if I’d been in Wyoming, they probably would have been shooting at me.”Mr. Clinton and Mr. Blair clearly developed an easy friendship. Mr. Clinton mentioned how his daughter, Chelsea, wanted to be a doctor and cheerily described a meal in Russia that included moose lips. He offered to babysit when Mr. Blair’s new son was born. At one point, Mr. Clinton excused himself in the middle of a conversation to let his dog outside.Despite their chummy informality, though, Mr. Clinton did not confide in Mr. Blair about the tensions at that moment in his marriage with Mrs. Clinton, who by their later account was making him sleep on the couch at their vacation getaway in Martha’s Vineyard. The only real references to her were pleasantries and discussion of her race for the Senate in 2000.“Hillary is doing great, happy as a clam,” Mr. Clinton told Mr. Blair on Nov. 10, 2000, speaking on a telephone during a break on the golf course, three days after his wife was elected to the United States Senate. “I am really proud of her.”Mr. Blair responded that “she was just fantastic” and “so strong and brave.”“Yeah, she was the little engine that could,” Mr. Clinton said.They discussed the 2000 presidential election repeatedly and the departing president expressed a mix of liberal scorn and professional respect for Mr. Bush’s performance against Republican rivals like Senator John McCain and the Democratic nominee, Vice President Al Gore.“One reason Bush is doing so well is because he criticized one thing on the right,” Mr. Clinton said on Oct. 13, 1999, days after Mr. Bush chided his party for budget cuts that hurt the poor. “He is making people think he is saving them from the right. But it’s a fraud because he is really for them on everything else. I have to figure out how to expose the fraud that Bush is the new Clinton, establishing a new Republican Party like I made a Democratic Party. It’s helping Bush but it is killing Al.”A few months later, Mr. Clinton told Mr. Blair, “Bush is a skilled politician, but he is not ready to be president — maybe not ever, certainly not now.”A month later, he said: “Bush is really smart. The campaign against McCain was the most vicious in modern memory. He has these right-wing foot soldiers do his dirty work so he can be nice.”After the election went into overtime with the Florida recount, Mr. Clinton gave Mr. Blair an intricate description of what went wrong and how more voters had actually meant to vote for Mr. Gore. He fumed at the “power grab” by Republicans. “They hate us more than we hate them,” he said. “It’s all about power to them. They don’t care as much about government. They just want the power.”Many of the conversations between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Blair centered on Northern Ireland, where the president was trying to help broker peace. But they also provide a deeper portrait of Mr. Clinton as a commander in chief during a multiday bombing attack on Mr. Hussein’s Iraq in 1998 and the Kosovo war against Mr. Milosevic’s Serbia in 1999.In both cases, Mr. Clinton sent messages through intermediaries that he would not take out the authoritarian leaders if they would just back down.“I told him to go to Saddam, call him and tell him that I have no interest in killing him or hunting him down,” Mr. Clinton said at one point, referring apparently to another Middle East leader. “I’m not fooling with him. I just don’t want his chemical and biological program going forward.”Mr. Clinton expressed frustration that he could not negotiate with Mr. Hussein directly. “If I weren’t constrained by the press, I would pick up the phone and call the son of a bitch,” he said. “But that is such a heavy-laden decision in America. I can’t do that and I don’t think you can.”During the air war to protect Kosovo from Mr. Milosevic’s Serb forces, Mr. Clinton similarly sounded open to a deal that would leave him in power. He remained leery of sending ground troops despite pressure at home, in part because it would exacerbate the already rising tensions with Moscow, which was aligned with Serbia. “If it comes to a troop option, what the hell are we going to do with Russia if it leads to the collapse of our relationship?” he asked.Russia is one area where Mr. Clinton made judgments he would certainly not embrace today, ones reminiscent of those made by Mr. Bush later on. “Putin has enormous potential, I think,” Mr. Clinton said after the emergence of the new Russian leader. “I think he’s very smart and thoughtful. I think we can do a lot of good with him.”At another point, Mr. Clinton said, “His intentions are generally honorable and straightforward, but he just hasn’t made up his mind yet. He could get squishy on democracy.”