http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/nyregion/cuomo-state-of-state-speech-new-york-homelessness-ethics.html
Cuomo, in State of State Speech, Unveils $20 Billion Housing Plan - The New York Times
Cuomo  Andrew M,State of the State Message (NYS),New York State,Infrastructure (Public Works),Public and Subsidized Housing,Affordable Housing,Real Estate and Housing (Residential)
Jan. 13, 2016
7478
ALBANY — Proposing to address the challenges of homelessness and a lack of affordable housing, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York delivered a State of the State speech on Wednesday that called for a financial and spiritual commitment to rebuild the state’s social and physical infrastructure.Mr. Cuomo, in a broad and at times emotional vision of his 2016 agenda, put forth a $20 billion plan to add 100,000 permanent housing units over five years, and thousands more units of housing that would offer shelter and social services across the state. In doing so, he vowed to exert his influence over problems that have bedeviled New York City.While the housing plan would benefit the city, elements of Mr. Cuomo’s proposed budget, also released on Wednesday, would have an opposite effect. He called on the city to increase its contribution to the City University of New York system and to Medicaid costs — further complicating a strained relationship with Mayor Bill de Blasio, a fellow Democrat.Mr. Cuomo, in a convention hall adjacent to the State Capitol, spoke as the former leaders of the State Assembly and the State Senate, Sheldon Silver and Dean G. Skelos, prepare to be sentenced for their convictions on federal corruption charges.The governor’s own concerns about a possible prosecution related to his interference and abrupt shutdown of an anticorruption panel known as the Moreland Commission in 2014 were eased on Monday, when the United States attorney in Manhattan said that there was “insufficient evidence” the governor had committed a crime.With a cloud of corruption still hanging over Albany, Mr. Cuomo proposed nearly a dozen ethics changes, including limiting legislators’ outside income to 15 percent of their base salary, about $11,900 a year. Congress already has such a limit, and government watchdogs have long lobbied Albany to adopt similar rules.Mr. Cuomo also proposed a law to strip convicted lawmakers of their pensions and again recommended closing the so-called L.L.C. loophole, which allows corporate interests to channel large amounts of campaign funds to candidates through limited liability companies.Mr. Cuomo has had a mixed record on ethics, though he has blamed individual crooked lawmakers and the Legislature as a whole for not having the will to change Albany’s corrupt culture.Dick Dadey, the executive director of Citizens Union, a government watchdog group that has proposed several similar ethics reforms, said he hoped the scope of Mr. Cuomo’s proposals — touching on lobbying as well as voting, campaign finance as well as outside income — was an “indication of his strong commitment to getting at least some of these accomplished.”Mr. Dadey added that the combination of the current political climate and Mr. Cuomo’s proven ability to extract concessions from the Legislature made him optimistic that, if the governor wanted to, he could push his reforms through.Mr. Cuomo’s budget proposes to reduce the state’s spending on four-year colleges at CUNY by some $485 million — $240 million of which the state would put to a possible labor agreement with CUNY employees. Those so-called senior universities are currently financed by state money, financial aid and tuition; how the city would make up that $485 million is unclear. The budget also calls on the city to increase its contribution to growing Medicaid expenses, which had been frozen for several years.Mr. Cuomo, as he has in previous years, emphasized holding the line on spending.But, all told, the loss of CUNY funds and change to Medicaid could cost the city more than $500 million, said E. J. McMahon, president of the Empire Center for Public Policy, a conservative research group, who called such a move “indefensible.”“It’s one thing to actually cap spending,” Mr. McMahon said. “It’s another to shift it to your biggest locality.”Still, if Mr. de Blasio was upset he did not show it, declining to take a verbal swipe at the governor for the cost shifting.“In broad strokes, this is a good day for sure and some real progress was made,” the mayor said at a news conference after Mr. Cuomo’s speech. He declined to comment on specifics, saying he had not had a chance to read the budget documents.Mr. Cuomo has criticized Mr. de Blasio’s approach to homelessness, saying he was slow to react to what he describes as a crisis on the city’s streets. But some advocates for the homeless say that the governor’s own cuts to a rental assistance program contributed to the problem. And when the mayor unveiled a plan in November to create 15,000 units of supportive housing — which provides social services to address residents’ issues like substance abuse and severe mental illness — he pronounced that the city was “acting decisively; we are not waiting on Albany.”Mr. Cuomo was bullish in his remarks, saying the state was “stronger than at any point in recent history.” And when the speech was interrupted by a prolonged outburst by State Assemblyman Charles Barron, a Brooklyn Democrat, the governor was unmoved by the heckling.“We came together; we refused to be intimidated,” Mr. Cuomo said, responding — nearly shouting — to the assemblyman. Mr. Barron was escorted out.As he did last year, the governor combined his annual address with his budget proposal, unveiling some $154 billion in state spending for the 2016-17 fiscal year, including disaster aid, capital projects and other federal aid.A briefing book of the agenda and budget ran more than 500 pages and included scores of proposals and multiple other holdovers from previous years, including a vow to pass the Dream Act, which would allow undocumented immigrants to apply for state financial aid, and a pledge to raise the age of criminal responsibility to 18.But the governor also presented newer ideas, including a push to enact 12 weeks of paid leave for workers with a new child or sick relative. He introduced that proposal by recalling his relationship with his father, former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, and how he regretted not having spent more time with him.Mr. Cuomo had also already unveiled more than a week’s worth of proposals before the State of the State address, vowing to remake the state’s infrastructure, remedy deficiencies in minority-owned businesses and address recidivism with various criminal justice reforms, among other plans. He has also rallied support for his proposal to increase the statewide minimum wage to $15 an hour.And the coming days will mark the beginning of actual negotiations, and details, though the governor’s office did offer plans for financing, saying the $20 billion housing effort was expected to be paid through state money and various bank settlements. The $100 billion infrastructure plan would be financed by state, federal local and private sources.Such practical concerns have long occupied Mr. Cuomo’s career as governor. But on Wednesday, he spoke at length about Sandra Lee, the television host whom he lives with in Westchester County and who received a diagnosis of breast cancer last year, and the death of his father on New Year’s Day 2015, just hours after his son had been inaugurated in a second term.“Life is such a precious gift, and I have kicked myself every day that I didn’t spend more time with my father at that end period,” he said. “It was my mistake, and a mistake I blame myself for every day.”