https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/arts/television/preacher-season-2-review.html
‘Preacher’ and ‘The Strain’: Smart Summer Fun - The New York Times
Television,The Strain (TV Program),Preacher (TV Program)
July 14, 2017
4560
Television hasn’t always had a summer silly season the way the movies have, but with the decline of summer reruns, one has taken shape. There’s popcorn TV year-round, of course, but it’s more dominant in the warm months. Dancing, dating and talent shows proliferate, and CBS chips in with breathless and sometimes addictive thrillers, like “Zoo” and the new “Salvation.”In the new golden age, though, popcorn can come in many flavors, and summer genre workouts don’t have to be dumb and formulaic. Two of the best examples of this, and two of the better shows of the summer, are “Preacher,” now in its second season on AMC, and “The Strain,” which begins its fourth and last season on Sunday on FX.“Preacher,” based on a comic book about a Texas minister with a Godlike power to command obedience, and “The Strain,” based on a series of novels about vampire-like creatures conspiring to take over the planet, are smart and serious takes on the superhero and horror genres — with almost diametrically opposed approaches.“The Strain,” created by Guillermo del Toro and Chuck Hogan (authors of the novels) and run by the longtime producer Carlton Cuse (“Lost”), is a prime example of traditional, meticulous craftsmanship and slow-building suspense. It’s full of action and gore, but it’s essentially a quiet, thoughtful show that posits a supernatural situation with political relevance — a small band led by a scientist, an exterminator and a Holocaust survivor battle parasitic bloodsuckers ruled by an all-powerful hive mind — and traces out its logical effects.“Preacher,” developed by Sam Catlin (the showrunner), Evan Goldberg and the actor Seth Rogen, is anything but quiet. It’s perhaps the truest Quentin Tarantino homage around. It posits a supernatural situation with moral and spiritual relevance — a disillusioned preacher with a violent streak is inhabited by an angelic-demonic entity that gives him the voice, if not the wisdom, of God — and piles crazy, grotesque, frequently hilarious complications on top of it.Each succeeds through clever writing, top-flight cinematography and, crucially, smart casting. The psychological drama of “The Strain” is largely carried by Corey Stoll and Kevin Durand, savvy, naturalistic actors who give emotional weight to the melodrama. (David Bradley of “Game of Thrones,” as the sword-wielding avenger Setrakian, provides the hammy B-movie embroidery.)In “Preacher” the central three actors — Dominic Cooper as the preacher, Joseph Gilgun as his vampire buddy, and the wonderful Ruth Negga as the preacher’s no-nonsense girlfriend — do the same thing from the opposite direction, finding real feelings while satisfying the show’s requirements for exaggeration and cool posturing.If you haven’t watched the shows before, now is both a good and a bad moment to jump in. Each has done a hard reboot before its current season, and each is a little unsteady on its feet in the early episodes.Spoilers ahead for both: “The Strain,” after three seasons of presenting the human-vampire war as a somewhat even competition, detonated the story by setting off a nuclear bomb in New York. The final season opens with the vampires (known here as strigoi) firmly in charge, and the human heroes scattered around the country in separate, new story lines. The question is how long the show will take to reunite them, with just 10 episodes to go.“Preacher,” as you’d expect (and in keeping with the comic book), took an even more extreme approach. After a season set entirely in a small Texas town, many of whose residents were key characters, the show blew up the town in a cow-dung-methane explosion and (apparently) killed off most of the characters. Season 2 opened with the preacher and his friends on a road trip, figuratively and literally in search of God, who’s gone missing. As metaphor and as entertainment, it’s everything you look for in a summer diversion.