https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/28/nyregion/airport-redevelopment-could-mean-new-life-for-a-jet-age-landmark.html
Airport Redevelopment Could Mean New Life for a Jet Age Landmark - The New York Times
Kennedy International Airport (Queens  NY),Hotels and Travel Lodgings,Historic Buildings and Sites,MCR Development LLC,MCR Development,Restoration and Renovation,New York City,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Airlines and Airplanes,Saarinen  Eero,Beyer Blinder Belle,Airports
July 27, 2015
7678
With the addition of two new wings, Eero Saarinen’s T.W.A. Flight Center at Kennedy Airport — a lyrical landmark in search of an everyday purpose — might finally reopen to the traveling public for the first time since Trans World Airlines went out of business in 2001.The six-story wings, shoehorned into a crescent-shaped area between the T.W.A. Flight Center and JetBlue’s Terminal 5, would be part of a 505-room hotel built by MCR Development. Its holdings include the High Line Hotel in Chelsea, which occupies part of the General Theological Seminary campus.Pending approvals, construction of the T.W.A. Flight Center Hotel, as it would be called, is to begin next year. It would open in 2018. The budget is roughly $250 million, including a $65 million renovation of the Saarinen building.The T.W.A. Flight Center opened in 1962. It may be the greatest single embodiment of the spirit of the Jet Age, which opened the globe to quick, convenient and (if one could afford it) comfortable travel. It is perhaps second only to the Gateway Arch in St. Louis as the most famous work by Mr. Saarinen.The building is safeguarded by a landmark designation and has been maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. But it is empty. There was no practical way, the airlines said, to retrofit a structure whose dimensions were based on Boeing 707s and Lockheed Constellations.The very qualities that made the terminal unique — soaring spaces without a right angle anywhere — seemed to militate against plans for adaptive reuse.The Wall Street Journal reported in April that MCR and JetBlue were in talks to develop a hotel at the Terminal 5 site.By mentioning the hotel plan in a speech Monday that was focused on the $4 billion overhaul of La Guardia Airport, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo lifted at least one corner of the curtain of confidentiality that had enveloped the project.“We’re on our way towards restoring the majesty of J.F.K. airport,” Mr. Cuomo said.The terminal building would serve as the hotel lobby. It would have restaurants, a ballroom and a museum focusing on New York’s role in the Jet Age, on the history of Trans World Airlines and on midcentury Modernist design.Beyer Blinder Belle, an architectural firm best known for the restoration of Grand Central Terminal, is to design the new hotel for a partnership that includes MCR, JetBlue and the Port Authority. They will work with Lubrano Ciavarra Architects.Mr. Saarinen died in 1961. His practicing successor is Kevin Roche, a founding partner of Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo and Associates. A spokesman for MCR said the architects of the new hotel would consult with Mr. Roche and others.The city’s Landmarks Preservation Commission will also have a say in the matter.Given the intense interest among preservationists in Mr. Saarinen’s building, it seems safe to predict opposition to a plan that would insert new structures as backdrops to a roofline that is often compared to a bird in flight.