http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/24/us/politics/indiana-hometown-molded-mike-pence-even-as-it-began-to-change.html
Indiana Hometown Molded Mike Pence Even as It Began to Change - The New York Times
Pence  Mike,Columbus (Ind),Indiana,Presidential Election of 2016,Vice Presidents and Vice Presidency (US),Republican Party,Trump  Donald J
July 21, 2016
6536
COLUMBUS, Ind. — “For the last three Sundays, the Edward Pence family has lit a candle in their Advent wreath and had a reading from the Mass proper for a part of their devotion to Christmas,” The Columbus Republic’s society page reported. “Christmas Eve they will follow the tradition of opening their gifts, placed under a tree which they picked themselves at the tree nursery, and going to midnight Mass at St. Columba.”It was Dec. 23, 1972. Mr. Pence was a rising executive at the Kiel Brothers Oil Company. His wife, Nancy, had moved from Cub Scout den mother to busy church and social volunteer. And a 13-year-old Mike Pence, the future running mate of the Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, was traversing eighth grade at St. Columba Catholic School, an exceedingly respectful student and altar boy at St. Columba Catholic Church.His classmates that school year voted him most likely to become president, one of them, Darlene Crouch, recalled this week.Today St. Columba is gone, merged into St. Bartholomew parish, the church razed and replaced with a stately new one. Kiel Brothers Oil, later run by one of the Pence sons, fell into bankruptcy in 2004, its remains scooped up by a Chicago investment firm. Columbus is itself vastly changed from the insular town of the mid-20th century where Mr. Pence grew up: faster-growing, more educated and more diverse, but also less family-oriented and less safe.But the Columbus of five decades ago has stuck with Mr. Pence, shaping him in ways large and small. His deeply conservative views on social issues from abortion to gay rights were crystallized by his faith-centered childhood and his later conversion to evangelical Christianity. But they also hark back to a Columbus of a less complicated era, where The Republic’s list of divorce filings and dismissals was perhaps its best-read feature and the police patrolled for teenagers breaking the 11 p.m. curfew.It was a time when the town’s minuscule African-American population was cloistered on the poor east side of town and drank at a bar called the Plantation. Abortion and homosexuality were both scandal and mortal sin. Elsewhere in America, there were race riots, war protests, free love and bra burnings. Columbus’s 26,500 citizens mostly clucked their tongues and went about their business.“I don’t remember how many churches there were, but there was one on every street,” Fred Armstrong, Columbus’s mayor for four terms, from 1996 to 2011, said in an interview. “It was just a family-oriented, religious, conservative community, very patriotic.“It was a lot different than what it is today,” he added.This was where Edward and Nancy Pence, Chicago children of a stockyards worker and a bus driver, settled in 1959, in a modest starter house on Columbus’s north side. Early on, Mike Pence has said, he shared a bed with two of his three brothers — later, there also were two sisters — but that did not last. Edward Pence rose at Kiel Brothers Oil, which ran a chain of 200 gas-and-convenience stores called Tobacco Road. The family moved to a big new split-level in one of the city’s better neighborhoods, and the parents plunged into church and social activities.The Pences were the rare dedicated parents who appeared in tandem at every parent-teacher conference and every school function, said Sister Sharon Bierman, a Benedictine nun who taught young Mike seventh- and eighth-grade math, religion and science at St. Columba. Their son was a model student, never missing classes, always arriving with homework completed — and by some accounts, a diligent student of the Constitution even before he was a teenager.Ms. Crouch, his classmate, remembered him as “thoughtful, respectful, well liked by his classmates.” Sister Sharon recalled him as a boy who loved singing and acting in the annual St. Patrick’s Day performance for the Rev. Patrick Gleason, a priest so thoroughly Irish that he made the day a school holiday. But mostly, she was struck by his dutiful study and conduct.“There was never any trouble with him talking out or doing things he wasn’t supposed to do,” Sister Sharon said. “Some of the guys in the eighth grade, they tried to show off by telling off-color jokes. Never Mike. He was just very well behaved.”On “teacher instinct,” she said, she chose Mike in 1971 to compete in a local Noon Optimist Club speech contest.The winner “lumped Abbie Hoffman, the Soledad Brothers, Angela Davis and Charles Manson in a negative, apathetic category of activists ‘who did not give a damn for America,’” The Republic reported.Mike Pence, age 12, placed second with a speech asserting that his generation would meet the challenges facing the human race. By high school, he was winning state and national awards with orations on topics like “The Constitution, an able partner for we, the people.”His talents were a foundation for a life in politics — first as senior class president at Columbus North High and president of his fraternity and a Christian youth organization at Hanover College, later as a conservative radio talk-show host, congressman and governor.In one way, Mr. Pence has moved in lock step with his hometown: Both once were reliably Democratic, and swung Republican during Ronald Reagan’s presidency. Mr. Pence’s parents were Chicago Irish Catholics who worshiped John F. Kennedy. Mr. Pence still boasts of keeping a box in his garage filled with Kennedy memorabilia, but Mr. Reagan, he adds, is his political guiding star.Yet Columbus seems not to have moved as sharply rightward as its native son. It has been shaped by other pressures. In 1970, 98 percent of its citizens were white; in the last census in 2010, that had dropped to 89 percent — and nearly one in 10 Columbus citizens was foreign-born. A slew of Japanese manufacturers, lured in the 1980s to combat a deep recession, have made Asians a large minority group here.Mr. Armstrong, a 66-year-old Democrat who mostly dealt with a Republican City Council, said stagnant wages, a shrinking middle class and frustration with a gridlocked government made Columbus voters as angry as any. But the results of this spring’s Republican presidential primary suggest otherwise: Voters in Bartholomew County, which includes Columbus, gave a smaller share of their votes to Mr. Trump — and a larger share to the comparatively moderate Gov. John Kasich of Ohio — than all but a dozen of the state’s 92 counties.On issues like immigration and trade that are central to the Trump campaign, and now to Mr. Pence, people here are more relaxed. Foreign investment — Japan alone has 25 companies here — has given citizens a different view of the benefits of trade. Hispanics have moved to Central Indiana en masse, and constituted 5.8 percent of the city’s population in 2010. But rather than displacing local workers, they mostly have filled lower-wage jobs that the city’s work force had rejected, Mr. Armstrong said.“There aren’t nearly as many hard-core Democrats or Republicans as there used to be,” Mr. Armstrong said. “They’re more soft Ds and soft Rs.”The City Council, once solidly Republican, now includes a young Asian Democrat.Last year, Mr. Pence stirred a national furor by signing legislation that allowed businesses to refuse to serve gays and other sexual minorities on religious grounds. But Columbus, which has long had an anti-discrimination ordinance, responded last fall by amending it to specifically include gays.And while Mr. Trump has pledged to restrict immigration by Mexicans and residents of Islamic nations — a stand Mr. Pence once criticized but now embraces — some here feel differently. Two doors down the street from the split-level the Pences bought during their climb, a family has planted a black-and-white sign in a front yard. It reads, “We stand with American Muslims.”