https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/us/politics/obama-vetoes-defense-bill-deepening-budget-fight-with-gop.html
In Wielding Rarely Used Veto, President Obama Puts Budget Heat on Republicans - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Federal Budget (US),Vetoes (US),United States Defense and Military Forces,United States Politics and Government
Oct. 22, 2015
1730
WASHINGTON —  President Obama on Thursday vetoed a $612 billion defense policy bill, rejecting a broadly supported measure that sets funding for military salaries and equipment, and intensifying his struggle with the Republican-led Congress over federal spending.Mr. Obama has wielded the veto only four other times since taking office in 2009, and his fifth one Thursday signaled his determination to use the defense bill as a bargaining chip to push Republicans to abandon strict spending limits on military and domestic programs enacted in the 2011 Budget Control Act.In an Oval Office ceremony choreographed for the news media, Mr. Obama signed his veto message, saying that while the legislation had a number of positive attributes, it fell “woefully short” in key areas that Congress had an obligation to address.“My message to them is very simple: Let’s do this right,” Mr. Obama told reporters while seated at his desk. “We’re in the midst of budget discussions. Let’s have a budget that properly funds our national security as well as economic security. Let’s make sure that we’re able in a constructive way to reform our military spending to make it sustainable over the long term.”Republicans quickly condemned the move and accused Mr. Obama of putting troop pay and national defense at risk to make a political point.“By placing domestic politics ahead of our troops, President Obama has put America’s national security at risk,” Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, said in a statement. He called the veto “indefensible,” and said it should not be allowed to stand.Such concerns were not merely partisan. Senator Angus King, an independent from Maine who caucuses with Democrats, said: “This bill contains important policy provisions involving issues such as acquisition reform, sexual assault in the military, curbing the potential use of torture, and positive modifications to the military pension system. This veto puts those provisions at risk.”The White House, though, said it was confident it would have the support needed from Democrats to sustain Mr. Obama’s veto should Republicans move to override it.Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the minority leader, said Democrats would sustain Mr. Obama’s action.“With this veto, the president has stood in strong support of giving our men and women in uniform, and our military over all, the certainty they need, not Republican budget gimmicks,” she said.The annual National Defense Authorization Act sets policies and spending levels for the military, but the actual funding must come through a defense appropriations bill that is stuck in Congress. Senate Democrats, trying to force budget talks that can ease caps on domestic spending, have refused to consider any of the 12 annual spending bills.The vetoed defense measure actually meets Mr. Obama’s overall funding request for defense programs because of an arcane budgeting mechanism lawmakers employed to avoid violating the spending caps. By shifting $38 billion to a special war funding account that does not count against those limits, Congress nudged military spending beyond the caps, while nondefense spending remains bound by them, something Mr. Obama has argued is unacceptable.The issue has made a broader budget agreement impossible, raising the prospect of another government shutdown in December if the president and Republicans fail to strike an agreement.Ashton B. Carter, the defense secretary, has called the budgeting method “objectionable” and “managerially inefficient,” arguing that it leaves military personnel and their families with “an absolutely undeserved element of uncertainty.”Mr. Obama also objects to a provision in the measure that would make it more difficult to close the United States military prison in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, an unfulfilled promise of his presidency. That provision has been included for years, prompting veto threats that until now have not been carried out.“This legislation specifically impeded our ability to close Guantánamo in a way that I have repeatedly argued is counterproductive to our efforts to defeat terrorism around the world,” Mr. Obama said, adding that its continuing existence has become one of the “premier mechanisms” for recruitment of terrorists.Such concerns have prompted Mr. Obama to threaten to veto defense policy bills in the past, but he has never followed through. On Thursday, some observers expressed surprise that the president would use the tool on military legislation, given that he backs many of its elements and the negotiation he is seeking is on spending levels across the government.“This is a very, very unusual use of the veto,” said Charles M. Cameron, a politics professor at Princeton who studies presidential vetoes. “Typically vetoes either kill bills or force Congress to compromise on the content of the bill,” but in this case, he said, “the president wants a compromise on an entirely different bill.”Still, by making his stand on the defense measure, Mr. Obama was leaving no doubt about his willingness to accept the budget limits, and drawing an early line in the sand — government funding runs out in seven weeks — in the spending fight.“He makes his point, it’s a principled point with clarity, and then gives Congress the ball back to either flail or make a compromise,” said Michael E. O’Hanlon, a defense budget specialist at the Brookings Institution.The tactic could accelerate the weekslong struggle between the White House and congressional Republicans over government spending, one that boils down to a tiny fraction of the $4 trillion budget.“It’s a remarkable amount of fighting that we’re probably going to have to watch,” Mr. O’Hanlon said, “over somewhere between one half of a percent and 1 percent of federal spending.”