https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/us/politics/republicans-have-one-word-for-presidents-proposals-and-veto-threats-no.html
Republicans Have One Word for President’s Proposals and Veto Threats: ‘No’  - The New York Times
State of the Union Message (US),Obama  Barack,United States,United States Politics and Government,Vetoes (US),Republican Party,Congress
Jan. 20, 2015
6789
WASHINGTON —  “No” seems to be all anyone wants to say in this town anymore. In his State of the Union address on Tuesday, President Obama enumerated policies that he opposed, from rolling back Wall Street regulations to exempting more businesses from their obligation to provide health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.To drive home his displeasure with the Republican agenda, the White House also issued two new veto threats in the hours before the president spoke — this time for bills that would ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy and accelerate approval of natural gas pipeline construction.For their part, Republicans immediately rejected most of the proposals that were central to Mr. Obama’s address, saying he was obviously not serious about working with them to pass consequential bipartisan legislation.The midterm elections may have delivered more power to Republicans, who control Congress, but the tenor of the president’s address and the Republican response to it showed there was no new dawn of cooperation.“I think this was a tremendous missed opportunity for this administration,” Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina, said. “When you start out with multiple veto threats and you show no willingness to even meet somewhere in the middle on issues that have been percolating for some time, it gives you very little hope that there’s going to be a breakthrough.”But in some ways, the Republicans may have the greater burden after promising to prove that they can govern productively after years of being mocked by the president as “the Party of No.”The president’s address signaled not only that he will make that transformation difficult, but also that he and fellow Democrats may adopt a form of the “No” strategy as their own.The parallels may not be exact, of course. Mr. Obama points out that many of the Republicans’ priorities seem designed to provoke him into issuing veto threats because they would dismantle popular pieces of his legacy.Yet, he and Congressional Democrats have to figure out how to assert themselves without becoming subject to the same label they have given Republicans: obstructionists.The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, accused the president of offering little more than “warmed-over proposals” and veto threats.Mr. McConnell told reporters that since the fall elections, the president had “almost without exception indicated he’s not for much of anything the American people voted for last November.”Republicans also said that if the president wanted to ensure his legacy, he should strike a far more compromising tone than he did during his address.“I mean what he’s talking about so far he knows doesn’t have any chance whatsoever of passing,” Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, said. “I would think the president in his last two years would actually want to accomplish something. And if he focused on trade and education and cybersecurity, fixing ‘No Child Left Behind,’ making it easier to go to college, all those are areas where we can get some agreement.”But on Tuesday, Republicans were offering few specifics and retreated to their familiar criticisms of Mr. Obama: that he is a tax-and-spend liberal whose policies they could never endorse.“This president, to every problem his solution is, ‘More taxes, more government,’ “ Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, said. “The American people made clear the last thing we want is yet more taxes from Washington, more government spending, more debt, more regulations.”Mr. Cruz likened Mr. Obama’s approach to the famous “Saturday Night Live” spoof of the Blue Oyster Cult song “(Don’t Fear) the Reaper.”“To every problem,” Mr. Cruz said, “his solution was, ‘More cowbell! More cowbell!’ “Republicans said that they were caught off guard by a major component of the president’s 2015 agenda, which he announced over the weekend and detailed further in his speech, to raise taxes and fees on the wealthiest taxpayers and the largest financial firms to pay for, among other things, tax breaks for the middle class and free community college.While these programs may prove popular with many Americans, Republicans said that they hoped the American public would see them as a ploy from a president who knows Congress will never pass them.“It’s the wrong way to approach things,” said Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin, who urged Mr. Obama to focus on “those areas of agreement rather than start talking about things that divide us automatically.”Several Republicans said they had yet to see the White House reach out in a serious way to start building better relationships. And Tuesday’s speech, they said, did not help.“He had a most curious list of where he thought we could work together,” Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah, said. “I didn’t understand where he was going with that or what he was trying to do.”Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma, said, “I’ve seen very little outreach since the November election.” Instead, he said, “It’s been one provocative move after the other.”Some Republicans said they thought the president’s speech and his tone since his party lost badly in the midterm elections signaled that he was interested in seeing little accomplished in the next two years, allowing Democrats in 2016 campaigns to portray Republicans as incompetent stewards of Congress.“For him, it’s all 2016 partisan politics now, and Republicans shouldn’t waste time debating the merits of the president’s political talking points,” Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, said. “As the president tries to divide Americans and distract them from the failures of his administration,” Mr. Lee added, “we shouldn’t take the bait.”