http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/26/upshot/two-completely-blue-coasts-hillary-clinton-is-in-striking-distance.html
Democratic Dream of Two Blue Coasts? Clinton Is in Striking Distance - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Elections  Senate,Trump  Donald J,Burr  Richard M,North Carolina
Aug. 25, 2016
6515
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor in New York, discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.Toni Before the days of Donald J. Trump, before our seemingly weekly references to Scranton, Pa., you wrote an article about the possible effect of Northern migration to the South. Here’s an excerpt for readers:What’s your impression after revisiting your article? The top five Southern states with non-Southern-born residents were Florida, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia.Nate Well, the first thing it makes me think is: I really wish pollsters would ask people “where they were born” as a standard demographic question.I think it could be very illuminating.That said, it does seem to line up with where Hillary Clinton might break through in the South. There have even been a few polls showing a tight race in South Carolina, which doesn’t seem too surprising when you look at this data.Toni What’s your reading on North Carolina for November? And for the future?Nate It looks to me like North Carolina already leans Democratic, at least in this presidential election. Trump is suffering big losses in the suburbs of Charlotte and Raleigh. Over the medium term, the question is whether the G.O.P. can recover its huge edge among those well-educated Southern white voters. If they can, I think it’s tough for demographic shifts alone to rapidly move these states into the Democratic column.Toni On Twitter, you posted some percentages on Florida voting demographics:“Florida voter registration on 8/1, heading into state primary: White 65, Black 13.3, Hispanic 15.4.You compared them with 2012. And you commented that “demographic change happens gradually, but the electorate changes in bursts when voter registration surges ahead of elections.”Nate Florida is one of the few states that include a question about race on the voter registration form, so we know more about the composition of the electorate than just about anywhere (except North Carolina). The newest data indicates that the white share of the electorate dropped to around 65 percent heading into the Florida state primary, and it could drop a lot further — perhaps a full point — over the next two months, as that tweet of 2012 data indicates.All of the demographic shifts that we analyze mean nothing unless new voters get registered to vote. The next two months are important ones for the Clinton campaign in that regard in Florida. New voters largely register in surges ahead of a presidential election.And a campaign makes decisions about where to target based on those shifts.Toni The latest Florida polling is positive for Clinton. Georgia looks more and more like a pure tossup. What the polling numbers and the migration numbers suggest is a future in which the entire East Coast — O.K., South Carolina still seems like a stretch — could be blue. The entire West Coast has already been blue for decades.Can liberals dare dream of two blue coasts?[In a map I’m including, Democrats could take the Electoral College by essentially winning nothing but the West Coast and Eastern and East Coast states — although of course they’re also heavily favored in some Midwest states and Colorado and New Mexico.]Nate I think the Democrats can dream of blue coasts in the same way that they can dream of decisive victories.I think a 10-point victory for Clinton could involve blue coasts.Toni Where do you stand on which red state would be most likely to turn blue? The latest poll in Missouri showed only a one-point Trump lead. That was a bit of a surprise, but Clinton has been doing well in a lot of recent state polls.Nate After North Carolina, I assume?Toni Right, I’m not counting North Carolina, which I guess says something.Nate Does Nebraska’s Second Congressional District count?Toni I didn’t have it in mind, but sure, I’m curious what you think about that.Nate There isn’t much data there, but I’d probably call Clinton the favorite there — in part based on a G.O.P. poll in a fairly similar district in Kansas that had Clinton up by six percentage points or so.And I think it makes sense, given that Trump is doing so poorly in suburban areas, and NE-2 (the Omaha area) is a metropolitan district.Toni A blue dot in a giant red sea.Nate It is adjacent to Iowa, so it’s more like a blue cape protruding into the giant red sea of the Plains.Cape is the correct word there, right?Like Cape Hatteras, or Cape Fear.Toni A cape of fear? Sounds a little like a speech from the Republican convention. Let’s get back to domestic migration. North Carolina is attracting young workers from Northern states. The Southern coastal states have warm weather, which is attractive to people from the North who want to move there or retire there. And you have a trend of African-Americans who are moving South. This poses a problem for Republicans because more of those people will lean liberal, on balance, right?Nate Well, I think it depends — I think a lot of the wealthy retirees are white, and probably lean Republican.If you’re attracting young tech workers to Raleigh, that’s a bit different.And, you know, Northerners are definitely more liberal than Southerners. But there are a lot of Republican Northerners!Take New York State. It went to Obama, 63-35, in 2012. To flip South Carolina with migration from New York — a heavily Democratic state — you would need about 735,000 new voters. That’s huge. That’s a tenth of the New York State electorate.All of which is to say: It’s very hard to flip states with migration, even at very favorable rates. We know, after all, that the new migrants to North Carolina aren’t 63-35 for Obama — they include people from all over the country, including elsewhere in the South. I am of the view that migration is an overrated factor in North Carolina’s shift.The single biggest factor is the huge increase in black turnout and support for Democrats.Toni What about black turnout in Georgia, Florida, South Carolina?Nate In those states, Democrats lost ground among white voters between 2004 and 2012 — canceling out many of those shifts.In North Carolina, Democrats basically held even among white voters — probably in part thanks to the countervailing migration trend. But obviously, holding even among white voters isn’t what turned North Carolina into a competitive state.Toni You also tweeted recently: “North Carolina is by far the most overlooked Senate race.”Nate Yeah, I think the North Carolina Senate race entered the year in the second tier, along with Missouri and Arizona.Now it’s clearly a top-tier race, and it’s probably ahead of Ohio (Rob Portman) and perhaps Florida (Marco Rubio).The heart of the issue is that Richard Burr is a weak incumbent who has never been especially well known in his own state. He hasn’t started campaigning vigorously yet. I think it’s going to be tough for him to run far ahead of “generic Republican,” unlike Portman or even Rubio, who have distinct brands and are well known in their states. Even in a more neutral year, I’m not sure we should have expected Burr to win this seat by a comfortable margin — given the polarization of the North Carolina electorate. And, of course, this isn’t a neutral year.Toni What are your thoughts on whether the Democrats can retake the Senate?Nate This Senate situation feels very familiar to me. I feel like we saw this in 2014, when the Senate was a tossup in August and then the G.O.P. swept nearly all of the competitive races. We saw it in 2012, when the Senate was a tossup and then the Democrats swept nearly all the competitive races. We saw it in 2008, when 60 seats seemed tough for the Democrats and then they swept nearly all of the competitive races. We saw it in 2006, when it seemed really hard for the Democrats to take the Senate and then they swept nearly all of the competitive races. I could take this story line back to 2000, but I’ll stop here.So here we are in August. The Senate looks like a tossup on paper in a lot of ways. But it seems clear that if any party is going to have the wind at its back this year, it’s going to be the Democrats. If they do, it’s really hard for me to see how the G.O.P. holds on.Republicans are already fairly clear underdogs, so it’s hard for me to see them making a comeback unless Trump leads the way.Toni Trump’s seeming flip-flop on immigration probably won’t help. (Ann Coulter is mad!) And he held a rally in Mississippi, a red state, on Wednesday night, which seemed a strange strategic choice. (Nigel Farage was there; I didn’t realize Mississippi was part of Brexit.)Other strange doings: Trump surrogates and supporters are saying that crowd size and enthusiasm are more predictive than polls. Give me one good reason I should believe you and not Eric Bolling.Nate Who’s Eric Bolling?Toni He’s a Fox News host who recently told another Fox host, Dana Perino, “These polls, Dana, honestly, we have to stop with these polls,” and added that the size of crowds was more telling. “Just look at what’s going on. You look at a Trump rally, and there’s 12,000, 15,000, 10,000 people.”Perino shot back, “It’s a real disservice to his supporters to lie to them that those polls don’t matter.”Nate Let me start with something that’s substantively irrelevant, but worth getting out there: There is nothing especially impressive about getting 15,000 people out to watch a presidential nominee. If he was getting 50,000, that would be something to brag about — 100,000 would be the real deal.Of course, even then, there wouldn’t be any reason to doubt the polls on that basis.What’s the one thing I would cite? I don’t know. Maybe that Bernie Sanders lost by double digits, even though he drew bigger crowds than Clinton.Maybe that everyone in 2012 was saying this same thing?Toni Perino essentially said that Fox News misled viewers in 2012, and she bravely admitted that she was duped and that it wouldn’t happen again.Nate I don’t know what to say at this point. These people aren’t interested in getting it right.Toni My thought is it’s like the Scopes trial. It’s not a scientific way of thinking. And that trial was in 1925.Nate A Donald Trump to William Jennings Bryan comparison could be sort of interesting.Toni Bryan was a Democratic populist and attacked evolution at the trial.Nate Though Bryan lost the 1896 election by only four points.Pretty similar map, though.(Readers can see the 1896 map here. We’re also looking for readers to share their memories of past elections: “50 Years of Electoral Maps: How the U.S. Turned Red and Blue.” And last week, Nate and Toni discussed what a landslide would look like for Mrs. Clinton and what Mr. Trump needed to do to rally.)