https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/19/us/protesters-confront-candidates-on-race-at-netroots-nation-conference.html
Protesters Confront Candidates on Race at Netroots Nation Conference - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,O'Malley  Martin J,Sanders  Bernard,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Discrimination,Netroots Nation
July 18, 2015
5384
PHOENIX —  A group of protesters repeatedly confronted Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland during a town hall discussion with liberal activists here on Saturday, demanding the Democratic presidential candidates address issues like discrimination and police brutality.Chanting, “What side are you on, my people, what side are you on?” and “Black lives matter,” the demonstrators moved to the front of the ballroom about 20 minutes into the event as Mr. O’Malley discussed proposed changes to Social Security. They remained there, heckling the candidates and posing questions, until organizers shut down the event, one of the centerpieces of the annual Netroots Nation conference.The protesters included members of the Black Alliance for Just Immigration and GetEqual, as well as Patrisse Cullors, a founder of the Black Lives Matter movement. A representative of the demonstrators took the stage to inform the event’s audience of what was happening, specifically that they were seeking policy proposals from the candidates on racial issues.Mr. O’Malley repeatedly tried to answer the demonstrators, saying that, as president, he would advocate for civilian review boards and other measures to overhaul the criminal justice system.“Black lives matter. White lives matter. All lives matter,” he said as he prepared to exit, drawing loud boos from protesters.Mr. Sanders, taking the stage a few minutes later to a standing ovation from the audience, tried to respond to the protesters and deliver a brief stump speech on economic inequality.“Black lives, of course, matter,” Mr. Sanders said, answering the chants. “I spent 50 years of my life fighting for civil rights and dignity, but if you don’t want me to be here, that’s O.K. I don’t want to out-scream people.”Mr. Sanders was mostly successful in delivering his prepared remarks, which included a call for a criminal justice overhaul and job creation to help boost low-income minority communities.“I’ll tell you what we are going to do,” he said. “We are going to transform economics in America so that we create millions of decent jobs,” as well as eliminate student debt and pass a living wage.Mr. Sanders then took several questions on immigration before the event was brought to an end 15 minutes ahead of schedule.Angela Peoples, an organizer for GetEqual, a gay rights group, said she and other progressive organizers decided to interrupt the town hall to combat “a lack of intentionality and action here at Netroots and especially from the candidates,” on issues of racial inequality.The town hall event, moderated by Jose Antonio Vargas, a journalist and immigration activist, provided a “very visible” platform, she said.“We’ve been silent for too long. We’ve been polite for too long. And our silence and our politeness is killing us,” she said.Ms. Peoples said that the group would have ceased chanting had they felt the candidates were giving substantive, authentic responses, rather than “cookie cutter generalities.”The four-day conference is the largest annual gathering of liberal activists from across the country. It was expected to offer a friendly crowd to Mr. O’Malley, and especially to Mr. Sanders, a self-identified democratic socialist whose campaign has ignited widespread support from progressives.But Mr. Sanders, who has consistently drawn larger crowds than any candidate of either party, has not seen such strong support from African-Americans, an important Democratic constituency. People here Saturday said that Mr. Sanders’s remarks demonstrated that his emphasis of a systematic economic overhaul, while attractive to them, simply feels out of touch with national conversations about racial injustice and violence.“I thought it was a good space for dialogue. It reflected a lot of the tensions being felt by the left right now,” said Collin Rees, who was here with SustainUS, an organization focused on racial and climate issues.Mr. Rees said he supported Mr. Sanders in the Democratic primary, but feels that he, like Mr. O’Malley, has a way to go to hone his message on race.Notably absent from the event was Hillary Rodham Clinton, a former secretary of state and the front-runner for the Democratic nomination. Mrs. Clinton elected instead to speak at the Arkansas Democratic Party’s annual Jefferson-Jackson Dinner on Saturday, after a brief swing through Iowa where she joined fellow Democrats seeking the nomination for a banquet put on by the state party in Cedar Rapids.Aside from the protesters, Mr. Sanders was greeted enthusiastically by supporters here, who wore “Bernie 2016” buttons and T-shirts, and waved signs of the senator dressed as Robin Hood.“I think he’s a man of the people, and that’s what we really need right now,” said Terry Swann, 72, of Phoenix.Mr. Swann, who wore a pro-Sanders T-shirt of his own design, said he sees populists like Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who delivered the keynote here yesterday, pulling the more moderate Mrs. Clinton to the left, “which she certainly needs.”“There’s a sea change happening in this country, so all things are possible,” he said of Mr. Sanders’s chances of getting elected. “Not likely, but possible.”Given the energy progressives are injecting into the race, Jenni Siri, a co-founder of Women for Bernie Sanders and New Mexico for Bernie Sanders, said Mrs. Clinton’s absence from the conference was notable.“Her not being here almost looks like she’s thumbing her nose at the event,” Ms. Siri, 54, said. “She’s acting like it’s not a big deal.”