http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/15/international/middleeast/15jordan.html
Jordan Says Bombing Suspect Aimed to Avenge Brothers - The New York Times
IRAQ,AMMAN (JORDAN),JORDAN,RISHAWI  SAJIDA MUBARAK AL-,RECORDINGS (VIDEO),UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES,TERRORISM,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Nov. 15, 2005
8578
AMMAN, Jordan, Nov. 14 - One day after Jordanian authorities presented to the world an Iraqi woman they said had taken part in the deadly Amman hotel terror attacks, investigators here said Monday that she had volunteered to become a suicide bomber because three of her brothers had been killed during "operations" in Iraq.Residents of Falluja, an Iraqi city where the insurgency has been fierce, said they knew her family. Her brothers, they said, had been killed in conflicts with American-led forces.The woman, Sajida Mubarak al-Rishawi, had every intention of detonating her own explosive-packed belt when she walked into the Radisson SAS Hotel last Wednesday night, investigators said, but was unable to succeed because she had left a crucial component -- what one investigator called a "key" -- in the car.While a videotaped confession showing Ms. Rishawi wearing the disarmed suicide belt was being broadcast around the world, details about her life, motivation and role in the attacks that killed 57 people began to emerge. One investigator said Ms. Rishawi had not shown any remorse.The official, who is closely involved in the case, spoke on condition of anonymity because of the work's covert nature. There was no way to independently verify the account.The American military also said Monday that it had briefly detained a man in Iraq last year with the same name as one of the Jordan bombers. But the man, Safah Muhammad Ali, was released because he was judged not to be a threat.On Sunday, Jordanian officials announced that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the Jordanian leader of Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, was responsible for planning the bombings of the three hotels, which included the Grand Hyatt and the Days Inn. The authorities said they had identified three Iraqi men who killed themselves in the attacks, including a Mr. Ali, and that earlier in the morning they had arrested Ms. Rishawi, the wife of one of the men. Her videotaped confession was broadcast Sunday.In all the years Jordanian authorities have been chasing terrorists, they said, they had never before had a case involving a woman. But investigators learned of her involvement shortly after the hotel attacks, when the owner of a house in Amman phoned the authorities to say that he had rented an apartment to three men and a woman several days before the blasts -- but that they had not returned Wednesday.The security official said that soon after the attacks, many people called in with possible leads, and it took time to sort through all the information. But the official said agents quickly found that the apartment had been a safe house, rented by the four bombers. And so, the official said, investigators knew a woman was involved even before Mr. Zarqawi announced that two men and a married couple were responsible. Investigators were not immediately sure, however, if she was dead or alive.The only videotape investigators pulled from security cameras was from the Grand Hyatt Hotel, but it proved useless because the images were not clear.Ms. Rishawi, 35, was married to Ali Hussein al-Shumari. The security official said the couple did not have any children. In her confession, she said that she lived in Ramadi, Iraq, and that her husband "planned everything." The investigator, however, said she was a willing participant.She said that on Nov. 5, she and her husband were picked up in Iraq in a white car with a driver and a passenger and that they entered Jordan using fake Iraqi passports. She said that they rented an apartment and that her husband had put an explosive belt on himself, then on her, and taught her how to use it.She said she saw a wedding in progress when she tried to detonate her bomb."My husband executed the attack," she said in the videotape. "I tried to detonate and it failed. People started running and I ran with them."According to residents in Falluja, Ms. Rishawi's family belongs to the same tribe as Sadoun al-Dulaimi, the Iraqi defense minister. Jordanian officials said one of her brothers, Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi, was a senior aide to Mr. Zarqawi.Residents of Falluja said Monday that Mr. Rishawi's full name was Thamir Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi, and that he was killed in combat in April 2004, when the Marines assaulted the city after four American contractors had been killed in an ambush and mutilated.The residents, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution, said two other brothers of Ms. Rishawi and two other relatives were also killed in confrontations with American forces in Anbar Province, which includes Falluja.Falluja, 35 miles west of Baghdad, had become a haven for insurgents from April to November 2004, when the Marines agreed to turn over security of the area to an Iraqi militia called the Falluja Brigade. The force eventually dissolved, with some of the soldiers joining the insurgency. The Marines decided to seize control of Falluja again in November 2004, but not before thousands of insurgents fled.Safah Muhammad Ali, who may or may not have been the same man who blew himself up in Jordan, was detained by the Americans in November 2004 as Marine-led forces were laying siege to Falluja. Mr. Ali was held for about two weeks at a division-level detention area."A review of the circumstances of his capture by the unit determined there was no compelling evidence that he was a threat to the security of Iraq and he was therefore released," the military said. "We cannot confirm that the person we detained is the same person allegedly involved in the bombings in Jordan."American troops often detain large numbers of Iraqis in operations and raids, releasing many of them days later.The Falluja offensive was the most intense urban combat the Marines had taken part in since the Vietnam War. Support for the insurgency was fairly widespread in Falluja, a Sunni-dominated city of 300,000 that is strongly religious.The Central Intelligence Agency recently warned that a new generation of jihadists was being trained in the Iraq war, and that these fighters could soon take their cause to other countries.The theory of a widening jihad, with Iraq at the center, is bolstered by intelligence reports stating that Mr. Zarqawi, long opposed to the Hashemite monarchy in Jordan, had been funneling people and supplies to Jordan even before Wednesday's attacks.