https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/01/us/politics/government-shutdown-congress.html
Spending Bill Passes, Averting a Shutdown - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),Planned Parenthood Federation of America,United States Politics and Government,Shutdowns (Institutional),Senate,House of Representatives,Republican Party,Democratic Party,Boehner  John A
Sept. 30, 2015
5783
WASHINGTON —  With only hours to spare on the last day of the fiscal year, Congress averted a government shutdown on Wednesday by approving a temporary spending measure to keep federal agencies operating through Dec. 11.In the House, the legislation was approved only because of strong support by Democrats — a sign of how angry rank-and-file Republicans remain over their powerlessness to force policy changes on the Obama administration.The House vote was 257 to 151, with 186 Democrats and 91 Republicans in favor. All of the “no” votes were by Republicans.In one last display of their fury, House Republicans on Wednesday adopted another resolution to cut off government financing to Planned Parenthood. The resolution was to be sent to the Senate, where Democrats were certain to block it.Ultimately, the internal Republican fight over the bill and how strongly to confront the White House cost John A. Boehner his job as speaker. While Mr. Boehner’s resignation announcement last week essentially assured Democratic support for the measure, the bill does nothing to resolve the core disputes over fiscal policy between Republicans and President Obama, setting up even larger and potentially more calamitous battles in the months ahead.Congressional Democrats and Obama administration officials said they were eager to begin negotiations with Republicans on a longer-term spending measure. It is far from clear, however, that any deal can be reached soon, given the upheaval in the House.The White House said Mr. Obama would sign the temporary measure but also chastised the Republican-controlled Congress.“The American people deserve better than last-minute, short-term legislating,” the White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, wrote in a statement. “There’s no reason that we should deny American families and businesses the certainty and support they need by kicking the can down the road again.”Republicans have pointedly blamed Congressional Democrats for blocking all efforts to adopt the regular annual spending bills, and the White House has consistently made clear that Mr. Obama would veto any measures that reflected solely Republican fiscal priorities.The temporary spending measure will keep the government operating at roughly last year’s levels — a rate of about $1.017 trillion a year, with some notable changes for emergency situations, such as $700 million to fight wildfires in the West.In the larger debate, Mr. Obama and his fellow Democrats are pushing to lift spending caps agreed to in previous fights, saying they are constraining economic growth and job creation.Republicans are generally opposed to increasing spending, but some are pushing for more military spending. At the very least, these Republicans say, there should be negotiations to readjust spending priorities.Among the issues that the White House and Republicans must confront are a potential need to raise the federal debt ceiling to avoid a first-ever default, the expiration of many highway programs at the end of October, the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank and the need for a longer-term spending accord.While Mr. Boehner has expressed a desire to do as much as possible before he leaves Congress at the end of October — “I don’t want to leave my successor a dirty barn,” he said — it seems unlikely that many of the big issues can be resolved before his departure. The House is scheduled to be in session for only 13 days in October.There is a weeklong recess for Columbus Day, and there will be several distractions. Not only do House Republicans need to choose new leadership next week, but on Oct. 22, Hillary Rodham Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, will be on Capitol Hill to testify before the Select Committee on Benghazi.Asked how much Mr. Boehner would be able to accomplish, Representative Peter Roskam, Republican of Illinois, replied, “Less than he thinks.”Earlier on Wednesday, the Senate approved the temporary spending bill by a vote of 78 to 20. Because of the unpredictability in the House, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, had taken the unusual step of having the Senate act first on the spending measure.Continuing the bitter debate over spending on the Senate floor, each party blamed the other for forcing the government to the edge of a shutdown. Mr. McConnell noted again that Democrats had blocked all 12 spending bills that were approved by the Appropriations Committee. It was “part of some arbitrary strategy,” he said, “to force our nation to the brink.”Mr. McConnell said Democrats should shift tactics if they want to achieve a broader fiscal agreement. “I think the American people are ready for our colleagues to finally get serious and get back to work,” he said. He added, “Moving forward will require Democrats to turn the page on bad habits and dysfunction.”The Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, noted Mr. Boehner’s resignation and described the Republicans as being in disarray. “He’s resigning because he knows he can’t deal with these people,” Mr. Reid said.“We have to do better than just keeping the federal government operating by a continuing resolution,” he added. “We have to stop devastating sequester cuts from hitting our military and our middle class.”Mr. Reid warned that the fight over raising the federal debt ceiling would be more urgent than the spending fight. “We all know that in a matter of weeks, unless we act, the United States will lose its ability to pay its bills,” he said. “If you think shutting the government down is bad, and I do, it pales in comparison to the government defaulting on all its debts.”As the day drew to a close, there were signs that the hard-line House Republicans, who had pushed for Mr. Boehner’s resignation, remained hungry for additional change.“I am disappointed that despite the gruesome and incontrovertible video evidence of Planned Parenthood’s activities, the president got his way and nothing changed,” said Representative Jim Jordan, Republican of Ohio, the chairman of the House Freedom Caucus. “Taxpayers are tired of being treated this way, and they are fed up with politics as usual.”