http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/25/world/middleeast/sheikh-khalifa-bin-hamad-al-thani-former-emir-of-qatar-dies-at-84.html
Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani, Former Emir of Qatar, Dies at 84 - The New York Times
Deaths (Obituaries),Thani  Hamad bin Khalifa al-,Qatar,Thani  Khalifa bin Hamad al-
Oct. 24, 2016
8685
Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani, who as the emir of Qatar for 23 years oversaw its independence from Britain and the rapid modernization of its economy, died on Sunday. He was 84.His death was announced by the government of Qatar, which did not specify the cause or where he died.His grandson Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, the current emir, declared three days of public mourning.Sheikh Khalifa took power from his cousin in a bloodless coup in 1972 and was ousted by his son in another bloodless coup, in 1995.During Sheikh Khalifa’s reign, Qatar — a country on a peninsula jutting out of the much larger Arabian Peninsula into the Persian Gulf — experienced rapid economic growth, helped by its vast oil reserves. In 1981, it joined five neighboring countries — Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — to form the Gulf Cooperation Council, although historical disputes over territory persisted.After Iraq, under President Saddam Hussein, invaded Kuwait in 1990, Sheikh Khalifa joined other Arab leaders in making his country’s military bases available to the American-led coalition that liberated Kuwait. United States, Canadian and French fighter planes flew missions from Qatar during the conflict.After the war, Qatar signed a security pact with the United States, and today it hosts the forward headquarters of the United States Central Command and aircraft involved in airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq.“Sheikh Khalifa’s legacy is decidedly mixed,” said Mehran Kamrava, a professor at the Qatar campus of Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service. “His assumption of power was greeted with much enthusiasm and excitement over many promised changes to come. But as the years wore on, popular expectations were frustrated, especially among the young.”Sheikh Khalifa was born in Al Rayyan, Qatar, in 1932, into the House of Thani, the country’s royal family since the early 19th century.He rose through the ranks of the ruling family, commanding its security forces and overseeing its civilian courts. He became the country’s deputy ruler on Oct. 24, 1960, and its finance minister two weeks later.Sheikh Khalifa became the first prime minister of Qatar — then a British protectorate — on May 29, 1970, after the job was created by the emir at the time, his cousin Sheikh Ahmad bin Ali al-Thani. Sheikh Khalifa also served as finance minister and oil minister.From that point on, he was effectively the ruler. When Qatar declared independence on Sept. 3, 1971, Sheikh Ahmad was on vacation in Switzerland, and it was left to Sheikh Khalifa to issue the proclamation.Sheikh Khalifa deposed Sheikh Ahmad on Feb. 22, 1972. He announced an immediate increase in salaries for civil servants and the 15,000 members of the police and armed forces, as well as plans to modernize government administration and cut consumer prices.The new ruler aimed to consolidate control over oil production. In February 1974, he reached an accord with foreign oil companies that gave the Qatari government control over 60 percent of revenues, and by the end of that year he announced plans to take over the remaining 40 percent.Oil exports boomed, making Qatar one of the world’s wealthiest nations per capita. (Qatar today has about 2.2 million residents, but most are workers from countries like India, Pakistan and Iran, and not citizens.)“Sheikh Khalifa boldly brought Qatar onto the stage of world affairs, even defying his new ally the United States — largely seen as Britain’s successor in guaranteeing the security of the gulf — by reaching out to the Soviets,” said Allen J. Fromherz, an associate professor at Georgia State University and a historian of Qatar. “It may have been this act, in fact, that prevented the U.S. from intervening when Sheikh Hamad, a hero of the Iraq war against Saddam, took power in 1995.”On June 27, 1995, the crown prince, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, who had already assumed a substantial amount of power, ousted his father and drove him into exile.Sheikh Khalifa had already begun to step back from governing in the late 1980s, while power and influence accrued to a younger generation of royals who “wanted to accelerate the modernization of Qatar’s economy and develop its gas reserves,” said Kristian Coates Ulrichsen, a political scientist at Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy.After several years in Europe, Sheikh Khalifa returned to Qatar in 2004 and led a low-profile life until his death. The country’s prominence continued to rise in recent years: Doha, its capital, has become a center of the arts world, and Qatar will host the FIFA World Cup in 2022.Sheikh Hamad announced his abdication in 2013, turning power over to his son Sheikh Tamim, who remains emir.