https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/27/world/middleeast/gunmen-in-baghdad-seize-a-leading-sunni-politician.html
Gunmen Seize, Then Free, a Leading Iraqi Politician - The New York Times
Baghdad (Iraq),Sunni Muslims,Maliki  Nuri Kamal al-,Adhadh  Riyadh al-
July 26, 2014
8786
BAGHDAD —  A senior Sunni politician was seized from his home in Baghdad by gunmen and briefly detained, the police said Saturday.It was not immediately clear whether the politician, Riyadh al-Adhadh, who leads the Baghdad Provincial Council, was arrested by security forces or abducted late Friday, the police said. Four of his bodyguards were also taken, according to a statement from the provincial council. The police officers spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief the media.Later on Saturday, Mr. Adhadh and his bodyguards were released, according to a Baghdad official, Ghalib al-Zamili, and the police.In recent weeks, Sunni militants have seized territory in northern and western Iraq, and Shiite militias have mobilized to help the beleaguered armed forces fight back. Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, a Shiite, is trying to secure a third four-year term despite widespread calls to step aside over the crisis.Mr. Maliki discussed Mr. Adhadh’s disappearance with Salim al-Jubouri, the Sunni speaker of Parliament, at a meeting on Saturday. Mr. Jubouri called the disappearance a “problem” without saying whether Mr. Adhadh had been arrested or kidnapped.Sunnis have long complained of being unfairly harassed by security forces, and their discontent with Mr. Maliki’s rule is seen as a central cause of the country’s unrest.Mr. Maliki’s security forces have singled out prominent Sunni politicians in the past, accusing them of having links to terrorism.Shortly after the last American troops withdrew in 2011, the security forces tried to arrest Vice President Tariq al-Hashemi, a Sunni, on terrorism charges, forcing him to flee to Turkey. Mr. Hashemi, who was later convicted in absentia and sentenced to death, has denied the allegations.Sunni government officials have also been attacked by Islamic extremists and other Sunni militants, who view them as traitors.At a news conference on Saturday, a Baghdad provincial council member, Falah al-Qaisi, called on the government to “shoulder its security responsibility” by opening an investigation into the seizing of Mr. Adhadh. Mr. Qaisi did not provide details about who might have seized Mr. Adhadh.In 2012, Mr. Adhadh, a medical doctor and a member of the Iraqi Islamic Party, was imprisoned for eight months on terrorism charges. He has maintained his innocence.