https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/07/us/politics/for-jason-chaffetz-quixotic-house-speaker-bid-is-in-character.html
For Jason Chaffetz, Quixotic House Speaker Bid Is in Character - The New York Times
Chaffetz  Jason,United States,House of Representatives,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party,House Oversight and Government Reform Committee,Congress
Oct. 6, 2015
5724
WASHINGTON —  Representative Jason Chaffetz of Utah admits he is not the best candidate to become speaker of the House. He fully expects to lose when his Republican colleagues pick their nominee on Thursday. But opportunity for Mr. Chaffetz is like the scent of an airport Cinnabon, and he has a habit of racing to its smell.So it was last week that Mr. Chaffetz helpfully informed his “good friend,” Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, that he would challenge him in the race to replace Speaker John A. Boehner. He pointed out that Mr. McCarthy, while the clear favorite of a majority of House Republicans, would most likely fail to get the 218 supporters needed on the House floor to become the next speaker.“Ten days ago, I didn’t think I’d do this,” Mr. Chaffetz (pronounced CHAY-fets) said in an interview in his Capitol Hill office-cum-hotel room, where he also sleeps, made cozy by some throw pillows decorated with the famous Utah honeybee. “There are very few opportunities to do this,” he said. “You have to be comfortable with losing. I am.”When Mr. McCarthy’s wall of support began to crack last week — after he suggested on Fox News that the House committee investigating the 2012 terrorist attack in Benghazi, Libya, had a political aim to drive down support for Hillary Rodham Clinton — Mr. Chaffetz, 48, ran a play he has mastered over the last decade: Seize the moment, talk about love of country, and prepare for the live shot.They are moves long honed by Mr. Chaffetz, a former high school soccer player who became a place-kicker on a lark and then practiced and exercised his way to Brigham Young University’s powerhouse football team. In politics, he used them to knock off an incumbent Republican and, later, to win the contest to become chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee.“Anyone who underestimates his ability does so at their own peril,” said Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, who has known Mr. Chaffetz for years. (His son John took Mr. Chaffetz’s daughter Ellis to the prom.)Mr. Chaffetz’s political acumen, willingness to take risks and ample supply of moxie helped him, the son of a Jewish father and Christian Scientist mother who later became a Mormon, land a job as manager of Jon Huntsman Jr.’s successful campaign for governor in 2004 even though he was inexperienced in politics.Before that, he had even helped a Democrat, though more out of family obligation than political fealty, when he helped run Michael Dukakis’s presidential campaign in Utah in 1988. (“It’s not like I did anything,” said Mr. Chaffetz, who occasionally traveled with the candidate — whose wife, Kitty Dukakis, was once married to Mr. Chaffetz’s father. “There are like seven Democrats in Utah.”)When it came time to run his own race, Mr. Chaffetz was a long-shot challenger to a six-term Republican congressman, Chris Cannon. He defeated Mr. Cannon in a primary in 2008, ahead of the Tea Party trend of running to the right of a conservative lawmaker to win.This year, Mr. Chaffetz leapfrogged several senior colleagues to become chairman of the House Oversight Committee. Under him, the committee has taken on high-profile targets like the Secret Service and Planned Parenthood, but also scores of low-flying ones, often with the help of Democrats.There have been highs — as when he ripped into Joseph P. Clancy, the head of the Secret Service, over a White House bomb threat, to the delight of many in both parties, a rare event on the highly partisan committee.There have been lows, like last week, when he used a widely mocked chart to try to demonstrate during a hearing that the number of abortions at Planned Parenthood was surpassing the number of cancer screenings. He also had to endure a leaked story that noted that he had been rejected from the Secret Service, but officials at the agency were called out for their actions.He also suggested that impeaching President Obama over the attack on the United States Mission in Benghazi was a possibility. “That’s not the goal or the incentive,” he said in the interview this week. “I’m not taking it off the table, but it’s not something I put on the table.”Mr. Chaffetz was one of the earliest advocates of investigating the administration’s handling of the Benghazi attack, and he has traveled twice to Tripoli, the Libyan capital. He has also accused Cheryl D. Mills, Mrs. Clinton’s chief of staff when Mrs. Clinton was secretary of state, of impeding his work.Mr. Chaffetz’s moves have earned him some criticism. As governor of Utah, Mr. Huntsman became annoyed with him after less than a year as chief of staff, and Mr. Chaffetz quit. This week, Mr. Huntsman wrote disparagingly about him in a Twitter post.The coup de grâce came in 2012, when Mr. Chaffetz endorsed Mitt Romney for president over Mr. Huntsman.Both Democrats and Republicans have grumbled at his actions on his committee. Some of them said he could be heavy-handed, which they had hoped would not happen after years of partisan skylarking by the previous chairman, Representative Darrell Issa of California.“I appreciate the new tone Chairman Chaffetz has brought to the committee this year,” said Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland, the top Democrat on the committee. The two have visited each other’s districts; Mr. Cummings learned about horses, and Mr. Chaffetz got a view of decidedly more urban Baltimore.“Democrats have responded by joining him in sending more than 300 bipartisan letters,” Mr. Cummings added. “That’s why I was surprised and deeply disappointed that the chairman engaged in such a blatantly partisan investigation of Planned Parenthood, in which even he admits that there is no evidence of illegal activity.”Mr. Chaffetz was born in Los Gatos, Calif. He spent many summers with his half brother, John Chaffetz, sometimes in California and sometimes with the Dukakis family, with whom he remains close. When Mr. Dukakis was governor of Massachusetts, he once raced to the Boston airport to assist a young Jason in changing planes. “He’s an exceptionally nice guy,” Mr. Chaffetz said.When his high school football coach needed a kicker, Mr. Chaffetz, then a soccer player, tried out and proved good enough to be recruited to Brigham Young. There, he played with the Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Ty Detmer, who went on to play 12 seasons in the National Football League.“I rolled into town in my Honda CRX with no money,” Mr. Chaffetz said. “That community was so nice to me.” He was eventually baptized Mormon and married his wife, Julie, in 1991; they have three children.It is not clear that Mr. Chaffetz’s quixotic journey to be speaker will yield more than 50 votes, although his Utah colleagues, at least, have begun to line up behind him. There is also the question of why he wants the job, other than, as he says, “to serve my country.”Being speaker at such a volatile time in Congress is “not good for career longevity,” he noted. “But I don’t plan to be here that long.”Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina — who, as chairman of the Benghazi committee, was perhaps most damaged by Mr. McCarthy’s suggestion that it was designed to harm Mrs. Clinton — said he had not made up his mind.“Whichever candidate I am maddest at when it’s time to vote will be the one I vote for,” he said. “Because it is a nearly impossible job.”