https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/10/realestate/sutdio-db-damian-zunino-britt-zunino-build-their-country-house.html
A Country House for a Family of Six - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Architecture,Amenia (NY),Zunino  Britt (1977- ),Zunino  Damian (1978- ),Interior Design and Furnishings
Jan. 8, 2016
9991
When Damian and Britt Zunino, the husband-and-wife principals of the New York design firm Studio DB, began conceiving their weekend house in Amenia, N.Y., they came to a surprising realization: designing a home for themselves was a lot more difficult than doing projects for clients.The couple bought the 12.5-acre lot for about $235,000 in 2011, having selected it for its mix of rolling hills, open field and forest, as well as for its proximity to Mr. Zunino’s parents’ house in nearby Kent, Conn.They began sketching plans for a house almost immediately, but soon ran into trouble.“There are usually restrictions and parameters” that help shape the design of a home, said Mr. Zunino, 37, an architect. “But here, it was entirely a blank slate. There was a lot of pressure to take all of our ideas and do it right.”Over the years that followed, the couple designed about half a dozen potential houses, but decided none of them was perfect.“We designed a lot of things that partially worked, but didn’t encompass all the ideas we wanted,” Mr. Zunino said.Ms. Zunino, 38, an interior designer, said, “We weren’t exactly on the same page, either,” noting that her husband desired a starkly modern home, while she wanted something with a touch of the local vernacular.At the same time, their family was growing. They had two children when they bought the lot, and a third arrived in 2012.By the spring of 2014, Ms. Zunino, pregnant with their fourth child, had become impatient with their lack of space. In Manhattan, the family lived in a fifth-floor walk-up with a single bathroom. When visiting Mr. Zunino’s parents on weekends, they stayed in a small guesthouse that felt cramped.“I said, ‘I cannot live all squished together any longer,’ ” Ms. Zunino recalled. “ ‘We own this land, are we ever going to build?’ ”In desperation, she began looking at a colonial-style house for sale just down the road from the lot they had purchased, thinking it could be quickly renovated.“That provided a little kick in the rear,” said Mr. Zunino, who remained focused on building a home of his own from the ground up.One morning that April, he cleared his head and sketched a new design: a three-story, 3,500-square-foot house consisting of a concrete box partly buried in a grassy slope, topped by a structure with the outline of a traditional gable-roof house.In addition to five bedrooms, four and a half bathrooms and a generous playroom, it also had a courtyard encircled by sliding glass doors at its center.Ms. Zunino loved it, and the couple moved swiftly to construction, breaking ground that August.To save energy, the home features exterior walls formed by structural insulated panels, some sections of green roof, floors with radiant heat and natural ventilation for cooling rather than an air-conditioning system.To save money, Mr. Zunino served as general contractor, managing laborers and tradespeople, while framing some of the interior walls himself, which reduced costs to about $225 per square foot.To cut down on expenses, the couple also collected gently used appliances (an old dishwasher from a home they renovated for a client, a range from Green Demolitions), traded design services for materials like the walnut floor in the master bedroom, and called in as many favors from suppliers as they could.Some of the furniture came from an apartment on the Upper West Side they had renovated and then staged for a client who decided to sell it. Rather than charge a fee for the staging, they struck an agreement to keep the furniture the client had purchased for it.The Zuninos moved in when the home was substantially complete this past July, and have spent nearly every weekend there since, even as they continued to work on finishing touches, like installing wallpaper, right up to last month.The children — Brecken, 10; Harper, 5; Elliott, 3; and Georgia, 1 — now have plenty of room to run, both indoors and out, along with the family’s black Labrador dog, Beezer.In summer months, the home’s courtyard functions as a space for water play with a portable pool, as well as a respite for stargazing. In winter, the slope just outside the house is ideal for sledding.“Sometimes it’s hard packing all the kids up" and getting them down four flights of stairs to leave the city, Ms. Zunino said. “But then, it’s really, really hard to leave here on Sunday night.”