https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/29/world/asia/china-united-states-presidential-election.html
Explaining the U.S. Presidential Election to China: It’s Not Really Like ‘House of Cards’ - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,You Tianlong,China,Podcasts,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J
Sept. 28, 2016
7246
As Election Day approaches in the United States, the Chinese are paying closer attention to the selection of the next president.Government censorship, the language barrier and an unfamiliarity with American political conventions have left many Chinese confused about the process. Many seem to have derived their sense of how the system works from “House of Cards,” the Netflix series about an unscrupulous politician who stops at nothing, not even murder, to scheme his way to power. The show was enormously popular in China.Last year, You Tianlong, a Chinese doctoral student in justice studies at Arizona State University, co-founded a podcast called “Xuanmei,” or “U.S. Election,” aimed at younger, urban Chinese. Mr. You and his partners — Hua Jianping, who writes on American politics, and Zhuang Qiaoyi, who holds a master’s degree in international relations from Syracuse University — and their guests discuss topics that have ranged from voter registration to how campaign managers tap into data to advance candidates’ prospects.An estimated 70,000 people listen the podcasts every month. In August, Mr. You published “Get Elected: A Very Short Introduction to the U.S. Presidential Election” (Taihai Publishing House, Beijing) with Mr. Hua and Lin Yao, who has a Ph.D. in political science from Columbia University.In an interview, Mr. You explained that the Chinese are more interested in the United States presidential election than ever, but don’t always understand it.What do Chinese get wrong about the American political process?I feel that the biggest misunderstanding is that many Chinese take “House of Cards” too seriously. American politics is complicated, even for Americans. For many Chinese, it’s just too confusing. So people take a shortcut. “House of Cards’’ is so real for them that it filters their impressions of American politics.Another misunderstanding is derived from the negative propaganda many Chinese have absorbed over the years, that is, that American politics is controlled by money or big capitalists and that politicians are just puppets controlled by capitalists. It’s possible that there are serious problems in American politics. But as far as plutocratic politics is concerned, it’s not as bad as people in China imagine.On the other hand, some liberal intellectuals in China believe that the United States is good in every way. Its political system is good and its people’s voices are heard. They attribute every achievement of the United States to its superior political system.I feel that many Chinese aren’t really observing American politics as much as they’re projecting their own biases onto American politics.Are people in China are better informed about the presidential election than four or eight years ago?We have access to far more information than we did four or eight years ago. Millions of Chinese have traveled to the United States. We have a powerful internet and social media. A large percentage of younger people speak English. But American politics is complicated. To understand it, we need to put it into context, which many Chinese can’t do.What is the range of Chinese political views you see on social media comments on the podcast?Obviously Chinese political views vary. But I’ve noticed that many in our audience who express their views publicly take a nationalistic stance. They look at the election from the perspective of what’s best for China.Who are your listeners?Data from Google Analytics show that about 60 percent are under 35, so born after China embarked on economic reform and opening. Most — 72 percent — are in China and about 15 percent are living in the United States.What shows or topics have been the most popular with your Chinese listeners?The four most popular shows, according to Google Analytics, dealt with Obama’s health care reform, guests explaining why they are against Donald Trump, spending bills and the Iowa caucuses. It shouldn’t be surprising that Chinese are interested in Obamacare. China is also undergoing health care reform and we want to learn lessons from the United States.As your Chinese listeners learn more about presidential politics and the American political system during this election, do they get more or less cynical?It’s hard to tell. From the comments of some Trump supporters on our Zhihu account [a question-and-answer website], they are clearly angry. But I can’t tell how representative they are of our audience. My personal observation is that they might be overpowering other voices by expressing themselves loudly and attacking others.But I would like to say that 2016 appears to be the beginning of a real Chinese interest in U.S. elections. The combination of a growing middle-class, more overseas experience and easier access to information have fostered more interest than I’ve seen before.You say many people in China seem to like Trump. But what about his attacks on China and threats of high tariffs over trade issues and his hard line on immigration and insensitivities toward ethnic minorities? Are these Chinese really supportive or just entertained?First of all, many Chinese don’t like Hillary Clinton. Since the 1995 United Nations’ World Conference on Women in Beijing, Hillary has been difficult towards China. When she became a senator, she often interfered in United States-China relations. When she became secretary of state, she advocated the pivot to Asia, which is seen by the Chinese government and public as an attempt to contain China. Of course Chinese people dislike her.Second, many Chinese don’t like the Democratic Party. President Truman, a Democrat, supported Chiang Kai-shek, oversaw the Korean War and interfered in China-Taiwan relations. President Kennedy, a Democrat, got involved in Vietnam. President Clinton, a Democrat, criticized China’s human rights record and slowed negotiations on China entering the World Trade Organization. Meanwhile, President Eisenhower, a Republican, ended the Korean War and President Nixon, a Republican, ended the Vietnam War and initiated the normalization of Chinese-U.S. relations. Many Chinese think another Democratic president would not be favorable to China.Third, many Chinese support Trump’s isolationist foreign policy. They believe that Trump would take a more pragmatic approach towards China and create new opportunities for China’s rise.