https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/us/politics/congress-spending-bill.html
Government Shutdown Looms Over Stopgap Spending Measure - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Shutdowns (Institutional),Federal Budget (US),Mines and Mining,Coal,Manchin  Joe III,Brown  Sherrod,Health Insurance and Managed Care
Dec. 8, 2016
616
WASHINGTON — The House voted overwhelmingly on Thursday to finance the government through late April, but a snag over the measure in the Senate threatens a shutdown of operations this weekend.With Congress on the cusp of wrapping up its lame-duck session, Senate Democrats picked fights on behalf of two constituencies to whom President-elect Donald J. Trump appealed during his campaign — coal miners and steel workers.The stopgap spending measure must be approved by the Senate by midnight Friday to keep the government open. But Democrats in the Senate, led by Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Sherrod Brown of Ohio, are objecting because they want a better deal for thousands of retired coal miners who are set to lose their health benefits at the end of the year.The spending bill extends the miners’ health coverage for only four months, which the Democrats view as insufficient.“We can do the right thing between today and tomorrow,” Mr. Manchin said on the Senate floor on Thursday afternoon, imploring his colleagues to stand with the miners.The House finished its work for the year on Thursday. If Democrats move to slow down approval of the spending measure over the issue, it could lead to a shutdown of the government beginning on Saturday.Republicans on Thursday were not sympathetic to the Democrats’ case.“They’re not going to get what they want,” said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the chamber’s No. 2 Republican. “They ought to actually be grateful for what they got.”Also uncertain on Thursday was the fate of $170 million to help Flint, Mich., and other communities dealing with water contamination.That funding was included in the stopgap spending bill. But the money for Flint relied on the approval of a second piece of legislation, a water projects bill that the House passed on Thursday but that faced resistance in the Senate, too.Senate Democrats were unhappy about the removal of language that would have written into law a permanent requirement that American-made steel and iron be used for water infrastructure projects.The House voted 326 to 96 to approve the spending measure, which funds the government through April 28.The measure includes language that would speed up the consideration of a waiver that James N. Mattis, a retired general who is Mr. Trump’s pick for defense secretary, needs in order to serve in that position.Federal law requires a seven-year waiting period between active duty and serving as defense secretary, and General Mattis retired from the Marines in 2013.The spending bill does not give the waiver to General Mattis, but lays a path for the swift consideration early next year of legislation granting one.“That should not be in this bill,” said Representative Louise M. Slaughter, a Democrat from upstate New York, adding that civilian control of the military was “one of the pillars of our democracy.”The spending bill also contains $7 million to reimburse law enforcement for overtime associated with protecting the president-elect, whose residence at Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan has created security headaches that have come with a considerable cost.Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York wanted $35 million, which his administration estimates will be the cost incurred by the city between the election and the inauguration.“We are counting on Congress to step up in the coming months to pay back what it owes our city,” the mayor, a Democrat, said in a statement after the spending bill was released this week. “This is a national responsibility, and the burden cannot fall alone on our city and police department.”