https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/17/us/politics/donald-trump-on-the-issues.html
Donald Trump on the Issues - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Republican Party
June 16, 2015
4187
Donald J. Trump’s entry into the race for the Republican presidential nomination amounts to his first actual foray into elective politics after several threats. A real estate developer and host of “The Celebrity Apprentice,” he opines about many issues in colorful terms, and is fast on the trigger with denunciations, but does not always make his own policy recommendations clear.Mr. Trump claimed last month that he had devised a “foolproof way” to defeat the Islamic State “very quickly.” But he refused to divulge it, saying he did not “want the enemy to know what I’m doing.” He calls President Obama “one of the worst things that’s ever happened to Israel,” and blames him for deteriorating U.S.-Israeli relations. He says Russian-backed separatists are acting aggressively in Ukraine because the United States is “not a respected country and we don’t have respected leadership at this moment” – but says America’s European allies should confront Russia.Mr. Trump – whose mother emigrated from Scotland – says illegal immigrants are “destroying the fabric of the country” while the middle class is getting “decimated.” He opposes efforts to grant legal status to undocumented immigrants, calling that a “suicide mission” for Republicans because “every one of those 11 million people will be voting Democratic.” He proposes instead to fortify the nation’s borders by building “a real wall” to keep immigrants out.Mr. Trump says that his views on marriage are “evolving” but that he still favors “traditional marriage,” between “a man and a woman.” (He has been married three times.) Same-sex marriage, he says, isn’t his “thing.”He does not just deny that climate change is occurring; he calls it a hoax, and says those who warn of global warming only want to raise taxes. He is less outspoken on other environmental issues, though he sued unsuccessfully in 2013 to block plans for wind turbines in Scotland that would power 65,000 homes, arguing, in part, that they would mar the view from a golf course he was proposing to build.Mr. Trump believes reckless government borrowing and stimulative policies by the Federal Reserve threaten the long-term health of the American economy and undermine the dollar, which, he said in 2012, “is going to go to hell.” He strongly opposes the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, calling it “an attack on America’s business” that fails to penalize Asian nations like Japan when, he says, they engage in currency manipulation to boost exports. He takes particular aim at China, accusing it of currency manipulation and flooding the United States with low-cost exports that “are truly hurting our economy and our jobs” – including, as it turns out, products with the Trump label. He attacked Mr. Obama last year for visiting China and “celebrating the fact that they’re ripping us off.”