https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/07/world/asia/chinese-womens-progress-stalls-in-varied-standards.html
Chinese Women’s Progress Stalls on Many Fronts - The New York Times
China,Women's Rights,Women and Girls
March 6, 2012
997
BEIJING — Eight dismissive words from a male Communist Party official made up Liu Ping’s mind last March — she would run for the local parliament, joining a growing global mainstream of women seeking political power.“He said, ‘Not this year, talk about it next year,”’ Ms. Liu recalled. “But the election was then and not next year! I decided immediately to run.”Ms. Liu’s campaign, waged on a bridge with a megaphone and via microblogging sites, led to a wave of hundreds of independent candidates around China. Almost all failed.Her bid flopped, she said, after being blocked by local officials. But Ms. Liu, 47, a steel-factory worker forced into early, impoverished retirement in Xinyu, in Jiangxi Province, achieved something more threatening to the government: She became a campaigner for the wider rights that women are seizing worldwide.“Women in China have no status,” said Ms. Liu, a divorced mother of a daughter.China, home to one in five of the world’s women, is among the few countries where women are experiencing a rights rollback, according to feminists, researchers and data from the All-China Women’s Federation, which is appointed and run by the government to represent women’s interests.In the 1950s, women here enjoyed top-down gains bestowed by the Communist Party and Mao Zedong’s maxim that “whatever male comrades can do, female comrades can do, too.”The blinding shimmer of the last 35 years of economic gains obscures the fact that while Chinese women have benefited from the rising tide lifting all boats, they are in fact losing ground.Women’s incomes are falling relative to men’s; traditional attitudes are relegating women to the home; and women’s net wealth may be shrinking. While female parliamentary representation elsewhere is rising, the percentage of women in China’s national legislature, the National People’s Congress, has flat-lined for decades at just over 20 percent.Clearly, women in China have more rights than their sisters in Afghanistan or Saudi Arabia. Women in Egypt and other Arab states see their rights endangered or already curbed by the rise in Islamists’ power since the Arab Spring.But China — such a rising force in other fields — is not emulating India, Europe, Latin America or African nations like South Africa and Rwanda in thrusting women to the fore.In part, this is because the Communists fear exactly what they see in Ms. Liu: an individual demanding rights in a one-party state. As she put it, “Actually, the problem is that no Chinese citizen has any status.”Ms. Liu says she is heavily monitored by the government, and on Dec. 30 was beaten to the ground by unidentified men after getting off a bus in Xinyu.Visitors — lawyers and online supporters — have been physically attacked, she said. She holds up her reddened hands; the right index finger is swollen and bent, broken deliberately by her younger brother after his son was denied entry to the army because of her political activism, she said.Yet she is determined to keep going. Women see their rights weaken when their income drops, she said. “We need the necessary political rights to take part in political debate.”Despite a powerful official narrative that women’s rights are well protected, there is no movement per se to protect women like Ms. Liu or expand the female factor in general.Feng Yuan, a feminist academic and head of the Anti-Domestic Violence Network in Beijing, said, “China doesn’t have any independent social movements.”Nor can the Women’s Federation help much, she suggested, saying, “They are part of the bureaucracy and have to compromise as a women’s organization.”She noted some recent activism. In Beijing on Feb. 14, Valentine’s Day, three young women in white bridal gowns smeared with red paint protested domestic violence. Days later, in Guangzhou, female students took over the men’s section of a public toilet to protest the lack of facilities for women and their lower social status, a protest since emulated in other cities.Yet crucially, say many feminists, there is no political will to improve women’s standing. “A very small group of men set policy in China, and they don’t see women’s rights as a mainstream issue,” said Hui Jin, 27, a postgraduate veterinary student who helped organize the wedding dress protest.There is no woman in the inner circle of power, the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the Communist Party, which has nine members; there is one among the 25 members of the Politburo. One in 16 full members of the Communist Party’s Central Committee is female. Just one of 120 centrally run state-owned companies, the most powerful economic sector, is run by a woman, Bloomberg Business News reported last year.Similarly, women lack economic clout. The oft-touted fact that Chinese women occupy 7 of the 14 positions on last year’s Forbes list of self-made billionaires “just tells you about those 7 women,” said Gail Hershatter, a history professor and specialist on Chinese women at the University of California, Santa Cruz.In the government’s most recent measure of how women are faring — the Third Survey of the Social Status of Women in China, conducted in 2010 — nearly 62 percent of men and nearly 55 percent of women said “men belong in public life and women belong at home,” increases of 7.7 and 4.4 percentage points from 2000.The income gap is widening, the survey found, with women’s average annual income 67.3 percent of men’s in urban areas and 56 percent in rural areas, down 10.2 and 23 percentage points from 1990.Of female “high-level talents” in 2010, 81 percent had college degrees, 7 percentage points more than men, but 80.5 percent said men held the senior jobs at their workplace.Meanwhile, research by Leta Hong Fincher, a doctoral candidate at Tsinghua University in Beijing, suggests that women’s wealth is shrinking.Because of ingrained cultural habits, a man buys the family home on marriage and a woman supplies the furnishings, meaning that fewer women than men own a home. Even when a woman contributes to the house purchase or mortgage, the desire to give a man “face” means that the home may only be in his name. A result is that many women have lost out on the last decade of exploding property prices, Ms. Fincher has found.“Many women have been shut out of what may be the biggest accumulation of real estate wealth in history, valued at over $17 trillion in 2010” by the bank HSBC, she wrote. A controversial amendment to the Marriage Law passed in August says that in divorce, unless contested, property reverts to the legal owner, leaving many women who cannot prove their financial contribution empty-handed, Ms. Fincher said.Figures from the All-China Women’s Federation show that in 2010, 37.9 percent of women and 67.1 percent of men owned real estate, including joint ownership.Yet it was a meeting in Beijing in 1995 that laid the groundwork for the last two decades of progress in women’s rights around the world: the United Nations’ Fourth World Conference on Women, where Hillary Rodham Clinton declared, “It is time for us to say here in Beijing, and the world to hear, that it is no longer acceptable to discuss women’s rights as separate from human rights.”Article 14 of the Beijing Declaration, which came out of that conference, said, “Women’s rights are human rights.” Women took it home and showed their governments. The momentum for change was building.Wu Qing, a 74-year-old retired English professor, attended the 1995 meeting. In her small apartment in Beijing, in the Haidian university district, where books and papers teeter in tall piles, Ms. Wu pulls a tattered Chinese-language copy of the declaration out of a plastic bag.There are also copies of the Chinese Constitution, the Labor Law, the Education Law, the Teacher’s Law, and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, an international bill of rights for women.“I carry these with me wherever I go,” Ms. Wu said.A committed feminist who in 1987 helped organize a women’s study group at her university, the Beijing Foreign Studies University, Ms. Wu says political freedoms are essential if Chinese women are to make progress.For 27 years, Ms. Wu was a member of the Haidian district’s People’s Congress, for much of that time an independent candidate chosen by constituents, the kind Ms. Liu aspired to be. But last year, Ms. Wu was not allowed to run.“I think the decision came from the very top of the government,” she said. “They” — the party and state — “are afraid of a domino effect.”“I’ve been to Africa, to Brazil, to India,” she added, “and I feel the system here is different. India is a democratic country and China is a totalitarian country. In India if women decide to work together democratically they can get something done. But in China it depends on how good the local officials are.”Over all, said Ms. Feng, the feminist academic, “the transition period of gender patterns is very, very long.”“It’s the longest revolution,” she said. “All other revolutions are pretty easy and short in comparison.”