http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/13/world/europe/13sweden.html
After Stockholm Attack, Focus Turns to Suspect - The New York Times
Abdaly  Taimour Abdulwahab al-,Terrorism,Sweden,Bombs and Explosives,Stockholm (Sweden)
Dec. 12, 2010
8515
STOCKHOLM — A day after two explosions struck central Stockholm, killing the man suspected of being a suicide bomber and wounding two other people, investigators began to focus on the possibility that the person responsible was a disaffected Iraqi-born Swede who had attended college in Britain.Reports in British and Swedish newspapers, citing government sources, identified the man as Taimour al-Abdaly, a 28-year-old Sunni Muslim whose family moved to Sweden from Baghdad in 1992. Attempts by The New York Times to confirm the reports independently were not immediately successful, and Swedish officials declined to comment, saying the bomber’s identity was part of the investigation.But the suspect’s possible link to Britain was  reinforced Sunday night when the Metropolitan Police in London said officers were searching a property at an address in Bedfordshire, the county in which Mr. Abdaly is believed to have attended college. A spokesman said the search was made “in connection with the incidents in Stockholm.”Sweden’s prime minister, Fredrik Reinfeldt, told reporters at a news conference that an investigation led by the Swedish intelligence agency Sapo was still working to establish links among the two explosions, the dead man found with blast wounds to his abdomen and the threatening messages sent to the Swedish news agency Tidningarnas Telegrambyra shortly before the explosions.Mr. Reinfeldt, leader of a center-right coalition, said the police were “treating this as a terrorist action,” but he appealed to Swedes not to jump to “the wrong conclusions” or allow preliminary reports about the explosions to stir fresh tensions over Sweden’s growing immigrant population, including about 450,000 Muslims. Sweden’s “openness is worth giving ourselves the time to get to the bottom of this,” he said.“Our democracy functions well,” Mr. Reinfeldt said. “Those who feel frustration or anger have the opportunity to express it without resorting to violence.”The blasts have caused widespread consternation in Sweden. The country has long prided itself on having created a tolerant and peaceful society at home, and on having avoided involvement in the upheavals that have ravaged much of Europe in modern times, including World War II. Until Saturday, it had escaped the bombings that have hit several other European capitals since the 9/11 attacks.Although officials withheld the name of the suspected bomber, the director of operations for the security police, Anders Thornberg, told reporters that investigators “now have a clearer idea about him.” Reports in Swedish newspapers said the man’s identity had been traced through the license plate of a car used in the blasts, and Mr. Thornberg hinted that he had acted alone.The first blast came from a car parked near the busy shopping street of Drottninggatan shortly before 5 p.m. on Saturday, and appeared to involve gas canisters found in the wreckage. A second blast came minutes later, about 200 yards away. A man’s body, with blast injuries to his abdomen, was discovered after the second explosion.The newspaper Aftonbladet reported on its Web site that the dead man had been carrying pipe bombs and a backpack full of nails. But the sequence left many unanswered questions. Among them was why the suicide bomber, if that is what he was, had detonated his bomb in an area with relatively few people, when he could have chosen any one of the crowded shops along Drottninggatan, a pedestrian mall hundreds of yards long.Other questions focused on the messages received by several Swedish news organizations. Dan Skeppe, an editor at Tidningarnas Telegrambyra, said the agency had received recordings attached to an e-mail minutes before the blasts. The recordings, obtained by The New York Times, were in Arabic, Swedish and English. In one, a man, speaking in fluent and scarcely accented English, addressed himself “to Sweden.”He read from what was apparently a prepared script, and said that Swedes had brought “these actions” on themselves. The message singled out Lars Vilks, an artist threatened repeatedly with death since  his  drawing of the Prophet Muhammad was published in 2007, and demanded that European nations withdraw their soldiers from Afghanistan.Then, with the sound of the turn of a page, he addressed his wife and children. The man confessed that trips he had made to the Middle East were not for business, but for “jihad.”“I love you all. Please forgive me if I lied to you. It wasn’t very easy to live the last four years with the secret of being mujahid,” he said, using an Arabic word for holy warrior, “or, as you call it, terrorist.” After a pause, he continued. “Please do know one thing,” he said. “You and the children are the best of what happened to me in this life.”The final words  were directed at “all hidden mujahideen in Europe and especially in Sweden.” Now, the speaker said, is “the time to strike even if you only have a knife to strike with, and I do know that you have more than that.”The recording’s reference to Mr. Vilks, 64, pointed to continued anger in the Muslim world over his drawing, which was deemed blasphemous.Publication of the drawing in Swedish newspapers drew widespread condemnation in the Muslim world and death threats against Mr. Vilks, who has since lived under police protection. In March, Colleen R. LaRose, an American who converted to Islam and used the pseudonym JihadJane, was charged with trying to recruit Islamic terrorists to kill Mr. Vilks.Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical cleric associated with Al Qaeda in the Arabia Peninsula in Yemen, had named Mr. Vilks among those he approved for assassination in a publication this summer.The family of Mr. Abdaly, the man identified in news accounts as the bomber, told reporters by telephone on Sunday that they had lost contact with their son. The Swedish newspaper Expressen quoted Mr. Abdaly’s father as saying that Taimour al-Abdaly had not responded to calls since Saturday. “He did not say where he was going,” he said. “The whole family is in shock, and wants to find out what happened.”In a recent profile he placed on an Islamic dating Web site, Muslima.com, the younger Mr. Abdaly described himself as an Iraqi who moved with his family to Sweden in 1992. The profile said that he had moved to Britain in 2001 to study for a degree, which was described in Mr. Abdaly’s Facebook profile as “sports therapy at the University of Bedfordshire.” The Facebook profile said he graduated in 2004.The dating Web site profile  shows a tall, stern-looking, neatly dressed man standing in front of a white curtain, his dark hair cropped short, with a trimmed black beard. Another picture available online shows him posing in a black jacket and sunglasses, beard trimmed to stubble, against a background of a dry and rocky valley,“I am married since 2004,” he said on his dating profile, according to a translation of the original Arabic. He described himself as “very religious” and said that he had two daughters, aged three and one. “I want to get married again,” he said, “and would like to have a BIG family. My wife agreed to this. I am looking for a practicing Muslim, Sunni, who loves children and wants to please Allah before me,” he said. “I am looking mostly for religion.”On his Facebook page he posted videos dedicated to Islamic fighters around the world. Among his listed interests there were both “I love my Apple iPad” and “Islamic caliphate state”, a historical concept that refers to a supreme Islamic nation pure in its religion.Officials in Sweden have made no mention of any involvement by al-Qaeda or any other extremist Islamic terror organization. But in an interview over the weekend, a former British counter-terrorism official, who did not want to be identified discussing a current operation, said that a number of known Islamic militants have traveled to Sweden in the past two years. The account was confirmed by an American intelligence operative, who spoke of an established al-Qaeda “cell” in Sweden. Both declined to provide further details.The Swedish military’s current deployment in Afghanistan, adding signals intelligence specialists to a NATO-led combat mission under American command, is a rare departure from the country’s usual pattern of avoiding participation in military alliances.But a major change has come with the impact on a historically homogeneous society of heavy immigration in the past three decades, especially of Muslims. Their growing numbers, and the furor surrounding Mr. Vilks, have contributed to a rise in tensions that have led to increased support for a right-wing anti-immigration party, the Sweden Democrats, which won 20 seats this summer in a general election. The party, blaming immigration for increased crime rates, has focused its ire on the Muslim population, which accounts for about 5 percent of Sweden’s 9.3 million people.According to Sweden's TV4 News, a squad of specialist police officers conducted several raids on addresses connected with the bomber Sunday, in the suburbs of Stockholm and an apartment in Tranas. At the latter address, reported TV4, material was confiscated in paper bags.