https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/20/opinion/indias-misplaced-outrage.html
India’s Misplaced Outrage - The New York Times
Khobragade  Devyani,United States International Relations,Domestic Service,India,United States,Editorials
Dec. 19, 2013
9813
India’s overwrought reaction to the arrest of one of its diplomats in the United States is unworthy of a democratic government. Officials in New Delhi have inflamed anti-American outrage instead of calling for justice, especially for the domestic worker who is at the heart of the case.The charges brought against Devyani Khobragade, the deputy consul general in New York, by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, should concern anyone who values worker rights. Ms. Khobragade was arrested last week and accused of submitting false documents to obtain a work visa for her housekeeper and paying her far less than the minimum legal wage. Prosecutors say the diplomat promised American authorities she would pay $4,500 a month but actually paid just $573 a month and made the housekeeper work far more than 40 hours a week.Instead of concerning themselves with that injustice, many in India seem incensed that Ms. Khobragade was arrested at all.It is not unusual in India for domestic employees to be paid poorly and required to work more than 60 hours a week. But such practices are not allowed under American law, and abuses by anyone should not be tolerated, regardless of their status. It was puzzling that Secretary of State John Kerry issued a statement on Wednesday expressing regret for the incident. All diplomats, including Ms. Khobragade, presumably are made aware of their legal obligations and American procedures before accepting an assignment in the United States.Even more disturbing is the fact that Indian officials would take extreme steps to retaliate for the arrest — they removed security barriers surrounding the American Embassy compound. Despite the way many Indians seem to view the case, it is not a challenge to India’s honor. It is a charge against one diplomat accused of submitting false documents to evade the law. Ms. Khobragade’s lawyer said she would plead not guilty and challenge the arrest on the grounds of diplomatic immunity, which prosecutors say does not apply in this case. In any event, she will have a full opportunity to defend herself against the charges.