https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/world/americas/report-criticizes-mexican-officials-for-ignoring-2011-massacre.html
Report Criticizes Mexican Officials for Ignoring 2011 Massacre - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Zetas,Drug Enforcement Administration,Mexico,Drug Cartels
Oct. 9, 2016
2548
MEXICO CITY — The killers went to the town of Allende one weekend in March 2011 with orders to exact revenge. They massacred 26 people in two days, including women and children, because of a feud among leaders of the feared Zetas drug gang.Over the ensuing months, more people in Allende were killed, 42 in all by the end of the slaughter. But nothing was done about it: There was no inquiry, no outcry, no elected official vowing that he would not rest until the guilty were brought to justice, according to an account released on Sunday by a noted human rights activist, Sergio Aguayo.Only after reports began to surface in the news media three years later did investigators from the Coahuila state government turn up in Allende, according to the report, which was sponsored by the government’s Executive Committee for Attention to Victims.In matter-of-fact detail, Mr. Aguayo and other researchers at the Colegio de México describe how the Zetas moved into the northern ranchlands near the border with Texas and established control by bribing the local authorities.The central accusation of the study is the failure at every level of government, from local police to the federal attorney general’s office, to undertake an investigation of the killings and acknowledge the rights of the victims and their families to a full accounting of what happened.Mr. Aguayo also raises questions about American involvement in the case. Two of the feuding Zetas leaders are in custody in the United States, where they are protected witnesses for the Drug Enforcement Administration.“The opacity of the United States is an obstacle to approaching the truth,” he wrote. “They have important information to understand what happens in Mexico.”The study also examines an emblematic massacre that has received more attention: the killing of 72 migrants in San Fernando, in the nearby state of Tamaulipas, in 2010.In Allende, “the municipal authorities were, in the best cases, decorative figures,” the report said. The mayor later said he had heard “isolated comments” about the massacre and never received any official complaint.When state prosecutors finally began an investigation in 2014, Mr. Aguayo’s team said, it was insufficient and heavily weighted toward eyewitness testimony. No attempt was made by prosecutors to address how the massacre fit into the context of gang-related violence sweeping northeastern Mexico at that time.The report raises the question of how many people may have been killed in neighboring towns because of the Zetas feud. One of the men in American custody, Héctor Moreno Villanueva, told a Texas court that there were 300 victims in all.Mr. Moreno and two other top lieutenants, Alfonso Cuéllar and Luis Garza Gaytán, were suspected by the Zeta leadership, the brothers Miguel Angel and Omar Treviño Morales, of collaborating with the United States authorities. Mr. Garza lived in Allende.Witnesses told investigators that the 60 men who stormed into the town that March weekend in 2011 were looking for anyone named Garza, and that they burned the victims’ bodies and destroyed 32 houses and two ranches in the town. Mr. Aguayo’s report said the investigation did little to determine the accuracy of that testimony.“This prevents establishing the facts with any precision, assigning responsibility and providing justice and reparations,” he wrote.