https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/12/opinion/new-rules-should-ban-discrimination-by-federal-contractors.html
New Rules Should Ban Discrimination by Federal Contractors - The New York Times
Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Discrimination,Government Contracts and Procurement,Obama  Barack,Supreme Court (US),Hobby Lobby Stores Inc,Transgender and Transsexuals,Freedom of Religion,Editorials,Hiring and Promotion,Executive Orders and Memorandums
July 11, 2014
5671
President Obama should resist a pressure campaign by some religious groups to weaken a promised executive order that would prohibit federal contractors from discriminating against gay men, lesbians and transgender people in their hiring practices.Emboldened by the Supreme Court’s addlebrained Hobby Lobby decision, several groups wrote to Mr. Obama on July 1 asking him to allow federal contractors to fire or refuse to hire workers based on their religious objections to a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.This is not a question of religious freedom. It is a question of whether to allow religion to be used as an excuse to discriminate in employment against a particular group of people. Many states already have laws protecting gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender workers. There is no such federal law, so the presidential order (promised but not yet produced) would extend those rules to companies that receive federal contracts in states without those kinds of anti-bias laws, protecting millions more people.Mr. Obama’s resolve is being tested. There is no good reason to give religious employers a special privilege to inflict undeserved pain by, for example, refusing to hire someone to work on a government-backed project just because she happens to be a lesbian, or firing a capable employee who marries someone of the same sex.The July 1 letter came one day after the Supreme Court decided that religious owners of secular, for-profit companies can refuse to comply with a regulation requiring that women be provided contraception coverage in their employer-based health insurance. The order created the danger that intolerant people would feel emboldened to try to justify denying fair treatment in other ways.The July 1 letter did just that, arguing that underwriting bigotry against gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people with the public’s money is the best way “to respect diversity of opinion on this issue in a way that respects the dignity of all parties to the best of our ability.” The letter, which followed a similar missive from 150 conservative religious groups, was organized by Michael Wear, an evangelical Christian who worked on the White House faith-based initiative during Mr. Obama’s first term and calls himself a supporter of both the president and gay rights.The Hobby Lobby ruling does not compel a retreat from the coming order’s goal of fairness for all. Indeed, the flawed majority opinion interpreting the Religious Freedom Restoration Act in the Hobby Lobby case contained assurances that it does not threaten anti-discrimination rules in other spheres. The Civil Rights Act gives religious groups some leeway to favor members of their own faith in hiring. In 2002, President George W. Bush extended that leeway to faith-based service organizations receiving federal money, and Mr. Obama has failed to keep a campaign promise to rescind Mr. Bush’s order.But longstanding rules forbid discrimination by government contractors based on race, sex or national origin, even on religious grounds. That should apply to sexual orientation and gender identity as well.