https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/16/us/politics/supreme-court-immigration-ruling-wont-end-political-tussle.html
Supreme Court Immigration Ruling Won’t End Political Tussle - The New York Times
Illegal Immigration,Obama  Barack,Supreme Court (US),Executive Orders and Memorandums,Immigration and Emigration,Presidential Election of 2016,Deportation,Hispanic-Americans,Trump  Donald J
April 15, 2016
8382
WASHINGTON — Inside the Supreme Court’s chambers on Monday, eight justices will consider whether President Obama abused the power of his office by issuing executive actions to allow millions of undocumented immigrants to work in the country legally and protect them from deportation.Regardless of how the justices answer that question, their ruling is certain to inflame the volatile immigration debate in the 2016 presidential campaign. The decision will also help determine whether Mr. Obama has a chance to redeem his legacy on immigration, or see it marred beyond repair.“If he wins, then overnight he goes from the president with the most deportations to the great liberator,” said Kevin Appleby, the senior director of international migration policy at the Center for Migration Studies of New York. “If he loses, I’m afraid historians won’t give him much credit for making the effort.”The ruling is not likely to come until June, a wait that will be excruciating for the White House, which has been caught between angry demands from Republicans for more border enforcement and rage among Latinos who expected more from Mr. Obama.A victory in the Supreme Court for Mr. Obama would allow millions of immigrants here illegally to come out of the shadows and stay in the country, but it would also be certain to provide new political ammunition for Donald J. Trump and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, the Republican presidential candidates who have used anti-immigrant rhetoric to rally support during the primaries.Administration officials say a late-spring surge of Central American migrants crossing the southern border — something that has happened before — could create a sense that the border is out of control at precisely the time that the Republican candidates are seeking to capitalize on the issue to bolster their campaigns.Mr. Obama announced his executive actions in late 2014 in a program called Deferred Action for Parents of Americans, which was aimed at as many as five million people in the country illegally. But the program was blocked by courts after Texas and 26 other states challenged it as an overreach of presidential authority.If the court rules against Mr. Obama, or if it splits 4 to 4, it will immediately end the president’s efforts to revamp the nation’s immigration laws. The decision would in turn add to the long-simmering frustration with Mr. Obama among Latinos, who blame his administration for carrying out a record number of deportations and remain angry about what they say was his slowness to act on a sweeping revision of the nation’s immigration system.A loss at the court would also increase the pressure on Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, the Democratic candidates for president, to offer new immigration proposals. Both have said they support Mr. Obama’s use of executive power to defer deportations. Mrs. Clinton said last week that as president, she would create an Office of Immigrant Affairs.“There’s a lot there for the Latino community to digest as it looks back on eight years of the Obama administration,” said Angela Maria Kelley, a veteran of Washington’s immigration battles and the executive director of the Center for American Progress Action Fund, an advocacy group. “There will be a lot less indigestion if the Supreme Court upholds the executive actions.”Although a loss in the Supreme Court would be a blow to Mr. Obama, it could also energize Latinos to turn out for Democrats this fall in hopes of seizing control of Congress and preventing the election of a candidate like Mr. Trump or Mr. Cruz.Pro-immigration activists are already vowing a huge surge of political energy if the court rules against Mr. Obama. Thousands of Hispanic activists are planning to rally on the steps of the Supreme Court and in front of the White House on Monday. Similar rallies are planned at state capitols and federal buildings across the country, organizers said.“The tenor of the debate around the issue of immigration — around Latinos and Muslims — has been so vitriolic and hostile that there’s a lot of attention,” Ms. Kelley said. “Fear can be quite the motivator.”Conservative activists have also mobilized in advance of Monday’s hearing. NumbersUSA, an anti-immigration organization, is urging the 3.7 million people who have “liked” it on Facebook and a million email subscribers to call their lawmakers and journalists in their hometowns to rally opposition to the president’s actions.The Federation for American Immigration Reform has been running a social media campaign with the hashtag #NoAmnesty and ads with Mr. Obama’s face that ask: “Is He Unstoppable? Will Supremes unleash a power-mad amnesty president?”Daniel Stein, the group’s president, described Mr. Obama as a “rogue executive” who tried to illegally open America’s borders to immigrants by usurping the power of Congress. Mr. Stein predicted an intense political fight on immigration during the fall election no matter how the court rules.“This is the most important immigration and separation of powers case to be before the court in decades,” Mr. Stein said. “You are going to get the same result either way, which is a continuation of the elevated, emotional pitch of the immigration issue in the presidential campaign.”Mr. Obama’s supporters agree. Mr. Appleby predicted that Mr. Trump would seize on the court’s ruling if he is the Republican nominee.“If Obama wins, he’ll say, ‘Elect me, and I’m going to correct this, reverse this, and build a wall,’ and if Obama loses, then Trump’s going to say, ‘See, I told you so. What we need is a wall.’ ”But Frank Sharry, the executive director of America’s Voice, a pro-immigration group, said Mr. Trump and the other Republicans might not get an electoral boost from the court ruling. He said conservative immigration activists were already certain to vote for the Republican candidate.“The anti-immigrant bear is loose in the city already,” Mr. Sharry said, adding that Mr. Trump had “activated the 40 percent of the Republican party that dislikes immigrants and wants to round them up and get rid of them.”Some of Mr. Obama’s immigration policies would be unaffected by the court’s ruling. The president has shifted enforcement priorities to focus more on dangerous criminals and less on immigrants with minor offenses. His administration also ended a program in which immigration agents worked with the local police to find and deport immigrants.But with the court case pending, the president’s aides are wary of offering any robust defense of Mr. Obama’s actions that might be interpreted as an effort to inappropriately sway the justices.“I feel a little limited in what I can say about it, other than to voice confidence in the strength of the legal argument that the Department of Justice will be presenting to the Supreme Court,” said Josh Earnest, the president’s press secretary.Roy Beck, the president of NumbersUSA, said activists on both sides would be anxiously waiting until the court ruling. He said whichever side lost could use the issue to rile up its voters.“Sometime in June, we will see through the glass clearly,” Mr. Beck said. “Something that big, with millions of people involved, this is going to be a big political issue in the campaign.”