https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/02/nyregion/fearing-loss-of-us-money-under-trump-new-york-begins-urgent-review.html
Fearing Loss of U.S. Money Under Trump, New York Begins Urgent Review - The New York Times
Illegal Immigration,Trump  Donald J,New York City
Dec. 2, 2016
8346
Officials are conducting an urgent review of the billions of dollars that New York City receives each year from the federal government to identify the streams of money that may be most at risk once President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office.Mr. Trump, a Republican, has threatened to punish cities that defy his efforts to deport undocumented immigrants, and there is also concern that the Republican-controlled Congress may seek to slash longstanding aid programs.“There’s urgency because the threat seems greater than it’s been,” said Tony Shorris, the first deputy mayor, referring to the effort to identify which programs may be most at risk. “There’s also uncertainty because the lack of clarity is much greater than it’s been.”Mr. Trump has said he will cut financing to so-called sanctuary cities that move to protect undocumented immigrants or refuse to cooperate with federal deportation efforts.In response, Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, and the mayors of many other cities have adopted a defiant stance, saying they will not comply with demands to help identify or round up immigrants in this country illegally.Officials said the federal government could not just eliminate all of the city’s financing, which flows to many programs, each bound by laws and regulations.Some kinds of financing are more vulnerable than others. Some cuts may require congressional action through the budget process or by changes to laws that require programs, Mr. Shorris said. But there are other types of financing that the president or federal agencies he controls could eliminate or suspend unilaterally.Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller, whose office has also begun to study the potential effect on the city of any federal cuts, said it was difficult to predict what actions Mr. Trump might take.“Donald Trump is unpredictable and he says one thing one day and he does another the next,” Mr. Stringer, a Democrat, said. He added that the greater danger were the deep cuts Congress might make to programs that Republicans have long wanted to slash.“With a Republican Congress,” Mr. Stringer said, “if their rhetoric creates actionable items, we could potentially constrict or collapse the safety net in the city and that is a very real threat to the survival of a lot of vulnerable New Yorkers.”Eric F. Phillips, Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary, said city lawyers and budget officials were preparing what he called an “exposure sheet,” highlighting programs that may be most vulnerable.Though city officials had promised to provide details of their work, they reversed course abruptly this week and refused to offer additional information.“The legal and financial analysis of our potential exposure is not yet complete,” Mr. Phillips said in an email.Estimates vary as to how much money the city receives from the federal government, but a study by the city’s Independent Budget Office put the total last year at about $7 billion. A review by Mr. Stringer’s office estimated the amount for the current fiscal year, which began on July 1, at somewhat higher than that, though less than 9 percent of the city’s overall budget, excluding recovery aid related to Hurricane Sandy.Mr. Shorris said that concerns went beyond direct federal financing of city programs.One threat is connected to Republican vows to repeal or weaken the Affordable Care Act. If that happened and large numbers of city residents lost their health insurance as a result, they would most likely seek care in city-run hospitals. That would greatly increase the burden on those hospitals, the largest provider of care to uninsured New Yorkers.Legal precedent may require that any cuts to federal funding be related to an issue in dispute between the city and the federal government. If, for instance, the city refused to allow the Police Department to cooperate with deportation raids, it could put money tied to the criminal justice system at risk.A city official familiar with the effort to identify vulnerable programs said it was unlikely that the federal government would seek to reduce financing aimed at helping New York fight terrorism. But the official, who was not authorized to comment publicly on internal discussions and asked not to be identified, said there were other, smaller funding streams that could be affected.Those include federal grants that could pay for programs meant to create alternatives to incarceration or for creating educational or rehabilitative programing within the city’s jails.Programs outside the criminal justice system may also be vulnerable, such as those that receive federal money for programs that specifically serve immigrants in areas such as adult literacy and work force development.Carol Kellermann, president of the Citizens Budget Commission, said she was skeptical that Mr. Trump would go too far in seeking to punish New York, particularly because of his ties to the city.“They’re going to do things that hurt cities, that hurt the president’s city, where the president is a real estate developer and cares about long-term property values?” Ms. Kellerman said. “I don’t think so. I hope these things don’t happen.”