http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/30/world/returning-tundra-s-rhythm-to-the-inuit-in-film.html
Returning Tundra's Rhythm to the Inuit, in Film - The New York Times
CANADA,IGLOOLIK (NUNAVUT),ARCTIC REGIONS,KUNUK  ZACHARIAS,MOTION PICTURES,INUIT INDIANS,GEOGRAPHIC PROFILES,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,FAST RUNNER  THE (MOVIE)
March 30, 2002
5430
ZACHARIAS KUNUK'S film, ''Atanarjuat (The Fast Runner),'' based on an age-old Arctic folk tale, has made him a celebrity of sorts. But frankly, he would rather pass on the parties.He was invited to peddle the movie at the Arctic Winter Games this month in Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut Territory, but he chose to stay home. He packed his snowmobile with an axe, a rifle and a video camera and went seal hunting instead.Mr. Kunuk, 44, is the first Inuk to direct a feature-length motion picture, one that was performed entirely by Inuit actors in their centuries-old Inuktitut language. The picture won him a prize for best first feature film at Cannes last year and in February won six Genies -- Canada's equivalent of the Oscar -- including one for best director.That prominence and the appearance of the first genuinely Inuit film are landmarks for the Inuit, an indigenous Asian people who crossed into North America thousands of years ago and who have made an uneven advance toward mainstream Canadian life. The Inuit, formerly referred to as Eskimos, persuaded the government to carve Nunavut from the Northwest Territories in 1999. Their language, strictly oral for centuries, has spawned an alphabet in the last few decades.For all his status now, life for Mr. Kunuk here in Igloolik, 125 miles north of the Arctic circle, is pretty much the same. He works in a spare office editing videotape and finds solace in a little shack that serves as a study. The shack is decorated with a plastic tropical plant, a wolf skull and the jaw of a polar bear hunted by one of his five children. Any day he likes, he can drop everything and poke around the ice cracks looking for a seal to shoot.''Everything I need is right here,'' said Mr. Kunuk, peering across the boundless tundra as he sipped tea, then lighted a cigarette and put on an extra layer of dog skins to keep warm in the 30-below-zero weather. ''There is no distraction and there is lots of light. Imagine doing a scene here. It could be a dog team scene, a hunting scene.''As if on cue, a fluffy white Arctic fox appeared over a ridge of blue ice to look over Mr. Kunuk and his three hunting companions before scurrying away. ''You see what I mean? That could have been a polar bear. Anything can happen here!''THE Arctic is a big, blank canvas in Mr. Kunuk's hands. In ''Atanarjuat,'' a nearly three-hour movie full of exquisite icy landscapes, he uses an ancient Inuit legend to show survival techniques and explore how love, hypocrisy, jealousy and revenge drive life in a community divided by an evil spirit.As the film has been shown across Canada's Arctic, entire Inuit communities have been brought to tears watching a tale that until now has been handed down from generation to generation as a bedtime story.Like Mr. Kunuk himself, ''Atanarjuat'' is alternatively reflective and rambunctious, sorrowful and funny.The movie is playing in theaters in France and the Netherlands and is scheduled for release in the United States and Australia in June. But Mr. Kunuk says the audience he cares most about are the 40,000 Inuit who live in isolated settlements across Canada's north, especially the young people who he says do not know how to endure in the wilderness.''It's about identity and showing people where they came from, but it's also about survival,'' said Mr. Kunuk, whose soft brown eyes are set above cheeks weathered like black chalk by the hostile climate. ''Young people today travel from community to community, and when a storm blows we have to rescue them. They don't know where they're going, they don't bring knives or saws to build a shelter out of ice, and they don't know how to do it.''''Atanarjuat'' also functions as a how-to film, showing viewers how to build an igloo in a storm. This reflects how much life is changing here. People still leave frozen walrus carcasses in their front yard for hungry neighbors. But supermarkets and automated teller machines are quickly taking root.MR. KUNUK and his art are a product of this revolution. He was born in a shack of frozen moss as the fourth child of 12, and was taken from his parents by the government so he would go to school.''I saw a little bit of that old way before I was dragged to school; people living in sod houses, hitching their dogs, and fathers going off for the day hunting,'' he said. ''And what else do you need? When I was 7, I didn't worry about money or grades or how I looked.''His mother, Vivi, had a particularly lasting effect on him with her gripping night-time storytelling and her personal connection to Inuit mysticism. She grew up as the adopted daughter of a woman who lost one child after another in childbirth because of the curse of a jealous shaman, Mr. Kunuk said.''I believe in shamans,'' he said. ''If it were up to me, I would go back to the law of the Inuit, the law of nature. I would live like that while checking e-mail in the morning, calling halfway around the world to do business, watching wars in my living room on television. It is possible to do both in this day.''The idea of picking and choosing from distinct cultures as if they were platters on a buffet, Mr. Kunuk acknowledges, is not entirely practical. Yet the choices he has made are full of paradoxical twists.He rebelled against Canada's socialization plans by dropping out of school after the eighth grade. But he was attracted to the cowboy films shown in Igloolik.Mr. Kunuk began his artistic endeavors as a carver of soapstone. In 1981, he traveled to Montreal to sell some sculptures and came home to Igloolik with a video camera.It took him two months to figure out how to get the color balance right but Mr. Kunuk went out anyway to document the adventures of hunters in black and white. A year later, the Inuit Broadcasting Corporation, an independent production company, opened an office here and hired Mr. Kunuk as a cameraman.In 1990, he co-founded Igloolik Isuma Productions, the first Inuit production company, to make a series of television and museum videos and short documentaries.Making ''Atanarjuat'' wasn't easy. There were interruptions in funding, flash snow storms and the death from cancer of Paul Apak Angilirq, the scriptwriter, in the middle of the shoot. But in the end, Mr. Kunuk said, ''shooting it was the most fun we could have.''''My generation,'' Mr. Kunuk said, sighing, ''we used to drive on the land in dog sleds. Now we look out the window and say, 'It's a nice day. Shouldn't we be out there?' That's where I want to take the audience.''