http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/world/asia/donald-trump-philippines-jose-antonio.html
Trump Business Partner Is Philippines’ New Trade Envoy to U.S. - The New York Times
Duterte  Rodrigo,Trump  Donald J,Philippines,Antonio  Jose E B,United States International Relations,Manila (Philippines),Presidential Election of 2016,Century Properties Group
Nov. 9, 2016
8398
BANGKOK — The timing of President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines couldn’t be better. Before Donald J. Trump’s election victory, the Philippine leader had already named Mr. Trump’s business partner in Manila as a special envoy to the United States.Mr. Duterte, whose colorful and unpredictable comments have drawn comparisons to Mr. Trump, late last month named the chairman of Century Properties Group, Jose E. B. Antonio, as an envoy to Washington for trade, investment and economic affairs, Philippine news outlets reported. Word of the appointment became public this week.Stock in Century Properties rose 20 percent on Wednesday on the Philippine Stock Exchange on the news that Mr. Trump had been elected.The company is building the Trump Tower at Century City, a $150 million, 57-story apartment building in metropolitan Manila. Mr. Trump has no involvement in the project except to provide his brand name.“I’ve always loved the Philippines,” Mr. Trump says on the company’s website. “I think it’s just a special place, and Manila is one of Asia’s most spectacular cities.” The website notes that the project is not owned, developed or sold by Mr. Trump or any of his companies.Mr. Trump’s assertion during the campaign that “animals” were entering the United States from “terrorist nations” including the Philippines angered many Filipinos. One Philippine congressman proposed barring Mr. Trump from the country.Mr. Antonio’s assignment is to enhance business ties between the two countries. A decade ago, he served as a special envoy to China. He could not be reached for comment.“His strong business leadership will steer the Philippines’ trade and economic goals in the right direction and help seize opportunities for both public and private-sector Philippine-U.S. businesses while promoting robust relations in the 21st century,” said Perfecto Yasay Jr., the foreign affairs secretary, according to a report in The Philippine Daily Inquirer.Mr. Duterte, who has said that President Obama “can go to hell,” is most likely hoping that Mr. Trump will be less interested in human rights and unconcerned by the killing of about 2,000 people in Mr. Duterte’s campaign against drugs.In a statement released by Martin Andanar, the communications secretary, Mr. Duterte congratulated Mr. Trump on his victory.“President Duterte wishes President-elect Trump success in the next four years as chief executive and commander in chief of the U.S. military, and looks forward to working with the incoming administration for enhanced Philippine-U.S. relations anchored on mutual respect, mutual benefit and shared commitment to democratic ideals and the rule of law,” the statement said.