http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/12/us/politics/indiana-senate-evan-bayh.html
Former Indiana Senator Evan Bayh Is Expected to Run for His Old Seat - The New York Times
Bayh  Birch Evan,Senate,Indiana,Democratic Party,Elections  Senate,United States Politics and Government,United States
July 11, 2016
6540
WASHINGTON — Former Senator Evan Bayh, Democrat of Indiana, is expected to announce that he will run to reclaim the job he gave up in 2010, a move that could strengthen the Democrats’ prospects of winning majority control of the Senate in November.Mr. Bayh, 60, served two terms as governor of Indiana, from 1989 to 1997, and two terms as senator, from 1999 to 2011. His father, Birch Bayh, served for more than 25 years as a senator and House member, and ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for president in 1976.Evan Bayh’s name recognition is expected to give him a strong advantage in the race for his old Senate seat, which is being vacated by Dan Coats, a Republican. He would face Representative Todd Young, 43, a Republican serving his third term in the House.Mr. Bayh has not officially announced his candidacy, but on Monday, former Representative Baron Hill, who was unopposed in the Democratic primary in May, abruptly dropped out of the race, saying that he wanted to make way for “a strong nominee who has the money, name identification and resources to win.”In Indiana, Mr. Bayh is effectively the only Democrat who fits that profile. He has a war chest of more than $9.2 million left over from his previous campaigns, according to Federal Election Commission data.But in a year when political insiders have struggled, Mr. Bayh would also bring some baggage. Since leaving the Senate, he has been a partner at McGuireWoods, a Washington law firm that, through a subsidiary, also provides lobbying and advocacy services.Mr. Bayh has served as a “strategic adviser” to many of the firm’s top clients, according to the company’s website. Republicans immediately branded him a lobbyist and noted his ties to Wall Street, where he also advises a private equity firm, Apollo Global Management.Because Mr. Hill was already certified as the Democratic candidate, he filed formal paperwork to withdraw from the race and notified the Indiana Democratic Party, which must now choose a candidate to replace him.Mr. Bayh would become the second former Democratic senator seeking to reclaim his old job this year. In Wisconsin, former Senator Russ Feingold is seeking to unseat Senator Ron Johnson, the Republican who defeated him six years ago.Democrats need to win five seats to take back the majority — or just four if Hillary Clinton wins the presidency, given that a Democratic vice president would break a 50-50 tie.