https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/14/world/americas/mexico-pope-francis-visit.html
Falling Asleep to Grenades: Mexicans Tell Pope How They Live - The New York Times
Mexico,Francis,Roman Catholic Church,Kidnapping and Hostages,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Corruption (Institutional)
Feb. 13, 2016
8232
A young mother living in one of Mexico’s most violent states said she had gone to sleep with the sound of grenades and guns outside her home. Another woman, in Mexico City, wrote that kidnappings had become so commonplace, they are spoken of like the weather. Many others complained about living under a corrupt government.Ahead of Pope Francis’s arrival in Mexico on Friday evening, we asked readers there to tell us what the pope should know about their lives. We received more than 500 responses on Facebook.Here is a selection, edited and condensed for clarity:Out of view: corruption, bad infrastructureThe pope should know that the Mexico he will be shown is NOT the real Mexico. He will not see the corruption, insecurity and bad infrastructure. Mexico is certainly in no position to squander the amount of money it is spending on his visit.— Silvia Zavala, 44, in Monterrey Nuevo León.Missing the old daysI would like Pope Francis to know that we’re missing the old days. Those days when we could go out and play outside. Those days were real, they were safe.Our children don’t know what it is to go out and not worry about the insecurity and kidnapping and everything that should not be happening in our Mexico. Our children think as adults and their childhood is being stolen, and it’s sad to see them worry about things we didn’t even worry about when we were 6 years old.But we will still welcome you because Mexicans have warm hearts, and we like pretending that nothing bad is going on around us.— Patricia Hernández, 28, in San Luis Potosí.Corruption and insecurityI think the pope should know (if he doesn’t already) that we are sick of living with the high levels of corruption and insecurity. We are also tired of having to pay for stupid expenses made by our government, like the pope’s visit.— Abraham Romero, 34, in Anáhuac, Nuevo León.Raising a baby amid violenceI live in one of the most violent states in Mexico with my husband and my baby daughter. I’ve seen decapitated people on my way to college, I’ve gone to sleep with the sound of grenades and AK-47s, and I have had to lie on the floor during a shooting.We’re already looking to emigrate as we do not want our baby daughter to grow up in a place like this, in MEXICO. People may think the pope’s visit is irrelevant but I for one believe that if a message of peace, love and fraternity can be heard here, then welcome #PopeFrancis!— Ana Karen Guevara Leal, 24, Tamaulipas, Mexico.Where kidnappings are commonplaceI would like the pope to know that the kidnapping and dismemberment of people is so commonplace, the neighbors talk about it like they do the weather.I hope I don’t get kidnapped for speaking out.Mr. Pope, to say what you feel here gets you murdered or desaparecido. How is it we can’t find the missing 43 students from Iguala yet? LIFE IS BEYOND NORMAL HERE. HELP!— Gabriela Gonzalez, 43, in Mexico City.A government distractionThe pope was invited to the country just as a strategy to calm down the people’s general anger about many issues (e.g. economy, violence, poverty and insecurity).This man (the pope) is not a fool and knows perfectly the kind of country he is going to find, and the kind of politicians he is going to meet, but he is going to act with his natural diplomacy. Nothing, nothing will change.Millions of Mexicans don’t really want him to visit, and we have actually nothing against him as a person or as a spiritual leader, but against the “opportunity” that our authorities found by planning this event.— Enrique Tritton, 41, a graphic designer, photographer and musician in Mexico City.Multiple realitiesThe pope should know and realize that in Mexico City there are several realities. If you are lucky, you can have a great life full of beautiful experiences, but if you are not, you are one of the thousands trying to survive every day…— Edgar Ramos Abarca, 24, from Mexico City.A hunger for knowledge and foodThe pope should know that Mexico is the most dangerous country for a woman, that our government is the biggest circus in the world, that here in Mexico slavery exists in many forms, that our children receive a poor education, they have hunger for knowledge and real hungry too; this is the most beautiful country and we have fear of living here.— Ayme Ag, 29, in Morelia Michoacán.Hope, courage and faith lives onI think the pope should know that in Mexico there are still young people with hope, courage and above all with faith in the midst of a society distorted by so much corruption.— Letty Tonacatl, 26, in Cancún, Quintana Roo.Sick and tired of our governmentUs Mexicans are so sick and tired of our government and their antics that we now think ill of everything that might look like an event to appease the masses.— David Villarreal, 24, from Monterrey, Nuevo León.Young people losing faithThe pope should know that he’s arriving to a Mexico where Catholicism is not as strong as it was before. Young people are losing our ‘faith’ in the Catholic Church, because of corruption and situations like pederasty among priests.— Ale Fernández, 24, in León, Guanajuato.Be our voiceA war zone in Mexico, where we daily live in fear of being robbed, kidnapped, or killed. I would like him to speak up for us, the people who are being silenced by fear. He has the power to tell the truth of the depth of the corruption in our government and how that has led to years of horror in this country.I would like him to come not as a representative of the Vatican, but as the representative of God on earth, and bring truth and hope.We Mexicans need you, Pope Francisco!— Laura Perez Wong 28, Matamoros, Tamaulipas.Anger over cost of tripIf he truly preaches peace, poverty, etc., wouldn’t the country benefit more by building schools, hospitals or just feeding the innumerable poor? Why must our taxes pay for what a lot of us frankly see as a waste and a terrible inconvenience?I, like most Mexicans, was raised a Catholic, but it is impossible for me to welcome him.— José Pita Juárez, a professional photographer in Mexico City.We stand with the ChurchWe are a very faithful nation and even though many things are changing in our country, mostly for bad, the majority of us stand up with the church and defend life and human dignity.— Isabel R-G M., 23, living in Querétaro.Looking for spirituality elsewherePope should know that Mexicans are very much disappointed with the Catholic Church. The arrogance (and stupidity) of the bishops, the nearness of the church with caciques, narcos and all kinds of harmful people and, above all, the silence of the Catholic hierarchy regarding child abuse.People are looking for spirituality in other places.— Angelita G. Navarrete, 69, in Mexico City.A country that belongs to the drug warThe pope should know that Mexico is not a country that belongs to spirituality. Mexico is a country that now belongs mostly to the drug war and anything to do with it. It’s a place where both women and men now do what they can to survive even against their moral convictions.He should be honest and tell the people that the church won’t save them, that it can be a guiding light to the individual becoming the best version of his/herself. But that we must look inside to find godliness and we must start to be brave and stand against corruption, against journalists kidnapped and murdered by corrupt officials, against university students disappeared and never heard from again.He should know that a country such as this with such a rich and beautiful culture deserves better. Its average citizen deserves a greater chance at stability, security, joy, and freedom.— Jesus M. Herrera, 23, Veracruz.