http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/22/washington/22kaufmann.html
William Kaufmann, Nuclear Strategist Who Helped Reshape Policy, Dies at 90 - The New York Times
Deaths (Obituaries),Atomic Weapons,Cold War Era,United States Armament and Defense,Armament  Defense and Military Forces,International Relations,Politics and Government,Defense Department
Dec. 21, 2008
3984
William W. Kaufmann, a close adviser to seven defense secretaries and a major proponent of a shift away from the early cold war strategy of mass  nuclear retaliation against the Soviet Union, died Dec. 14 in Woburn, Mass. He was 90 and lived in Cambridge, Mass.The cause was Alzheimer’s disease, said his wife and only immediate survivor, the former Julia Alexander.Mr. Kaufmann was a special assistant to every secretary of defense in the Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter administrations, responsible for preparing the annual report to Congress on the Defense Department’s overall military strategy and budget.“He was one of those shadowy people from the cold war era who had a great deal of influence behind the scenes and no appetite for the limelight,” said Fred M. Kaplan, the national defense columnist for Slate magazine and the author of “The Wizards of Armageddon” (Simon & Schuster, 1983), about the group of experts, including Mr. Kaufmann, who laid the groundwork for the nation’s nuclear strategy.In the mid-1950s, while a political science professor at Princeton, Mr. Kaufmann wrote “Limited War,” an influential paper that called for rebuilding conventional armies in Western Europe rather than relying on nuclear weapons. Soon after, he was working for the RAND Corporation, the military research institution.In the 1950s, under Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, the Strategic Air Command held powerful sway over nuclear war plans. Its policy was that if the Soviet Union invaded Western Europe, even if it did not employ a nuclear weapon, the United States should fire nuclear weapons at every major military and civilian target in the Soviet Union, other Warsaw Pact nations and Communist China. By some estimates, 285 million people would be killed in such a mass attack.“Kaufmann comes into this world and concludes that this is just insane, not just because of moral considerations but also strategic,” Mr. Kaplan said. “Such an attack wasn’t capable of destroying every Soviet nuclear weapon, so millions of Americans and Western Europeans would also be killed.”Along with other leading nuclear strategists, Mr. Kaufmann developed the concept of counterforce. Instead of an all-out nuclear attack if the Soviets invaded Western Europe, counterforce called for precision bombing of military targets coupled with warnings that cities would become the next targets of missiles launched from submarines and underground missile silos if the Soviet forces did not retreat. To Mr. Kaufmann, it would be a way of perhaps controlling nuclear war instead of igniting the cataclysm.“There is some difficulty in imagining international politics operating in all their traditional sense or through their historical institutions without the lubricant of military power,” Mr. Kaufmann wrote in his 1956 book, “Military Policy and National Security” (Princeton University). “But how can it or will it function now that the development of mutual annihilation may be making the use of force no longer feasible for the settlement of outstanding issues?”In 1961, after President John F. Kennedy took office, Mr. Kaufmann, along with other members of the so-called whiz kids from RAND, was hired by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara. Soon after, Mr. McNamara was incorporating aspects of counterforce into the nation’s nuclear strategy.Mr. Kaufmann also served under James R. Schlesinger, who was defense secretary in the Nixon and Ford administrations. In an interview Tuesday, Mr. Schlesinger offered a nuanced view of the adoption of counterforce.“In that LeMay period, we did not have overhead reconnaissance, did not know what the Soviet strategic capabilities were,” he said. “After Kennedy campaigned for closing the missile gap and after the first satellites flew, it turned out that the Soviets had very little in the way of nuclear armaments. Counterforce became a possibility because of the weakness of the Soviet capability.”Mr. Kaplan said Mr. Kaufmann was “by no stretch a pacifist or an antinuclear activist,” adding, “he had ambivalence about the whole nuclear war enterprise but did still think you needed to retain these options for smaller scale nuclear attacks.”William Weed Kaufmann was born in Manhattan on Nov. 10, 1918, one of six children of Charles and Antoinette Kaufmann. His father was a businessman. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1939, a master’s in 1947 and a doctorate in 1948, all in international studies and at Yale. During World War II, he served in the Army Air Forces.Mr. Kaufman taught at Yale and then Princeton before joining RAND in 1956. In 1961, the same year he went to work at the Defense Department, he was appointed to the political science faculty at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. For years, he split his time between Washington and Cambridge.Although out of public service after 1981, Mr. Kaufmann remained a potent voice in defense policy discourse. As President Ronald Reagan successfully pushed for a nuclear buildup to face down the Soviets, Mr. Kaufmann became concerned that counterforce was being taken to an extreme, what the Pentagon called “protracted nuclear war,” with controlled launchings over weeks or even months.“He suddenly became rather outspokenly critical of these ideas of limited nuclear war,” Mr. Kaplan said. “They had taken a direction he now regretted.”In 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Mr. Kaufmann concluded that the United States could reduce military spending by more than a third and still deal with any emergency in the post-cold war era. His thinking was laid out in a report written with John D. Steinbruner for the Brookings Institution, the public policy research organization.They wrote: “The future ability of the United States to maintain the conditions of its security will depend as much on its moral authority, diplomatic skills and economic assets as on its military capabilities.”