http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/29/world/europe/france-reflects-on-role-in-rounding-up-jews-for-death-camps.html
France Reflects on Role in Rounding Up Jews for Death Camps - The New York Times
France,Jews and Judaism,Hollande  Francois,Deportation,Holocaust and the Nazi Era
July 28, 2012
3091
PARIS — Early on a Thursday morning in July 1942, more than 4,000 police officers set out in pairs through the streets of occupied Paris, carrying arrest orders for scores of Jewish men, women and children. Within days, 13,152 people had been rounded up for deportation to death camps. No more than 100 would survive.The mass arrests, the largest in wartime France, were planned and carried out not by the Nazi occupiers but by the French. That difficult reality, for years denied, obscured, willfully ignored or forgotten, is now increasingly accepted here, historians and French officials say, part of a broader reckoning with France’s uncomfortable wartime past.The 70th anniversary of that dark episode — known as the Vel d’Hiv roundup, after the arena where many of those arrested were taken — has brought a flurry of commemorations this month, with official ceremonies, museum exhibits, wide news media coverage and an address by President François Hollande. Perhaps most telling, though, is a modest installation at the municipal hall of the Third Arrondissement in central Paris, where the national police are exhibiting for the first time the documents that record the operation in cold administrative detail.For decades after the war, historians say, the police resisted a public accounting of their actions under the German occupation and the collaborationist Vichy government, restricting access to their archives as they struggled with the same tangle of pride, guilt and shame that marked much of French society. The police were especially reticent, said Tal Bruttmann, a scholar of the Vichy period, “because it was they who conducted the arrests.”The exhibit in the municipal hall is symbolic of a memory that has been largely “soothed,” Mr. Bruttmann said. “It means that they are taking responsibility for this history.”Beneath the hall’s marble pillars and gilded cupola, visitors can examine the nine-page police circular, marked secret, that specified non-French Jews as the targets of the operation, men ages 16 to 60 and women 16 to 55. “Children of less than 16 years will be led away at the same time as the parents,” the yellowing paper reads.“The teams charged with the arrests will have to proceed with the most possible speed, without useless words and without comment,” the directive said. “Furthermore, at the moment of the arrest, the well-foundedness or ill-foundedness of this arrest is not to be discussed.”Buses were to take those arrested to the transit camp at Drancy or to the Vélodrome d’Hiver, the cavernous indoor bicycle arena in the 15th Arrondissement. The circular took care to insist that the bus windows “must remain closed.”Also on display is a note dated July 21, 1942, five days after the roundup began, pronouncing a grim arithmetic: “Men: 3,118; women: 5,919; children: 4,115; or in total: 13,152 arrests.”Despite the scale of the Vel d’Hiv operation, researchers have found few official papers that document it. In the name of national unity, the postwar French government ordered all documents linked to the treatment of Jews during the occupation destroyed, a sort of imposed national forgetting. (Another display case shows a 1946 directive to prefects across the country, instructing that “there must no longer remain any trace of the exceptional legislation instituted under the occupation, and all the documents based upon the Jewish status must be destroyed.”)For reasons that are not clear, though, the records of two police commissariats in the Third Arrondissement were spared and apparently forgotten. They were rediscovered by chance about a decade ago.The display is largely the work of Charles Tremil, 77, a retiree who heads a local historical association and who petitioned the police administration to allow the documents to be shown. His mother and older brother were arrested on July 16, 1942; they died at Auschwitz. Mr. Tremil, then a young boy, hid outside Paris during the war.The police administration is “conscious of the duty of memory that is incumbent upon it,” Bernard Boucault, the Paris police prefect, said at the inauguration of the exhibit this month.Mr. Tremil, speaking of the display, said: “The police prefecture had the courage to do it. A few years ago, it would not have been possible.”Police ties to difficult wartime realities are not limited to the Vel d’Hiv roundup. Maurice Papon, for instance, a former Vichy administrator, served as Paris police prefect after the war, before being convicted in 1998 of complicity in Nazi crimes against humanity.The first official recognition of broad French culpability for the Vel d’Hiv roundup came only in 1995, when President Jacques Chirac, on the anniversary of the operation, spoke of the nation’s “collective wrongdoing.” Since then, France has taken pains to address that dark chapter. A government commission set up in 1999 has paid compensation to tens of thousands of families whose property was seized during the war, for instance.“To the Jewish martyrs of the Vélodrome d’Hiver, we owe the truth about what happened 70 years ago,” Mr. Hollande said last Sunday at the site of the arena, the Winter Velodrome, which was demolished long ago. “The truth is that the crime was committed in France, by France.”In doing so, Mr. Hollande broke with his mentor and the hero of the French left, François Mitterrand, who refused to acknowledge broad French responsibility for the operation. Mr. Mitterrand, who worked as a low-level Vichy administrator before joining the resistance, declared when he was president in 1992, “Let us not ask for an accounting from the Republic.”Mr. Mitterrand insisted on a distinction between an ideal, irreproachable Republic and a traitorous wartime “French state,” and the semantics remain contentious. Mr. Hollande’s references simply to “France” drew criticism from some opposition politicians who said he was assigning guilt too broadly.Pascale Hassoun, 69, a psychologist, visited the police exhibit the day it opened. “It authenticates things,” she said softly in the echoing marble hall.Ms. Hassoun’s family “did not want to be completely aware” of the horrors carried out during the war, she said. “The first reflex is to not know,” Ms. Hassoun said. “It’s not a denial, it’s rather a willful ignorance.“We need to learn to live with this stain,” she said, as the country’s past cannot be expiated. “We will never be able to do enough.”