https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/02/arts/television/jimmy-kimmel-baby-son-wife.html
Jimmy Kimmel’s Emotional Monologue: His New Son’s Heart Condition - The New York Times
Kimmel  Jimmy,Colbert  Stephen,Corden  James (1978- ),Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Meyers  Seth,O'Brien  Conan,Jimmy Kimmel Live (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (TV Program)
May 2, 2017
5215
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.“Jimmy Kimmel Live!” was off the air last week. What fans didn’t know was why.Mr. Kimmel revealed on Monday’s show that his wife had given birth to a son, who, within hours of delivery, was found to have severe heart defects. He needed emergency surgery, leading to a torturous series of events — then, ultimately, a happy ending.Mr. Kimmel shared the experience in an emotional opening monologue. “We had atheists praying for us, O.K.?” he said. “And I hate to say it — even that son of a [expletive] Matt Damon sent flowers.”Mr. Kimmel eventually turned toward politics, decrying the idea that anyone should be denied access to health insurance and to coverage for pre-existing medical conditions, about which President Trump has been unclear. Many people are concerned about the loss of such coverage, and Mr. Kimmel captured their fears:“This isn’t football,” Mr. Kimmel added. “There are no teams. We are the team, it’s the United States. Don’t let their partisan squabbles divide us on something every decent person wants.”Congress agreed to a budget deal over the weekend. Trevor Noah noted on “The Daily Show” that after much back-and-forth on the issue, the agreement didn’t include funding for President Trump’s border wall.Conan O’Brien is a little bothered by the foreign leaders Mr. Trump has chosen to praise lately.Did romance just bloom during a Nigel Farage video clip?A history of the Civil War, starring Andrew Jackson.The endlessly hilarious Amy Schumer will talk to Stephen Colbert on “The Late Show” on Tuesday. She’ll probably discuss her new film, “Snatched,” which also features Goldie Hawn.Michael Moore will soon have his own Broadway show. Its goal? “To bring down a sitting president.”