https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/22/nyregion/brentwood-ms-13-gang-case-arrests-long-island.html
35 Arrests in Long Island Gang Case as Another Body Is Found - The New York Times
Gangs,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Immigration and Emigration,Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13),Brentwood (NY),Suffolk County (NY)
Oct. 21, 2016
2615
With another body discovered in Brentwood, N.Y., this week, the Suffolk County Police Department has announced its response: the arrest of what it said were 35 members of MS-13, a gang with roots in El Salvador and Los Angeles that has long been terrorizing the Long Island town.“It’s a significant percentage,” Timothy Sini, the Suffolk police commissioner, said in an interview on Friday. “This is not 1 percent — this is a major shot against the criminal enterprise.”Mr. Sini said it was only the beginning. Five of the 35 people arrested, he said, are “violent, high-ranking gang members” who are in federal custody, having been charged under the RICO organized crime act.On Monday, the police found skeletal human remains in the woods near the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center, which they identified on Thursday as belonging to Jose Pena-Hernandez, 18. His body was the sixth found in Brentwood in a little over a month.Mr. Pena-Hernandez’s bones were uncovered in an area where the authorities found the remains of Oscar Acosta, 19, and Miguel Garcia-Moran, 15, in September.Like them, Mr. Pena-Hernandez had been missing for several months before officials identified his body. But unlike the other two young men, the police identified Mr. Pena-Hernandez as being a member of MS-13.The police said they had located the remains as a result of their investigation. “You don’t stumble upon skeletal remains by accident,” Mr. Sini said.The recent grim findings have added to the profound unease of a community struggling to comprehend renewed gang violence.“Although it’s very disturbing to find these skeletal remains, it is part of the process,” Justin Meyers, the assistant Suffolk police commissioner, said. “We are eradicating gangs from a community. We put pressure on them, we gather intelligence, we find out past crimes. The goal is not only to quell the violence now, but it’s also to uncover past information to build cases on people.”Last week, another Brentwood resident, Dewann Stacks, 34, was found beaten to death on a street. The police believe he, too, was killed by members of MS-13.The most recent spate of violence associated with MS-13 was ignited in mid-September, when two friends, Nisa Mickens, 15, and Kayla Cuevas, 16, were found dead 50 feet from each other in a cul-de-sac close to an elementary school. Their bodies were badly beaten, and the police have not determined a motive.MS-13 was formed in Los Angeles in the 1980s by immigrants from El Salvador escaping civil war. The gang began to expand to other cities and developed in El Salvador after some of its members were deported there.The authorities say the gang has been in Suffolk County since around 1998 and is organized in cliques bearing names like the Brentwood Locos Salvatruchas. Since 2009, MS-13 has been accused of at least 16 murders, court and police records show.Mr. Sini said he was encouraged by having five suspects charged with federal RICO crimes in the short period since the murders of the girls. He said it was a result of increased patrols and the cooperation of multiple law enforcement agencies.By using helicopter patrols, in particular, Mr. Sini said the police were able to search densely wooded areas where gang members were known to gather.“We’re going to keep our enhanced presence for now,” he said. “We are in this for the long haul. Our goals are very clear: Solve the murders and eradicate this gang from Brentwood.”