https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/opinion/the-roberts-courts-reality-check.html
The Roberts Court’s Reality Check - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court (US),Roberts  John G Jr,Health Insurance and Managed Care,United States,Scalia  Antonin,Decisions and Verdicts
June 25, 2015
5796
Sometimes the Supreme Court moves in mysterious ways. The health care decision was not one of those times.A case that six months ago seemed to offer the court’s conservatives a low-risk opportunity to accomplish what they almost did in 2012 — kill the Affordable Care Act — became suffused with danger, for the millions of newly insured Americans, of course, but also for the Supreme Court itself. Ideology came face to face with reality, and reality prevailed.The 6-to-3 vote to reject the latest challenge means that one or perhaps two of the justices who grabbed this case back in November had to have jumped ship. Here’s why: It takes at least four votes to add a case to the court’s docket. Given that the decision to hear this case, King v. Burwell, was entirely gratuitous — the Obama administration had won in the lower court, and an adverse decision in a different appeals court had been vacated — we can assume the votes came from the four justices who nearly managed to strangle the law three years ago in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius.These four were Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Samuel A. Alito Jr. Maybe Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., excoriated in right-wing circles for having saved the statute with a late vote switch last time, also agreed to hear the new case. Or maybe his four erstwhile allies were trying to put the heat on him. It’s a delicious question without, at least for now, an answer.When I think of this case on its trajectory toward the court, the image that comes to mind is of the great white shark in “Jaws,” swimming silently under the water, its lethal teeth bearing down on the statutory language freshly discovered by the administration’s enemies: “Exchange established by the State.”Do “words no longer have meaning,” as Justice Scalia put it in his angry dissenting opinion? What, after all, could be clearer? The state, not the federal government. The two are not the same. They are different! So poor and middle-class people in the 34 (mostly red) states that refused to set up their own insurance exchanges, defaulting that task to the federal government, are just out of luck. They aren’t eligible for tax subsidies to help them buy insurance, subsidies that are critical to making the law work. End of story, end of case, end of the Affordable Care Act (or Scotuscare, as Justice Scalia said the law should be re-named).The chief justice’s masterful opinion showed that line of argument for the simplistic and agenda-driven construct that it was. Parsing the 1,000-plus-page statute in a succinct 21-page opinion, he deftly wove in quotations from recent Supreme Court opinions.Who said that we “must do our best, bearing in mind the fundamental canon of statutory construction that the words of a statute must be read in their context and with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme”? Why, it was Justice Scalia (actually quoting an earlier opinion by Justice Sandra Day O’Connor) in a decision just a year ago.And who said that “a provision that may seem ambiguous in isolation is often clarified by the remainder of the statutory scheme” because “only one of the permissible meanings produces a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law”? Why, Justice Scalia again.“In this instance,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote, “the context and structure of the Act compel us to depart from what would otherwise be the most natural reading of the pertinent statutory phrase.” He concluded: “A fair reading of legislation demands a fair understanding of the legislative plan.” Among the chief justice’s silent partners in the six-justice majority opinion was Justice Kennedy, by most accounts the driving force behind the near miss three years ago.What happened between November and now was no accident. Ordinarily, as a party in a major Supreme Court case, the federal government doesn’t bother to do what private parties do routinely: mobilize organizations and well-credentialed individuals to support the position from different perspectives in briefs filed as “friends of the court.” But this time, fully aware of the stakes, the government rounded up dozens of such friends. The chief justice cited two of those briefs in his opinion, one from the health insurance industry and the other, which he referred to several times, from the country’s leading experts on the economics of health care.The government’s side spoke not only with authority but also with a sense of urgency about the consequences of the law’s failure. Outside the court — inside the Beltway, especially — voices rose in what both The Hill and Politico properly called a frenzy. The Supreme Court’s marble walls are thick, but they aren’t that thick.And so a case that once looked easy, almost cost-free, became a trap. Justice Scalia derided the majority opinion as a “defense of the indefensible.” But what would be truly indefensible, I believe the chief justice and Justice Kennedy came to understand, was the Supreme Court itself, if it bought a cynically manufactured and meritless argument and thus came to be perceived as a partisan tool.This whole exercise was unnecessary, the outcome too close for comfort. But there is cause for celebration in a disaster narrowly averted — for the country and the court, which is to say, for us all.