https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/02/books/review-laura-secors-children-of-paradise-the-struggle-for-the-soul-of-iran.html
Review: Laura Secor’s ‘Children of Paradise: The Struggle for the Soul of Iran’ - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Secor  Laura,Iran,Children of Paradise: The Struggle for the Soul of Iran (Book),Children of Paradise (Book)
Feb. 1, 2016
9112
Given Iran’s recent nuclear deal with the West, the lifting of economic sanctions and political maneuvering before this month’s parliamentary elections (in which hard-liners have tried to disqualify large numbers of moderates and reformists from running), Laura Secor’s new book about Iran since its 1979 Islamic Revolution could not be more timely.In “Children of Paradise,” Ms. Secor — who has written about Iran for The New Yorker, The New York Times and Foreign Affairs, among other publications — indelibly portrays the journalists, dissidents, reformers and student activists who have fought bravely for their ideals in a country where voicing one’s beliefs has often led to imprisonment, torture and death.As described by Ms. Secor, their ordeals often read like Kafkaesque nightmares in which “nearly every Iranian was guilty of something that could carry a prison sentence” or worse, be punished by death (apostasy, alcohol consumption and “crimes against chastity”). Or like monstrous fairy tales, complete with secret prisons and “miracle rooms,” where torture (savage beatings, sexual humiliation, sleep deprivation and mock executions) was used to extract forced confessions.Some of those profiled began as anti-Western militants involved in the taking of American hostages and evolved into proponents of democratic reform. Some began as revolutionaries with the highest hopes of creating a new Islamic state with room for liberal, humanist ideas, only to find themselves in the crosshairs of extremists, intent on cementing their own power and crushing all dissent. Some tried to maintain political viability by trying to triangulate among the many factions in Iranian politics. And some were killed or forced into exile after excruciating stints in prison and threats against their relatives and friends.Ms. Secor’s portraits create an impressionistic montage of Iranian life during the last 37 years, which is hugely valuable in helping us understand Iran’s complex back story. Indeed, as this book underscores, today’s battles between hard-liners and more moderate and reformist forces are part of a historical clash between political and religious principles, as well as tensions between nationalistic yearnings for authenticity and a philosophical openness to (even fascination with) Western ideas and ideals.Drawing parallels between Iran’s revolution and the classic template of revolution described by the historian Crane Brinton in “The Anatomy of Revolution,” Ms. Secor points out that revolutionary Iran’s first political leaders like Mehdi Bazargan and Abolhassan Bani-Sadr were moderates, but that they were soon driven out of government by radicals, who consolidated power and put into effect what Brinton would have called a reign of “terror and virtue.”So many “enemies of God” were executed in the summer of 1988, following a fatwa issued by the Ayatollah Khomeini, she writes, that “executioners complained of overwork and asked to use firing squads,” but “silence and secrecy were of the essence.” According to one former official, she says, prisoners “were loaded onto forklifts and lifted onto six cranes from which they were hanged” — for some two months, this reportedly went on every half hour from 7:30 in the morning until 5 o’clock in the evening.The problem with “Children of Paradise” is that it can feel haphazardly assembled, hopping and skipping around, and sometimes providing only a fuzzy sense of political context. For instance, it skims over the reverberating consequences of the C.I.A.’s orchestration of the 1953 coup that ousted Mohammad Mossadegh, Iran’s prime minister. And the book sharply truncates an account of the 2009 democratic Green movement and the brutal crackdown unleashed on its protesters by Khomenei’s successor, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. The volume also ends abruptly, skating over the presidency of Hassan Rouhani and his efforts to contend with hard-liners, eager to squash his more moderate policies and outreach to the West.What Ms. Secor does do in this book — with intense emotion — is convey the often harrowing stories of her subjects’ lives: their hopes, their aspirations and the often terrible prices they paid for dissent. There’s the writer Akbar Ganji, a Revolutionary Guardsman in the 1980s, who became a liberal agitator and one of the Islamic Republic’s most formidable political prisoners. And there’s Abbas Amir Entezam, who served under Mehdi Bazargan (the country’s first prime minister after the revolution, who appealed for moderation); he became known, Ms. Secor writes, as “Iran’s Nelson Mandela,” serving some 27 years in prison or under house arrest — two and a half of those in a cell so crowded “that the inmates took turns sleeping on the floor, each of them getting just three hours of sleep every 24 hours.”Among the most haunting stories recounted in these pages is that of two brothers, Akbar and Manouchehr Mohammadi, who led a secular student group and who were found guilty of waging war against God. Though their death sentences were commuted, Ms. Secor reports, they were tortured horribly in prison: Akbar refused to implicate his brother in a foreign plot against the state and was beaten so badly that a disk in his spine ruptured and he suffered internal bleeding from his kidneys and stomach. He mounted a hunger strike in 2006 as a plea for medical care, Ms. Secor writes, but after being given an “unspecified medicine,” his condition worsened and he was left on a stretcher to die.Under pressure from the media and international human rights groups, the judiciary granted Manouchehr — whose vertebrae had been fractured by prison beatings — a furlough to attend a memorial for his brother, and with the help of Iran’s Kurdish Democratic Party, he managed to escape to Iraq, and then Turkey, and make his way to the United States.Although Ms. Secor does not always manage to situate such stories within a larger, coherent narrative, her subjects’ experiences speak for themselves — and they provide sharp, pinhole windows into a country that for many years has seemed, in her words, like “a black box whose contents were all but unknowable.”