http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/03/science/a-doctor-s-journal-in-pain-clinic-fruit-candy-and-relief.html
A DOCTOR'S JOURNAL; In Pain Clinic, Fruit, Candy And Relief - The New York Times
PAIN,MEDICINE AND HEALTH,THERAPY AND REHABILITATION
Dec. 3, 2002
3008
We sit around a large table in the conference room of the First Choice Community Health Center here. A purple paisley sheet, hung with duct tape, covers the window fronting the parking lot. In a corner is a wheeled cart stacked with hospital gowns, gauze pads, syringes and a hydroculator unit, a metal tank containing hot packs in a water bath.There are nine of us, including Magda P., who sits at the head of the table, and all of us are munching grapes and Hershey Kisses from the communal snacks on the table.It is the Thursday afternoon chronic pain clinic and Magda is telling us her story. Magda is in her early 50's, a slim woman whose blonde hair is lightly touched with gray and tied back in a ponytail. She is a desk clerk in a motel. She used to be a successful trial lawyer who practiced martial arts in her spare time -- until she was kicked in the head, a misplaced tae kwon do blow that momentarily knocked her unconscious.Magda did not seek medical care immediately, but soon began to experience crushing headaches and, more significant, memory loss. She forgot appointments, misplaced important briefs, couldn't remember the names of friends and common objects. X-rays and CAT scans were normal, but she had suffered a closed head injury. Her brain was bruised, and vital connections were disrupted. Then, on her way home from seeing a doctor, she missed a stop sign and crashed into another car. She had a severe whiplash that resulted in chronic neck and back pain.Forced to give up her practice, she stayed at home, hurting and depressed. She and her husband divorced. She lost her health insurance and began coming to see us at First Choice, a community health center that cares for poor people.We are a group of health practitioners with very different stripes: four doctors, including two who are also skilled acupuncturists; an occupational therapist; a myotherapist, who specializes in treating painful muscle conditions; a behavioral counselor; and usually a medical student and resident from the University of New Mexico School of Medicine.We are an interdisciplinary pain clinic, and now we are concentrating our varied skills on Magda. Together, we complete her history and physical exam. ''You know, this is a pretty unique experience,'' she tells us as we finish.''Maybe that's because you're hogging all the grapes and chocolates,'' says Dr. Brian Shelley, a physician and an assistant professor at the medical school.Magda laughs, passes the goodies and says: ''I'm not kidding. It really is extraordinary.''We nod in agreement. This is the most clinically satisfying medicine I have practiced in over 25 years.The EffectsPain Takes Its Toll, In Money and LivesIt is estimated that disabling pain, acute or chronic, affects millions of Americans and costs more than $90 billion dollars a year in health care and lost work. Pain is the most common reason for visits to physicians and other practitioners. And it is vastly underdiagnosed, undertreated or mistreated. People who have never experienced chronic pain have no idea of its effects, how it can affect the quality of their lives.It is inexorably linked to depression, and it is the most frequent underlying cause of suicide. It is most common among the poor, the people who do more manual labor and are more frequently injured, and who often lose their livelihoods as a result, the very people with limited access to effective treatment.The experience, perception and definition of pain is uniquely individual, and when I ask my patients to use as many adjectives as they can to describe their sensation, I am continually surprised. ''It's like a hot poker that's stuck from this hip right through to the other one.'' Or ''It's like one of them Middle Ages stretching machines that's pulling me apart.''People with chronic pain see many different practitioners in their search for relief.I have patients in my practice who have had five and six back operations, and seen umpteen physicians and therapists, whose charts are stuffed with hundreds of pages, who have had every test and tried every drug known to medicine. But they still hurt.The TreatmentLife Would Be Better With a Perfect PillIn 2001, the American Medical Association, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, the American Hospital Association and other national organizations finally labeled chronic pain a chronic problem and adopted guidelines to help assure more effective diagnosis and treatment.Pain, they said, is the ''fifth vital sign,'' joining temperature, pulse, respiration and blood pressure, worthy of regular monitoring.Unfortunately, pain management is not given much time in a doctor's training. Physicians, in spite of their oath to relieve pain, have relatively few skills and even less enthusiasm to deal with the complex problems that pain inflicts.It would be much easier if there were a perfect pain pill. First-line analgesics like aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, like ibuprofen, naproxen, and others in the class, relieve mild to moderate pain reasonably well, but a common side effect is gastrointestinal upset and, not infrequently, bleeding requiring hospitalization. Acetaminophen causes less gastrointestinal upset, but when taken in large sustained doses for chronic pain may damage the liver.The strongest analgesic class is narcotics, and many physicians have a deep fear of them, sometimes refusing to prescribe them or giving only small amounts, because of concerns over addiction.Research indicates that for a vast majority of people with severe chronic pain, quality of life can often be greatly improved with the right narcotic analgesic and that people with severe pain, who don't already have a prior history of drug or alcohol abuse, can be given narcotics safely. In fact, there are probably far fewer overall complications from legitimate narcotic prescriptions than from some other drugs.We started the pain clinic last year with a two-year grant from the Johnson & Johnson Community Health Care Program, a national effort to finance medical care for people most in need.What if our clinic made the time to do a comprehensive history and physical exam on every patient, where an interdisciplinary group of practitioners all participated at once? What if we all asked questions, and examined the patient together, compared notes and decided on a course of treatment -- with the patient? Would an upfront, multispecialty consultation make more sense than the present system, with patients referred from one doctor to another when the usual treatments don't work? Could initial multispecialty consultations save time and money?Most important, could they help people feel better?The ExaminationA Crowd of Doctors, With Hershey KissesMagda tells us her neck and back pain is deep, aching, present all the time, and about an 8 or 9 in severity on a 10-point scale. We ask all of our patients to draw their pain on an anatomical diagram and to measure its character and intensity. Patients fill out a number of other activity and quality-of-life measurements that will be reassessed over time.Initial patient histories and physical exams take about an hour and a half. There are many of us asking Magda questions, but the atmosphere is relaxed. There are no white coats, no beepers going off, and of course the snacks help.The practitioners are experienced and respect one another's expertise, so the patient interviews flow easily, and the patients uniformly remark that yes, they were nervous, but they felt that we were taking the time to really listen, and that we were often the first ones who really had.We have made the time to take detailed histories and to do careful physical exams, because X-rays and M.R.I.'s cannot see the isolated contractions in Magda's neck and back muscles -- the exquisitely tender trigger points we touch that reproduce her pain.Skeletal muscle makes up nearly 50 percent of body weight, and in accidents like Magda's, it is the most commonly injured tissue. The tae kwon do kick caused Magda's closed head injury and her cognitive losses, but the car accident caused the whiplash -- the rapid, extreme flexion and extension of neck and back muscles and other soft tissues that six years later were still contracted and painful.After examining Magda, everyone agrees she has a myofascial pain syndrome -- pain involving muscle and other soft tissue, probably the most common pattern seen in primary care and pain clinics.When muscle is injured by trauma, overuse, or even bad office furniture, muscle fibers shorten, they contract, and that's when they hurt. Most of us have experienced and felt these painful nodules in our upper shoulder, neck, and back muscles.In general, the longer the muscle fibers have been contracted, the more time it takes to stretch and relax them. If the contraction or spasm can be relieved, and the muscle stretched to its normal length, the pain can be eliminated or greatly eased. The diagnosis, and the fix, involves the laying on of hands.Touch is still the most important tool in examining patients and making a diagnosis. Fingertips are our most sensitive instruments, and they can learn to get better -- to feel the texture of tissue, to follow a fetal outline, to find a hidden lump, to massage a painful muscle.But I suspect touch has an even deeper significance. Primates groom one another. Apes and monkeys and barbers and chiropractors and massage therapists are all groomers. In Amazonia, I've watched whole families groom one another. I think people go to healers, of whatever class or category, to be groomed. Touch can make people feel better.Physicians, in general, are not very good groomers, and we're getting worse. We now touch patients in an increasingly gloved, sterile way, a clinical touch not a healing touch.We decide to treat Magda's myofascial pain with a combination of therapies: trigger point injections, acupuncture and myotherapy, treatments that work to relax, stretch and ease the pain in contracted muscles.Injections are made precisely into Magda's painful, contracted muscle bundles, trigger points in her neck and back. We either use small amounts of a local anesthetic, or a dry needle, like an acupuncture needle -- it doesn't seem to be anesthetic that does the work so much as hitting the right spot, which relaxes the muscle. After several minutes, Magda tells us her pain has almost completely gone. We apply hot packs to further relax her muscles.Then, Elliot Shratter, a muscle pain specialist, shows Magda how to stretch the affected muscles, and Betsy Van Leit, an occupational therapist, shows her how to revise her work environment to prevent recurrent muscle injury. Frequently, if caught in time, a stretching program for specific muscles combined with the correction of faulty body mechanics can resolve myofascial pain problems without the injections.On her next visit, Magda is to see Dr. Maureen Small, who will needle traditional Chinese acupuncture points, and Rosy Shratter, a counselor, who will help coordinate mental health and other support services.Over the next four visits, Magda tells us that her pain has diminished, sometimes down from an 8 or 9 to a 2 on her scale. The range of motion of her head and neck is much better, and her mood has brightened. We see a smart, creative, spirited woman beginning to get her life back.''It's made an enormous difference, like night and day,'' Magda tells us. ''For the first time my pain is manageable.''