https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/arts/television/seth-meyers-donald-trump-border-wall.html
Seth Meyers Says Trump ‘Thinks in Cartoons’ - The New York Times
Meyers  Seth,Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Trump  Donald J,Colbert  Stephen,Fallon  Jimmy,Kimmel  Jimmy,Jimmy Kimmel Live (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
July 18, 2017
4539
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.Seth Meyers returned from vacation on Monday and quickly caught up with President Trump’s most offbeat statements from the past two weeks.He was a big fan of Mr. Trump’s suggestion that a United States-Mexico border wall might need to be transparent. The president had explained: “As horrible as it sounds, when they throw the large sacks of drugs over, and if you have people on the other side of the wall, you don’t see them — they hit you on the head with 60 pounds of stuff? It’s over.”On “The Late Show” on Monday, Stephen Colbert kicked off his much-touted “Russia Week.” He’ll broadcast dispatches from his trip to Russia last month. The first segment featured his appearance on “Evening Urgant,” the popular Russian late-night show hosted by Ivan Urgant.Mr. Colbert told Mr. Urgant that he’s considering a run for president — though there didn’t seem to be too much sincerity in that. Just as surprising, Mr. Colbert even got his cautious fellow host to make a few cracks about possible collusion between the Trump administration and the Russian government.Speaking to his own audience on Monday, Mr. Colbert said that he had been constantly followed by what seemed like a government detail during his time in Russia.Guillermo Rodriguez of “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” asked stars the hard-hitting questions at Disney’s D23 Expo.Seth Meyers is incredulous about what has transpired in the Russia scandal since he was last on the air.Keegan-Michael Key, who made his name as one-half of “Key and Peele,” is stepping back into the spotlight with a role in “Friends From College,” the new Netflix show. He’s also playing Horatio in the Public Theater’s current production of “Hamlet.” He’ll head across town to pay “The Late Show” a visit on Tuesday.Our comedy and movie critics weighed in on the legacy of George Romero, the horror movie director and granddaddy of the zombie-flick genre who died on Monday.