https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/15/business/mutfund/finding-growth-in-pizza-paint-and-credit-card-companies.html
Finding Growth in Pizza, Paint and Credit-Card Companies - The New York Times
Stocks and Bonds,Mutual Funds,Morgan Stanley,Sherwin-Williams Company
April 15, 2017
3644
Growth stocks — those whose earnings are expected to grow faster than average — surged in the first quarter. They carried with them the managers of several of the quarter’s top-performing stock funds.Those managers grabbed onto that growth in expected sorts of companies, like Alphabet and Facebook, and in more surprising and mature ones like MasterCard, Domino’s and Sherwin-Williams.Dennis P. Lynch and the growth investing team at Morgan Stanley Investment Management had the unusual distinction of placing three funds among the quarter’s best performers: their Growth Portfolio, Multi Cap Growth Trust and Mid Cap Growth Portfolio funds. Mr. Lynch, who leads the team, said that, while the precise holdings of each fund differ, they can and do overlap. Five of the trio’s top 10 holdings were the same as of Feb. 28.The funds are also unified by a philosophy, Mr. Lynch said.“What we do is try to buy good growth companies and own them for many years,” he said. “We look very different from any benchmark. We have differentiated holdings, and we take concentrated positions. And with that, comes some volatility.” Shares of Amazon and Facebook, for example, each accounted for about 9 percent of the Growth fund’s assets at the end of February.Morningstar’s numbers bear out Mr. Lynch’s points. The three funds’ turnover ratios, indicating the percentage of holdings sold annually, are below average, while their risk ratings are above. Put differently, the funds tend to trade less than average, but their returns tend to roller-coaster more than the indexes they’re benchmarked against.A characteristic shared by many of the funds’ holdings is that they can be tough to pigeonhole in a conventional investment sector, like technology or health care, Mr. Lynch said. “If there’s not an easy category or comparison, then the company is more likely unique,” he said.Take Alphabet, the holding company for Google. Many people call it a tech company, but it makes its money from advertising, which would traditionally point to media. “They used the internet to create a large audience and then disrupted the advertising world,” he said.Other examples are MasterCard and Visa, lately held by both Growth and Multi Cap Growth. Some investors may classify them as tech companies because they provide networks for transaction-processing. “But what’s really driving their economic exposure is consumer discretionary spending,” Mr. Lynch said. They are platforms for purchases, becoming more valuable as more consumers and businesses use them.The largest and, in the most recent quarter, best performing of the three Morgan Stanley funds was the Growth fund. The fund, whose A shares carry an expense ratio of 0.96 percent, returned 16.25 percent for the quarter, compared with 5.5 percent for the S.&P. 500-stock index.Thomas M. Galvin, lead manager of Columbia Select Large Cap Growth, approaches his fund in ways similar to what Mr. Lynch does: He and the other managers also concentrate their holdings and aim to hold down turnover.“We’re trying to identify two to three dozen high-growth companies whose stocks have little to do with one another,” he said. “We then let that growth germinate. We’re trying to invest in companies for three or four years.”Another point of emphasis is ensuring the returns of the fund’s investments are not correlated with one another. The managers do that by using both statistical screens and fundamental analyses of how businesses may interact in unexpected ways, Mr. Galvin said. It is also one of the reasons they limit the portfolio’s size. After about 35 stocks, he said, correlations in stock prices start to rise. “Either the companies are competing with each other, or they’re impacted by the same macroeconomic trends,” he said.One of the qualities that drew Mr. Galvin and his colleagues to Domino’s, the pizza delivery chain, was that its size and strong financials have enabled it to invest heavily in technology. And that has differentiated it from independent pizza peddlers, he said.“The digital divide is finally separating them from the mom-and-pop operators,” he said. “With digital, you tap the app and have a pizza delivered, along with other menu items. Local operators don’t have the financial wherewithal to invest in that kind of technology.”Mr. Galvin and his team divide their holdings into two groups: established companies, like Domino’s, and emerging ones, like biotechnology outfits. The former “provide ballast to the portfolio,” and the latter, opportunities for outsized returns, he said.“When you have about half the portfolio in each of those, it blends out at an 18 to 22 percent level” of average earnings growth, he said.The Columbia fund, whose A shares carry an expense ratio of 1.08 percent, returned 15.6 percent in the first quarter.Jason L. Weiner, manager of the Fidelity Growth Discovery Fund, differs from Mr. Lynch and Mr. Galvin in that he doesn’t try to concentrate his fund’s holdings; the fund held 151 stocks on Dec. 31. But he, too, keeps an eye on his turnover ratio (lately 72 percent) and has been pulling it down over the last several years by trading less.“I was just trading too much, and I didn’t think I was that good at trading,” he said. “If I’m doing good work, I should recognize mistakes, but I should also let the ideas develop.” That means selling when he’s sure an investment has gone bad but also hanging on through down periods if he is confident in a company’s plans and prospects.Like any growth manager, Mr. Weiner hunts for strong, sustainable earnings growth. That has led him to put more than a third of the portfolio in technology stocks, like Facebook and Amazon. But it can also lead him into less obvious plays like the paint company Sherwin-Williams.“The paint-store business is huge and consistent and grows nicely year in and year out,” he said. Sherwin-Williams caters to professional painters, and they’re loyal in return. “They don’t want to go to Home Depot,” he said. “They want 30-day terms.” That is, they want to finance purchases for a month, rather than paying upfront.The business has pricing power, too, he said. The actual paint is a small enough portion of the cost of most paint jobs that the final consumer is not that sensitive to changes in price. “People hire a painter and get a quote and have no idea what the cost of paint is in the quote,” Mr. Weiner said.The Growth Discovery Fund, with an expense ratio of 0.78 percent, returned 12.15 percent in the first quarter.