https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/realestate/at-home-with-broadway-actress-jackie-hoffman.html
Jackie Hoffman on the Place Where She Hangs Her Hat - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Theater,Interior Design and Furnishings,Hoffman  Jackie,Feud (TV Program),Television
June 9, 2017
9987
Daily, Jackie Hoffman looks around her one-bedroom apartment and thanks the Almighty for her quintessentially Jewish mother, Charlotte. “She’s a genius,” said Ms. Hoffman, 56, who has a featured role in the new Broadway musical “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” and plays Joan Crawford’s Teutonic housekeeper in the FX series “Feud.”Charlotte Hoffman’s claim to brilliance: In 1984, she got her daughter on a waiting list for an apartment in a Mitchell-Lama cooperative in Chelsea. “I wanted to be an actor despite what my mother wanted,” said Ms. Hoffman, whose credits include roles in the Broadway musicals “The Addams Family” and “Hairspray.” “She always used this phrase ‘you need a place to hang your hat.’ At the time, I was in my 20s and I was in that idiotic phase of ‘whatever.’ I was more focused on buying weed and picking up men who weren’t Jewish than I was on an apartment.“It took 12 years, and then they started calling me about vacancies,” Ms. Hoffman continued. “At the time I was working in Second City in Chicago, so there was all this drama when my name came up. Through a little bit of wheeling and dealing and weeping in the office, I got in.”She hung her hat first in a studio, eventually upgrading to the one-bedroom that she now shares with her husband, Steve Smyth, a musician. “It’s not glam, it’s not on trend, but by Manhattan standards it’s palatial,” Ms. Hoffman said, taking note of the terrace with particular pride and pleasure. This enthusiasm is not shared by her mother “because,” she said, “to a Jewish mother a terrace translates to falling.”To hear Ms. Hoffman tell it, the studio apartment was the home of unfortunate paint choices — the sage gray that was more green than it had any right to be, the red that looked like a nice ripe tomato in the sample, yet resembled a weathered barn when applied to the wall. But mistakes are how you learn, and since moving to a larger place, Ms. Hoffman has learned to outsource.“I have fancy gay friends who do everything perfectly and have impeccable taste and had their apartment in Elle Decor, so they told me what to do,” she said. They urged her toward Chelsea Gray for the living room and Habanero Pepper for the foyer.Those elegant friends were part of the posse when Ms. Hoffman went to Jensen-Lewis in search of a khaki-colored (don’t ask) pullout sofa for the living room. It’s since been recovered in dark gray. “The whole thing was crazy. I think the poor salesman is still shaking,” she said. “I kept asking, ‘Why are there so many pillows?’ and ‘Why are the cushions so tall?’ And to explain the decorative features, he kept saying, ‘Lady, it’s show business.’”Ms. Hoffman continued: “I hate houseguests, but God forbid I have them, it’s a good couch. Not comfortable enough for them to stay long, but a decent surface.”Perhaps eager to avoid another unfortunate scene with a furniture salesman, Ms. Hoffman eagerly accepted two Danish modern chairs from her Aunt Judy. “She told me, ‘I have a feeling that these are very valuable, and when I die my kids will throw them in the garbage, so I want you to have them,’” Ms. Hoffman recalled. “We had them redone. There was a lot of drama about having them redone.” Previously cushioned in what she described as “a hideous, beaten-down, green-checked tweed,” they’re now a sprightly turquoise.Ms. Hoffman’s father was a graphic artist and owned an ad agency. The wall opposite the sofa holds three sketches that he drew on the spot at a party in the mid-’50s; in the foyer is a portrait he painted of Ms. Hoffman’s two older brothers. “A cornball portrait,” she said.“Mince words,” you might want to say to Ms. Hoffman. Good luck with that. But look at the bright side: When she says she loves something, you can take it to the bank. She speaks with great tenderness of the embellished wooden box made for her by the late humorist David Rakoff, a close friend, and seems pretty crazy about the framed ad for Aunt Jemima pancakes in Yiddish that hangs on the kitchen wall. Also, her uterus-shaped puppet, a prop from a show she did at Joe’s Pub, and the personalized canvas strip off the back of her chair from the set of “Feud.”“This is the first time I had my name on a chair,” Ms. Hoffman said. “Jessica Lange, Susan Sarandon, Stanley Tucci, Alfred Molina, Jackie Hoffman. All in a row. My last day of shooting, when they said, ‘It’s a wrap for Jackie,’ I said, ‘Thank you, you won’t be needing this,’ and I took it.”Ambulances, sirens blaring, speed up the avenue day and night, giving Ms. Hoffman the sense that she’s smack in the middle of a television series about a hospital. She says she thinks about moving to an apartment deeper in the complex, or perhaps somewhere else entirely, but there’s not much conviction in her voice.While in Los Angeles shooting “Feud,” she stayed for a time at a hotel, then decided to rent a place. “The building was charmless, a concrete tower,” she recalled. “And when my husband came out to see me, he stood in the living room and said, ‘This is just like our apartment in New York.’ I had simply transferred my life.“You know,” she added, “I’m not a new horizons kind of gal.”