https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/12/upshot/medicaid-rolls-are-growing-even-in-states-that-rejected-federal-funds.html
Medicaid Rolls Are Growing Even in States That Rejected Federal Funds - The New York Times
Medicaid,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),States (US),Health Insurance and Managed Care,State Children's Health Insurance Program (S-CHIP),Federal Aid (US)
Aug. 11, 2014
3036
Call it a side effect of the Affordable Care Act: Even in states that haven’t changed their Medicaid programs, nearly a million people signed up for Medicaid this year.The law has expanded insurance coverage to millions of poor Americans through its broadening of the federal-state Medicaid program. In about half the states, that expanded program means that anyone below a certain income threshold is automatically qualified for the program. As you might expect, Medicaid enrollment went way up in those states.But Medicaid enrollment has also increased this year in many states that chose not to accept federal funds. Data from Medicaid released Friday show that enrollment jumped in most states that did not expand their programs, including Georgia (16 percent), Montana (10 percent), Idaho (9 percent) and Florida (7 percent). Altogether, enrollment in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program in the states that didn’t make any changes has gone up by 975,000.The reason is a phenomenon that health experts like to call the “welcome mat effect” or the “woodwork effect,” depending on whether they see it as good news. What happened is that many people who were always eligible for the program have finally decided to sign up.There was no policy change that gave them new access to insurance, but new online marketplaces and all the public conversation around new insurance options encouraged them to apply and get benefits they were always eligible for. There are quite a lot of uninsured people in the country who fall into this category. A 2012 study in the journal Health Affairs estimated that, in some states, fewer than half of all eligible people were enrolled in their state’s programs.These enrollees hitched a ride on the Affordable Care Act’s coverage expansion. For states, like Washington, that are eager to get eligible people signed up for coverage, this enrollment is a development they cheer. The state has had an explicit goal of covering all children in the state since 2007; this year, they’ve made significant strides.“If you go out into the communities, and you talk about the programs, there is a bump,” said Jim Stevenson, a spokesman for the state’s Health Care Authority. Washington has added about 400,000 people to its program, most through expansion, with about 40,000 through spreading the word and making it a little easier to sign up.Officials in Washington use “welcome mat.” Other states with tight budgets and less enthusiasm for program growth often use the term “woodwork.” Either way, these people are the incidental beneficiaries of Obamacare.