https://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/16/us/politics/16debate.html
Clinton’s in Thick of Barbed Democratic Debate - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2008,Debating,Democratic Party,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Nov. 16, 2007
5257
Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton shifted to a much more assertive tone in a debate Thursday night by going directly after her opponents, issuing a stern warning that Democrats should stop “throwing mud” and adopting tactics “right out of the Republican playbook.”John Edwards and Senator Barack Obama of Illinois did not shy away from the fight, criticizing Mrs. Clinton for refusing to provide detailed plans to deal with Social Security, Iraq and Iran. Mr. Obama took on Mrs. Clinton more directly than he had before over health care, while Mr. Edwards attacked her as a defender of a Washington system “that is rigged and is corrupt.”Much of the debate had a confrontational edge and freewheeling tone, with the leading candidates trying to draw sharp contrasts with pointed language. Mrs. Clinton even said she was wearing an “asbestos” pantsuit, while Senator Christopher J. Dodd worried about “a shrillness to the debate.”With seven weeks to go before the Iowa caucuses, the night largely revolved around Mrs. Clinton, as the field sought to dislodge her from her leading perch and Messrs. Obama and Edwards tried to position themselves as the best alternative.The most striking change from the seven previous debates was that Mrs. Clinton no longer stayed above the fray, and instead addressed her rivals by name, criticizing their positions, and rebutting them as much as the moderator would allow.Her refashioned approach was a response to the political damage she suffered from the last debate, on Oct. 30, when her rivals questioned her honesty and electability, her position on driver’s licenses for illegal immigrants and her role in keeping her papers from the Clinton administration under wraps.Mr. Edwards’s charge that Mrs. Clinton was part of a corrupt political class prompted her to deliver her sharpest denunciation of the night. She sternly told him — and, by extension, her other Democratic opponents — that they risked playing into the hands of Republicans and losing the presidency in 2008 by fiercely attacking one of their own.“We’re Democrats and we’re trying to nominate the very best person we can to win,” she said at the two-hour debate, held in Las Vegas and sponsored by CNN. “And I don’t mind taking hits on my record, on issues. But when somebody starts throwing mud, at least we can hope that it’s both accurate and not right out of the Republican playbook.”Mr. Edwards responded a moment later that he was not trying to drag down Mrs. Clinton, but was instead fighting intensely on behalf of struggling Americans.“There is a fundamental choice that everyone in this room and Democratic voters have to make, and that is, who do you believe will take on this system?” Mr. Edwards said. “When is our party going to show a little backbone and strength and courage and speak up for those people who have been left behind?”Mr. Obama, as if picking up where the last debate left off, also quickly pounced on Mrs. Clinton as an old-style politician who was not being forthright with voters. He hit her on her initially contradictory answer on licenses for illegal immigrants, a resonant issue in the state of Nevada — a home of many Hispanic immigrants and one of the four states that will vote first in the presidential nominating process.“What the American people are looking for right now is straight answers to tough questions, and that is not what we’ve seen out of Senator Clinton on a host of issues, on the issue of driver’s licenses for illegal immigrants,” Mr. Obama said, referring to a now-abandoned New York proposal that she initially indicated support for but has since come out against.“It took not just that debate but two more weeks before we could get a clear answer in terms of where her position was,” he added.Mrs. Clinton hit back swiftly, noting that Mr. Obama’s proposed expansion of health coverage would not require people to buy insurance and therefore could not guarantee universal coverage, though that is his goal.“When it came time to step up and decide whether or not he would support universal health care coverage, he chose not to do that,” Mrs. Clinton said. And then, pointedly referring to crucial early nominating states, Mrs. Clinton added: “His plan would leave 15 million Americans out. That’s about the population of Nevada, Iowa, South Carolina and New Hampshire.” In fact, the population of the four states is 11 million.While the debate started off with some of the most slashing exchanges of the campaign, it was also marked by light moments, like when Dennis J. Kucinich was asked why he was the only one on the stage who voted against the USA Patriot Act. “That’s because I read it,” he replied. And at the end of the debate, in another sign of how Mrs. Clinton was often the central focus of the event, she was asked if she preferred diamonds or pearls. “Both,” she replied.On Social Security, too, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama jousted, with Mrs. Clinton charging that her rival would permit “a $1 trillion tax increase” by lifting the cap on payroll taxes completely to pay for Social Security. Mr. Obama countered that he favored only increasing the amount of income subject to Social Security taxes for wealthy Americans.“This is the kind of thing that I would expect from Mitt Romney or Rudy Giuliani,” Mr. Obama said to Mrs. Clinton, referring to the Republican presidential candidates, “where we start playing with numbers — we start playing with numbers in order to try to make a point.”At one point Wolf Blitzer of CNN asked the candidates whether they would promise to support the Democratic nominee, no matter who won the primary. Each replied yes, including Mr. Edwards, who twice declined to say in an interview last week with The New York Times whether he would support Mrs. Clinton if she won the nomination.In answering, Mr. Edwards also drew some laughter and hisses as he took a glancing shot at the Clinton campaign’s recent embarrassment for planting questions in audiences at two Iowa events. “Is that a planted question?” Mr. Edwards said to Mr. Blitzer.Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. also delivered a punchy and humorous turn at the debate, tweaking the moderators for not giving him more time to speak, while expressing grave concerns about Pakistan and vowing to pick a woman as his first Supreme Court appointment. He also laid down a direct challenge to President Bush over Iran.“If he takes the country to war in Iraq,” Mr. Biden said (though he meant Iran), “without a vote of Congress, which will not exist, then he should be impeached.”The mood also lightened somewhat when Senator Clinton was asked to explain recent comments by her and her supporters about the role of her sex in the campaign.“I’m not exploiting anything at all. I’m not playing, as some people say, the gender card here in Las Vegas. I’m trying to play the winning card,” Mrs. Clinton said. “People are not attacking me because I’m a woman. People are attacking me because I’m ahead.”When asked by Campbell Brown to clarify what she had meant when she spoke of a boys club, Mrs. Clinton smiled.“Campbell,” she said. “It is clear from women’s experiences that from time to time that there may have been some impediments.”Mr. Obama, meanwhile, was also challenged for missing a Senate vote on whether to designate the Iranian Revolutionary Guard as a terrorist organization. He has criticized Mrs. Clinton for voting in favor of the resolution, but he missed the vote himself because he was campaigning.“It was a mistake,” Mr. Obama said of not attending the vote. “This is one of the hazards of running for president.”