https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/04/arts/design/delivering-fresh-attention-to-josef-albers.html
Delivering Fresh Attention to Josef Albers - The New York Times
Art,Albers  Josef,Museums,Zwirner  David  Gallery,Museum of Modern Art,Tate Modern,Guggenheim  Solomon R  Museum,Christie's,Leiber  David
Nov. 3, 2016
9571
Last year, abstracts by the German-born artist Josef Albers were selling for $150,000 to $250,000 at auction: not bad for a guy who died 40 years ago.Last month, when Christie’s in London auctioned off the collection of the Modern-art dealer Leslie Waddington, the first of three small paintings by Albers tripled estimates, selling for $848,000. And in its postwar and contemporary evening sale on Nov. 15, Christie’s will offer a 1973 piece from Albers’s long-running “Homage to the Square” series for $900,000 to $1.2 million.This new energy in the Albers market has followed the estate’s shift in representation to the mega-gallerist David Zwirner, from Mr. Waddington, who died last year. The Zwirner gallery sold a 1964 work from the “Homage to the Square” series to an American collector for $1 million at the preview of Frieze Masters in London.For Nicholas Fox Weber, the executive director of the Josef and Anni Albers Foundation, what matters most is that both artists are getting their due and that their work is being seen.“I’m tired of the art market as a sort of obsession,” Mr. Weber said. “I know that it’s real — we benefit from it terrifically — what happened at the Waddington sale was astonishing. But what you’ll hear from me is a real emphasis on ideals. Anni and Josef set up this foundation for the revelation and evocation of vision through art.”Zwirner’s first show since taking on the estate, “Josef Albers: Grey Steps, Grey Scales, Grey Ladders,” opened on Thursday in Chelsea, and the gallery is presenting an Albers show at its London location in January.On Nov. 23, the Museum of Modern Art is opening “One and One Is Four: The Bauhaus Photocollages of Josef Albers” — “it’s black, white and gray in two parts of New York for the renowned color theorist,” Mr. Weber said.In addition, the Guggenheim is presenting a show, “Josef Albers in Latin America,” in 2017; the Tate Modern is planning a major retrospective of Anni Albers’s work in 2018; and an exhibition about the Black Mountain College in North Carolina, which includes Josef and Anni Albers — organized by the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston — is now at the Wexner Center in Columbus, Ohio.David Leiber, a director at Zwirner who helped win the Albers estate after a process akin to an architectural competition, said this moment represented an opportunity to look back at Mr. Albers’s work “and maybe try to understand why it’s not where it should be in terms of critical reception or market reception.”“From a market point of view, as a dealer, it’s ludicrous,” he said. “There is the right number of paintings in this body of work that you can really develop a market, because he was prolific. There were 2,400 ‘Homages’ painted between 1950 and 1976, when he passed away.”Although Zwirner’s New York show focuses on black, white and gray in Albers work, this doesn’t mean that color isn’t there.“My hope through the installation is that you’re going to see all kinds of colors once you see these pictures up against each other,” said Mr. Leiber, who specializes in postwar American and European art with a focus on Germany and Italy in the ’50s and ’60s.“When you look at these paintings under certain light — especially natural light — you see that they’re not gray, but the gray might actually be more of an eggplant,” he added. “There’s violet in there, there’s blue — it’s almost a decoy for something else. You start to see other colors.”The show’s title was taken from Albers’s own words. In his 1963 book, “Interaction of Color,” he explained that to differentiate “between lighter and darker in color, it appears appropriate, even necessary, to develop a more discriminating sensitivity. To this end, we study gradation by producing so-called grey steps, grey scales, grey ladders.”The show includes an oil study closely related to the first “Homage” painting, shown in a 1991 exhibition organized by Donald Judd’s Chinati Foundation in Marfa, Tex.In the 1960s, Albers started making larger “Homage” paintings that were 48 by 48 inches. Asked why he had expanded to these dimensions — whether it had to do with the New York School’s change in the scale of abstract painting — “he said, ‘It’s when we got a station wagon,’” Mr. Leiber said.The Zwirner exhibition tries to offer a window into Albers’s creative process, how he thought about composition and color. He painted mostly on Masonite, using a palette knife to prime the surface with layers of white gesso, then applying each color minimally for maximum effect — one coat of pure color, straight from a tube.“He would talk about how he paints like he spreads butter on his toast in the morning — he starts in the middle and moves out,” Mr. Leiber said. “Or the way his father taught him how to paint a door: You start in the middle and you control the drips and move out to the edges.”In its January show in London, “Sunny Side Up,” Zwirner will focus on the yellow in Albers’s work, which most likely had to do with the artist’s interest in Mexico and in Maya culture. “There’s a reference to health, to healing,” Mr. Leiber said, “to a kind of sunniness.”