https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/us/hawaiian-judge-derrick-watson-trump-travel-ban.html
From a Placid Judge, a Cutting Rejection of Trump’s Travel Ban - The New York Times
Watson  Derrick Kahala,Decisions and Verdicts,Immigration and Emigration,Hawaii,Trump  Donald J
March 16, 2017
8440
Judge Derrick K. Watson’s language was stern, even biting: In an order on Wednesday that blocked President Trump’s travel ban from taking effect, he rebuked the government for its “illogic” and for presenting arguments he bluntly called “not true.”The sometimes cutting opinion drew applause on social media, as critics of Mr. Trump’s policy cheered on Judge Watson like a gladiator in the ring.To friends of the judge, that role would seem an unlikely one: He is known to them not as a feisty scrapper, but as a placid and patient colleague, an even-tempered former Army reservist and automobile aficionado who rarely gets riled up, except where baseball is concerned.“The only time he probably gets extremely emotional is with respect to the Dodgers,” said James A. Bruen, a San Francisco-based litigator who worked closely with Judge Watson at two law firms.Far from an attention seeker, Judge Watson eschewed the typical ceremony for his installation on the bench in 2013, telling The Honolulu Star-Advertiser, “It’s just not me.”Yet if Judge Watson, 50, is an uneasy temperamental match for his sudden role in history, there are elements in his career that appear to have put him, and his native Hawaii, on a kind of legal and political collision course with Mr. Trump.A former federal prosecutor who graduated from Harvard Law School alongside Barack Obama and Neil M. Gorsuch, Judge Watson became the only federal judge of Native Hawaiian descent upon his confirmation in 2013.In nominating him, Mr. Obama hailed him as a jurist who would help “ensure that the judiciary resembles the nation it serves.” In a questionnaire submitted to the Senate as part of the confirmation process, Judge Watson described his pro bono work representing Mexican workers and challenging a California school district’s elections as racially discriminatory.Supporters of his nomination presented him as a distinctly Hawaiian success story: The National Asian Pacific American Bar Association highlighted his background as the son of a Honolulu police officer and local bank employee, who graduated from the private Kamehameha Schools and became the first college graduate in his family, attending Harvard College before Harvard Law.Throughout his screening by the Senate, which confirmed him unanimously, Hawaii’s all-Democratic congressional delegation embraced the judge as a reflection of the state’s unique diversity.The state’s political leaders have denounced Mr. Trump’s order temporarily banning travel from six predominantly Muslim countries as close to the opposite. Doug Chin, Hawaii’s attorney general, called it “antithetical to Hawaii’s state identity and spirit” in a court filing, and likened it to the Chinese Exclusion Act and the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.In siding so forcefully with Hawaii and imposing a nationwide freeze on Mr. Trump’s order, Judge Watson surprised even some admirers with the scope and intensity of his opinion.In addition to barring Mr. Trump from enforcing the travel ban, Judge Watson described Mr. Trump’s past comments about Muslims as “remarkable” evidence that his order was motivated by animus toward a religious faith.The decision, issued just hours before Mr. Trump’s travel ban was to go into effect, drew a furious response from the president. At a campaign-style rally in Tennessee late Wednesday, Mr. Trump accused Judge Watson of acting “for political reasons” and declared angrily that the ruling “makes us look weak.”Senator Brian Schatz, Democrat of Hawaii, who supported Judge Watson’s nomination in 2013, said the decision was more pointed than he might have expected from Judge Watson based on his personal demeanor.“I wasn’t surprised by the ruling,” Mr. Schatz said. “But the language itself was a bit stronger than I would have anticipated.”He added in an email: “He got an enormous bipartisan vote not only because of his credentials but his demeanor, which we in Hawaii would call ‘local style.’ Even keeled, not domineering, capable of seeing other people’s point of view.”Despite Mr. Trump’s charge of political interference, Judge Watson’s career before joining the bench — as a civil litigator and a prosecutor in California and Hawaii — offers no obvious hint of partisanship.The Federal Election Commission has no record of contributions made in his name, and Judge Watson described himself to The Star-Advertiser as an independent.He also quashed speculation that he was close with Mr. Obama, a fellow Hawaiian in his law school class, telling the newspaper that he had never met the president.In the questionnaire he submitted to the Senate, Judge Watson described having dealt with cases related to the rights of travelers, migrants and minorities. In one case, he defended the federal government in a 2010 civil suit claiming that Customs and Border Protection agents in Honolulu had caused the death of an infant from American Samoa who was detained with his mother while traveling to obtain medical care.He wrote in his questionnaire that he had “successfully argued that C.B.P.’s actions at the airport could not have been the cause of the infant’s death as a matter of Hawaii tort law.”L. Richard Fried Jr., a Honolulu litigator who represented the plaintiffs in that lawsuit, said he had come away with an impression of Judge Watson as “quite conservative, actually,” at least where legal process was concerned. “He would not try to figure out a decision and then try to back into it,” said Mr. Fried, who added that he supported Judge Watson’s ruling on the travel ban.In his nomination paperwork, Judge Watson also reported spending “hundreds of hours” on pro bono work while practicing law in California, including on litigation involving “human trafficking, common law tort, and wage and hour claims on behalf of two Mexican nationals against a chain of Bay Area taquerias.”“After extensive discovery, much of which was done in Spanish, we recovered significant sums for both plaintiffs and their families,” Judge Watson wrote.He also detailed pro bono work with the San Francisco Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights against a school district that had “prevented the election of a Hispanic member for decades despite Hispanics constituting the majority of residents in the district.”But little in the record of his confirmation foreshadows a clash on the scale of his confrontation with Mr. Trump. And Judge Watson gave a decidedly modest answer to a written question from Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who asked him about the scope of a president’s power to issue executive orders.Judge Watson said presidents typically had more latitude to issue orders that proceeded from actions taken by Congress, as well as on matters of national security.