http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/us/measuring-the-success-of-health-insurance-subsidies.html
Insurance Subsidies Remain, but So Do Health Law Questions - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court (US),Federal Aid (US)
June 25, 2015
5252
WASHINGTON —  The Affordable Care Act, saved by the Supreme Court for the second time in three years, has changed the fabric of health care in America, providing treatment and coverage to millions of the uninsured while transforming the insurance and hospital industries. But the law still faces stiff political resistance in many quarters and could yet return as an explosive issue in the 2016 elections.The impact of the law appears most clearly in the shrinking number of uninsured Americans. In 2014, the number of people without health insurance coverage fell to 36 million from 44.8 million in 2013, a decline of nearly 20 percent, according to data released this week by the National Center for Health Statistics.That decline was made possible in part by federal insurance subsidies, which the court upheld on Thursday, and by the expansion of Medicaid in more than half of the states, which was financed under the law.Health insurance companies have reinvented themselves, adopting new business models. The law requires them to accept anyone who applies for insurance and prohibits them from charging sick people more, as they did for decades. Insurers not only survived but are thriving, and the industry is being swept by interest in mergers as companies try to cut costs and premiums while preserving their profits.The law has also, by many accounts, contributed to a significant slowdown in the growth of national health spending and the cost of Medicare, a pacesetter whose influence extends far beyond its 55 million beneficiaries. No one can say for sure whether the trend will continue, or how much of it is attributable to the health care law.And industry executives said the law had fostered a revolution in the delivery of health care, encouraging hospitals large and small to increase the coordination of care and the use of electronic medical records while minimizing the readmission of patients who have been discharged. Doctors and hospitals have accepted that they will be rewarded or penalized for the quality of care they provide: their ability to keep people healthy. Medicare and private insurers have adopted a dizzying array of “quality metrics.”“This is now the law of the land,” said Dr. H. Jack Geiger, who founded the country’s first community health centers in the 1960s. “It is a victory for all poor people without access to health care.”In the Rose Garden on Thursday, President Obama rejoiced, declaring, “The Affordable Care Act is here to stay.” Conservatives lamented the decision for the same reason.But many questions about the law’s impact were not resolved by the ruling. Foremost among them is whether the law is making health care truly affordable for most consumers.Many people complain that they must pay several thousand dollars in deductibles before they receive tangible benefits from insurance policies. Many others assert that the law has encouraged insurers to narrow their networks of health care providers, limiting the selection of doctors and hospitals available to some consumers.And rate increases could be coming for consumers in 2016. Many insurers have sought increases of 15 percent to 25 percent. The cost of claims has substantially exceeded what they expected when they set premiums, they said.Consumers can try to avoid big rate increases by switching to less expensive health plans. “You can move to another carrier even if you have a pre-existing condition,” said Mike Kreidler, the insurance commissioner of Washington State.The largest question — whether the law has improved health care outcomes for Americans — remains unanswered, because researchers have not had enough time to reach a conclusion.Obama administration officials say the law benefits consumers by increasing competition among insurers. Many insurers have discovered a potentially profitable line of business in the public marketplaces where more than 10 million people have obtained coverage, subsidized in most cases by the federal government.But the law has also unleashed a “merger frenzy,” said Prof. Leemore S. Dafny, a health economist at Northwestern University who used to work at the Federal Trade Commission. Hospitals are buying up other hospitals and physician groups. Commercial insurers like UnitedHealth Group, Cigna, Aetna, Humana and Anthem are chasing one another in a wave of possible mergers and acquisitions.Such consolidation has the potential to improve care, but it could also increase the ability of individual health care providers and insurers to demand higher prices. And it could leave consumers with fewer options.The court’s decision on Thursday, in King v. Burwell, was a huge victory for Democrats, who adopted the law on party-line votes in 2010. But it may also prove to be a blessing for Republicans, who can continue to pummel “Obamacare” without having to enact a replacement for it.Some Republicans acknowledged that voters would probably have blamed them if the court had ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, cutting off insurance subsidies for millions of people in the 34 states that use the federal marketplace.Four Republican governors running or expected to run for president — Scott Walker of Wisconsin, Chris Christie of New Jersey, Bobby Jindal of Louisiana and John R. Kasich of Ohio — were among those who refused to set up state exchanges under the health care law.The ruling leaves many Republican candidates in a more familiar and comfortable position: They can call generally for the abolition or replacement of the health care program without having to enact or specify an alternative.Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, a spokesman for Republicans on health policy, said the fate of the law would be decided in the 2016 presidential election. Jeb Bush, a leading candidate for the party’s 2016 nomination, pledged on Thursday to “work with Congress to repeal and replace this flawed law with conservative reforms that empower consumers with more choices and control over their health care decisions.”Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio said Republicans would keep trying to repeal and replace the law. “Obamacare is fundamentally broken, increasing health care costs for millions of Americans,” Mr. Boehner said. “Today’s ruling doesn’t change that fact.”Individual pieces of the health care law are popular, particularly a provision that allows young people to remain on their parents’ health plans until they turn 26. But the latest poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that the public remains deeply divided over all, with 42 percent reporting an unfavorable view of the law and 39 percent reporting a favorable view. By contrast, in April 2010, the split was 40 percent unfavorable and 46 percent favorable.The subsidies at the heart of King v. Burwell have, by many measures, succeeded in expanding coverage.More than seven million people are enrolled in the federal health insurance marketplace, and 87 percent of them receive subsidies in the form of tax credits to help pay their premiums, the government says. Without subsidies, many would be unable to buy insurance.The subsidies also appear to have drawn substantial numbers of younger, healthier Americans into the new insurance markets, stabilizing premiums even for people who pay the full cost themselves.The subsidies average $272 a month, or $3,264 a year, and cover nearly three-fourths of the average premium for people receiving assistance, the government says. Beneficiaries are clustered in the lower income brackets.Two-thirds of federal marketplace customers have incomes less than twice the poverty level (below about $23,500 a year for a single person), according to the Department of Health and Human Services. More than 40 percent have incomes less than 150 percent of the poverty level.Lower-income people have long been more likely to be uninsured.Lizzie Perez Jimenez, 22, of Tampa, Fla., is studying to become a nurse and works part-time at a store in a shopping mall. She earns $1,300 a month and is not offered insurance. Her premium is $200 a month. She pays $50 and receives a tax credit of $150.Without the credit, “I probably would not have insurance,” said Ms. Jimenez, who has asthma. “It’s way too expensive for me.”A survey last year by the Kaiser Family Foundation estimated that nearly six in 10 people with coverage through the exchanges were previously uninsured.Medicaid has been at least as significant as the exchanges in reducing the number of uninsured Americans. More than 71 million people are now enrolled in Medicaid and its sister program, the Children’s Health Insurance Program — an increase of 12.3 million, or 21 percent, since October 2013, when the marketplaces opened.The health care law greatly expanded Medicaid eligibility. But the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that this was an option for states, not a requirement. To date, 29 states have taken the option, and Republican opposition remains strong in many others.The 2012 ruling has created a certain unevenness in health coverage. Nearly four million poor people remain uninsured because they live in states that chose not to expand Medicaid. They have too much income to qualify for Medicaid and too little to qualify for subsidies in the insurance exchanges. They would have been eligible for Medicaid if their states had expanded the program, experts say. Most of these people live in the South, and many are black.Of the 21 states that have not expanded Medicaid, all but three are led by Republican governors. Some of those governors, including Bill Haslam of Tennessee and Matt Mead of Wyoming, have tried to expand coverage, but their Republican-controlled state legislatures have refused.Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government pays all costs for newly eligible Medicaid beneficiaries through 2016, and after that, the federal share never goes below 90 percent.Mr. Obama said he hoped to persuade more states to expand Medicaid. “We’ve still got states out there that, for political reasons, are not covering millions of people that they could be covering,” he said Thursday, “despite the fact that the federal government is picking up the tab.”Charles R. Drapeau, 63, of East Waterboro, Me., who bought insurance through the federal exchange, said he was “ecstatic and extremely relieved” at the ruling.Mr. Drapeau has multiple myeloma, a blood cancer, and takes a drug that costs more than $10,000 a month. A federal subsidy covers nearly half of the $1,600 monthly premium for a policy covering him and his wife.Now, he said, he worries that his coverage will be reduced as a result of the 2016 elections.