https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/30/world/asia/malaysia-protests-najib-razak-1mdb.html
Antigovernment Protesters Gather in Malaysia, Defying Police Orders - The New York Times
Malaysia,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Najib Razak,Corruption (Institutional),1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB),Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia)
Aug. 29, 2015
9824
BANGKOK —  Tens of thousands of demonstrators in Malaysia defied police orders on Saturday, massing in the capital in a display of anger at the government of Prime Minister Najib Razak, who has been accused of corruption involving hundreds of millions of dollars.The demonstration in central Kuala Lumpur, which had been planned for weeks, was declared illegal by the Malaysian police, and on Friday the government went as far as to pass a decree banning the yellow clothing worn by the protesters.But the demonstrators, who represent a broad coalition of civic organizations in Malaysia, including prominent lawyers, asserted their right to protest on Saturday. Among other issues, they are angered at the transfer of 2.6 billion ringgit, about $630 million, into the personal bank accounts of Mr. Najib.The government has acknowledged that Mr. Najib received the money in 2013 and said it was a donation from undisclosed Arab royalty. Opposition groups have ridiculed the government’s explanations for the cash transfer, citing a Wall Street Journal report that said investigators had tracked the money to companies linked to a sovereign wealth fund headed by Mr. Najib, called 1Malaysia Development Berhad, or 1MDB.One group of protesters on Saturday carried the image of a giant check in the amount of 2.6 billion ringgit, with a sign that read, “You really think we are stupid?”The group organizing the protest goes by the name Bersih, which means clean in Malay.A former prime minister from Mr. Najib’s party, Mahathir Mohamad, was among those who joined the protest, underlining the split in the party. Mr. Mahathir’s wife, Siti Hasmah Ali, told reporters, “this is people power,” a paradoxical phrase given the sometimes brutal repression of protests during Mr. Mahathir’s rule. Among the protesters were a large number of Chinese Malaysians, a minority that in recent elections has largely turned against the government.Calls for Mr. Najib to resign have come both from within his party, chiefly from Mr. Mahathir and his allies, and from the opposition. One junior member of Mr. Najib’s party, the United Malays National Organization, filed a lawsuit against Mr. Najib on Friday asking for details of how the money was spent.The government has been aggressive in seeking to plug leaks from the investigation and seems to be trying to slow it down. In late July, after reports of the transfers to his accounts surfaced, Mr. Najib fired the country’s attorney general and shuffled his cabinet, removing the deputy prime minister, who had called for further investigations.José Ugaz, the chairman of Transparency International, an international anticorruption organization that is holding a conference in Malaysia this week, said the government was “manipulating” Malaysia’s anticorruption agency and accused the government of stonewalling the investigation.“It is clear that there is a push by the government to not allow this investigation to go forward,” Mr. Ugaz said.“It is not really believable that all this huge amount of money came as a donation into the personal bank account of the prime minister,” he said. “Even if it is true, it is absolutely improper that a prime minister received such an amount of money from a secret source. Donation for what?”Mr. Najib was initially scheduled to be the headline speaker at the anticorruption conference, titled “Ending Impunity,” which starts Wednesday. But as of Saturday, the prime minister’s office had not confirmed that he would attend, Mr. Ugaz said.Mr. Najib’s troubles are much broader than the scandal over the sovereign wealth fund and the bank transfers.Malaysia’s currency, the ringgit, has lost a third of its value over the past year, and prices of the country’s largest commodities — oil, rubber and palm oil — have plummeted, severely reducing government revenues. A sales tax introduced earlier this year has been deeply unpopular. The difficult economic times have coincided with reports of lavish spending by Mr. Najib’s wife.Mr. Najib has also come under fire over the curtailing of civil liberties, including increased use of the country’s Sedition Act to quell dissent, and the jailing in February of Anwar Ibrahim, the country’s opposition leader, which further weakened a fractured opposition.