https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/30/us/politics/republican-senator-meets-with-garland-and-urges-colleagues-to-follow.html
Republican Senator Meets With Garland, and Urges Colleagues to Follow - The New York Times
Garland  Merrick B,Supreme Court (US),United States,Kirk  Mark Steven,United States Politics and Government,Appointments and Executive Changes,Republican Party,Senate
March 29, 2016
4886
WASHINGTON —  Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois on Tuesday became the first Republican to meet with Judge Merrick B. Garland and said he hoped the meeting would influence other Republicans to at least sit down with President Obama’s choice to fill a Supreme Court vacancy despite pressure from party leaders not to consider his nomination.“We need rational, adult, open-minded consideration of the constitutional process,” said Mr. Kirk, who is perhaps the most endangered Senate Republican up for re-election this fall. “He’s been duly nominated by the elected president of the United States to fill a vacancy which we know exists on the court.”With Judge Garland by his side, Mr. Kirk praised Mr. Obama’s pick as “one of the most eminent judges in the country.”“I think when you just say, ‘I’m not going to meet with him,’ that’s too close-minded,” Mr. Kirk said.As Judge Garland visited the Capitol, accompanied by a handful of White House aides and smiling for the cameras, the Obama administration pressed forward with one of the traditional steps in the nomination process: having Judge Garland answer the extensive list of questions the Senate Judiciary Committee poses to judicial nominees.Brandi Hoffine, a White House spokeswoman, said Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican who is the committee’s chairman and has vowed not to hold hearings on the nominee, appeared ready to receive Judge Garland’s answers.“We are heartened by this development and look forward to the committee making this request directly to the nominee as well as to the White House, as is standard practice,” she said in a statement. “The nominee is prepared to provide all relevant information, consistent with standard practice, in short order.”But Beth Levine, Mr. Grassley’s spokeswoman, said the committee did not intend to provide a questionnaire tailored for Judge Garland.“Because the Senate isn’t moving a Supreme Court nominee forward during a presidential election year, there is no point in sending a Supreme Court questionnaire to Judge Garland,” she said.But she said the committee could not stop the White House from having the president’s nominee fill out the standard questionnaire given to lower court nominees, like the one Judge Garland completed before he was approved in 1997 to be chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.“If they feel it necessary to complete a questionnaire, we assume that’s what they’ll use because the committee won’t be sending them a separate one,” Ms. Levine said.On Monday, Democrats on the Judiciary Committee urged Mr. Grassley and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, to reconsider their decision not to look at Mr. Obama’s nominee during an election year. The Democrats said the court “will not fully operate” without filling the vacancy left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia last month.“Your refusal to consider his nomination would be an unprecedented break from the Senate’s history and would harm our constitutional democracy and undermine the Supreme Court’s ability to be our nation’s final arbiter of the law,” the committee’s nine Democrats said in a letter.In the starkest example yet of the effects of Justice Scalia’s absence, the Supreme Court deadlocked 4 to 4 Tuesday on a case that many feared would undermine organized labor, awarding a victory to public unions and demonstrating the conservative justices’ diminished capacity.As Mr. Kirk met with Judge Garland in Washington, many Republicans home for the Senate’s two-week recess were fielding tough questions from constituents, fueled by opponents eager to seize on the image of an obstructionist Senate majority. Mr. Grassley, who has easily held his seat since being elected in 1980 but now confronts an unexpected, potentially formidable Democratic challenger, has faced some particularly intense inquiries about not holding hearings.Most Americans believe the Senate should vote on whether to confirm Judge Garland, with a wide majority saying Republican leaders are refusing to hold hearings for largely political reasons, a recent CBS News/New York Times poll shows.Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, who faces a difficult re-election fight in his Democratic-leaning state, was the latest of more than a dozen Republicans to agree to meet with Judge Garland. A Franklin and Marshall College poll released last week, the day after Mr. Toomey’s announcement, showed that 35 percent of the state’s registered voters held unfavorable views of him, up from 23 percent a year ago. Mr. Toomey’s spokesman said Tuesday that Mr. Toomey and Judge Garland were coordinating schedules for a sit-down in the coming weeks.Mr. Kirk, who offered a striking image as he condemned his colleagues’ intransigence with Judge Garland at his side, was not the only Republican to criticize his party on Tuesday. Senator Susan Collins of Maine, who plans to meet with Judge Garland next week, said she believed the process was too important to be bogged down in politics.“The president, whether Republicans like him or not, is our president until next January, until Inauguration Day,” she said in an interview with Newsradio WGAN in Maine. “And it just seemed to me that there was no basis for saying that no matter who the president nominates, we were not going to consider that individual.”Ms. Collins — who, with Mr. Kirk, is one of only two Senate Republicans who have said they will grant Judge Garland full consideration — said she was “a bit perplexed” by Mr. McConnell’s opposition, believing that if Hillary Clinton is elected president, she will probably pick someone more liberal.“If the next president is a Democrat, then the balance could be tipped way further than Judge Garland, based on what I know about him so far,” she said.