http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/us/politics/harry-reid-dnc.html
Video Tribute Will Precede Harry Reid’s Final Convention Speech as Senator - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Elections  Senate,United States Politics and Government,Democratic National Convention,Democratic Party,Senate,Reid  Harry,Nevada
July 27, 2016
6567
Senator Harry Reid, the feisty Democratic leader from Nevada, will deliver his final speech to a party convention as an elected official on Wednesday; he is retiring from the Senate next year.In his remarks, Mr. Reid is expected to hit on one of his favorite topics: how the tactics and ideology of conservative congressional Republicans helped create a political environment that led to the nomination of Donald J. Trump for president.But before Mr. Reid takes the stage to lacerate his political opponents, a few people who have worked closely with him will share their thoughts about the leader via a three-minute video created for the convention.In the video, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, notes Mr. Reid’s unusual habit of abruptly ending phone conversations without saying goodbye. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, in line to replace Mr. Reid as Democratic leader in the Senate, recalls that Mr. Reid used to slip him $20 for a shoe shine since he did not like Mr. Schumer’s scuffed footwear. Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, tells how he recruited her as a financial watchdog. His wife, Landra, calls him relentless. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont says he appreciates Mr. Reid’s blunt manner.In the video, Mr. Reid attributes his determination to push through the health care law to his personal experience. He tells of how his family’s lack of money prevented them from visiting a doctor even when his brother broke his leg and his mother lost her teeth. He gets emotional talking about his mother.“The one thing I did that I’m always proud of — the first time I got money, I worked all one summer in a service station — I bought my mother some teeth,” he said. “If I do nothing else in my life, I got my mother some teeth.”Another person leaving elected office also weighs in.“Millions of people are better off for the work we did,” President Obama says. “Harry, we’ve had a good run. You and I, we’ve fought the good fight and we did it together.”