https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/09/world/middleeast/palestinian-municipal-elections.html
Top Palestinian Court Postpones Oct. 8 Municipal Elections - The New York Times
Palestinians,Elections,Fatah  Al,Hamas,Palestinian Authority,Abbas  Mahmoud,Gaza Strip,East Jerusalem,West Bank,Israel
Sept. 8, 2016
8687
JERUSALEM — Palestinian politics are constantly in disarray. This time, the chaos is by court order.The Palestinian high court on Thursday suspended municipal elections, scheduled for Oct. 8 in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, pending a second hearing after a challenge by a lawyer over balloting in East Jerusalem. A Palestinian official said the next hearing would be on Sept. 21, although reports said it would not take place until December.“From what I know, it is the intention of the prime minister, the president’s office and the elections committee to hold the elections as scheduled,” said Jamal Dajani, the director of strategic communications and news media in the office of the prime minister of the Palestinian Authority, Rami Hamdallah. “But we are bound by the court decision.”Mr. Dajani was speaking by telephone from the West Bank city of Ramallah, where the authority has headquarters.President Mahmoud Abbas’s party, Fatah, which dominates the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, has long had a bitter rivalry with Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls the coastal territory of Gaza.The two parties have not faced off in an election since 2006 when Hamas trounced Fatah in legislative elections. Hamas seized full control of Gaza a year later.The authority held  municipal elections in the West Bank in 2012, after balloting was postponed twice, but they failed to reflect popular sentiment because Hamas did not participate or allow balloting in territory it controls.The court case that has snarled the latest effort was brought by a Palestinian lawyer and is largely based on his complaint that there will be no municipal balloting in East Jerusalem.The Palestinians demand East Jerusalem as the capital of a future state. The Israelis claim sovereignty over it as part of their capital, although its annexation from Jordan in 1967 has not been internationally recognized.Mr. Dajani said the decision to proceed with elections that excluded East Jerusalem “had to do with sovereignty and an Israeli decision not to allow polling stations or people to vote.”The Palestinian court is also examining issues related to the legality of municipal voting in the Gaza Strip, where Hamas has been using the courts to block some Fatah candidates.The decision to suspend the elections unleashed speculation, with Hamas saying the court had come to the rescue of Fatah, which feared electoral losses.Hazem Kassem, a spokesman for Hamas in Gaza, said that the court ruling was a political decision “to protect the Fatah movement” after some of its lists of candidates fell apart.Amin Muqbel, general secretary of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, the party’s Parliament, said lawyers had lodged complaints against the Palestinian government decision to hold elections in the Gaza Strip because the Hamas forces responsible for monitoring the elections there are “considered illegitimate.”