https://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/16/nyregion/man-in-fatal-subway-pushing-case-pleads-not-guilty-to-murder-charge.html
Man in Fatal Subway-Pushing Case Pleads Not Guilty to Murder Charge - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Subways,Davis  Naeem,Han  Ki-Suck,Wittner  Bonnie G,Manhattan (NYC)
Jan. 15, 2013
9746
A suspect charged with pushing another man to his death in front of an oncoming subway train in Midtown Manhattan last month told the police that he knew the victim was too drunk to pose a deadly threat and acknowledged that he could have just “walked away,” a prosecutor said Tuesday.The suspect, Naeem Davis, also told the police that he felt bad for the dead man’s wife but that things “happen; it was bad timing,” according to the prosecutor.The man who died, Ki-Suck Han of Elmhurst, Queens, was struck and killed by a Q train on the tracks of the 49th Street subway station on Dec. 3. Witnesses have said that Mr. Han, 58, appeared to have been drunk.Mr. Davis, 30, pleaded not guilty in State Supreme Court in Manhattan on Tuesday to charges of murder and manslaughter. When his lawyer, Stephen Pokart, repeated earlier assertions that his client had been trying to get away from Mr. Han, Justice Bonnie G. Wittner seemed incredulous.The judge asked Mr. Pokart if he was saying that Mr. Davis had “no other way to prevent injury to himself” other than to push Mr. Han in front of a train. “It doesn’t seem that would be an appropriate way to defend yourself,” she said. “Maybe I’m wrong.”Justice Wittner added that the explanation would seem inappropriate even if Mr. Han had been drunk. She then gave a prosecutor, James Lin, an opportunity to rebut Mr. Pokart’s assertion, and the prosecutor briefly cited Mr. Davis’s statements to the police.In the statements, which were filed with the court, Mr. Davis was quoted as telling the police that Mr. Han had been “staggering” and had “slurred” his words. After the two bumped into each other, Mr. Han screamed, “I’m going to kill you!” and appeared to have a “knife or a glass bottle or something” in his coat pocket, according to the statement.Mr. Davis, who was born in Sierra Leone, told the police that he had pushed Mr. Han to get him away but that the older man fell head first onto the tracks, “rolling like a bowling ball.”Mr. Davis faces life in prison if convicted. He has been held without bail since his arrest.