https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/13/insider/a-reporting-teams-nuclear-stress-test-hazmat-suits-face-masks-and-9-flights-of-stairs.html
A Reporting Team’s Nuclear Stress Test: Hazmat Suits, Face Masks and 9 Flights of Stairs - The New York Times
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant (Japan),Japan Earthquake and Tsunami (2011),Radiation,Japan
March 13, 2017
7841
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. FUKUSHIMA, Japan — We were all a little bit nervous as we entered the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant that had suffered a meltdown six years ago after a major earthquake and tsunami. We had surrendered our cellphones and our passports, given digital prints of our middle fingers and sat in radiation scanners to take note of our baseline levels.So it cut the tension when Ko Sasaki, a photographer who regularly works for The Times, pointed out a sign in front of the security gates that warned employees and visitors, “Absolutely no playing Pokemon Go on the premises!”Along with Veda Shastri, a videographer who had flown in from New York, and Hisako Ueno, a researcher in the Tokyo bureau, we were visiting the Fukushima plant to chronicle the continuing cleanup process.Tokyo Electric Power Company, or Tepco, which operates the plant and is overseeing the cleanup, has made progress toward reducing radiation levels on the plant grounds by paving over much of the site (to cut down on radioactive dust swirling around) and storing waste in cement or steel containers. Still, we all wondered about the risk to our health.I had consulted a security adviser who has visited Chernobyl multiple times, and he assured me that on a short visit we would be safe as long as we followed precautions and wore protective clothing.It was my second trip to the plant; the first time around, about three months earlier, I had been restricted to seeing the plant from the inside of a bus, and was required to wear only a vest, gloves and plastic shoe covers.This time, we were going to be escorted to parts of the plant on foot and would need more protection. Our first stop was the roof of a new building that Tepco had built to house offices, dressing rooms, a canteen and rest facilities for the 6,000 workers on the site.We were given vests, white cloth gloves and personal dosimeters (devices that measure exposure to ionizing radiation). Tokyo Electric staff members gave the women in the group pink-trimmed vests clearly marked “Ladies,” as well as hard hats, paper masks and glasses.We exited through a side door, and a press officer pointed to a metal staircase attached to the side of the building. It was about 40 degrees outside (5 degrees Celsius) and windy. The roof was nine flights up.Climbing while breathing into a bulky mask made me feel lightheaded. Veda, who was carrying her camera, said she thought she might pass out.The wind was biting on the roof. Veda and Ko were outfitted with weighted belts so they wouldn’t fall off or fly away while shooting with their cameras.It was a good place to start our tour, to give us a visceral sense of the scale of the cleanup. In every direction, we could see the tanks (1,000 in total) that contain contaminated water, as well as the sea that had wreaked so much damage on the plant that March day in 2011.After climbing down from the roof, we loaded onto a bus with grimy windows and duct-taped seats. A Tokyo Electric employee held up a large Geiger counter to monitor radiation levels as we bumped along the roads winding around the reactors where the meltdowns occurred.We were allowed to get out briefly about 80 meters from Reactor 3, where the monitor spiked to show radiation of 260 microsieverts per hour. (Microsieverts measure the health effects of low levels of radiation on the human body.) At that level, if we stood still in that spot for 16 days straight without any protection, we could be exposed to enough radiation to increase our risk of cancer.To see as much of the cleanup as possible, we had asked for permission to go into the building that houses a large pool where spent nuclear fuel rods are stored.For that, we were ushered into a parked trailer, where we donned thick paper hazmat suits with hoods over our winter coats; two pairs of socks; cotton gloves covered by two pairs of rubber gloves; paper head covers and hard hats; filtered gas masks, and rubber boots. As we marched off to the spent-fuel pool, we looked like padded body doubles on the “Ghostbusters” set.After we entered the spent-fuel building, we changed out of the boots we had worn to walk there and put on another pair to go inside.Once in the large room with the pool, which was dark and spookily quiet, Tepco officials debated among themselves what, exactly, Veda and Ko could photograph or film. It seemed an odd time to have that discussion.A sign next to the pool warned visitors not to get too close to the edge, and, rather absurdly, to hold the hands of any children.Veda approached the side of the pool. “Please don’t drop your camera in the water,” a press officer cautioned. I am pretty sure she was entirely sincere underneath her mask.We finished the rest of our tour on the bus. After we returned to the main building to take off our gear, most of which went into the garbage, we returned to the radiation scanners and checked our personal dosimeters. After about five hours touring the plant, all four of us had absorbed 30 microsieverts or less of radiation, about .06 percent of the annual allowable dose for workers.That night I emailed the security consultant again with a report on our visit and a question about whether we should throw away our shoes and the clothes we’d worn underneath our hazmat suits. Despite his reply — “NO NEED TO THROW OUT” — I had lingering fears.That feeling stayed with me the next day as we toured several evacuated towns and filmed in abandoned neighborhoods. I could understand why so many people are still afraid to return, even as scientists reassure them that the radiation has declined to safe levels.My heart broke to see all that was left behind. Peering into the windows of one family home, I could see piles of clothes, books, DVDs and magazines. In the living room, a stuffed pink bunny lay on a coffee table. In the kitchen, a little girl’s first-grade calligraphy prize, dated 2008, still hung on the wall, next to a photograph of a boy in his baseball uniform.And out in the back garden, a yuzu tree bloomed with ripe orange fruit.