https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/business/united-airlines-profit-earnings.html
United Airlines Profit Rises Despite Boycott Threats Over Passenger Treatment - The New York Times
United Airlines,Dao  David A (1948- ),Airlines and Airplanes,Public Relations and Publicity
July 18, 2017
1304
So much for the outrage directed at United Airlines.On Tuesday, the carrier released its first financial statement that included the period after security officers forcibly removed a 69-year-old passenger, Dr. David Dao, from a plane. The incident left him bloodied and disheveled and left United facing widespread calls for a boycott. But nearly three months later, it appears that all the public anger has not hurt the company’s bottom line.United reported a profit of $818 million in the most recent quarter, ending in June, up 39 percent compared with last year. Sales rose, too, as more customers booked flights with the carrier, amid rising demand over all for air service. In a separate report this month, United said that it had more than 71 million passengers during the first half of the year, up 4.2 percent compared with last year.The results point to a truth about the airline business: Passengers, by and large, look for the most convenient and cheapest fares, not which airlines claim to offer the best service.The case of Dr. Dao, and the initial public reaction, had appeared to put that to the test.A video of airport security officers dragging him off a flight on April 9 ricocheted around the world after another passenger posted it to Twitter. Dr. Dao’s lawyer said the removal, to make his seat available to a United employee, had left Dr. Dao with a broken nose, a concussion, two knocked-out teeth and sinus problems.The event became a public-relations nightmare for the airline, generating several weeks of bad news. Elected officials in Washington threatened consequences for United, and customers promised to boycott the carrier. United’s chief executive, Oscar Munoz, did not get an expected promotion to board chairman.Dr. Dao later settled with United for an undisclosed amount.“The positive financial and operational performance this past quarter demonstrates that United is firmly on the right path,” Mr. Munoz said in a statement released Tuesday afternoon. Management at the company, including Mr. Munoz, is scheduled to discuss the company’s performance on Wednesday morning.United has taken steps to prevent incidents like Dr. Dao’s removal from happening again, like adding rules about when passengers can be removed from planes and increasing the financial incentives it offers customers aboard overbooked flights.