https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/upshot/why-some-policy-experts-question-clintons-plan-to-contain-drug-costs.html
Why Some Policy Experts Question Clinton’s Plan to Contain Drug Costs - The New York Times
Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Presidential Election of 2016
Sept. 22, 2015
5176
When critics complain about the high cost of a prescription drug, drug makers tend to have two main defenses. One is that developing drugs is an expensive, risky endeavor, and so companies need high prices to cover the cost of medical research. The second is that their products bring value by improving health and wellness, and the companies should be rewarded for those public benefits.Hillary Rodham Clinton is unveiling her proposal to lower drug costs Tuesday, and she has taken aim squarely at that first defense: If companies really need high prices to spend it on science, then they should be required to spend a set amount of their revenue on research and development costs. She proposes requiring that any additional drug company revenue be plowed back into government research for new therapies. The proposal would apply to any drug company that benefits from federal support — which would mean most of them.“The drug industry argues that high prices are necessary to pay for research and development, so let’s take them up on that argument,” said Topher Spiro, the vice president for health policy at the left-leaning Center for American Progress, which published a paper last week endorsing a similar idea. “Let’s have a relationship between prices and spending on research and development.”It’s a feel-good idea that calls on the companies to account for their claims that they are research entities. But when I ran it by some health economists and other health policy experts, several strongly disliked the idea because it misunderstands the diversity of companies in the pharmaceutical industry. They say it would create perverse incentives that could raise instead of lower the costs of developing new drugs.“This is an astonishingly naïve approach,” said Amitabh Chandra, a professor of public policy at Harvard University, in an email. He argues that the plan could encourage wasteful research spending without necessarily doing much about the prices charged for medications.The proposal takes its inspiration from a provision of the Affordable Care Act that requires health insurers to spend about 80 percent of the revenue that customers pay as insurance premiums on medical care. That provision has been popular, because the insurers that overcharge are required to send rebate checks to their customers. And though critics warned that it could reward inefficient spending on medical care, this does not seem to be happening so far. Early research suggests the measure has held down premiums.But the drug industry is different from health insurance in some important ways. For one, in recent decades companies have become much more specialized. Some small biotech start-ups develop only one drug. Other companies are focused only on basic research; they sell their discoveries to larger companies. Still others are the buyers of those technologies, specializing in clinical trials, navigating the drug approval process and bringing drugs to market. And there are the big pharmaceutical companies, which tend to do everything from basic research to sales.A set ratio of research spending and revenue would most likely bring about a reshuffling of the industry, said Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a scholar at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute who serves on the boards of several pharmaceutical companies. “There’s no uniform business model in the drug industry,” he said. That means it could be hard to have a ratio that would apply appropriately across all the different categories of companies.The idea behind the plan is that it would pressure companies to spend less on marketing, overhead and executive pay, and to consider lowering their drug prices in cases where there’s a mismatch between revenue and research budgets. It might discourage companies from buying products that are close to market-ready, and then charging high prices for them. Mr. Spiro pointed to two examples in which that has happened: Sovaldi, an expensive drug for hepatitis C, which was purchased by Gilead Pharmaceuticals after it was partway through clinical trials; and Daraprim, a generic anti-parasitic drug that was recently acquired by Turing Pharmaceuticals, which rapidly increased its price from $13.50 to $750 for a pill. The rule would force those companies to charge far less, Mr. Spiro said, since they spent little on research and won’t spend a lot on manufacturing the pills.But critics worry that drug companies might instead stick with their prices and then pour more money into new forms of research, even if they don’t have good ideas or won’t provide much public benefit with the work.“Saying every company ought to spend a given amount on R&D is not an efficient way to encourage more R&D, if that is the objective here,” said Patricia Danzon, a professor at Wharton, the University of Pennsylvania’s business school, who studies pharmaceutical pricing regulation.Mrs. Clinton’s plan is still sketchy in its details. Her campaign staff has not yet said what percentage of a drug company’s revenue must be spent on research, or what time period the ratio would apply to. Some of those details may come to ameliorate critics’ concerns. Mr. Spiro said that the details about what would count as research spending might be defined in a way that would apply to a broad array of companies in the drug industry.It also comes as part of a package of reforms on drugs. Mrs. Clinton would further change the company’s business strategies by eliminating the tax deductibility of marketing costs. She would force insurance companies to limit how much customers could be asked to pay for drugs each month. She would require Medicare to negotiate directly with drugmakers on prices, and allow American customers to import drugs manufactured in other countries.Mrs. Clinton’s choice is interesting not just because it is relatively novel in the health policy debate, but also because it represents a strategy very different from the one used in nearly every other developed country to constrain drug spending. What most countries do is develop some system for evaluating the medical value of new products, and negotiate prices based on that value. Such an approach, which measures how much a given medication would improve people’s life span and quality of life, is relatively rare in the United States, though there is growing interest in such a metric.Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, a University of Pennsylvania professor who worked on the Center for American Progress proposal and is a former adviser to the Obama White House, said the goal should be a system that rewards innovation and improvements in health. The ratio, he said, is one way of nudging the system in that direction. “Exactly how we get to that in the political system that we have I think is complicated, and you may not be able to get there directly in a way that policy wonks would want,” he said.The ratio approach makes some sense as a tool to regulate pharmaceutical companies in an environment where it is difficult to attack price directly, says Dr. Peter Bach, the director of the center for health policy and outcomes at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and a vocal critic of many recent high prices attached to new cancer drugs. But he says he hopes the American system finds a way to measure and reward companies that provide medical value, not just those that spend a lot on research. “Can we get to a value-based price so companies win for making better products, not for playing the system more cleverly?” he asked.