https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/29/sunday-review/these-guys-really-like-trump.html
These Guys Really Like Trump - The New York Times
Layoffs and Job Reductions,Trump  Donald J,Pittsburgh (Pa),Ambridge (Pa),United States Politics and Government
April 29, 2017
2404
PITTSBURGH — Al Paslow and Joe Peterson, friends since high school, together surfed the real estate and energy bubbles that buoyed the American economy — and together endured losing their lucrative jobs when each bubble burst.Mr. Paslow, 61, is a soft-spoken college graduate, Mr. Peterson, 62, a visceral debater who chose work straight out of high school. They both root for the Steelers and squabble about climate change. And 100 days into his presidency, they still share an unshakable faith in Donald Trump: This is the man who can restore the America they miss and cherish, the outsider too rich to bribe and too strong to intimidate.“When Joe first told me about Trump, I said no, that guy’s a bragger,” Mr. Paslow said. “Then I started listening to him, and I noticed, he’s a billionaire. If somebody comes along and says, ‘President Trump, I want to keep my plant in China and I want to close my plant here, here’s $50 million,’ he says, ‘I don’t need your money, mister.’ ”I first met them at a Trump rally in October in the Western Pennsylvania town of Ambridge, once the vibrant headquarters of the American Bridge Company, where Mr. Paslow’s mother wound cables during World War II. Mr. Peterson proudly wore his Trump-Pence T-shirt; Mr. Paslow a more modest Trump sticker. They had both been out of work for more than a year, laid off from their jobs in oil and gas exploration with two weeks’ notice, no severance, no pension and no unemployment insurance — like many American workers, they were independent contractors, without the protections of full employment. And like many American men, they were now depending on their wives’ jobs to get by.Mr. Trump came striding into this bleak landscape and offered them hope. He pledged to the crowd that he would bring back the oil and gas industry the very first day he was in office. “Unbelievably, that is exactly what we wanted to hear!” Mr. Paslow said. “Our hearts were uplifted.”What struck me that day and in conversations over the next several months was how much it meant to them to be heard and seen, and how durable their trust was, once conferred. Here was a celebrity self-proclaimed billionaire who was paying attention to their fate, their town, their battered industry. They are quick to suspect conspiracy and corruption, in their state and in Washington. They thought even Mr. Trump might have his price — but luckily, it would be too high for most to afford.This amalgam of faith and cynicism still binds them to their president. They may not like his tweets — “bad,” Mr. Peterson said in his only criticism — but they consistently give him the benefit of the doubt.They dismiss protesters as sore losers, and pundits who attack policy swings as establishment voices bent on sabotage. Where critics point to promises unfulfilled, they see obstacles that are not their president’s fault.“I think he’s doing a great job — he needs more help from everybody,” Mr. Peterson said. And if Congress, judges and other naysayers get out of the way, Mr. Paslow said, “then he might go down as one of the best presidents we’ve ever had.”When fact checkers pounce, the two men see an insistence on petty detail when they know what their president really meant.Mr. Peterson, whose parents voted the straight Democratic ticket, denounced Hillary Clinton as a liar and President Barack Obama as a weakling. Mr. Paslow voted for Mr. Obama in 2008, spellbound by speeches that he said could make you happy and make you cry. In 2016, Mr. Peterson had persuaded his reluctant friend to hear out Mr. Trump, and Mr. Paslow was sold.At a dinner with their extended families in December, the two friends were elated at a victory that took them and their country by surprise. Mr. Paslow’s wife, Adele, was outraged by Mr. Trump’s treatment of women, and sparred with Mr. Peterson and her own mother, a fervent Trump supporter. By April, though, she was liking most of what she saw, and believes the nation’s president deserved the allegiance of even those who did not vote for him.After the election, Mr. Paslow got a new job researching land titles for oil and gas exploration. He gives Mr. Trump credit for buoying the industry by promising to roll back environmental regulations that stifled growth. Even though Mr. Paslow welcomed the cleanup of a Pittsburgh once so polluted that streetlights went on by noon, he and his friend criticized Obama-era rules they saw as helping scuttle the shale gas boom and putting them out of work.“There were thousands of rules; you had to wait six, eight months just for paperwork,” Mr. Peterson said. “It cost millions of dollars.”“You couldn’t drill because the owls were mating,” Mr. Paslow said. Or the bats, Mr. Peterson added.The only work Mr. Peterson has found in 18 months is in West Virginia, and he does not want to move. He was a “landman,” going door to door asking whether landowners were willing to lease plots for drilling and then dispensing checks. But even in Pennsylvania, he says, he received a death threat from a farmer angry that his wife had been approached. He fears West Virginia would be even more hostile.The two friends reminisced about their childhood home on drives through Pittsburgh over the past few months. Though the city has reinvented itself as a center of health care, education and technology, they pointed out the houses that are still boarded up, the old economy and the new bumping up against each other in uneasy coexistence.“The things that made this country great are disappearing — factories, jobs, education,” Mr. Paslow said. “Someone could get a job at the mill and live happily ever after. Now it’s Walmart and Best Buy. Come on — a job at Walmart when you could have had a nice life working at a factory?”Yet they both set their sights at non-factory jobs when they first started out. “My dad didn’t want me working there because it was bad,” Mr. Peterson said of the mills. Instead, he started out trimming grass at a cemetery and then worked for 20 years in an electric motor repair shop until it folded. Meanwhile, Mr. Paslow set up a company based on researching land titles for the state for eminent domain and highway projects.As the real estate market heated up in the ’90s, the two friends teamed up to build databases of available loans to refinance at lower rates, which they sold to mortgage brokers. Mr. Peterson remembered making $14,000 for little more than 15 hours’ work.Then real estate foundered, and they had to start over. Mr. Peterson worked at Domino’s and Papa John’s, and set up a small business selling baseball cards.A newly booming oil and gas industry came to the rescue. At one point, Mr. Paslow said, he had 60 people working for him researching titles to make sure owners had no competing claims on land that could trip up companies who wanted to drill. “People were hiring their brothers, sisters, ex-wives,” he said. For 10 years, business thrived.“Then the bubble broke, and now we’re talking desperation,” Mr. Paslow said. “We got used to having a constant paycheck, got used to having that job, and we didn’t worry. We lost our zest to go out there and be your own entrepreneur.”Mr. Peterson is slowing down. He battled pneumonia this winter. “I’m looking for more part time than full time,” he said. “I’m getting older. Everything hurts.”He is able to consider part-time work because of his wife’s management job at a telecommunications company. Mr. Paslow’s wife owns a laundromat and manages her parents’ apartment rental business.Mr. Paslow is grateful to have work, but he chafes at all the software he has to use, and misses the secretaries who used to help him input data. “It’s giving me headaches,” he said. “Now we’re typists.”If they are adrift in a sea of menace, graft and scorn, Mr. Trump is an anchor. “Trump walked in and asked, what you want — that’s what I’m going to give you,” Mr. Paslow said. It’s only been 100 days. They still think he can do it.Related: The Women Who Still Like Trump