http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/19/world/americas/brazil-michel-temer-poet.html
Leader’s Poems Grip Brazilians, but Not in a ‘Fiery Flames’ Way - The New York Times
Temer  Michel (1940- ),Brazil,Poetry and Poets
July 18, 2016
8170
BRASÍLIA — Before becoming Brazil’s interim president, Michel Temer had a bit more free time on his hands. As a lawmaker shuttling between Brasília and São Paulo a few years ago, he found himself jotting his musings on cocktail napkins in airport lounges.In 2013, his first book of poetry, “Anonymous Intimacy,” was published, drawing mostly yawns from Brazilians.Mr. Temer, 75, a button-down career politician whose demeanor is so cryptically ceremonious that his rivals liken him to a butler in a horror movie, was apparently inspired by an array of themes.He brooded about the demise of letter-writing in the text-messaging era. He described a rookie lawyer’s pride in winning a case. Then there was his septuagenarian’s lustful ardor — after all, he had courted a new bride 42 years his junior.In “Red,” he wrote:Of redFiery flames of fire.Brilliant eyesWhich smile with scarlet lips.FiresThey take hold of me.Of my mindMy soul.All mineIn heat.My bodyOn fireConsumedDissolved.FinallyAshes are leftThat I spread on the bedTo sleep.With Mr. Temer now in the spotlight, his poetry is drawing renewed attention as Brazilians try to decipher the man at the helm after a bare-knuckle power struggle that ousted President Dilma Rousseff in May. Parodies of his oeuvre are flourishing, a sign that Brazilian satire is keeping pace with the country’s political upheaval.“Temer’s poems are really somewhat of a joke,” said Daniel Ramos, 25, an engineer who created a Twitter account skewering Mr. Temer’s verse.“This small diversion makes things kind of bearable,” said Mr. Ramos, who also publishes an independent poetry magazine.Catering to more than 32,000 followers, Mr. Ramos updates the feed, called Poet Temer, with his own poems as often as three times a day. He riffs on everything from Mr. Temer’s stilted, formal writing style to the graft scandals plaguing the interim president’s two-month-old administration.As Poet Temer becomes a cult sensation among Brazilian writers and political commentators, Mr. Ramos delves occasionally into composing in English, producing rhymes reminiscent of Epic Rap Battles of History, a video series on YouTube.i went for it all, watch out:i’m the presidentrhyming my way upthrough a bay of innocentsi rap, i laugh, recap,i ignite the roomcoup? hahahai’m the sweetest face of DOOMSome scholars want to know why Mr. Temer decided to make a late-in-life foray into poetry.There is a precedent of Brazilian political leaders who aspired to polish their résumés with some literary production. For instance, the Brazilian Academy of Letters, a literary society in Rio de Janeiro inspired by the Académie Française, counts numerous Brazilian political figures among its long list of so-called immortal inductees.They include José Sarney, 86, the former president remembered for his disastrous management of Brazil’s economy in the late 1980s. A foundation in Mr. Sarney’s home state of Maranhão in northeastern Brazil still celebrates his prowess as a novelist-statesman.Then there is Getúlio Vargas, who joined the academy in 1943 without even boasting much of a literary reputation. He did have one important factor in his favor, though: presiding over a nationalist dictatorship from 1937 to 1945.Supporters of Mr. Temer, who has also written books on constitutional law, nevertheless sing the praises of his poetry.“I had the privilege of reading this work when it was still a collection of scribbles,” said Gaudêncio Torquato, a political scientist who is a friend of Mr. Temer’s and an adviser. He described the interim president’s poetry as “authentic, concise and full of acute observations.”At the launch of his poetry collection, Mr. Temer revealed that he was inspired largely by Brazilian Romantic writers of the 19th century. He cited Álvares de Azevedo, a poet whose popularity has recently grown among Brazil’s goth subculture.In “Anonymous Intimacy,” Mr. Temer’s choice to occasionally err on the side of concision led Sensacionalista, a website that satirizes Brazil’s political class, to question whether the author of some of the verses might actually be his 7-year-old son, Michelzinho.Their case in point: a poem titled “Radicalism.” It comprises just one line:No. Never again!In a statement, Mr. Temer’s office said he was open to such reviews. “In a democratic country, such criticism is received naturally,” it said.But on previous occasions, Mr. Temer showed himself to be sensitive to such scrutiny.After the anthropologist and political commentator Roberto DaMatta questioned Mr. Temer’s forays into verse in a newspaper column, Mr. Temer responded by sending Mr. DaMatta a copy of his book and a letter taking issue with the criticism.“I doubt that you’re one of those people who discourage the tenderfoots from daring to experience sentimental writing,” Mr. Temer wrote.The exchange moved Mr. DaMatta to consider whether Brazil needed more politicians like Mr. Temer writing verse, with the hope that such writing might enlighten a political establishment soaked in scandal.“I beg now that his poetry can illuminate, with the agony and uncertainty of every poem, this Brazil of ours, where the political stage produces such vulgar dramas without any embarrassment,” Mr. DaMatta wrote in a subsequent column.Of course, Mr. Temer faces an array of other challenges that have little to do with how his poetry is pilloried. His government has already faced one scandal after another, prompting the resignations of top aides including his planning minister, his anticorruption minister and his tourism minister.Mr. Temer’s own credibility also remains in question.He was recently found guilty of violating campaign finance limits in a case that could make him ineligible to run for office for eight years. A construction executive has also testified that Mr. Temer was the beneficiary of a $300,000 bribe, a claim he denies.More political instability may also be on the horizon. Ms. Rousseff, the suspended president, is preparing for her impeachment trial in the Senate over claims of budgetary manipulation. If Ms. Rousseff succeeds in changing the votes of fewer than 10 senators, she could reclaim the presidency.All the drama is pushing Mr. Temer — and his poetry — further out of the shadows.When Veja magazine recently profiled his 33-year-old wife, Marcela, a former beauty pageant contestant who wed Mr. Temer when she was just 20 (he was 62), it quoted from “Red,” the libidinous poem in which Mr. Temer describes his carnal impulses.“It’s all just too ridiculous: the poetry, the way he became president, the much younger wife,” said Gabriel Gianordoli, 34, an information design consultant.Mr. Gianordoli reacted by writing computer code that randomly regurgitates “Red” into new poems that are sublimely sarcastic. With his wife and two friends, he fashioned this creation into a website, “Temer the Poet.”“If Temer can proclaim he’s a poet,” Mr. Gianordoli said, “then he can deal with the reactions his work has spawned.”