https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/04/upshot/the-tough-path-facing-chris-christie-and-marco-rubio.html
The Tough Path Facing Chris Christie and Marco Rubio - The New York Times
Christie  Christopher J,Bush  Jeb,Rubio  Marco,Huckabee  Mike,Presidential Election of 2016,Primaries and Caucuses,Republican Party
Feb. 3, 2015
7665
The end of Mitt Romney’s candidacy has brought the so-called invisible primary — the behind-the-scenes competition for the resources and credibility needed to win the nomination — into a new phase, with new players. Marco Rubio and Chris Christie, in particular, seem as if they might benefit. The two are racing against Jeb Bush to earn the support of Mr. Romney’s former supporters, according to my colleague Nicholas Confessore.Mr. Rubio and Mr. Christie might well soak up many Romney supporters, but neither candidate seems as well positioned to win the nomination as Mr. Bush. They could still do so, of course, especially if Mr. Bush turns out to be a weaker candidate than he now appears. Yet both Mr. Rubio and Mr. Christie have a tough path.Their central problem is that Mr. Bush, with all of his apparent support from the G.O.P. elite, now occupies a large space in the center-left of his party. He has already earned the support of top political operatives, his strength having stopped Mr. Romney's candidacy. The likeliest formidable challenger would come from his right, from a candidate who can consolidate the conservative opposition to him and marginalize the further-right factions of the party, represented by candidates like Ted Cruz or Mike Huckabee.Mr. Christie and Mr. Rubio are not well positioned to consolidate the conservative opposition to Mr. Bush. They are not necessarily trusted by the conservative grass roots, in part for the same reasons that Mr. Bush isn’t trusted. Mr. Rubio was one of the senators who led the charge for an immigration overhaul in 2013, while Mr. Christie has his own problems on immigration as well as on Obamacare, not to mention his history with President Obama himself. To the extent that either might be acceptable to the right (particularly Mr. Rubio), they lack the credibility to run the type of full-throated conservative campaign that might make them natural candidates for the conservatives.Instead, Mr. Christie or Mr. Rubio will most likely mount a direct challenge to Mr. Bush, competing for the same donors and the same mainline Republican voters.Could Mr. Christie or Mr. Rubio simply outmuscle Mr. Bush for the party’s center to center-left? It’s possible. The easiest way would be for Mr. Bush to implode. Despite his appeal to the party’s elites, Mr. Bush has not yet made his case to the voters. I’m open to the possibility that a candidate who hasn’t won an election since 2002; hasn’t enunciated a public message for 2016; and has insisted that he won’t pander to the base could fade between now and January, creating room for either Mr. Rubio or even Mr. Christie to compete for the party establishment.But if Mr. Bush doesn’t fade quickly, a head-on-challenge from another candidate roughly in the center of the party would be very hard to pull off. It would require an exceptional candidate, one with enough natural appeal among voters to compensate for a disadvantage in the invisible primary, or enough strength in the invisible primary to fight Mr. Bush. Mr. Christie, given his weak favorability ratings, doesn’t look like such a candidate, and Mr. Rubio's own support collapsed over the last three years even as he received as much or more mainstream news media attention as any other candidate.We’ll probably get a sense for whether Mr. Rubio and Mr. Christie are stronger than they now appear — or whether Mr. Bush is weaker — over the next couple of weeks. We might learn that Mr. Bush is not faring quite as well in the invisible primary as it seems — that Mr. Romney’s weakness, more than Mr. Bush’s strength, was responsible for the lack of interest in Mr. Romney's candidacy. Donors and activists might show more interest in Mr. Rubio or Mr. Christie than Mr. Romney.For now, though, based in part on what happened to Mr. Romney and on my subjective read of the reporting on Mr. Bush’s early strength among the G.O.P. elite, there probably isn’t enough room for Mr. Christie or Mr. Rubio to build the candidacies they had hoped for.