https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/sports/miami-marlins-michael-jordan-derek-jeter.html
Michael Jordan Joins Derek Jeter’s Group Seeking to Buy Marlins - The New York Times
Baseball,Miami Marlins,Jordan  Michael,Jeter  Derek,Auctions,Clemente  Roberto,Automobile Racing,Gibbs  Joe  Racing,Kenseth  Matt,Jones  Erik (1996- ),Formula One,Silverstone Circuit,British Grand Prix,Hockey  Ice,Arizona Coyotes,Tocchet  Rick,Pittsburgh Penguins,Recchi  Mark,New York Islanders,Buchberger  Kelly,Gudlevskis  Kristers,Golf,Senior LPGA Championship,Johnson  Trish,Gymnastics,Sex Crimes,Child Pornography,Nassar  Lawrence G (1963- ),Michigan State University,USA Gymnastics,Soccer,Gold Cup (Soccer),Canada,Costa Rica,Hertha (Soccer Team),Klinsmann  Jonathan,Ajax (Soccer Team),Nouri  Abdelhak (1997- )
July 12, 2017
5363
Michael Jordan has joined the investment group led by Derek Jeter that is trying to buy the Miami Marlins.Jordan’s spokeswoman, Estee Portnoy, confirmed Jordan’s involvement Tuesday. Jordan, a Basketball Hall of Famer, owns the Charlotte Hornets and is expected to assume a minority ownership role if Jeter’s group buys the Marlins.Commissioner Rob Manfred said the Marlins’ owner, Jeffrey Loria, was soon expected to choose a winning bid from among three groups seeking to buy the team, and all have offered about the same amount of money. Manfred said the three groups were working on financial structuring, legal issues and due diligence in preparation for a purchase.One investment group is led by Jeter, a former Yankees shortstop and a 14-time All-Star. A second group includes former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida and the Massachusetts businessman Tagg Romney, and the third group is led by the South Florida businessman Jorge Mas.CLEMENTE ITEMS BRING MORE THAN $7.5 MILLION Some 300 items from the Hall of Fame outfielder Roberto Clemente’s collection were sold with winning bids that totaled more than $7.5 million at the annual Major League Baseball All-Star FanFest.Clemente’s 1967 National League silver batting championship award brought a record price of $493,500, Hunt Auctions said. The old record was $313,500 for Mickey Mantle’s 1956 American League silver bat award.Joe Gibbs Racing is replacing Matt Kenseth, Nascar’s oldest full-time driver, with one of the youngest as the series undergoes a rapid changing of the guard.Erik Jones will drive the No. 20 Toyota for Gibbs next season. That has been Kenseth’s seat since 2013, and he has won a lot of races for the organization. But Kenseth is 45, and Jones is 21, and Jones is on a one-year loaner contract to Gibbs’s sister team Furniture Row Racing, and Gibbs had to put Jones somewhere in 2018.Kenseth is the 2003 Cup champion and a two-time Daytona 500 winner, and he has 38 career victories.SILVERSTONE SEEKS BETTER DEAL The heartland of Formula One will lose its home race in 2020 unless Silverstone is handed a cheaper deal to stage the British Grand Prix. Despite seven of the 10 teams being based in Britain and Silverstone attracting the biggest crowds in the sport, the circuit has told the Formula One owner Liberty Media that escalating race fees have made the race unsustainable.Silverstone activated a break clause in the contract that was signed in 2009 when the British Grand Prix was last under threat, providing two years’ notice of its intention to walk away.The Arizona Coyotes named Rick Tocchet as coach, replacing Dave Tippett, who parted ways with the franchise after last season. Tocchet spent the past three seasons as an assistant of the Pittsburgh Penguins, a stint that included consecutive Stanley Cup championships.Tocchet, 53, played 18 seasons in the N.H.L. and helped the Penguins win the Stanley Cup in 1992.The Penguins did not look very far for Tocchet’s replacement, hiring the newly elected Hockey Hall of Famer Mark Recchi. Recchi, 49, is the 12th-leading scorer in N.H.L. history. He spent the past three years as a player development coach with the Penguins.ISLANDERS HIRE BUCHBERGER AS ASSISTANT The Islanders have hired Kelly Buchberger to be an assistant under Coach Doug Weight. Buchberger was vice president for player development for the Edmonton Oilers last season, after spending the previous two as the club’s manager of player personnel.Also, the team agreed to terms with goaltender Kristers Gudlevskis on a one-year, two-way (N.H.L./American Hockey League) deal. The Islanders acquired Gudlevskis from the Tampa Bay Lightning on July 1 for forward Carter Verhaeghe.Trish Johnson shot a par 72 to take a three-stroke lead into the final round of the Senior L.P.G.A. Championship in French Lick, Ind., the first major championship for senior women. Johnson, a 51-year-old Englishwoman, opened with a double bogey and had three birdies and a bogey on French Lick Resort’s Pete Dye Course. She had a five-under 139 total.Michele Redman was second after a 69. Lorie Kane (70), Liselotte Neumann (71) and Carolyn Hill (74) were tied for third at one over.A former Michigan State University and U.S.A. Gymnastics doctor pleaded guilty to possessing child pornography, admitting he tried to get rid of the evidence last fall while the police were investigating allegations that he had sexually assaulted young female athletes.The doctor, Larry Nassar, pleaded guilty to three charges in federal court in Grand Rapids, Mich. Each could land him in prison for up to 20 years.He is awaiting trial on charges in three cases alleging that he sexually molested a total of nine girls, including eight who were gymnasts seeking treatment for injuries. He has pleaded not guilty, and his lawyer, Shannon Smith, said Nassar intended to proceed to trial in those cases.Alphonso Davies scored in the first half in Houston and Milan Borjan made several brilliant saves as Canada held on for a 1-1 tie with Costa Rica to remain undefeated in the 2017 Concacaf Gold Cup.The 16-year-old Davies opened the scoring with his third goal of the tournament in the 26th minute for Canada, using his blazing speed to race past the Costa Rica defense and hammer a cross to the near post.Francisco Calvo tied the score off a corner kick in the 42nd minute, outleaping a Canadian defender and redirecting the ball past Borjan. The result left Canada and Costa Rica tied atop Group A.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)GERMAN CLUB SIGNS KLINSMANN’S SON Hertha Berlin signed Jonathan Klinsmann, the son of the former United States coach and Germany striker Jurgen Klinsmann, after he impressed during his trial with the Bundesliga club. The 20-year-old Klinsmann, a goalkeeper with the United States Under-20 team, achieved his goal of earning a contract, Hertha said.AJAX MIDFIELDER UPDATE Doctors at a hospital in Innsbruck will start waking up Ajax midfielder Abdelhak Nouri, who has been kept in an induced coma since collapsing during a friendly game in the Austrian Alps on Saturday. The Dutch club says Nouri is in “a stable and not life-threatening” condition, adding that doctors were “cautiously optimistic about his recovery.”