https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/business/dealbook/gary-cohn-federal-reserve-chairman.html
For the Top Fed Job, Slow and Steady Beats Wall Street Brash - The New York Times
Federal Reserve System,Cohn  Gary D,Yellen  Janet L,Stocks and Bonds,United States Economy
July 12, 2017
8871
Only in Trumpland can Gary D. Cohn be considered a suitable Federal Reserve chairman.Mr. Cohn, the former Goldman Sachs president who is a current White House adviser, is said to be the leading contender to replace Janet L. Yellen, according to Politico. Though not a trained economist, Mr. Cohn’s years in finance put him ahead of President Trump’s other cabinet picks who notably lack relevant résumés. But a Wall Street trader’s temperament makes a bad match for the staid central-bank job.The registered New York Democrat did not have a government background when he became director of the National Economic Council. Still, he had honed his finance skills during more than 25 years at Goldman, and he quickly hired White House staff members with complementary experience. His operation contrasted with those of cabinet members like Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, who struggled to answer basic questions about school curriculums in her confirmation hearing.Choosing Mr. Cohn as head of the central bank would be an unconventional pick. Over the last 40 years, Fed chiefs have been economists and have also served at least two four-year terms. Ms. Yellen will have served only one if Mr. Trump does not renominate her. The last one-term, noneconomist Fed chairman was G. William Miller, who had been the chief executive of Textron before President Jimmy Carter tapped him. At a time of high inflation, his policies tanked the dollar and he lasted just over a year.Mr. Cohn spent much of his time at Goldman as a trader. He joined its J. Aron commodities unit and became the head of the divisions for fixed income, equities and global securities before he became the company’s president. Goldman is known as the most alpha of the investment banks, and the hard-charging job fit Mr. Cohn’s personality.Running the central bank is a more sedate affair. The staff consists of number crunchers with doctorates in economics who pore over various models to analyze growth and employment. News conferences after meetings by the interest-rate-setting committee are carefully scripted. Ms. Yellen, like her forebears, chooses her words carefully, knowing any hint of surprise can rattle markets.Her predecessor, Ben Bernanke, learned that in 2013, when he said the central bank would no longer be purchasing bonds, causing United States Treasury yields to surge in what became known as the “taper tantrum.” Mr. Cohn, a blunt talker, may find such restrictions suffocating. Markets will prefer a more boring choice.