https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/08/nyregion/08bloomberg.html
Bloomberg Tactics Were Highhanded on Traffic Plan, Lawmakers Say - The New York Times
Bloomberg  Michael R,Congestion Pricing,Albany (NY),Silver  Sheldon,Manhattan (NYC),Roads and Traffic,Commuting,Legislatures and Parliaments,Sadik-Khan  Janette
April 8, 2008
7713
Last week, with a landmark proposal at a delicate juncture, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s transportation commissioner raced to Albany as part of an all-out effort to persuade state lawmakers to approve a measure to charge drivers entering the busiest sections of Manhattan.In Albany, the commissioner, Janette Sadik-Khan, expressed the mayor’s sentiments, saying: “You are either for this historic change in New York or you’re against it. And if you’re against it, you’re going to have a lot of explaining to do.”Ms. Sadik-Khan’s remarks were widely noted by Albany lawmakers, with some viewing her tone as condescending. So when it was revealed that the state police had pulled her over for speeding and improperly using her lights and sirens on her way to the Capitol, it only underscored what the legislators saw as the Bloomberg administration’s imperious attitude.“When Commissioner Sadik-Khan was coming up here telling me I can’t drive, she was busy being driven in a city-owned car by a chauffeur, speeding, getting a ticket with her lights and sirens on,” said Assemblyman Jeffrey Dinowitz, a Bronx Democrat and an ardent foe of the program. The proposal was “rotten to the core,” said Mr. Dinowitz, who was handing out copies of a Daily News article about Ms. Sadik-Khan’s citations to  fellow legislators.Despite the intimate meals at Gracie Mansion, exhaustive lobbying, and presentations of sophisticated, district-by-district traffic analyses, Mr. Bloomberg was unable to persuade lawmakers like Mr. Dinowitz to support his plan, which would have formed a major pillar in his legacy. Indeed, Ms. Sadik-Khan’s stumble was but one of many missteps that state lawmakers said had led to the program’s demise, and something of a replay of events last July, when Mr. Bloomberg previously failed to persuade lawmakers to approve the proposal to charge drivers $8 to enter a designated zone in Manhattan.Given the New York City Council’s limited powers, and its habit of deferring to the mayor, Mr. Bloomberg has sometimes found himself at a loss for how to persuade a resistant State Legislature to embrace his plans.“All politics is relationships, and if he hasn’t built the relationships over time he can’t suddenly create those relationships with 48 hours to go in the process,” said Assemblyman Micah Z. Kellner, a Manhattan Democrat who supported the proposal but complained that Mr. Bloomberg treated lawmakers like an afterthought. “It just shows that six and a half years into his term, the mayor just does not know how to approach the Legislature.”Indeed, several lawmakers, already offended by what they saw as the mayor’s past highhandedness, said that the  hardball tactics employed by Mr. Bloomberg and his surrogates simply made a bad situation worse. In recent weeks, for instance, the League of Conservation Voters announced the creation of a political action committee positioned to work against lawmakers who did not support the plan.Mr. Bloomberg is close to the organization, and Kevin Sheekey, his chief political deputy, spoke at a party celebrating the establishment of the committee, called the Climate Action PAC. Both men have hinted that opponents of congestion pricing would face rejection by voters in the fall elections.“If there are people out there who aren’t helping New York City, I suppose they should fear,” Mr. Sheekey said on Monday, just hours before the Assembly rejected the measure in a closed door meeting. “It’s not the mayor they should worry about.”But the threatening tone did not sit well with state lawmakers. “I imagine that’s how one becomes a multibillionaire, by being a strong-arm individual,” said Assemblyman J. Gary Pretlow, a Westchester Democrat who opposed the plan. “He’s not going to push us around, though. We are the immovable body at this point.”But some supporters of the plan said that the mayor faced an almost insurmountable task, given the competing interests of the transit agencies and the unwillingness of Albany lawmakers to take a politically risky vote as they face re-election in the fall.And Mr. Bloomberg’s aides privately grumbled that Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver  supported the plan but did not press his members to vote for it. With Mr. Silver and his staff refusing to meet with the mayor’s top aides in recent days, Jeff Kay, the director of the mayor’s office of operations, was left to circle the halls of the Capitol distributing a list of 15 changes Mr. Bloomberg had agreed to make to the program to satisfy critics.The defeat of the program, which was to be the catalyst for major transit and environmental improvements, is a crushing blow for Mr. Bloomberg, and threatens to leave him with little legacy beyond ending indoor smoking.Lawmakers cited a number of reasons the mayor’s political strategy failed. The problems started when he rolled out the plan relatively late in the legislative session last year and then had a testy meeting with Senate Democrats that poisoned relations.Democratic lawmakers were further annoyed earlier this year, when word leaked out that the mayor had cut a $500,000 check to the Senate Republicans to help them retain their  majority. And even while the mayor was reaching out in a series of meetings and phone calls in recent weeks, his talk  and that of his staff was at times threatening. “People don’t appreciate threats,” said Assemblywoman Linda B. Rosenthal, a Democrat from the Upper West Side, who said she would have voted for the plan.“Members who might have been on the fence reacted negatively to the specter of a campaign from the mayor if they didn’t go along with his plan.”Among the mayor’s other problems, he never seemed to find a vocal backer for the plan among the Assembly Democrats. Not only did he have to deal with Mr. Silver’s skepticism, but he had a vocal opponent, Assemblyman Richard Brodsky of Westchester, fomenting opposition among the rank and file without an effective counterweight.“There was no champion for congestion pricing within the Legislature,” said Assemblyman Rory I. Lancman, a Queens Democrat opposed to congestion pricing. “It was such an obvious transaction between the Senate Republican conference and the mayor. That’s not just a reflection of poor tactics on the mayor’s part, it’s a reflection of how little support the policy had on the merits.”