http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/30/nyregion/trump-buys-hotel-delmonico-for-115-million.html
Trump Buys Hotel Delmonico for $115 Million - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,HOTEL DELMONICO,KOREIN  SARAH,TRUMP  DONALD,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,HOTELS AND MOTELS
Nov. 30, 2001
8388
In a sign that the real estate market has not collapsed, Donald J. Trump outmaneuvered three other bidders Wednesday night to buy the Hotel Delmonico on the Upper East Side for $115 million.The 32-story hotel, at the northwest corner of Park Avenue and 59th Street, is  known more for its location in one of the most expensive residential neighborhoods in the world than for its architecture.''It's a great location,'' said Thomas P. McConnell, a hotel specialist and a senior managing director of Insignia/ESG. ''How often can you buy something on Park Avenue? It's a trophy in that respect.''Mr. Trump was elated. He said he expected to close the deal in 120 days.Mr. Trump is buying the hotel from the estate of Sarah Korein, a legendary real estate investor who combined charm with a tough-as-nails approach to negotiations. Mrs. Korein died three years ago. The hotel has been run by her daughter, Elysabeth Kleinhans, for more than a decade.''It's been interesting,'' Mrs. Kleinhans said yesterday, ''but I'll be quite happy to get out of here. My mother loved the excitement of having a hotel. My dream is to have a theater complex, not a hotel.''Mrs. Kleinhans said she had plans for a small building she owns that houses the Kaplan Deli and is adjacent to the hotel on 59th Street. She plans to convert the building into a not-for-profit theater complex when the deli's lease expires in April.Mr. Trump won out over bids from three other parties for the hotel: Alan B. Friedberg; Aby Rosen and Michael Fuchs; and Izak Senbahar and Simon Elias.''I'm disappointed,'' said Mr. Friedberg, who had bid $118 million. ''I would've liked to have it. But it's O.K.''Although Mr. Friedberg had a higher bid, the Korein family said that Mr. Trump was willing to put money at risk before he got the title, which made the Koreins confident that he would close the deal. But one person involved in the bidding said Mr. Trump was still putting together his financing package.''All the bids were in a tight cluster,'' said Joseph Williams III, a managing director of Sonneblick Goldman Corporation, which advised the Koreins. ''We were in a position to go from one to the other if we ran into any bumps.''Mr. McConnell said he expected Mr. Trump to transform the Delmonico into a condominium hotel not unlike the Trump International Hotel and Tower.It would not be the first time that the Delmonico changed.The owners of the 525-room Delmonico went bankrupt shortly after the hotel opened in 1929, amid the Depression. William Zeckendorf Jr., the developer, bought the building in 1974, converted it into a luxury apartment house and installed Christie's auction house as a retail tenant.A decade later, Mr. Zeckendorf sold the property for $32 million to Ms. Korein, who turned it back into a hotel, converting the apartments into about 200 suites.When Mrs. Korein died at 93, her holdings included either the land or the land and the building at Lever House, 390 Park Avenue, between 53rd and 54th; the old Equitable Building, 120 Broadway, between Cedar and Pine Streets; and 1 Penn Plaza, the fourth-largest office building in the city. Mrs. Kleinhans said her family had no plans to sell the other properties.