https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/upshot/why-does-education-translate-to-less-support-for-donald-trump.html
Why Does Education Translate to Less Support for Donald Trump? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Education,Colleges and Universities,Voting and Voters,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Nov. 1, 2016
6735
It’s probably the biggest demographic story of this election: Hillary Clinton has made big gains with well-educated whites, particularly women. And Donald J. Trump has continued recent Republican gains in winning over less educated whites, particularly men. As Nate Cohn wrote in an article last month, education has replaced the culture wars as the defining electoral divide.But what exactly do we mean by “educated”? Some Upshot readers, responding to the article, suggested it was about intelligence — that college-educated people can see through Mr. Trump because they’re smart.The I.Q. connection is purely speculative; no rigorous studies have been published to support it. Other readers warned against the temptation to stereotype, pointing to various explanations and showing how difficult it is to come to definitive conclusions about the education correlation.These days, the highly educated tend to be liberal. A Pew Research center study showed this growing connection among those with graduate degrees. Some readers said it had to do with what you learn at college: You become “educated.”Another reader highlighted the advantages of encountering different points of view on campus.What if you mostly goof off at college — beer pong at the fraternity instead of bearing down at the library — but manage to get a degree? You may not be “educated” but you still have an edge in the job market: The degree can be a ticket to a good job and the good life. If you don’t have that credential, you may feel left out and frustrated — and more willing to shake things up with Mr. Trump.It’s worth mentioning that income is not nearly as predictive of presidential preference in this election as education. Trump supporters are not as poor as a lot of people think. And at the highest levels of income, the rich are set to reverse a decades-long pattern and support a Democratic presidential candidate.Several readers blamed left-wing bias on campus, particularly among professors — or as one reader, L’Osservatore, put it, “the unquestioned control of collectivists and socialists on 95 percent of college campuses.”Studies have shown that professors have in fact become more liberal, with faculty members in New England standing out as far more liberal than the rest. A group of professors, frustrated by this trend, has compiled a Heterodox Academy ranking of colleges based on ideological diversity.But other readers, pointing to examples like the rejection by many Republicans of the science on climate change, said there was an “anti-intellectual” strain in the modern G.O.P. (Political science aficionados will think back to the book  “Anti-Intellectualism in American Life” by Richard Hofstadter.)Jane of Santa Rosa said, “This is why Donald Trump — and the G.O.P. by extension — ‘love the poorly educated.’ ”In 2012, the Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum called President Obama “a snob” for urging students to pursue college.A reader, John of Los Angeles, said of conservative complaints of one-sidedness: “Alternatively: Facts have a liberal bias.”The clustering of like-minded people — the so-called Big Sort — has been underway for quite a while, but the effect on political preferences seems to be accelerating in this election.Region plays a role. In 2012, President Obama won a fairly high percentage of the white working class in Wisconsin and Minnesota, states with a tradition of labor rights and Progressive values. He didn’t do nearly as well with working-class whites in Southern states.Educated white voters are more likely to live in big cities or near them, areas that have had better job growth and that tend to lean liberal. The mostly liberal Northeast has the highest percentage of college graduates — you’re more likely to be expected to go to college — and the populous Northeast megalopolis, for example, draws college graduates searching for jobs.College graduates from rural towns who move to a metropolitan area for work may have their views influenced by their new environment and social circles. It’s also possible that their views and interests may prompt them to move, whether in search of cultural opportunities or like-minded people. The result is social polarization by place.A reader, William Hayes of Houston, said, “Trump promises jobs by rolling back globalization, which appeals to the undereducated, not because they’re stupid, but because they believe decreasing globalization will help them get good jobs.”A reminder here that the education correlation is among whites only. Nonwhites may have other priorities in assessing Mr. Trump. A reader, Space Needle from Seattle, wondered if Trump supporters were “simply angry about their perceived loss of power in a society growing increasingly diverse.” An article in The Times today explores “white anxiety that has fueled political tumult” not just in the United States, but throughout the Western world.Suburban and moderate white voters may be uncomfortable with more explicit appeals to racial, ethnic and religious resentment — and those who have the college credential would have less reason for scapegoating. Some studies have shown that education can increase tolerance, but there’s also evidence suggesting the effect can be overstated when it comes to race.One overlooked factor is Mr. Trump’s success with older voters. He has polled much better among those over 65 than among millennials, perhaps because of his appeal to return America to perceived glory days.Ed Kilgore of New York magazine said calling people “white working class” because they don’t have a diploma can be misleading: “It is important to understand that a majority of today’s seniors came of age at a time when a college education really was not necessary for most jobs — in many cases even management-track jobs.”Educational attainment has been rising for decades. In the late 1960s, only about 10 percent of Americans had bachelor’s degrees. Today, that number is almost 33 percent, and for whites, it is around 36 percent. People with degrees tend to be more reliable voters.Two readers had advice for Democrats:Have we missed any reasons that white Americans with college degrees are less likely to support Mr. Trump? Let us know in the comments.Update: A reader, DrJ. of Pa., adds a comment about the possible impact of religion. Mr. Trump is the overwhelming favorite of evangelical Christians:“I think it’s relevant that conservatives are by and large more religious, certainly more fundamentally religious, than liberals. But religious SCHOLARS are not so religious.“In religion, the open mind and love of scholarship leads one away from the path of the true believer. The desire to cling to tradition (and, I would say, superstition) leads these conservatives to be less likely to pursue education and scholarship.”Update: It turns out that Mr. Trump himself has said that people are simply born smart (or not). He said he’s a “gene believer.”