https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/nyregion/uber-drivers-kennedy-airport-restrooms.html
For Uber and Other Drivers at Kennedy, a Long Wait to Do Their Business - The New York Times
Car Services and Livery Cabs,Bathrooms and Toilets,Kennedy International Airport (Queens  NY),Uber Technologies Inc
June 29, 2017
5959
In a cellphone parking lot on the fringe of Kennedy Airport, nearly every spot is taken, with drivers waiting to hear from the internet about being hired. A man on a prayer rug makes his devotions. As the summer day comes toward its end, the air stirs and shifts on an evening breeze.A cleaning rag in his hand, Parvinder Singh, 23, stops polishing the side mirror on his Uber car.“You smell that?” he asks. “Every time, when the wind blows!”An Uber driver in the next parking spot, Parvinder’s cousin Ronnie Singh, moves the narrative along.“People pee behind the car,” Mr. Singh, 25, said.Well, some people.“The men have that option,” said another driver, Michele Dottin, 54. “As a female, we don’t have that option.”For close to a year, drivers for the app-based services who congregate in the cellphone lots have sought permission to build restrooms there. They have had constructive meetings with officials from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport, said Sohail Rana, 49, an Uber driver who volunteers with the Independent Drivers Guild, an affiliate of the Machinists Union. Uber has offered to pay the cost, Mr. Rana said.“They seemed receptive, but it has been a year,” he said.The drivers wait in the cellphone lot for arriving airline passengers to order a car. Signs say that parking is available for only 60 minutes, but that often is not long enough, so the drivers overstay.“This is a big problem, boss,” Yahya Balde, 27, said. “I’ve been here for 90 minutes. I’m thinking of going to take a pee right now.”He meant he would go to an area of the lot with just enough privacy to do his business, not to leave altogether.Mr. Rana said: “You cannot blame the people. They just have to go.”The airport has an area where passengers can take their pets. “If you have an area for animals, why is it a problem having a facility for people who sit in the lot?” Ms. Dottin asked. “This should not even be a discussion.”To some extent, the Port Authority agrees. Cheryl Ann Albiez, a spokeswoman said, “These drivers do have access to restroom facilities.”She was referring to bathrooms in the central taxi holding area, which is within driving distance of the lot. All of the drivers said neither the toilets there, nor those in gas stations near the airport, were feasible because the drivers were in an electronic queue, with their positions monitored by the app companies.“If you drive out of the lot, you will lose your position in the queue,” Mr. Rana said.Ms. Dottin explained: “It takes about 20 minutes for a driver to leave, use the bathroom and come back. That 20 minutes is time you could be sitting in the lot.”The longer the drivers sit, the sooner they will be called for a trip. The functions of the body being what they are, it is also true that the longer they sit, the more urgent the need to use a toilet. “If you leave the parking lot area and lose your position after you’ve been waiting there three hours, all that time is wasted,” Mr. Rana said.So people hold it. Some people. Not the men.Many of the drivers are practicing Muslims and pray five times a day after a ritual washing of hands and face. “There is no water here,” said Zaheer Hussein, 29. “Somebody brings water. Sometimes I bring water.”The prayer rugs are on a sidewalk, most of them in a plastic container marked with a sign, “Rug Box for Rain.”At La Guardia Airport, portable toilets have been set up in the cellphone lot. This seems like a pretty straightforward solution. Ms. Albiez said: “Uber and the Port Authority are seeking to install portable toilets in the limo lot and cellphone lot at J.F.K. for the drivers’ convenience.”Seeking to install them? Portable toilets can actually be ordered with a phone call and delivered in a day or even sooner.What was taking so long? Ms. Albiez initially did not explain, but later said she expected them to be in place on Friday.As Mr. Rana noted, “People still have to pee every day.”There’s definitely no app for that.