https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/21/arts/television/bachelorette-rachel-lindsay-guide.html
A ‘Bachelorette’ Bible - The New York Times
Reality Television,Dating and Relationships,Race and Ethnicity,ABC Inc,The Bachelor (TV Program),The Bachelorette (TV Program),Lindsay  Rachel L
May 21, 2017
686
There is a mantra often repeated on “The Bachelor” and its spinoff, “The Bachelorette”: “Here for the right reasons.” Contestants who go on the show to put their trust in “the process,” find true love and settle down are “here for the right reasons.” Those who come to take off their tops, boost their Instagram followings and land hosting gigs on the spring break party circuit are not.You can think about watching the show in the same way. You can tune in and sincerely root for a lasting connection between a dental hygienist and a junior sales associate. Or you can embrace it on the level of spectacle, view it as a shimmering reflection of capitalism, gender and race in America.“The Bachelor” franchise, which turned 15 years old this year, is a deeply American artifact. It’s a freaky mash-up of one-true-love monogamy and hedonistic polyamory. It isolates men and women from their families, friends and smartphones, liquors them up and edits them into catty bitches and aggressive bros. It’s the most synergistic thing I’ve ever seen: Every episode of “The Bachelor” functions as a native ad for “The Bachelorette” and “Bachelor in Paradise” — the spinoff in which contestants who were “not here for the right reasons” are all put on an island to fend for themselves sexually. Over the years, the shows has eaten up the rest of the ABC lineup, bloating from one hour to 90 minutes to two hours an episode — it finally reaches three hours near season’s end, when the live specials begin.It’s also the whitest thing ever. On this season of “The Bachelorette,” which debuts on Monday night, the show will feature a black lead for the first time. As NPR’s Linda Holmes has smartly noted, the franchise works as a metaphor for white privilege because each new Bachelorette or Bachelor is selected from the previous season’s top contestants, power appears to pass naturally from one white romantic lead to the next. How the show grapples with Rachel Lindsay, a 31-year-old Dallas lawyer, as the Bachelorette — Will a white romantic hopeful tell her he “doesn’t see color?” Will a race war break out among the guys? — won’t tell us much about race in America, but it will tell us plenty about the story that white America would like to sell itself about race. The prospects are equal parts fascinating and horrifying.If you’ve never set foot in Bachelor Nation, now would be a good time to start. As a reality show star lords over American politics, reality television looks more urgently political than ever. And social media has added an additional subtext, spinning the show into a delightfully meta communal experience. On Twitter, the show’s staged moments are analyzed and ridiculed in real time. There are podcasts to download and fantasy leagues to join.To help you navigate the spectacle and understand why the show matters, we offer this guide from the “Bachelor” obsessives of The New York Times and one newcomer to the franchise.So. Will you accept this rose? AMANDA HESSA FERRIS WHEEL FOR YOUR SOUL “The Bachelor” and “The Bachelorette” are designed to feel like thrilling roller coasters — He likes her! No, he prefers her! He’s insane! She’s not eliminating him! — but are actually closer to Ferris wheels: They follow a predictable pattern, delivering the illusion of adventure as well as that sinking feeling you have been on this ride before. Watch them long enough and you won’t need to consult Reality Steve, the “Bachelor” blogger who posts juicy spoilers (including the winner). For example:Someone will always be trying to “steal her for a second.” That’s “Bachelor” speak for “rudely interrupt a conversation at a critical moment for gamesmanship purposes.” It happens constantly at the cocktail parties before elimination ceremonies and group dates. It is infuriating.There’s always a “bad” hopeful, someone who is “not here for the right reasons” (see above) and “not good for the Bachelorette.” Surely the Bachelorette will see through this man’s hollow charms and eliminate him swiftly! That will not happen. This person is ratings gold and going nowhere.There will always be a date where a musical act serenades the couple, who pretend to be big fans and awkwardly dance. On the most recent season of “The Bachelor,” it was the Backstreet Boys. Past performers have included the Lady Antebellum member Charles Kelley, the “X Factor” runner-up Josh Krajcik and the Cranberries. It’s always a bit of a cringe and a bit of a laugh, much like “The Bachelor” franchise itself. CARYN GANZPLAYING TO WIN It’s a game and everybody knows the rules. Throughout any season of “The Bachelor” or “The Bachelorette,” like the N.F.L. or N.B.A., there is an understood structure to the action, conventions that provide the scaffolding for strategy and competition. And as in professional sports, this affects both behavior and speech: While basketball might bring talk of “defensive rotations” and “weak side cuts,” on “The Bachelorette” we have “two-on-ones” (typically a single-elimination date where one of two suitors goes home) and “hometowns” (essentially the start of the playoffs, when we meet contestants’ families). “Can I steal you for a sec?” is a play that works every time.The “first-impression rose,” given out in Week 1, puts a spotlight on someone — and a target on their back — as an early-season favorite. For the uninitiated, the naturalness with which everyone throws around this jargon can be baffling; it is its own language, though it’s easy to learn. But it also shows those competing to be fully bought-in to this strange endeavor, having internalized its procedures. They are students of the game and — make no mistake — they are playing to win. — JOE COSCARELLIBELATEDLY BREAKING A BARRIER The racial limitations displayed by “The Bachelor” and its spinoff properties have been evident from the first season. Not just on the shows — which have rarely featured nonwhite contestants — but also owing to the plethora of other reality programming premised on the one thing “Bachelor”-world seemingly couldn’t, until now, fathom: a black lead.Equal parts hilarious and ignominious, “Flavor of Love” turned Public Enemy’s Flavor Flav into an unlikely and sometimes unwitting Lothario. That was followed by the severely undervalued “I Love New York,” which over two seasons made a bawdy comic star of the “Flavor of Love” contestant Tiffany Pollard. (That show in turn inspired a spinoff featuring two contestants, the Givens brothers, called “Real Chance of Love.”)Some black celebrities have used these shows as brand-builders: See “For the Love of Ray J,” “Ochocinco: The Ultimate Catch” and “The Ultimate Merger,” which over two seasons looked for love for Omarosa Manigault and Toccara Jones. More recently, “Match Made in Heaven” closely emulated the structure of “The Bachelor,” with a predominantly black cast, with the addition of a pastor, who offered loosely spiritual guidance.Even “Everlasting,” the fictionalized show at the core of the drama “Unreal,” had a black male suitor in its second season, a barrier “The Bachelor” has yet to hurdle. But that chain might be about to break: About half the 31 men competing for Ms. Lindsay’s hand are not white. JON CARAMANICAA BLACK WOMAN TAKES THE LEAD Until this season, my only interaction with “The Bachelor franchise” was through a Tumblr called “Forever Alone: Faces of Rejected Bachelorettes,” which captures the precise moment when the contestants realized they had been rejected. Their crumpled, mascara-stained faces provided a canny meditation on the pressure that American culture places on women to prove their worthiness for marriage and, ultimately, love. It was delicious, pure camp and enough to convince me I didn’t need to watch the show to understand what it represented.But then Rachel Lindsay happened. Ms. Lindsay told “Entertainment Tonight” that she wouldn’t shy away from difficult discussions. If the male contestants on her season were new to interracial dating, she planned to ask them about it. She also told People magazine that her season is not likely to be “that different from any other season of ‘The Bachelorette,’” an impossibility considering that, by virtue of being the first season with a black star, it is already completely different from any other.But I understood her point — Ms. Lindsay doesn’t want to hide her blackness or be defined by it; she wants viewers to understand that black women can be black and also human.What we haven’t seen, at least not extruded through the farcical paradigm of reality television, is an autonomous black woman asserting herself as the ultimate catch, something men of all races should be lucky for the opportunity to compete for. And Ms. Lindsay seems to be in complete control of the narrative — she already leaked the news that she is engaged to one of her suitors. “I am getting my happy ending,” she told E!Online. What will happen between now and then is anyone’s guess — and I can’t resist tuning in to see it unfold. JENNA WORTHAM