https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/04/sports/olympics/rio-de-janeiro-bribes-2016-games.html
French Are Investigating Possible Bribes for Rio Olympics - The New York Times
Olympic Games (2016),International Olympic Committee,Le Monde,Olympic Games,Diack  Lamine (1933- ),Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)
March 4, 2017
9011
PARIS — French investigators suspect that bribes were paid for Rio de Janeiro to be awarded the 2016 Olympic Games, the newspaper Le Monde reported on Friday.The International Olympic Committee said it would contact the French authorities over the allegations. The I.O.C. also said its ethics committee was investigating a payment made to the I.O.C. member Frankie Fredericks before Rio was awarded the Games in 2009.Le Monde’s report said that French investigators “have concrete elements to doubt the process to award the Olympic Games. Rio is alleged to have cheated.”Three days before the I.O.C. awarded the Games, the Brazilian businessman Arthur Cesar Menezes Soares Filho paid $1.5 million to the son of Lamine Diack, the former head of the International Association of Athletics Federations, the governing body of track and field. Another payment of $500,000 was made around the same time to another account belonging to the son, Papa Massata Diack, in Russia.Lamine Diack and his son already face bribery charges in France over millions of dollars reportedly paid to cover up Russian athletes’ failed doping tests.French prosecutors in the Diack case have already announced that they are investigating the awarding of the 2016 Games to Rio and the 2020 Games to Tokyo. Both cities have denied wrongdoing.Le Monde said that on the day of the Olympic vote, Fredericks received $299,300 from Papa Massata Diack’s firm, Pamodzi Sports Consulting.The I.O.C. spokesman Mark Adams said the organization “remains fully committed to clarifying this situation, working in cooperation with the prosecutor.”He added: “The I.O.C. trusts that Mr. Fredericks will bring all the elements to prove his innocence against these allegations made by Le Monde.”Adams also said Fredericks had “emphasized his innocence” in response to the newspaper report and had made himself available to the I.O.C. ethics commission on Thursday. Fredericks, a Namibian sprinter who won silver medals in the 100 and 200 meters at both the 1992 and 1996 Olympics, is the head of the evaluation commission for the 2024 Olympics.