https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/sports/baseball/yoenis-cespedes-new-york-mets-colorado-rockies-score.html
Mets Get Good News After An Early Exit by Yoenis Cespedes - The New York Times
Baseball,New York Mets,Colorado Rockies,Cespedes  Yoenis
July 15, 2017
4414
It seems that at Citi Field these days, nothing comes without a price tag.So when, in the sixth inning of Saturday night’s game against the Colorado Rockies, Mets left fielder Yoenis Cespedes sprawled awkwardly to the ground, tearing a huge divot out of the turf as he tried to catch Nolan Arenado’s flair to shallow left, it appeared as if even a second consecutive easy victory would come at a steep cost.After all, for the past two days, Manager Terry Collins had gone out of his way to mention the importance of a healthy and productive Cespedes to the Mets’ flickering playoff hopes over the second half of the season.And when Cespedes went down — and then, after a pause to gather himself, slowly walked off the field and into the dugout — it looked as if that flickering light had just gone out.Even though the Mets went on to win, 9-3, and have now outscored the Rockies, 23-5, in the first two games of their three-game series, the possible loss of the most dangerous player in the Mets’ lineup left a cloud over the victory — especially as the team provided no information about the nature or severity of Cespedes’s injury during the game.So it came as something of a surprise when both Collins and Cespedes minimized the episode after the game and even expressed some mild disagreement about whether Cespedes would be back in the Mets’ lineup for the series finale on Sunday.“I don’t think it’s real serious with Ces,” Collins said. “I doubt he’s going to be in there tomorrow, just as a precaution. And incidentally, he almost made a heck of a play out of it.”Cespedes said: “If it’s a matter of being able to play, I’m able to play. But if he wants to give me the day off, I’ll gladly take that day off and rest.”That sound you hear is a giant exhalation of relief coming from the vicinity of Flushing Bay, because as Collins had said before the game, “If we’re going to get back in this thing, he’s got to lead the way.”Even if Cespedes does not play on Sunday, the Mets seem to think he will be back on the field by Monday. Cespedes has already missed 39 games this season with a left hamstring strain — interestingly, the Mets went 19-20 in those games compared with 22-27 in games that Cespedes has played — and when he first went down, it was easy to assume the worst.“I was just hoping he got up,” said Jay Bruce, who sprinted over from right field to check on Cespedes. “He popped right up, so I wasn’t too worried after that.”As Cespedes left the field, Bruce carefully replaced the chunk of grass that Cespedes’s knee had displaced. “Looked like one of my golf divots,” he said.That momentary scare was the only worrisome moment of the night for the Mets. They jumped out to a 4-0 first-inning lead against Rockies starter Tyler Chatwood, who walked the first two batters he faced and then surrendered a long three-run homer to Bruce. Chatwood left the game with a calf strain after walking the next hitter, T. J. Rivera.The Mets got their fourth run of the inning on a Travis d’Arnaud single off reliever Chris Rusin and added three runs in the second on a run-scoring single by Rivera — his fourth R.B.I. in the two games against Colorado — and a two-run double by Lucas Duda.Seth Lugo, making his sixth start after beginning the season on the disabled list, held the Rockies to three hits over the first five innings before tiring in the sixth. He allowed three runs on seven hits in six and two-thirds innings to earn his fourth win of the year.But Lugo was most excited about hitting his first major league home run in the third inning, jumping on a first-pitch fastball from Rusin and lining it into the left-field seats. Jose Reyes, who has been red hot (19 for 47) over his past 13 games, led off the eighth with his ninth home run of the season to complete the Mets’ scoring.“He’s been the spark plug, he really has,” Bruce said of Reyes. “He brings the energy every single day. I hope I have that energy when I’m 34. I’m not sure I have it now.”The two wins over the Rockies, who came into this series with a 52-39 record, fourth best in the National League, continue to fan the flames of hope for the Mets, who are still six games below .500, 12 games behind the Washington Nationals in the N.L. East and eight and a half games out of the second wild-card spot, with five teams ahead of them.Making up that ground is a daunting task that might well have become impossible if Cespedes had been seriously injured.“It was pretty much precautionary, but he did feel something in his hip, so I just took him out, and we’ll see where he’s at tomorrow,” Collins said, adding that he was not too worried. “Certainly, if he’s out for any length of time, we’ll just have to do the best we can. Do I think we can? Yeah. I mean, we’d have to.”