http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/03/us/03mine.html
Tearful and Angry, Sago Miners' Families Demand Answers - The New York Times
Mines and Mining,West Virginia,International Coal Group Incorporated
May 3, 2006
2144
BUCKHANNON, W.Va., May 2 — Relatives of the 12 coal miners who died in an explosion at the Sago Mine on Jan. 2 sobbed Tuesday as they remembered their lost loved ones, then dried their tears and angrily demanded that federal, state and company officials explain the disaster."Twelve men, good family men, lost their lives," said Peggy Ware Cohen, daughter of one of the miners, Fred Ware Jr., "and we deserve good answers to our questions."In the first of two days of public hearings here sponsored by state and federal mine safety agencies, public officials said their investigation would be thorough and definitive.But it was the victims' relatives who dominated the microphone and asked the toughest questions. The hearings are intended to give the families a chance to ask questions directly of the officials involved. By turns plaintive, skeptical and mocking, they challenged government regulators and officials of the  International Coal Group, the mine owner, to provide more information.Family members remain angry about communications breakdowns that began immediately after the explosion, at 6:30 a.m. A misunderstanding late in the evening among rescuers in the mine led to a false report that all the miners had survived. Relatives waiting at the Sago Baptist Church were crushed when they learned, hours later, that all but one of the men had, in fact, died."My dad was the mine operator," Mrs. Cohen said at the hearing. "Did he have a walkie-talkie that day, and did you ever try to contact him with it?"Jeffrey Toler, superintendent of the mine and a nephew of Martin Toler Jr., who died in the accident,  answered, "Sadly, I didn't even think to take a radio into the mine with me." Mr. Toler said he had come within 2,000 feet of the lost miners minutes after the explosion, but was forced to evacuate because of rising carbon monoxide levels. "That is part of my nightmare from that day, and I truly apologize to you."The explosion occurred in a closed section of the mine, according to John Stemple, assistant director of safety for International Coal.  The company released a report March 14 that said the explosion might have originated with an enormous lightning strike that blew up a tree a mile and a half from the mine at nearly the exact instant the blast occurred."That's possible," said Robert M. Friend, acting director of the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration. "I wouldn't say it's probable."The closed section had been sealed off with stone barricades that should have prevented the blast from affecting areas still being mined, Mr. Stemple said.Several barricades failed, however, and were so obliterated by the explosion that rescuers stepped over them without noticing, said Sam Kitts, senior vice president of operations for International Coal.Relatives asked whether the workers who installed the barricades had been properly trained, whether the barricades had been properly anchored to the mine walls  and whether state or company workers had ever inspected the walls.Kevin G. Stricklin, district manager for the mine safety administration, said he did not know exactly how the barricades had been constructed."Well, you signed the order," said Russell Bennett, the son of Marty Bennett, one of the coal miners who died. "You should know."The miners each carried self-rescuers, canisters that are supposed to provide an hour's worth of oxygen in case of an emergency. Initial tests by the safety administration showed that all of the canisters were functional, Mr. Friend said.But in a letter last week to victims' families, Randal McCloy Jr., the one surviving miner, wrote that four of the canisters had malfunctioned, forcing miners to share what little oxygen they had. Some officials have questioned whether the miners were adequately trained to use the devices."They donned their respirators and barricaded themselves as they were trained," said Christopher Toler, the son of Martin Toler Jr. "Instead of pointing fingers at the men, M.S.H.A. is the one who needs to answer for its actions."