https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/us/sexual-assault-on-university-campuses.html
Behind Focus on College Assaults, a Steady Drumbeat by Students - The New York Times
Sex Crimes,Colleges and Universities,Biden  Joseph R Jr,Obama  Barack,United States Politics and Government
April 29, 2014
7331
WASHINGTON — In March, two women who were sexually assaulted when they were students at the University of North Carolina arrived unannounced at the office of Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand with a request: Help us stop sexual assault on college campuses.Knowing that Ms. Gillibrand, a New York Democrat, was active in the fight against sexual assault in the military, they hoped to grab her attention for their battle — a long-simmering and, until recently, largely ignored problem on Capitol Hill.Ms. Gillibrand met with the two women, who had formed an organization called End Rape on Campus, and agreed to work on legislation and appeal to the White House for their cause.The two women help explain what might at first seem to be a sudden focus in Washington, most notably at the White House, on the problem of sexual assault on college campuses. In fact, attention to the problem has been quietly but steadily building because of a convergence of factors: successful lawsuits filed by women against their universities, a stepped-up enforcement of civil rights by the Obama administration, and the political savvy of student activist groups.Those groups, which often consist of sexual assault victims, have increasingly captured the attention of lawmakers and the White House and have ignited a multilevel attempt to crack down on the colleges.Over the past two years, students have organized protests and given one another legal advice through social media. They have waged a grass-roots but sophisticated lobbying campaign on Capitol Hill, where lawmakers spent the past year in intense debate about how to handle the issue of sexual assault in the military and long for legislation that can attract bipartisan support. Victims of sexual assault, once stigmatized, are gaining courage to challenge institutions publicly, representing a generational and cultural shift.An increasing number of students have also won large damage awards in sexual assault cases filed against their universities. These efforts provided impetus to the Obama administration, which has moved to more vigorously enforce civil rights laws. On Monday, the administration officially released recommendations to universities to better prevent and police sexual assault. Several bills in Congress to tackle the problem are in the offing.“This is their movement and I am here to help them any way I can,” Ms. Gillibrand said in an email. “I am optimistic that the momentum created by these students and their determination will move the needle in Congress towards needed bipartisan reform.”Universities have long been compelled to respond to sexual harassment and assault complaints under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. But students have long said that universities brushed their complaints aside, or that their procedures for recourse were cumbersome and often humiliating and that their complaints were discouraged.“Acknowledging that you have this problem is exposing your campus to negative publicity,” said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri. “There is a self-preservation thing here that frankly we saw in the military.”In the 1990s, when the Supreme Court affirmed the right to sue for monetary damages and clarified the standard a plaintiff would have to meet under Title IX in such cases, more students began to take legal action. During the first decade of the century, women prevailed in several high-profile cases.In 2011, the Department of Education wrote a letter to universities warning that they needed to create better procedures and to start following the law. The letter emphasized that complaints could be successfully pursued through the department’s Office of Civil Rights. In 2013, the office received 30 complaints regarding Title IX violations directly related to sexual assault. In the first four months of this year, the office has already received more than 30 such complaints.“That letter was the benchmark of the modern era in sexual assault,” said Erin E. Buzuvis, a Title IX expert and a law professor at Western New England University. “Students learned that filing complaints with the Office of Civil Rights is a lot easier than filing a lawsuit. Once it was clear that that was something students could do themselves, it prompted the current spate of complaints.”Students said they quickly realized that their own complaints echoed across the country. “When we filed our complaint it became public,” said Annie E. Clark, who went with Andrea Pino, another assaulted student, to see Ms. Gillibrand. (The two filed a complaint against the University of North Carolina last year.)“We made it not just about U.N.C.; we made it a national issue,” Ms. Clark said. “We were a microcosm of what we are seeing across the country, and we have seen a groundswell of survivors coming out and also filing complaints.”Students and lawmakers say there are parallels between the fight to curb sexual assault in the military and on campuses. “In some ways the themes are the same,” Ms. Clark said. “They are the same institutional betrayal, with people going places they expect to be safe and the institution treating the survivors poorly.”On Tuesday, Vice President Joseph R. Biden. Jr., who has long championed women’s rights, said the administration would continue to focus on the issue. “Colleges and universities can no longer turn a blind eye or pretend rape or sexual assault doesn’t occur on their campuses,” he said at a White House event.Students have in the meantime found ways to help one another understand the system and share hard stories.“It spreads well on social media,” said Zoe Ridolfi-Starr, a Columbia University student who was assaulted two years ago and has since become active on the issue. “Before it was just swept under the rug, because the mechanism for filing the complaints was not an easy process to navigate. It was a huge systemic problem and it just became clear that the activism was important.”