http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/20/world/americas/20prexy.html
Hemisphere’s Leaders Signal Fresh Start With U.S. - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Latin America,Summit of the Americas,Organization of American States,United States International Relations,Chavez  Hugo,Venezuela,Cuba
April 19, 2009
7443
PORT OF SPAIN, Trinidad and Tobago — Leaders from the Western Hemisphere, inspired by a new American president, closed a two-day summit meeting proclaiming a new dawn for relations in the region, which had been marked by bitter disagreements in recent years with the United States.The antagonism seemed to melt away, replaced by a palpable enthusiasm for a new openness from the United States and hopes of improved relations for Washington with Venezuela and Cuba, which emerged as a core issue here.The newfound togetherness was a turning point for the region, leaders here said, at a time when the ability to work together could prove critical to weathering the global economic crisis, which threatens to reverse gains the region has made in alleviating poverty in the past several years.“There was a spirit of good will that went way beyond the wildest dreams of any one of us,” Patrick Manning, the prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago, said Sunday.Some of that good will went too far for President Obama’s critics in Washington, where seemingly friendly images of him with President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela and Mr. Obama’s overtures to Cuba drew criticism from Republican lawmakers.Senator John Ensign, Republican of Nevada, said on CNN that it was “irresponsible for the president” to be seen laughing and joking with “one of the most anti-American leaders in the entire world,” referring to Mr. Chávez.And Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, pointed to Cuba’s estimated 200 political prisoners. “Release the prisoners and we’ll talk to you,” he said of the Cuban government on Fox News Sunday, adding, “Put up or shut up.”Mr. Obama defended his overtures at a news conference on Sunday, saying the handshakes and the polite conversation he shared with Mr. Chávez here were hardly “endangering the strategic interests of the United States.”Wrapping up a four-day swing through Latin America, he said he believed he had paved the way for “frank dialogue” with countries like Venezuela and Cuba, whose relations with the United States have been badly strained.But he also sought to calibrate his message, saying Sunday that he had “great differences” with Mr. Chávez and insisting that freedom for the Cuban people would remain the guiding principle of his foreign policy.“That’s our lodestone, our North Star,” Mr. Obama said.Expectations had been low for the fifth Summit of the Americas, where Mr. Obama joined 33 other leaders on his first trip to Latin America and the Caribbean since taking office. The last such summit meeting, in Argentina in 2005, was marked by violent riots and anti-American rants by Mr. Chávez.Leaders left here almost shell-shocked by the lack of tension at this year’s gathering, with Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president, saying he was “extremely surprised” by what transpired.Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada said, “The most remarkable thing about this conference was the failure to fulfill expectations of great confrontation.”Despite the warm feelings, some old tensions remained. President Evo Morales of Bolivia confronted Mr. Obama during a private session on Saturday with a charge that the United States had plotted to assassinate him. Mr. Obama responded on Sunday, saying, “I am absolutely opposed and condemn any efforts at violent overthrows of democratically elected governments.”And President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua, an old Washington nemesis, sought to embarrass Mr. Obama in a nearly one-hour speech filled with anti-American vitriol in which he likened the American embargo of Cuba to the Berlin Wall.Summit meeting organizers on the island of Trinidad, which was transformed into a virtual police state for three days, tamped down Mr. Chávez’s impulses to grandstand before the cameras by keeping the meetings closed-door. By the conference’s end, Mr. Chávez said he was ready to send an ambassador to the United States.Still, Mr. Obama said Sunday that the Venezuelan leader’s inflammatory rhetoric had been “a source of concern,” adding that “the test for all of us is not simply words, but also deeds.”Mr. Obama said he was not worried about the political fallout, saying that he tries to figure out “what’s right in terms of America interests. And on this one, I think I’m right.”Hoping to push the process forward, leaders from Latin America and the Caribbean have volunteered to aid in a reconciliation between the United States and Cuba. “Brazil would be able to help,” Mr. da Silva said Sunday. In an interview published Sunday in the Spanish newspaper ABC, he said the United States should not wait for Cuba to take the next step in efforts to end their half-century of feuding.While Cuba did not dominate all the deliberations, it overshadowed closed-door discussions here about regional energy needs, climate change, regional drug policy and the global economic crisis. The leaders ultimately agreed to work to strengthen the Inter-American Development Bank to assist countries struggling with a lack of access to credit.Mr. Manning said that the final declaration from Port of Spain did not properly reflect the current global crisis because negotiations over the document began more than a year and a half ago.He denied that conflicts at the 2005 meeting, or Mr. Chávez’s history of using such events to rail against the United States and others, had anything to do with keeping the leaders’ discussions private. Public scrutiny “stifles a full and free expression of views,” Mr. Manning said, which “could lead in some instances to posturing.”Mr. Chávez took the initiative Saturday, saying he was naming Roy Chaderton, Venezuela’s representative to the Organization of American States, to be his new ambassador to Washington.Mr. Chávez had ejected the American ambassador to Venezuela in September, saying he had discovered an American-backed plot to remove him from power. Washington responded in kind.The State Department said that Mr. Chávez approached Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to discuss returning ambassadors to their respective posts in Caracas and Washington. The State Department called it “a positive development.”