https://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/30/nyregion/30newark.html
Survivor Describes Horror of Triple Murder in Newark - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Newark (NJ),Godinez  Rodolfo,Aeriel  Natasha,MS-13
April 29, 2010
8445
NEWARK — She lay face-down on the pavement, trying in terror to follow the orders of those who had already robbed and molested her. “Somebody had their knee on my back,” she said, when suddenly, “They pulled my hair up and was trying to chop my neck off with a machete.”“I guess the knife was dull, because I just felt banging,” Natasha Aeriel told a jury here Thursday morning. “But then I saw a bunch of blood.” Screaming for mercy, she managed to push one attacker off her and rose to flee, when another shot her in the head.The sole survivor of a notorious attack in a Newark schoolyard that left her brother and two friends dead almost three years ago, Ms. Aeriel told her story publicly for the first time in State Superior Court in Essex County. She recounted the horror of Aug. 4, 2007, in grim detail, in testimony that is at the heart of the prosecution’s case in the first trial of one of the six men accused in the slayings.Despite partial facial paralysis from the shooting that forces her to talk from one side of her mouth, Ms. Aeriel, 22, spoke clearly in three and a half hours on the witness stand, pausing just once to regain her composure. But her left hand was in nervous motion much of the time, holding her chin or her cheek, playing with the collar of her light brown jacket or running through her braids.More than 20 relatives and friends of the victims sat in the gallery, underlining her words with a few gasps, silent tears, even a little laughter and, at one point, a smattering of applause, which brought a rebuke from Judge Michael L. Ravin.She calmly described her wounds, tugging at her gray blouse to reveal a machete scar on her right shoulder, and pointing to the spot where the bullet struck behind her left ear. She told of living in chronic pain and of multiple operations to remove bullet fragments from her head, reattach her ear and partially reconstruct her jaw.But what she could not do was say much about the defendant in this trial, Rodolfo Godinez, 26. She identified another of the accused as the one who shot her and said a third hacked at her neck and shoulders. In the aftermath of the attack, she was able to identify some of the defendants from pictures, but not Mr. Godinez, whose lawyers have acknowledged that he was there but say he did not participate in the attack.Investigators have described Mr. Godinez, a native of Nicaragua, as a recruiter for MS-13, or Mara Salvatrucha, a violent street gang composed mostly of Central Americans.Mr. Godinez’s lawyer, Roy Greenman, repeatedly raised questions about possible gaps or inconsistencies in Ms. Aeriel’s memory of that night. Earlier in the investigation, for example, she said there were six or seven people in the group that attacked her and her friends, but on Thursday she testified that it was definitely six.Mr. Greenman also had her recount how police detectives, after interviewing her in summer 2007, did not talk to her again for almost a year — and so were unaware that she had firmly identified a suspect she saw on television as the one who shot her.Much of Ms. Aeriel’s testimony could have been lifted from a horror movie script, starting with an innocent gathering of four friends behind Mount Vernon School in the Ivy Hill neighborhood, relaxing and listening to music on their car radio on a hot summer night.There was Ms. Aeriel, then 19; her brother, Terrance Aeriel, 18; Ms. Aeriel’s best friend, Iofemi Hightower, 20; and Dashon Harvey, 20, whom she remembered dancing to the rap song “Wipe Me Down.” Three were students at Delaware State University, and Ms. Hightower had planned to enroll there.Mr. Godinez and a friend were already in the schoolyard, drinking beer, and a while later four more people — a mix of young men and teenage boys — joined them. At that point, Mr. Aeriel, who had stepped away from his friends to make a phone call, sensed that something was wrong. He sent his sister a text message saying that they should leave, she testified, and walked swiftly back to his friends with a serious expression.They were preparing to get back in the car, Ms. Aeriel said Thursday, when the other group, at least two of them armed with guns, surrounded them and ordered them to lie face-down on the ground and to empty their pockets.“They was checking our pockets, telling us if they find anything, we’re dead, don’t hold nothing back,” she said. Under questioning by Mr. Greenman, she insisted that each of the six was demanding their valuables and threatening them.Mr. Harvey had a new cellphone that he tried to hide, she said, but it began ringing. “I was scared they were going to take my car,” she said. “I didn’t think they would start going crazy the way they did.”“They was like, ‘Mama, you sexy,’ that kind of craziness,” Ms. Aeriel told the jury. Someone tried to pull down Ms. Hightower’s pants, but she was wearing a belt. Then someone yanked down Ms. Aeriel’s basketball shorts and touched her, she said, and “all I could keep doing was saying, ‘Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus.’ ”Turning her head slightly, Ms. Aeriel said, she caught the last glimpse she would ever get of her brother and her friends. The attackers marched the other three to a different spot, and then Ms. Aeriel felt the machete.As she fought off the attacker, “I was screaming, ‘Don’t do that, please don’t do that, why?’ ” she recalled. As she stood up, she heard gunshots, and she kept screaming. Moments later, she said, one of the group shot her.Ms. Aeriel testified that she had repeatedly tried to get to her feet, crawled a short distance, and “then I’d fall in a pool of blood.” She finally blacked out.Regaining consciousness in an ambulance, she testified, “I kept saying, ‘Leave me here, leave me here; it’s some kids behind that wall — go take care of them.’ ”