http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/23/nyregion/a-garden-will-grow-with-fans-concrete-coolant-and-28000-plants.html
A Hudson Yards Garden Will Grow With Concrete, Coolant and High-Power Fans - The New York Times
Hudson Yards (Manhattan  NY),Parks and Other Recreation Areas,Long Island Rail Road Co,Railroads,Gardens and Gardening,Transit Systems,Manhattan (NYC),Architecture
July 22, 2015
3262
Any gardener will understand the challenges faced by the designers of the Public Square at Hudson Yards: Ensuring there is abundant water. Providing nutrient-rich soil. Finding a balance between sunlight and shade. Insulating the bottom of the planting beds from blasts of 150-degree heat rising out of an active train yard directly below.Wait a minute. What was that last?Much of the Hudson Yards project, between West 30th and West 34th Streets in Manhattan, is being constructed over the 26-acre John D. Caemmerer West Side Storage Yard, where hundreds of Long Island Rail Road cars may be marshaled at any time, waiting to go into service.Though the 4.5-acre Public Square will look like a garden when it is finished in late 2018 (according to the current timetable), it will actually be the roof of a working rail yard — not the greatest place for plants.The soil and roots, the cooling system for the roots, the water supply and storage, storm drainage, ventilation for the rail yard, and the utilities and sewage lines needed by the buildings around the square must be compacted into a layer of the roof ranging from 18 inches to seven feet.“All the things we put into the ground without thinking, we have to sandwich here,” said Thomas L. Woltz, principal of Nelson Byrd Woltz Landscape Architects, designers of the square. “We went through a lot of acrobatics to get a healthy, long-living horticulture.”Development over the Caemmerer yard (named for the Long Island state senator who was instrumental in its creation) is a megaproject that many New Yorkers believed would never occur in their lifetimes. Some certainly hoped as much.Over 20 years of false starts, it was to have been a site for Madison Square Garden, for Yankee Stadium and for an Olympic stadium that would later be used by the Jets.In 2005, legislative leaders in Albany killed the stadium plan. After that, Far West Side redevelopment came unglued before the Related Companies signed a deal in 2008 with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to build a $20 billion commercial and residential complex.Construction began in 2012. Today, 10 Hudson Yards, a 52-story office tower at 10th Avenue and 30th Street, is nearing completion. An abutting shopping mall, anchored by Neiman Marcus, is well underway. And a 92-story skyscraper, 30 Hudson Yards, is starting to emerge at 33rd Street.Four other towers, a retail pavilion, an information kiosk and a performance space called the Culture Shed are to complete the 11-million-square-foot project on and around the east half of the Caemmerer yard.The yard is being spanned by a $750 million, 10-acre, steel-and-concrete platform, which was designed and engineered by Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates and Thornton Tomasetti, as were 10 and 30 Hudson Yards.The Public Square will be the southern extension of the Hudson Park and Boulevard, a new swath of green space from 10th to 11th Avenue, north of 33rd Street, in which the new No. 7 subway station sits.Going into the Hudson Yards project, Mr. Woltz said, he knew there would be constraints. “This was never going to be a lush chunk of Central Park dropped into the West Side,” he said. “We have no soil.”What they had were 234 reinforced-concrete columns, called caissons, that were threaded down to bedrock around the tracks and, in some places, around Amtrak and New Jersey Transit tunnels below the Long Island Rail Road yard.Steel columns atop the caissons support deep trusses on which the platform is being built. As a rule, there is a clearance of about 16 feet between the tops of the rail cars and the bottom of the platform.The first layer of the platform will be a six-foot-high empty space known as a plenum, through which fresh air will be propelled by 15 powerful fans at 45 miles an hour to ventilate and cool the rail yard. Hot-air exhaust stacks will be built into the retail pavilion and information kiosk.Above the plenum, in some areas, will be a two-and-a-half-foot-deep, 60,000-gallon collection tank to store rainwater. This, in turn, will be used to irrigate 225 trees and 28,000 plants.The trees and plants will sit in beds that are 18 inches to four feet deep, isolated from the heat below by concrete slabs threaded with conduits carrying glycol coolant, not unlike the base of an ice-skating rink.The chief material under the paving will be what is called sand-based structural soil. Around the plantings, it will be supplemented with nutrients, compost, mulch and a biological crust, including lichen, fungi and algae.The Public Square might be likened, in small scale, to Riverside Park and Park Avenue, both of which span active railroad lines.Noting the similarities, Michael M. Samuelian, a vice president of Related who is overseeing the creation of the square, said, “We’re providing intensive engineering for what will be invisible to the public.”