https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/us/politics/kevin-mccarthy-expected-to-seek-speaker-john-boehners-post.html
Kevin McCarthy Expected to Seek Speaker John Boehner’s Post in House - The New York Times
Boehner  John A,McCarthy  Kevin (1965- ),United States Politics and Government,United States,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Congress
Sept. 25, 2015
3849
WASHINGTON —  When John A. Boehner announced his retirement on Friday, speculation about who would succeed him as speaker immediately centered on the No. 2 House Republican: Kevin McCarthy, a 50-year-old Californian who has had a rapid rise through the party ranks.Mr. McCarthy declined to discuss his plans on Friday, at one point telling reporters, “I’ll make an announcement, when there’s an announcement.” But he is widely expected to seek the post as Republicans prepare for what are likely to be hotly contested battles for other leadership positions.Asked who he thought should replace him, Mr. Boehner noted that he would not be in Congress to vote on the matter. “That’s up to the members,” he said. But he then gave Mr. McCarthy a strong endorsement: “Having said that, I think Kevin McCarthy would make an excellent speaker.”Even with Mr. Boehner’s backing, Mr. McCarthy could face some obstacles, including a potential challenge from the party’s conservative wing and his own relative inexperience. Mr. McCarthy, who was first elected to the House in 2006 and is serving his fifth term, would be the least experienced speaker in more than a century, since Charles Frederick Crisp, Democrat of Georgia, took the post in 1891 having served just four terms.Mr. McCarthy, the majority leader, is also expected to be confronted on his ability to corral the most conservative Republicans in the House, who pressured Mr. Boehner to step down.Mr. McCarthy is from Bakersfield, a bastion of California Republicanism about 100 miles north of Los Angeles. A graduate of California State University, Bakersfield, Mr. McCarthy was active in the Young Republicans. He worked as district director for Representative Bill Thomas, who became chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee.When Mr. Thomas retired in 2006, Mr. McCarthy, who was serving in the California State Assembly, ran for his seat. Mr. McCarthy rose quickly through the Republican ranks in part because of his fund-raising skills. Along with Representatives Eric Cantor of Virginia and Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, Mr. McCarthy was part of a group of so-called Young Guns in 2010 who were crucial to Republicans’ regaining the majority. During that cycle, Mr. McCarthy was head of recruiting for the National Republican Congressional Committee, which provides another base of support for him among the rank and file.The No. 2 Republican in the House is often such a shoo-in for the speaker’s job that the fight for that lower post generates the fiercest competition among lawmakers climbing the ranks.Mr. Boehner said on Friday that he had planned to resign last year, but reversed his decision after the unexpected election loss of Mr. Cantor, the No. 2 Republican at the time, left Mr. Boehner without an obvious successor.“When it became clear that the majority leader lost his election, I didn’t frankly believe it was right for me to leave at the end of last year,” Mr. Boehner said.But if Mr. Boehner was counting on his No. 2 to replace him, he did not give Mr. McCarthy much warning, telling him about his plans to retire only two minutes before giving the news to the entire House Republican conference. “I had to tell him five times, because he didn’t believe me,” Mr. Boehner said.While there appear to be no challengers to Mr. McCarthy for the speakership at this point, there is little doubt that Tea Party conservatives will be looking for a candidate to back.Mr. Ryan, perhaps the best-known House Republican and a former vice-presidential candidate, said on Friday that he was not interested in the speakership.The No. 3 Republican, Steve Scalise of Louisiana, is expected to run for the majority leader post, as are Tom Price of Georgia, the Budget Committee chairman, and Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington, the Republican conference chairwoman.