https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/20/world/middleeast/european-union-sets-emergency-session-on-suspending-aid-to-egypt.html
European Union Sets Emergency Session on Suspending Aid to Egypt - The New York Times
Foreign Aid,European Union,Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt),Ashton  Catherine,Egypt
Aug. 19, 2013
2717
LONDON —  European Union foreign ministers will meet in an emergency session on Wednesday to discuss suspending aid to Egypt, but the continuing military crackdown there has been a devastating blow to European efforts to negotiate a political solution and fill a vacuum left by Washington.The European foreign ministers are under pressure from their voters to act, but it is less clear whether any step they take can be more than symbolic in an Egyptian situation that senior European officials acknowledge to be embittered and divided.The European Union’s foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, worked to earn trust on all sides and had remarkable access to leaders of both the military and the Muslim Brotherhood this summer when the United States was being criticized by all sides. At the same time, senior officials concede, she and her envoy, Bernardino León, could do little to promote a compromise or even a useful dialogue.“Unlike Washington, we were seen as having no historical baggage, no hidden agenda, and we used to see everyone,” a senior European official said in an interview. “They saw the added value we could bring by talking to everyone. That was the European advantage.”Without the intimate ties the United States has to the military or a history of nearly uncritical alliance with Egypt’s former president, Hosni Mubarak, the Europeans were more trusted by the democrats, secularists and Islamists, and they were heard by the military, too. How sincere both sides were in their discussions remains unclear, though the official said there were moments in the last few months when Ms. Ashton felt that both sides were “speaking the same language and things were moving.”European officials remain hopeful that some sort of accord can be worked out. “We believe a political solution is possible, and we have to insist upon it,” Mr. León said on Monday in Brussels. “All violence from both sides needs to stop. There are no easy solutions, no easy way out. But the E.U. will keep striving for this.”But efforts to create confidence-building measures and produce meaningful negotiations about an inclusive and democratic political process never quite came to fruition, for the Europeans or for the Americans. “Everyone agreed with us and said, ‘Yes, we have to talk and get together and make it happen,’ but it never did,” the official said. “Now there’s a blame game on all sides.”The Europeans are facing a lot of criticism, as are the Americans, for “being blind, not seeing what’s going on, not condemning terrorism,” the official said. “So it becomes more difficult to have the same level of access.”Throughout her visits, officials said, Ms. Ashton pressed for the inclusion of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egyptian political life; the release of the ousted president, Mohamed Morsi; and a quick return to the democratic process. Ms. Ashton is said to believe that there is a danger of discouraging the Brotherhood and other Islamists in the region from believing that the democratic process can work for them, which will only give more ammunition to the radical Islamists who favor the use of force against force, another European official said.But it became increasingly clear that the military continued to see the Brotherhood and Morsi supporters as a threat to Egypt’s future, while the Islamists themselves refused to accept what they considered to be a military coup that overthrew the democratically elected Mr. Morsi.Egypt is important but only part of a larger regional struggle of Islam versus secularism and Sunni versus Shiite, the official said. “It’s an historical process, and you can only judge it much further down the line,” the official said. “From a day-to-day tactical basis, you can say it didn’t work, let’s do something else. But we want to help bring Egypt to where Egyptians want it to be, to a democratic path as an important neighbor for Europe.”The doors are not closed, and Ms. Ashton and Mr. León are “ready to go back, but there has to be something to do,” the official said. “The idea was to create an environment for people to talk together, but only they can decide whether or not to do it.”Late last week, the Swedish foreign minister, Carl Bildt, forecast a period of severe repression, with hard-liners in command in Cairo, but said the Europeans should keep talking to all sides so as to be ready, if the opportunity arose, to play a role in achieving a solution.The official would not speculate on what the European Union foreign ministers might do on Wednesday, but a number of them have already spoken about rethinking the bloc’s aid program and relationship with a government so obviously dominated by the military that has just cracked down so violently.The European Union, together with member nations, is by far the largest donor of nonmilitary aid to Egypt, with continuing programs worth some $800 million. But many of those are already blocked by the political turmoil, so not much is happening, European officials said.Even those sums are dwarfed by what the military government is getting from Sunni allies like Saudi Arabia, which has already vowed to make up the difference if Western aid is cut or suspended.So Europe’s real leverage is not so much money as it is tourism and private investment, the officials say. While Egypt is in turmoil, no one is investing, and nearly all European governments have advised their citizens not to travel to Egypt.European nations are Egypt’s biggest trading partner, according to the Egyptian statistics office. The trade volume between Egypt and the European Union reached almost 24 billion euros in 2011 (then $34.5 billion), compared with $8.2 billion with the United States. And European nations sell about $400 million a year in military equipment to Egypt.Last year, the bloc and its member countries pledged a combined 5 billion euros ($6.7 billion) in multiyear loans and aid for Egypt.American military aid to Egypt dwarfs civilian aid: of the $1.55 billion in total assistance the White House has requested for 2014, $1.3 billion is military and $250 million is economic.Briefing reporters in Brussels after an ambassadors’ meeting to prepare for their foreign ministers, Mr. León said there was “practical unanimity,” adding that “it is absolutely important for Europe’s foreign relations to be engaged constructively in Egypt and at the same time respond to the situation.”He said Europe would keep working with “democratic forces” in Egypt. “We will respond to the situation and will act as a constructive actor in giving a political solution,” Mr. León said. “The E.U. will keep striving for a political solution.”