https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/magazine/a-new-california-cuisine.html
A New California Cuisine - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Venice (Calif),Yams,Vegetarianism,Recipes
Feb. 18, 2016
3628
Travis Lett is a bearded, hippie-chic chef who runs a trio of popular restaurants in the beachside community of Venice, Calif. The flagship is Gjelina, a loud, fashionable and vegetable-centric neighborhood spot as well known for the attractiveness of its clientele as for its pizzas and salads, slathered toasts and smoky pastas. The restaurant is an aspirational lifestyle camp, replete with fire pit and sloe-eyed waiters.Thankfully, little of that scene is documented in ‘‘Gjelina: Cooking From Venice, California,’’ Lett’s excellent cookbook, which came out in the fall. The restaurant’s dining room and patrons are largely omitted from its pages. Instead, the food dominates. There are dozens and dozens of recipes set alongside luxurious portraits of simple ingredients, simply prepared, though in riots of contrast: sweet against salty; spicy against sour; crunchy against smooth.I have spent the last few months cooking from the book, bringing a little California warmth and brio into my chilly East Coast kitchen, along with a lot less meat. ‘‘I wanted the restaurant to offer something that didn’t demand too much attention but at the same time had the ability to inspire if you paused and truly looked,’’ Lett writes in the introduction. The same goal animates his recipes. Cooking them carefully can lead a home cook down fascinating paths.Grilled king oyster mushrooms with tarragon butter could be luscious accompaniments to a massive steak (indeed, they are). But served on their own, they are even more singular: steaklike themselves beneath their gleam of herb-scented butter, perfect with a glass of wine and roasted potatoes. Charred brussels sprouts with dates and bacon? Likewise. You could serve them with pork chops or turkey cutlets. But maybe don’t, and watch as a double batch of the recipe goes down as successfully as a full-throttle meat-and-side dinner. More room for dessert.Lett has fine instructions for roasted cauliflower with garlic, parsley and vinegar; so, too, for pizza with Castelvetrano olives, a wee bit of guanciale and the mild heat of Fresno chiles. Come spring, I’ll grill his jumbo asparagus with sauce gribiche and bottarga; in summer, I’ll make the most of ricotta gnocchi with a cherry-tomato pomodoro. Cooking this way takes on its own satisfactions and makes the decision to cook a great haunch of meat all the more special when we come to it not as a matter of expectation but as an occasional treat.Again and again this winter, I have made Gjelina’s roasted yams with honey, Espelette pepper and lime yogurt. These are a marvelous accompaniment to a roast chicken. They are as good or better as a platter served alongside a salad of winter greens, cheese and nuts. ‘‘Yams are abundant and cheap in the winter months,’’ Lett writes, ‘‘and customers find them soul-satisfying and delicious.’’ Which is true. But what gets them there is technique: tossing the tubers in honey before roasting them intensifies their caramelization. That crisp, near-burned sweetness works beautifully against the heat of the pepper and the acidic creaminess of the yogurt you dab onto the dish at the end.Forty years ago, SkateBoarder magazine published a series of articles on the skate scene along Venice Beach, near where Gjelina now operates, a world that would later be captured in the documentary film ‘‘Dogtown and Z-Boys’’ in 2001. The magazines landed with force in cities far from California, where they were passed around with reverence, like dispatches from a promised land. The tricks depicted in the photographs and described in the text — graceful turns on steep concrete, one hand trailing behind as if through the curl of an ocean wave — had an immediate and transformative effect on skateboarding across the nation.‘‘Gjelina’’ could have some of the same effect on the subset of Americans interested in cooking well and healthfully, in laying down beautiful food on tables accustomed to a different sort of fare. It is simple cooking. It results in fantastic meals. You don’t need to go to Venice to experience it.Recipe: Gjelina’s Roasted Yams