https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/nyregion/new-york-city-transfer-schools-off-track-students.html
New York Schools for Off-Track Students May Face Stricter Rules - The New York Times
Education (K-12),Dropouts,Education Department (NYC),Board of Regents (NYS),Every Student Succeeds Act,Education Department (NYS),New York City
July 16, 2017
3154
Martin Guichardo’s first shot at high school did not go well. While attending Franklin Delano Roosevelt High School in Brooklyn, which has over 3,500 students, he would skip class to hang out with his friends, and he rapidly fell behind.By the fall of what should have been his senior year, in 2006, he had only nine of the 44 credits he would need to graduate. A counselor told him that if he stayed at F.D.R., it might take him several more years to finish.But she suggested another option: a small school that had recently opened called West Brooklyn Community High School, dedicated to helping students who had gotten off-track get their diplomas. In its more intimate setting, with a lot of one-on-one attention from teachers and counselors, Mr. Guichardo buckled down and was able to graduate in 2008.“Without West Brooklyn, I think I would have probably ended up dropping out or going for a G.E.D.,” said Mr. Guichardo, 27, who is now a commercial pilot. “I’m really, really glad I had that opportunity.”West Brooklyn Community High School is what is known in New York City as a transfer school. The city’s Education Department now runs 51 such schools, serving 13,000 students.The schools are small, and many of them work with community-based organizations to offer counseling, college and career advising, and internships. They have a significantly better track record than other high schools in graduating students who are two or more years behind. But because students often enter transfer schools with few credits, it can take them six, seven or even eight years in total to graduate.Now advocates and city education officials fear the schools may be in danger. On Monday, the State Education Department is expected to present the Board of Regents with regulations to conform with the Every Student Succeeds Act, the successor to No Child Left Behind. Under the expected regulations, the vast majority of the city’s transfer schools would be designated as “in need of improvement” and could be at risk of being closed.Under the regulations, schools that fall short of a six-year graduation rate of 67 percent would be put on a list to receive “comprehensive support and improvement.” Only four of the city’s 51 transfer schools currently meet, or are on track to meet, that benchmark.If a school could not get off the list within three years, it could be moved into the state’s receivership program, which could eventually lead it to close.A spokeswoman for the State Education Department, Emily DeSantis, said that, in response to feedback, the department had abandoned an earlier version of the regulations. Under that version, transfer schools that failed to get off the comprehensive support and improvement list after three years would have automatically been put into receivership.Under the new version, Ms. DeSantis said, the state education commissioner, MaryEllen Elia, “would partner with districts to determine the most appropriate interventions for improvement at these schools.”City officials and educators are still worried. Just being placed on the support and intervention list would create instability at schools, they say, unnerving parents, making it harder to retain teachers and creating pressure for principals to turn away the students who are furthest behind.“That’s really concerning for us,” said Ursulina Ramirez, chief operating officer of the city’s Education Department.In 2006, the city’s Education Department released the findings of a study on young people in a category known as overage and undercredited: those between 16 and 21 who were two or more years off the pace to graduate in a timely way. At the time, there were 138,000 such people in the city, nearly half of whom had dropped out of school.In an effort to address their needs, the Education Department invested heavily in new transfer schools, more than doubling their number between 2006 and 2014. The dropout rate has since fallen to 8.5 percent, from 22 percent in 2005.Rachel Forsyth, the senior division director for partnership schools at Good Shepherd Services, a nonprofit agency that works with four transfer schools, said New York City had been a national leader in reducing the dropout rate.If the proposed regulations are adopted, she said, “we’re going to lose ground on a lot of great work.”Helene Spadaccini, the principal of Mott Haven Community High School in the Bronx, said she was worried that in seeking to improve graduation rates, transfer schools would turn away the students who were furthest off-track.“We want to give every student that opportunity” to get a diploma, she said. “It may become a question of, in doing that for every student, do we risk closing down and not being able to serve any student?”The city evaluates transfer schools using a transfer school graduation rate, which is primarily based on the number of students who graduate within six years of starting high school, while giving schools partial credit for students who graduate within seven or eight years. Mott Haven’s rate is 60 percent. A comparable group of students who attended other, mostly nontransfer schools graduated at a rate of only 47 percent.Ailish Brady, a senior adviser to Carmen Fariña, the city’s schools chancellor, said, “I don’t know what you would tell a school like Mott Haven, with a 60 percent graduation rate, that’s outperforming its comparison group in a really incredible way, how they would have to improve in order to increase their graduation rate by an additional seven points.”The State Education Department argues that the federal law requires it to hold all high schools to a 67 percent graduation rate standard. But city officials and others believe the law allows flexibility for schools that primarily serve students who are off-track.After the proposed regulations are presented to the Regents, they will go to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, who will have 30 days to review them. The Regents will vote on the regulations in September, before the state submits them to the federal government.New Visions for Public Schools, a nonprofit group that oversees and supports 69 high schools in the city, including 10 transfer schools, has urged the State Education Department to convene a panel of experts to come up with a customized accountability system for transfer schools.Ms. Ramirez, from the city’s Education Department, said it was not that the city did not want the schools’ performance to be scrutinized. “It’s all about differentiated accountability,” she said.