http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/13/us/politics/13intel.html
White House Sides With C.I.A. in Turf Battle - The New York Times
Espionage,Intelligence Services,United States International Relations,Reform and Reorganization,White House (Washington  DC),Central Intelligence Agency,Blair  Dennis C
Nov. 12, 2009
6981
WASHINGTON— After a months-long turf battle between America’s top spies, the White House has sided with the Central Intelligence Agency in the dispute over who has the power to appoint the top spy in each country overseas, according to intelligence officials.The decision is a blow to Dennis C. Blair, the director of national intelligence, who had used the issue as a litmus test of the power of his office, created in 2004 to enhance cooperation among intelligence agencies and put an end to persistent squabbling among American spies.Yet the recent dispute is further evidence that the intelligence overhaul five years ago did little to end longstanding rivalries or clearly delineate the chain of command within American’s intelligence bureaucracy.For decades, C.I.A. station chiefs in embassies around the globe have been the senior American intelligence officers in each country, charged with running clandestine operations and meeting regularly with the heads of foreign spy services.In May, however, Mr. Blair issued a classified memorandum announcing that it would be his office that selected the top American spies in each country. One day later, Leon E. Panetta, the C.I.A. director, sent a memorandum telling the C.I.A. workforce to disregard Mr. Blair’s message because the matter had yet to be resolved.According to several intelligence officials, Mr. Blair was furious at what he saw as Mr. Panetta’s insubordination, and was sure that the White House would recognize his  authority. Top lawmakers weighed in on Mr. Blair’s behalf.Yet Mr. Panetta, a former White House chief of staff with close ties to some members of President Obama’s inner circle, in recent months has pled his case to maintain C.I.A. supremacy overseas.A stalemate resulted, as the issue was taken up by Gen. James L. Jones, the national security adviser, and eventually by Vice President Joseph R.  Biden Jr. The White House finally ruled in the C.I.A.’s favor.The White House decision, made in recent days, was first reported Thursday by The Associated Press.Current and former C.I.A. officials argued that the matter is not just about bureaucratic turf. They said that the C.I.A. for years has cultivated relationships with foreign spy services —  relationships that could be thrown into confusion if foreign spymasters were forced to deal with different American liaisons.Some of Mr. Blair’s aides dismissed these concerns as petty, and pointed out that in the vast majority of cases, the C.I.A. station chief would remain the top American representative abroad. But they said that in some instances it might make sense to for a representative from another agency to be the senior intelligence representative.An often-cited example is Britain, where the National Security Agency operates a large listening post. Some argue that it would make sense for an N.S.A. official to be the top American intelligence representative in Britain, a close ally and a country where the C.I.A. does not carry out clandestine intelligence collection.Wendy Morigi, a spokeswoman for Mr. Blair, said that the decision by the White House  included matters that were decided in the favor of the director of national intelligence. “This agreement, which addresses several key authorities, reinforces the D.N.I.’s important mission of advancing an intelligence community team that is greater than the sum of its parts,” she said.