https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/18/us/politics/fact-check-trump-florida-rally.html
Fact Check: What Trump Got Wrong at His Rally - The New York Times
Crime and Criminals,Polls and Public Opinion,Trump  Donald J,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,United States Economy,Bureau of Labor Statistics
Feb. 18, 2017
8518
Much seemed familiar on Saturday as President Trump held his first campaign rally as president — the hats, the chants, and even some of the misstatements and exaggerations made by Mr. Trump.Mr. Trump compared himself to Thomas Jefferson and Abraham Lincoln, presidents who “fought with the media and called them out.”“We are here today to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,” he said. But he then offered several misleading claims.Refugees are vetted, and it takes two years.Mr. Trump repeatedly made this inaccurate claim during the 2016 campaign, and it is still inaccurate. The country’s vetting system for refugees, which begins at the United Nations, is extensive.Applicants undergo several rounds of background and biometric checks — fingerprints and retina scans, for example — by multiple federal immigration and intelligence agencies. The system is not foolproof, and intelligence officials have raised concerns about gaps in data collection on people coming from conflict zones like Syria.Some polls show optimism, others don’t.In the immediate aftermath of Mr. Trump’s election, the majority of voters expressed optimism about the next four years in several respected polls. But the results have varied in more recent months: 53 percent said they were optimistic in a Quinnipiac University poll, while 54 percent said they were pessimistic or uncertain in an NBC/Wall Street Journal poll.According to Gallup’s weekly economic optimism poll, Americans are slightly less confident in the economy in February than they were in January. In other Gallup polls, Mr. Trump’s approval rating and Americans’ view of the country’s standing in the world are the lowest in decades.Data shows modest gains so far.The economy added 227,000 jobs in January 2017, a healthy but less than record increase, more likely attributable to the ending days of the Obama administration than the incoming president. And the unemployment rate “was little changed,” remaining at 4.8 percent for January, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.That’s 0.1 percent higher than it was the previous month.Crime is high in Chicago, but it has generally declined.Mr. Trump warned of soaring levels of crime during the 2016 election, ignoring data. Chicago did experience a surge in homicides last year, with more than 750 people murdered. The country’s third-largest city, along with three other urban areas, contributed to a jump in the national murder rate in 2016. But over all, both violent crime and property crime have fallen since the early 1990s.