https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/09/nyregion/preet-bharara-us-attorney-making-a-rare-visit-to-albany-receives-a-glowing-reception.html
Preet Bharara, U.S. Attorney, Takes a Victory Lap in Albany After Winning Corruption Cases - The New York Times
Bharara  Preet,New York State,Mayors,Corruption (Institutional),Politics and Government
Feb. 8, 2016
5488
ALBANY — He was hailed as a man of “tremendous courage” by one interviewer. He was trailed, everywhere he went, by a flock of reporters and cameras. He made a packed audience of government watchdog supporters “weak-kneed,” as one spectator posted on Twitter.It was the prosecutorial equivalent of the victory lap, the going-to-Disney World moment after the Super Bowl, if comparisons can be made between household-name football stars and federal law-enforcement officials. Preet Bharara, the soft-spoken crusader who has done for clean government what Bernie Sanders did for Democratic Socialism, had come to Albany.In a season of discontent with elected leaders in the state capital — and in a year when the federal prosecutor’s office Mr. Bharara occupies has been fictionalized in the TV show “Billions” — Mr. Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, enjoyed an admiring reception on his first trip to the scene, so to speak, of the crime.He urged a conference of New York State mayors at the Hilton hotel to be watchful for corruption in city contracts. Seats to an afternoon speech and interview, broadcast live from a performance studio of the regional radio station WAMC, were snapped up in less than a day.Mr. Bharara, 48, had a somewhat more equivocal greeting for the city that has provided him fodder for some of his highest-profile triumphs, including, most recently, the convictions of the former speaker of the State Assembly, Sheldon Silver, and the majority leader of the State Senate, Dean G. Skelos.Publicizing his afternoon speech on Twitter, Mr. Bharara chose a quote from Edward R. Murrow: “A nation of sheep will beget a government of wolves.”In his speech from the performance studio, Mr. Bharara repeatedly hammered the complacency and implicit collaboration of other lawmakers, whom he called “enablers,” in the “rancid culture” of Albany.“What’s been going on in New York State government lately is simultaneously heartbreaking, head-scratching and almost comic,” he said, echoing remarks he made last month in front of the Kentucky Legislature.Mr. Bharara rejected complaints about prosecutorial overreach. “Blaming the prosecutors is not leadership,” he said. “Whining is not leadership.”In a Q. and A. after his speech, Mr. Bharara said his public-corruption unit was “not closing up shop anytime soon.” But he was more circumspect about other investigations, demurring when asked about an inquiry into the Buffalo Billion, a plan offered by the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, which has poured hundreds of millions of dollars into that beleaguered western New York city. And he offered no more than a previously released statement about the end of his investigation into the demise of the Moreland Commission, an anti-corruption panel established by Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat.About the only person who seemed determined to treat Mr. Bharara’s appearance as a nonevent was Mr. Cuomo, who sat facing Mr. Bharara but did not speak to him at the swearing-in ceremony of Janet DiFiore, the state’s new top judge, at the Court of Appeals. Mr. Cuomo clapped from his seat when Mr. Bharara was introduced. Mr. Bharara returned the favor from his seat in the second row, behind a group of Cuomo administration veterans that included Lawrence S. Schwartz, the former secretary to the governor, whose strong-armed interactions with the Moreland panel were documented by The New York Times.Mr. Cuomo, noting the Appeals Court judges’ comfortable salaries, mentioned that he might someday nominate himself to the court. The overflow crowd cackled. Mr. Bharara did not.After the ceremony, Mr. Cuomo left by the rear of the court, while Mr. Bharara left by the front entrance. Neither man attended the cheese-and-fruit reception.Reporters outside the court promptly bombarded Mr. Cuomo with questions about Mr. Bharara’s visit, the relationship between the two men and whether Mr. Bharara should be considered a “champion” of the democratic process. Through the entire session, Mr. Cuomo managed to avoid even saying the other man’s name.“I think his point that we need ethics reform is the same thing that I have been saying,” Mr. Cuomo said, later noting that when he served as state attorney general, he had successfully prosecuted a state senator and a comptroller on corruption charges.If Mr. Bharara did not find Mr. Cuomo’s jokes particularly amusing, his own witticisms met with more appreciation from his audiences in Albany — even if more than a few of those jokes were groaners involving Mr. Bharara’s fierce devotion to Bruce Springsteen, who had a show scheduled in Albany on Monday night.The setup: “I understand that Bruce Springsteen is in town.” The punch line: “If any of you have tickets, I am perfectly prepared to subpoena them.”(“Darn it, that’s better than anything I could’ve written for a US Atty,” Young Il Kim, a writer for “Billions,” which stars Paul Giamatti as a federal prosecutor bent on rooting out Wall Street wrongdoing, remarked on Twitter.)Asked during the radio broadcast whether he had any interest in running for elected office, Mr. Bharara invoked, once again, the other celebrity in Albany on Monday night.“Let me put it this way, given that Bruce Springsteen is in town,” he said. “I was not born to run.”