http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/13/dining/reviews/restaurant-review-aska-in-williamsburg-brooklyn.html
Aska in Williamsburg, Brooklyn - The New York Times
Williamsburg (Brooklyn  NY),Aska (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Restaurants,Berselius  Fredrik,Aska (NYC)
Feb. 12, 2013
9554
A single blue icicle. An empty beach. Clouds in a blank pewter sky. Leafless birches. Someone rolling in the snow, naked.They scroll by in somber photographs of Sweden on the Web site of Aska, where Fredrik Berselius cooks renovated Scandinavian cuisine. Seen as advertisements for a Swedish vacation, they promise a journey into solitude, despair and frostbite. But I see them as a visual companion to dinner at Aska. Like one of Mr. Berselius’s $65 tasting menus, the photos find richness in a spare landscape and leave me thinking that, seen through the right lens, even the most austere materials can have an exoticism of their own.Mr. Berselius, who last year ran a kind of beta version of Aska called Frej in this same space, knows the latest kitchen technology from his time at Corton and Seäsonal. At Aska, he mostly confines himself to older methods. He cooks cream for hours until it is as thick as toothpaste and the color of butterscotch, then stirs in sour milk. It tastes like dulce de leche without the sugar and makes a dizzyingly rich sauce for pork belly or a tender strip of short rib.A common ingredient is made unfamiliar, a transformation the kitchen pulls off again and again. The paper-white ovals shaved over braised pork and ultrasmooth applesauce: sunchokes. A chewy amber sheet that tastes like candy from the ocean: a dried and toasted scallop chip.What looks like a whole fish is in fact the fried head and tail of a herring, with the rich, soft cured fillet connecting the two crunchy ends. (Granted, fresh herring may not qualify as common. “It’s one of my favorite ingredients, but I’ve only been able to get it twice in the seven years I’ve been cooking,” Mr. Berselius said.)If you have been to Noma in Copenhagen or had other run-ins with the New Nordic movement, you can guess that many of these odd, sometimes poetic compositions are carried to the table by Mr. Berselius and his cooks, all wearing dark aprons over their whites. It won’t surprise you that they are arranged on natural materials, like trays carved by a local woodworker and oatmeal-colored bowls spun by a potter in Piermont, N.Y. (“She’s a real hippie and a lot of fun,” Eamon Rockey, Aska’s general manager, said one night.) And you already have an inkling that Mr. Berselius leads foraging parties to hunt for rose hips, yarrow leaves, birch branches and bark, which Mr. Rockey made into a dark, sticky liqueur, its woodsy breath minty with wintergreen.As at Noma, dinner begins with a parade of small bites called snacks. Two from my most recent meal sum up Aska’s strengths and occasional missteps.First came a Maine shrimp. The head and shell had been fried to a delicious crackle and enriched with shrimp butter. The smooth body of the shrimp lay on top of the shell like a pink comma. I popped it into my mouth and then sat back and enjoyed the deep shellfish flavor, which seemed to go on for minutes.Next up was a dot of sea buckthorn jam on a cracker made of dried pig’s blood. Sea buckthorn berries grow wild near the ocean. They look like tiny orange eggs and have an astringent sourness. Their flavor is mildly pleasant, but not pleasant enough to make dried pig’s blood taste like anything other than a healing wound. If this was a snack, it was the kind that Morticia Addams might hand out to unwary trick-or-treaters.When he cooks shrimp and herring, Mr. Berselius is clearly summoning flavors he grew up with outside Stockholm. I wasn’t sure that was the case with pig’s blood. Was he simply jumping on the hemoglobin bandwagon?I had a similar suspicion about lichen. Properly prepared to neutralize its toxins, lichen can save your life if, say, your sleigh gets lost north of the Arctic Circle. But in modern times it hasn’t generally been eaten by choice until it began turning up at Noma and other restaurants. The bitter, dark lichen broth Mr. Berselius served with poached oysters and salsify suggested it was best saved for cases of starvation.At times you might wish the sun would shine more brightly in Mr. Berselius’s kitchen. A number of dishes were decorated with one colorless, nearly flavorless white sauce or another. Few of them contributed much beyond hinting at a snow-covered landscape.This may have been the idea, because Mr. Berselius knows how to turn up the flavors when he wants to. The flavors he draws out of vegetables, meat and seafood can stop your breath. He found exceptional sweetness in the purple carrots he served with pike and whipped anchovy cream, and extracted a broth from monkfish bones that had something like the depth of veal stock when it was spooned around a fillet of the fish and a slice of its sautéed liver.His meditative vision brightens a bit on the à la carte lounge menu, where you can get a taste of Aska without committing to the tasting menu. These are good snacks in anybody’s book, including a fried ball of mashed potatoes filled with pork and served with lingonberry preserves, and a crazy “Swedish” hot dog on a griddled flour tortilla (got that?) with spicy brown mustard and buttery mashed potatoes shot through with bits of fried onion that crunch between your teeth.Wherever I sat, Aska always engaged my attention in ways that many restaurants don’t. Aska inhabits Kinfolk Studios, an art and design exhibition space, and at times it can resemble an installation piece by an arts collaborative that includes the potter, the woodworker and the Williamsburg muralists who reproduced a red-in-tooth-and-claw Audubon print on the rear wall. Mr. Berselius and his cooks are part of the installation, making your dinner while you watch and then setting it in front of you with the natural shyness of set builders called out on stage.While the photographs on the Web site don’t change, Aska does. I get the sense that even Mr. Berselius isn’t sure what will happen next. The icicle will probably melt. The birches will leaf out. That naked figure in the snow might even bolt through the dining room one night.