https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/06/nyregion/police-arrest-naeem-davis-in-subway-death.html
As Victim’s Family Grieves, Suspect Is Arrested in Subway Killing - The New York Times
Han  Ki-Suck,Murders and Attempted Murders,Davis  Naeem,Subways,Police Department (NYC),New York City
Dec. 5, 2012
9745
The police charged a 30-year old man with murder on Wednesday, saying he pushed a man into the path of a subway train on Monday. Friends and relatives of the victim, meanwhile, struggled to understand both the crime and gruesome images from his final moments, captured by a freelance photographer who happened to be in the station during the attack.The suspect was identified as Naeem Davis, who performed odd jobs for vendors around Times Square and who the police said had no fixed address. He was taken into custody by the police Tuesday afternoon on 50th Street and Seventh Avenue, a block from an entrance to the subway platform where the police say he pushed Ki-Suck Han of Elmhurst, Queens, onto the tracks. Mr. Han was struck and killed by a Q train that arrived moments later.“After they saw this photo, they couldn’t sleep,” the Rev. Won Tae Cho said of Mr. Han’s wife and daughter during a news conference at Faith Presbyterian Church in Maspeth, Queens, on Wednesday afternoon as both women sat nearby. “They stayed at my home. It is difficult to see them. It was traumatic.”The daytime crime prompted debate among many New Yorkers after the photo of Mr. Han — hanging on to the side of the train platform, unable to lift himself to safety — appeared on the front page of The New York Post on Tuesday. Witnessed by many on the platform, Mr. Han’s death raised questions about how bystanders in the city should behave in moments of crisis.Barely audible over the clack of camera shutters at the news conference, Mr. Han’s daughter, Ashley, 20, said her father would never hesitate to help another person. “He was always there to help,” she said.Detectives questioned Mr. Davis for hours at the Midtown North Precinct station house, and Paul J. Browne, the department’s chief spokesman, said that during questioning Mr. Davis had made statements implicating himself in the crime.Mr. Davis had been arrested several times on charges that included theft and peddling, according to court records from New York and Pennsylvania and a law enforcement official. Vendors in the area where he was taken into custody by the police on Tuesday said that they knew Mr. Davis and that he ran errands for them.After witnesses identified him in a lineup, Mr. Davis was charged and later taken in an unmarked car to a Manhattan criminal court, where he was ordered held without bail. His next court date is Dec. 11.Mr. Davis grew up in South Philadelphia and has roots in western Pennsylvania, where he lived with a foster family in New Brighton, according to a 1998 profile of that family in The Beaver County Times. The paper reported that as a child he suffered the effects of fetal alcohol syndrome.Cellphone video recorded by a subway rider on the 49th Street station platform showed what appeared to be a confrontation between Mr. Davis and Mr. Han. One witness said Mr. Han appeared to be acting aggressively toward Mr. Davis and had alcohol on his breath.“He was staggering,” the witness, Leigh Weingus, 26, said. “The victim kept saying ‘Hey! Hey!’ ” at the suspect, getting closer and closer to him. At first the suspect was calm, saying, ‘I don’t know you, you don’t know me, get out of my face.’ ” Ms. Weingus said the verbal argument then escalated, frightening her and others on the platform who moved away from the two men.A few moments later, Mr. Han was on the tracks.At the news conference, Mr. Han’s family talked about the outpouring of support that they had received from New Yorkers, many of them strangers. “The thought of someone helping him up in a matter of seconds would have been great,” Mr. Han’s daughter said. “But what’s done is done.”