http://www.nytimes.com/2001/06/03/style/the-age-of-dissonance-babes-in-adultland.html
THE AGE OF DISSONANCE; Babes in Adultland - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,MAGNOLIA BAKERY,CUPCAKES,BAKERIES AND BAKED PRODUCTS
June 3, 2001
7693
SEVERAL times a night, smug customers will jokingly ask Barbara Sinko, a manager at the Magnolia Bakery on Bleecker Street, if they can lick a bowl of frosting. ''I don't even answer anymore,'' she said.It was nearly midnight one recent Saturday, well past bedtime for real children, and the mob of wiggly adults on line for buttery warm cupcakes was unruly.''Hey, I was here first,'' a stubbled man bellowed. Fashionable adults who should have been at hot spots like the Park or Man Ray were trying to cut in line. They grabbed cupcakes frosted in bright pink, lime green and other resort colors (as well as the new brown, of course) with desperate hands, as if they were cigarettes or caipirinhas. ''You told me the line starts here,'' a guy in leather pants yelled at a cashier.Ms. Sinko, who has colored streaks in her hair and stars tattooed by her eyes, was unrattled. ''I used to work in day care, so I'm used to childish behavior,'' she said.Ah, but in this town who isn't? Just when it appeared that the cult of Hello Kitty, club kids with teddy bear backpacks and comfort food was finished, another wave of childhood chic washes over us. We've seen a DoubleClick party in January 2000 with Oompa Loompa waiters and an ''Almost Warm and Fuzzy'' exhibition about art and childhood at P.S. 1 last winter.Once upon a time, childhood wasn't even acknowledged by adults. Until the 18th century, historians say, children were seen by some as workhorses and by others as immoral forces to be restrained. Now, it isn't just childhood that's an industry, but adult regression, too. Ilona Rich recently grabbed the spotlight from her mother, Denise, with a fashion show featuring Candyland colors and Bo Peep dresses. Chip Duckett, a downtown party promoter, gave himself an 8th-birthday party at a bar called Flamingo East, where clowns served Twinkies, Ding Dongs and ice-cream sandwiches. Then there are the cheese balls and cupcakes made by the cult actress Amy Sedaris -- she was selling them all spring during intermission at a downtown production of ''The Book of Liz,'' written by her and her brother, David Sedaris.''It's to help pay for my pet rabbit,'' she likes to tell people.The Magnolia Bakery and cupcake chic have even made it into British Vogue.Is childhood just another marketing ploy for a generation of Wendys and Peter Pans? Or are all these hemmed-in urbanites craving the spacious real estate of their youth?''You feel like you're in your grandma's kitchen when you're here,'' said one customer at Magnolia Bakery, who was on a second date and had just had a cupcake. ''Actually, my grandma's kitchen wasn't anything like this place, but it's the idea that counts.''For all the fetishizing of all things from the years of innocence, it's a well-known fact that New York is a magnet for people who are happier as adults than they were as children. Maybe that's the real appeal of the Mangolia Bakery. Discomfort food, anyone?''Who's next? Move the line!'' yelled the hard-edged hipsters working the counter like angry servers in a school cafeteria. ''Who needs help?'' one kept yelling. Judging from the look of things, everybody, and in more ways than one.A peroxided assistant manager, Matthew Bonfiglio, shook a big tip box with a poem on it called ''Requiem for a Cupcake.'' (''But as these people lick their lips/You'll have revenge on their hips.'')''Sometimes I feel like demanding proof and then busting people for being over age,'' said Mr. Bonfiglio, 30. ''It's not pretty when you see grown men getting bent out of shape because we're out of pink cupcakes.'' Nor is it particularly pretty when you see a woman hoarding cupcakes with one hand and working a cell phone with another. ''Hey, I can't share this,'' she snapped at her date.At the end of the night, Ms. Sinko was counting money in the corner. The number of cupcakes sold was so high that she could estimate sales only at over 3,000. ''Pretty soon,'' she said, ''the real money to be made from this crowd is going to be in rehab.''