http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/21/us/politics/21web-protests.html
Few Protesters at Inauguration - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Bush  George W,Demonstrations and Riots,Presidents and Presidency (US)
Jan. 20, 2009
6442
WASHINGTON — Protesters, a fixture of every inauguration since President Nixon’s in 1973, were few and scattered on Tuesday as Barack Obama assumed the presidency. It appeared there were far more vendors looking to make a buck selling Inaugural Chocolate Bars and Obama Incense than protesters seeking to make a statement.Those who raised their voices were more likely to be expressing gratitude that former President George W. Bush was leaving office than displeasure that Mr. Obama was replacing him.Some boos could be heard in the crowd gathered on the mall   when Vice President Dick Cheney and Mr. Bush were introduced for Mr. Obama’s swearing-in.And when it was over, a chant of “na na na na, hey hey, goodbye” arose from some among the throng on the Mall as Mr. Bush’s helicopter flew by carrying him to Andrews Air Force Base and on to his retirement in Texas.In the streets surrounding the parade route, an occasional anti-Bush sign could be seen, protesting his treatment of the Kurds in Iraq or just urging him to get out of town. Some along the parade route held signs demanding that Mr. Bush be indicted.In Lafayette Park, protesters from the Coalition for Peace hung signs along a fence demanding an end to Islamic radicalism and Middle East oil imports. The group also expressed its support for Israel’s invasion of Gaza. One of the group’s leaders said the message was not so much a protest but a plea.“It is directed toward Barack Obama in that we want him to make a clear statement to stop Iran’s march to nuclear weapons and Pakistan’s threat against India,” Marion Dreyfus of the coalition said through a police fence separating the park from the street. “We are also supporting Israel against the aggression of Hamas in Gaza.” There were a number of groups and individuals who came to the inaugural festivities to have their causes heard.Code Pink, the liberal women’s group, passed out hundreds of pink ribbons asking the new president to “stand up for peace.”Amnesty International staged a small demonstration outside a subway station to protest the seventh anniversary of the opening of the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.On Connecticut Avenue, one of the city’s major thoroughfares, someone parked a truck towing a large sign demanding a single-payer health care system.Outside the Swiss Embassy near the National Cathedral, a small cluster of anti-homosexual activists from the Westboro Baptist Church in Kansas held up signs protesting gay marriage and gay rights.Some advocates of gay rights booed when the Rev. Rick Warren of California’s Saddleback Church delivered the invocation. Mr. Warren, one of the nation’s best-known evangelical preachers, opposes gay marriage. He spoke at Mr. Obama’s invitation. About 100 people rallied outside his church in Lake Forest, Calif., on Monday to protest his inclusion in the inaugural ceremonies.Also on Monday, a number of groups seeking to “Give Bush the boot” set up a 15-foot-tall inflatable doll of Mr. Bush in a flight suit in Dupont Circle and threw shoes at him.“This action is of course a catharsis for folks who have watched in dismay as Bush and Cheney leave office with no impeachment proceedings, no criminal investigations, no accountability whatsoever for their actions at home and abroad,” said Jamilla El-Shafei, who helped organize the event.