https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/business/economy/jobs-report-explained.html
Can You Believe the Jobs Numbers? - The New York Times
Labor and Jobs,Unemployment,United States Economy,Bureau of Labor Statistics
June 2, 2017
3688
As a candidate, President Trump repeatedly questioned the validity of the Labor Department’s jobs reports. Now it is his administration that is releasing the monthly estimates. No matter who is in the White House, however, civil servants in the Labor Department collect and analyze data the same way.Here are the basic ground rules. The Labor Department releases its employment report on the first Friday of the following month (or occasionally, the second Friday) at 8:30 a.m. The initial monthly estimates are based on separate surveys, and the estimate of jobs added or lost is revised twice in subsequent months.Unemployment can be defined several ways, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics publishes alternative measures. The “official” unemployment rate, and the one most frequently cited, is the percentage of the adult civilian labor force without a job and actively searching for one. Whether someone receives government benefits like unemployment insurance is irrelevant. This measure is known as U-3.The broadest one, which includes both discouraged and underemployed workers, tends to rise and fall with the official rate but is always larger. This measure is known as U-6.The data also provide a window into how specific demographic groups and industries are faring from month to month. (The monthly report does not, however, include a breakdown by state.)Like all statistical measurements, the figures can be both honest and imprecise — a best estimate given the available tools but nonetheless subject to ambiguity, misinterpretation and error. It’s important to keep in mind that every monthly jobs report provides only a temporary and incomplete snapshot of the economy.The monthly employment report is derived from separate surveys that serve different purposes.The first, collected by the Census Bureau since 1942, enables the government to estimate the number of people who are employed and calculate the unemployment rate. It is based on the Current Population Survey, conducted each month among 60,000 households, or about 110,000 individuals from around the country. It is commonly called the household survey.In general, anyone who reports working for pay — even just an hour — during the previous week is considered employed. Anyone who was laid off or actively looked for work (sending out résumés, responding to help-wanted ads) during the previous four weeks, regardless of any government benefits received, is considered unemployed. People who are not looking — this includes millions of students enrolled in college, plenty of parents who are happy to stay home with young children and millions more retirees — are not counted in the labor force.The second,  the Current Employment Statistics program, commonly called the establishment survey, is intended to measure changes over time. This survey, conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, focuses solely on jobs, rather than on individuals. Thus, a single person working two jobs would be counted once by the household survey (one individual is employed) and twice by the payroll survey (two jobs exist).To estimate how many jobs were created and lost, the bureau gathers data each month from 146,000 private business and government agencies covering about 623,000 work sites.As a general rule, the monthly numbers are seasonally adjusted. That means the effects of predictable seasonal events like weather changes, major holidays and school schedules are removed (through a statistical technique) so that cyclical, underlying trends can be better observed.Employed: Someone with a job.Unemployed: Someone without a job, available for work and searching. Labor force: The combination of people working and those who are unemployed, available and looking for a job.Not in the labor force: People who are unemployed and not looking for work.Official unemployment rate: The share of the labor force that is unemployed.Labor force participation rate: The percentage of the population 16 years and older that is either working or actively seeking work.Employment-population ratio: The percentage of the population 16 years and older that is currently working.