http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/23/upshot/in-context-health-premium-increases-dont-actually-look-like-increases.html
In Context, Health Premium Increases Don’t Actually Look Like Increases - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Medicare
Sept. 22, 2014
6133
In the Affordable Care Act marketplaces, which now serve 7.3 million Americans, some premiums are going up while others are going down. Based on data available so far, we reported last week that the average premiums for last year’s most popular plans would rise 8.4 percent, but that people willing to switch plans could get much better deals — an average 1 percent increase, and even decreases in some markets.But is 8.4 percent an alarming increase or a good deal for a plan you like? Is a 1 percent increase a disappointment or a terrific bargain? To put both increases in context, we’ve assembled some historical data on insurance markets that existed before the Affordable Care Act.None are a perfect comparison group — there are many reasons the new marketplaces and the people shopping there are different from customers in the older markets. But, taken together, they can give us some sense of whether the health law is giving customers a good deal on insurance.The overall assessment: By nearly any comparison, the average 1 percent premium increases available to consumers willing to switch plans is remarkably low. We are in a period of record-low health-care spending growth. But even in this period, premium increases lower than inflation are unusually good news.Even the average 8.4 percent increase for people who renew in the most popular plans falls within the range of historical increases in the individual market. It’s not on the low end, but it’s not in the category of runaway premium growth that many critics of the Affordable Care Act warned might be coming.Recall that back before January, when the marketplace plans launched, the individual insurance market was a very different place. Insurance companies were free to exclude customers with previous illnesses. People tended to cycle in and out of coverage very frequently as their income and employment status changed.And regulations in some markets limited the amount that insurers could vary premiums by age, making products unaffordable for many young, healthy customers.But the old individual market still remains the best comparison group for the new individual market — the Affordable Care Act marketplaces. By that standard, even an 8.4 percent annual increase looks pretty good.A Commonwealth Fund study conducted by the M.I.T. economist Jonathan Gruber this summer found that, before the Affordable Care Act passed, premiums were rising by higher rates: 9.9 percent in 2008, 10.8 percent in 2009 and 11.7 percent in 2010. Those are average rates. As in the current marketplaces, there was a lot of local variation in price increases.The employer market has seen smaller recent increases, but that market has not seen an average 1 percent increase in recent memory. The Kaiser Family Foundation recently published its 16th annual survey of employer health plans. It found that 2014 was a year with a record-low premium increase for family plans: 3 percent. That number makes 8.4 percent look less rosy. But the 1 percent available to marketplace switchers looks good.By Medicare standards, an 8.4 percent increase seems absurdly high. Medicare, the public insurance program for those 65 and over and the disabled, is enjoying a period of unusually slow growth. In that program, per capita spending is quite flat, and looks to be going down over the next few years.Medicare’s spending numbers are helped by demographic changes. The baby boomers began aging into the program in 2011, pulling down the average age of beneficiaries and making the population in the program healthier. Since 2006, when the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit went into effect, annual per capita spending growth has been less than 5 percent — and in the last two years, it’s been less than 1 percent.