http://www.nytimes.com/2000/07/03/world/mexico-election-overview-challenger-mexico-wins-governing-party-concedes.html
THE MEXICO ELECTION: THE OVERVIEW; CHALLENGER IN MEXICO WINS, GOVERNING PARTY CONCEDES - The New York Times
MEXICO CITY (MEX),MEXICO,LOPEZ OBRADOR  ANDRES MANUEL,LABASTIDA OCHOA  FRANCISCO,CARDENAS SOLORZANO  CUAUHTEMOC,FOX QUESADA  VICENTE,MAYORS,MEXICO-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,ELECTIONS
July 3, 2000
8254
Vicente Fox Quesada, the rough-spoken rancher and businessman who galvanized a maverick grass-roots presidential campaign, won a momentous victory in Mexico's presidential election today, ousting the political party that has ruled for 71 years.''The next president of Mexico will be Vicente Fox Quesada,'' said President Ernesto Zedillo shortly after 11 p.m., conceding that his Institutional Revolutionary Party, known as the PRI, had lost the presidency for the first time since 1929.In an outpouring of giddy joy, Mr. Fox's supporters swarmed into the streets of Mexico City tonight, honking horns and celebrating the demise of the only rulers most people here had ever known.In one night of triumph, Mr. Fox converted Mexico from a waning one-party state into a self-confident democracy whose voters are capable of ousting a government, no matter how dominant.Mr. Fox stood tonight on the balcony of his party headquarters, before a crowd savoring his triumph over Francisco Labastida Ochoa of PRI and chanting, ''Vicente Presidente!'' He shot back: ''I like it when you call me that.''''This is the moment of democracy, the moment of change that our country has so desired,'' said Mr. Fox of the National Action Party, or PAN. He praised the federal elections authorities for conducting national balloting that finished ''without an important or notable stain.''Mr. Labastida, the first PRI candidate who had ever even had to undergo an internal party primary, was swift to concede defeat, and to underline that the country should now unite after a ferocious campaign and the most open vote in the country's history.''The citizens have taken a decision, that we all should respect,'' said the 57-year-old former interior minister. ''And I will be the first to set the example.''Mr. Zedillo said he had called Mr. Fox to congratulate him after the first official returns confirmed what television surveys of voters had indicated all night: that the PRI had lost the presidency despite mobilizing its well-oiled machine to try and extend into the new century the dominance it exerted for most of the last.At Mr. Labastida's headquarters, several young supporters started to cry when the television reported results of the first polls. The huge plaza at the center of the PRI compound, many times the scene of tumultuous rallies, was empty.In an interview this evening, Mr. Fox immediately offered reconciliation to Mr. Labastida. ''It was a very combative process, but I open my arms to him,'' he said.He also reached out with unusual warmth to the United States, which had been the chief adversary of many PRI presidents. ''We are not only neighbors and partners, but we have a common destiny,'' said Mr. Fox, who was once the chief executive officer of Coca-Cola in Mexico. ''I know we are going to do many great things together. I want to work intensely with the United States.''Mr. Fox's big lead in the voter surveys took all of Mexico by surprise. The final polls before the election had showed him in a neck-and-neck race with Mr. Labastida.''This a very important step in our struggle to become a democratic country,'' said Francisco Barrio, a leading PAN politician who is a former governor of the northern border state of Chihuahua.With a note of astonishment he said: ''Now our party has become the strongest and most important one in Mexico. We got more votes than the PRI did today.''The streets around the Angel of Independence, the winged statue on a tall pedestal in downtown Mexico City that is this country's most distinctive monument, became a rollicking fiesta of thousands of cheering, weeping, dancing Fox supporters.Throughout the day, eager voters lined up at polling stations -- often waiting for hours in punishing heat -- for their chance to take part in an election that offered a choice between the country's familiar but tainted ruling party and a chance for something different.The elections today were the most open ever held here, and the balloting was generally orderly, though marred in several states by reported pressure on voters from the governing party, which has a history of fraud, and disorganization that blocked many thousands of people from casting ballots.After a blistering campaign that filled the television and other media as never before, many voters said they made their decision only in recent days, suggesting that the undecided, who were as much as 19 percent of the total in the most recent polls, would determine the day.In many neighborhoods that long were PRI strongholds, and among working class Mexicans who were its most loyal followers, one theme was recurrent: Mexico had to do something different.''I've never seen a change, and I have been asking myself, when is it going to happen?'' said Gustavo Sanchez, a 32-year-old auto mechanic in Ecatepec, a huge proletarian suburb of Mexico City where the PRI was once invincible. ''Our leaders need to know that if they don't do the job right, we're going to get rid of them.''At mid-afternoon, Jose Woldenberg, the president of the Federal Elections Institute, which is running the election, reported that only 13 of 113,423 polling places nationwide had failed to open because of organizational problems, a historical record.Besides the presidential race, Mexicans also voted for the Senate, with 128 seats, and all 500 seats in the Congress, and to elect two state governors and the mayor of Mexico City.At 7:30 p.m., Felipe Bravo Mena, the president of PAN, declared that the party had won the governor's race in the central state of Morelos, beating the PRI by 54 percent to 28 percent. Before the election, the polls showed that that race was close. Mr. Fox's candidate also swept the governor's race in his home state of Guanajuato by 59 percent to the PRI's 31 percent, Mr. Bravo Mena said.Even in Mexico City, Mr. Fox's PAN fared well, with the party candidate coming within three percentage points of the victor in the race for mayor, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, from the leftist Party of the Democratic Revolution.Cuauhtemoc Cardenas Solorzano, the candidate of the leftist party in the presidential contest, had refused to unite with Mr. Fox, and late this evening conceded defeat by his conservative opposition rival.Mr. Fox, who turned 58 today, shatters many traditional paradigms. Every Mexican president in this century has been either a general, a lawyer or an economist, and each one has been the favorite son of an elite with a strong anticlerical and antibusiness bias.Mr. Fox breaks this mold. He is a businessman, a devout Catholic and politically he has largely been on the outside looking in.In the economic turmoil here in the 1980's, opposition forces achieved their first major victories in mayoral elections across northern Mexico. In 1988, dozens of beleaguered northern entrepreneurs ran for Congress representing the National Action Party, including Mr. Fox.He won, served one term in Congress, and ran for governor of Guanajuato in 1991, losing a disputed election marred by fraud. When he ran for governor again in 1995, he won a sweeping victory. Three years into his governorship, he launched his quest for the presidency.Although President Zedillo, voting early today in a public school near his official residence, noted ''great calm throughout the country,'' that was not true everywhere. In the main square of the city of Puebla, in central Mexico, thousands of people lined up for long hours at a special polling place set up for Mexicans who were not in their home towns on Election Day.Before the polls opened, hundreds of army soldiers and policemen, mostly in civilian clothes, crowded to the front of the line at the one special station for out-of-town voters.Since the special station had only 750 ballots to be given out, many voters realized, after waiting for hours in line, that they were not going to be able to vote. As the line stretched for six blocks out of the plaza, angry and frustrated people began to suspect that the PRI was pulling one of the election tricks for which it was notorious in the past.''Fraud! Fraud!'' the voters chanted as tensions mounted, ebbed and mounted again.''This is the PRI again,'' said Maria Guadalupe Corona Moreno, a 28-year-old manager of a textile factory from the state of Guanajuato who was in Puebla on business. ''I've been waiting to cast my vote for years,'' she said, waving her voter card, ''and now it turns out this is just a piece of trash.''PRI voters in Puebla were also furious about being left out.The special polling stations were set up for Mexicans who would not appear on local rolls because they went to vote in places different from where they registered. In regular polling places, Mexicans were given ballots after matching their voter card with a photograph against a list that included both their name and picture. But because of restrictions in the campaign laws, only 715 special polling places were set up nationwide, with only 750 ballots each.The voting today was monitored by no fewer than 38,433 Mexican observers and 860 foreigners. Everywhere they went, observers found voters thrilled about being part of what felt like a bona fide democratic exercise.''Everyone was saying that this time their vote really matters,'' said Pamela S. Falk, a law professor from the City University of New York.PRI leaders had promised that the party's huge machine would be in full gear today, with 2.5 million party followers working to deliver its voters to the polls. But the power of the PRI system, which for three decades depressed workers' salaries, was not much in evidence nationwide.''It looks to me like the people have come out because they want a change,'' said Ana Maria Mosqueda, 38, a secretary who served was an elections observer on behalf of a national teachers' union that has been a bastion of the PRI. She made it clear that her PRI sympathies had waned. ''We want to be treated better, and we can make it happen today, one grain of sand at a time.''In many places the election split families in two, with the older generation sticking with the PRI and the younger people going for the opposition. Husbands and wives differed as well.Jose Luis Caballero Rivas, an office worker who is 39, said he chose Mr. Labastida because ''we need someone who will help us.'' But as they emerged from a polling station in Ecatepec, his wife, Gabriela Alcazar, piped up to contradict him.''It is time to change,'' she said.In the state of Chiapas, followers of the Zapatista rebels burned the voting stations in two tiny rural communities, and rebels wearing ski masks set up roadblocks to stop PRI followers from voting in the town of Altamirano. The actions came even though the Zapatista leader who calls himself Subcomandante Marcos, had said the Zapatistas would not obstruct the election.