https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/19/us/politics/kalorama-dc-neighborhood-.html
A Neighborhood Where the Obamas and the Trumps Are Just Part of the Mix - The New York Times
Washington (DC),Obama  Barack,Bezos  Jeffrey P,Tillerson  Rex W,Trump  Ivanka,Kushner  Jared,Rumsfeld  Donald H,Wallace  Chris (1947- ),United States Politics and Government
Jan. 19, 2017
5629
WASHINGTON — Every morning, Meena Ahamed takes a three-mile walk around Kalorama, her northwestern Washington neighborhood. The enclave is exclusive, full of showpiece brick homes, many decorated with flying flags of distant republics.Her stroll on Wednesday was serene save for the buzzing of saws, the thumping of hammers and the nearly constant chop-chop-chop of helicopters overhead. All were telltale signals that some well-known residents are moving in: President Obama and his family; President-elect Donald J. Trump’s daughter Ivanka and her husband, Jared Kushner; and the Amazon founder and billionaire Jeff Bezos, to name a few.Another will soon join the crowd. Rex W. Tillerson, the former chief executive of Exxon Mobil and Mr. Trump’s pick for secretary of state, is in the process of buying a home nearby on 24th Street Northwest, said Jack Evans, a District of Columbia City Council member whose ward includes the neighborhood. A person with knowledge of the sale, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that Mr. Evans was correct.“In New York, it’s what building Madonna is in,” said Ms. Ahamed, a writer and United States advisory board member of Doctors Without Borders who splits her time among New York, Los Angeles and Washington. “Here, it’s which politician is living next to you.”The neighborhood, a stately jumble of embassies, ambassadors’ residences, and homes owned by financiers, lobbyists and other members of the upper class, has always been exclusive. But a stormy political climate has produced an unusual medley of newcomers who have generated interest in the neighborhood that extends well beyond Washington.On Belmont Road, the Obamas will take up residence in a Tudor-style home around the corner from Ms. Trump and Mr. Kushner, who will live in a large white home on Tracy Place. A few streets away, on S Street, Mr. Bezos, the Amazon founder and owner of The Washington Post, is renovating a former textile museum, which sits between the former home of Woodrow Wilson, the nation’s 28th president, and the embassy of Myanmar. Mr. Tillerson is said to be moving in somewhere between Mr. Bezos and Ms. Trump.To many residents here, the big-ticket real estate shuffle is normal as they insist that, really, this is a neighborhood like any other. It’s no big deal, they say, to invite a high-profile neighbor over for a meal made from a backyard pizza oven, or to be on an email chain with the “Fox News Sunday” anchor Chris Wallace, another resident, gossiping over neighborhood changes or complaining about the lack of parking in the area.Holly Sukenik, who has lived in Kalorama since 1981 and lives a few doors down from Ms. Trump and Mr. Kushner’s home, rattled off a list of well-known Washington names to emphasize that residents here have seen it all before.“Rumsfeld lived there,” Ms. Sukenik said, pointing in one direction, toward the former home of Donald H. Rumsfeld, who lived in Kalorama when he was defense secretary in the George W. Bush administration.“Caspar Weinberger lived there,” she said, motioning in the direction of a home once occupied by President Ronald Reagan’s first defense secretary.“And that Austrian spy,” she paused. “What was his name?”It was Felix Bloch, who had an apartment in Kalorama. He was accused of spying for the Soviets in the late 1980s.“Media was parked in my driveway,” Ms. Sukenik said. “I was like: ‘Excuse me, guys. I’ve got to leave.’”Others know the drill. For the past six years, the lobbyist Tony Podesta — the owner of that backyard pizza oven and the brother of John D. Podesta, Hillary Clinton’s 2016 campaign chairman — has lived two doors down from the Obama family’s new home. He said longtime residents were used to the influx of new people, but an arrival does occasionally raise an eyebrow.“It’s been awhile since we’ve had a president,” Mr. Podesta conceded. Of Mr. Bezos, he added, “Turning the museum into a private home was a little bit of a surprise to the neighborhood.”Kalorama was expensive enough to be largely limited to millionaires before, but Maxwell Rabin, a broker for TTR Sotheby’s International Realty, said the sort of money that Mr. Bezos spent on his property — $23 million, according to reports — signaled a shift from old Washington power players to a new stratosphere of wealth moving into the city.“We have our share of wealthy people,” he said, “but that’s a different dimension.”Even for a neighborhood full of people who say they try not to focus on the comings and goings of others, gossip has a way of spreading quickly. Residents have been on the alert for activity in front of Ms. Trump’s new residence, and on Wednesday, two moving trucks and two security vans were parked near the house.Residents are also subtly monitoring the construction going on outside the Obama residence, which on Wednesday remained approachable from the street. Once the Obamas move in, people are expecting a bigger security presence, including roadblocks near the residence and more Secret Service officers, said Mr. Evans, the City Council member.“I think the Secret Service probably likes it, because they’re used to that area,” he added.Ms. Sukenik and Ms. Ahamed say they have heard worrying talk that Belmont Road will be cut off to traffic. Residents are also concerned that protesters will march through the neighborhood on Inauguration Day on Friday to drop off messages for Ms. Trump, urging her to stand up for women’s rights.But, Ms. Ahamed said, this could be untrue. Nearby, a poster for the Women’s March on Washington had been taped to a street lamp across the street from Ms. Trump’s new home.“I hope they’ll be happy,” Ms. Ahamed said of the couple. “It’s a very nice, very quiet neighborhood.”