https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/canada/justin-trudeau.html
Justin Trudeau, Nearing a Year in Office, Tries to Recast Himself - The New York Times
Trudeau  Justin,Canada,Liberal Party (Canada),Politics and Government
Sept. 14, 2016
5410
OTTAWA — The crowd was enthusiastic, and Justin Trudeau was working it. He seemed to leave no hand unshaken in the crush of the convention hall as light perspiration gathered on his forehead. Even on what could have been hostile turf, the ebullience was palpable.That’s how it goes when you are a prime minister-slash-social media star on a political honeymoon — one that, far from waning, has actually seemed to intensify since Mr. Trudeau and his Liberal Party swept to power in Canada’s general election last fall.After 10 months in office, though, Mr. Trudeau is signaling a shift in focus toward grasping the nettles of power as well as the laurels.Opinion polls have shown his support continuing to rise, even among people who usually back Canada’s two other major parties. In the most recent Nanos Research poll, 73 percent of respondents agreed that Mr. Trudeau had the qualities of a good political leader.Delegates in the convention hall seemed to think so, too, even though they belonged to Unifor, the country’s largest private-sector trade union. Its predecessor unions helped to found the New Democratic Party, the Liberals’ main rival on the center-left.“I love him. He’s thinking forward, always forward,” said Annette Morgan, a member of a Toronto local of Unifor.“And he’s supportive of labor; he’s willing to talk to us,” her friend Nicole Beard added.With his first anniversary in office approaching, Mr. Trudeau has been subtly trying to recast both himself and his party. Analysts say that in the next few months, he will have to demonstrate that he is not just the latest YouTube sensation, but also the head of a government that will deliver on a long and often ambitious list of election promises.His emphasis on consulting the public before making major decisions — in stark contrast to the Conservatives he unseated — has bought Mr. Trudeau time on some potentially thorny issues. So have the disarray and the leadership void of both main opposition parties. But that will not last forever.“He really is the one carrying everything right now,” said Alex Marland, an associate professor of political science at Memorial University of Newfoundland.“My sense is that he is trying to move away from being known as the selfie prime minister,” Professor Marland said. “The risk is that you become seen as nothing more than a celebrity. If people are to think of him as someone who is intelligent and thoughtful, he’s going to have to keep coming up with new things.”Mr. Trudeau held retreats for his cabinet and his parliamentary caucus in late summer with that pivot in mind. After the cabinet retreat, where his ministers bunked down in somewhat spartan college dorms rather than at a luxury resort, Mr. Trudeau’s public remarks were tinged with caution.“There are going to be difficult decisions and challenges ahead of us on everything from natural resources to investments to trade deals,” he said at a news conference in Sudbury, Ontario.At the cabinet gathering, Mr. Trudeau’s ministers heard from Michael Barber, who was chief adviser of Tony Blair’s Delivery Unit when Mr. Blair was prime minister of Britain.The message, Mr. Barber told reporters afterward, was that there could soon be an end to what Mr. Trudeau famously called the Liberals’ “sunny ways.”“In Year 2 you really need a focus on relentless implementation, on taking some difficult decisions where you can’t please all of the people all the time,” Mr. Barber said.Mr. Trudeau did move swiftly on some of his promises after taking office, including taking in 25,000 Syrian refugees.But so far, “it would be fair to say that the biggest change has been in tone and style of leadership” rather than policy, said Nik Nanos, the chairman of Nanos Research.Mr. Trudeau’s approach to government has been less secretive, less centralized and, in Mr. Nanos’s view, more in line with long-held Canadian values than the approach of Stephen Harper, his Conservative predecessor. “The charm offensive continues,” Mr. Nanos said.Mr. Trudeau’s rising popular support may be without precedent in Canadian history, said Norman Hillmer, a professor of history and international relations at Carleton University in Ottawa. But even so, Professor Hillmer said, the prime minister may soon find himself haunted by his habit of making explicit promises — something his father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, usually avoided doing when he was prime minister in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s.“Expectations have been ramped up so high that disappointment is sure to come,” Professor Hillmer said. “Maybe now is that time; they’ve picked the low-hanging fruit.”As his tenure continues, Mr. Trudeau will have to sort out some conflicting promises and deal with issues where there is no clear national consensus.He has said that climate change will be a top priority, but he has also promised to help the country’s economically vital oil and gas industry — a major and growing source of carbon emissions — out of its current slump.Passions on the climate issue run high: The country’s National Energy Board was forced in August to suspend hearings on a pipeline to carry oil from Alberta’s oil sands to the Atlantic Ocean after a melee in Montreal in which police wrestled protesters to the ground.Relations with aboriginal Canadians, which reached a new low under the previous Conservative government, immediately improved under Mr. Trudeau. But it is probably beyond any government’s power to resolve all of that community’s problems and grievances in a handful of years, when some of them conflict sharply with the views of other Canadians.And while there appears to be broad public support for Mr. Trudeau’s plan to revive the economy through government spending, it will be difficult to find a lasting way to revitalize key sectors, particularly manufacturing.Still, no one thinks the country will soon turn against the popular new prime minister.The government scandals that have surfaced on his watch so far have been relatively paltry, like the flap over a $400 expense claim by the health minister to pay for access to Air Canada’s airport lounges.“The government is about to spend $1,486,680,000 on buses and subways, and on studies about buses and subways, and the controversy of the day is about an amount of money equivalent to 0.0007 percent of that massive total?” The Globe and Mail, a Toronto newspaper, asked in an editorial. “Have we lost our minds?”And the opposition remains in disarray and without clear leadership. Mr. Harper of the Conservatives has quit politics, and the New Democrats have rejected the leadership of Tom Mulcair. No strong candidates have emerged to succeed either of them.Before last year’s election, some on the left suggested that the Liberal and New Democratic Parties should merge and fight the Tories together. Professor Marland of Memorial University said voters may have gone ahead and done the job for them: Polling data indicated that most of the Liberals’ gains came at the New Democrats’ expense, he said, while the core of Conservative support remained stable.“It’s the N.D.P. that’s really kind of fallen through the floor,” he said. “It almost seems in some ways that Justin Trudeau has united the left.”