http://www.nytimes.com/2004/10/26/business/worldbusiness/mergers-show-steel-industry-is-still-worthy-of-big.html
Mergers Show Steel Industry Is Still Worthy of Big Deals - The New York Times
ROSS  W L  & CO,MITTAL STEEL,INTERNATIONAL STEEL GROUP,ARBED SA,ISPAT INTERNATIONAL NV,USINOR SACILOR,ROSS  WILBUR L,MITTAL  LAKSHMI N,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,STEEL AND IRON
Oct. 26, 2004
2145
LONDON, Oct. 25 - Showing that money can still be made in the old-line industries, the turnaround specialist Wilbur L. Ross is selling a steel company that he created over the last two years in a deal that could create a profit of more than $2 billion for himself and his shareholders.Mr. Ross entered the steel industry in 2002, when his buyout firm W.L. Ross & Company made a $325 million offer for a shuttered Cleveland steel mill.Five deals, almost $2.2 billion and less than three years later, Mr. Ross is selling the company for $4.5 billion, and pocketing a personal stake in the new company worth nearly $300 million.Just 10 months after he took the International Steel Group public, Mr. Ross is capitalizing on skyrocketing steel demand sparked by industrialization in China, Eastern Europe and India by selling the company to a billionaire steel businessman, Lakshmi N. Mittal of London.Mr. Mittal intends to consolidate two family-controlled companies, and then merge them with International Steel, to create the largest steel producer in the world, bypassing Arcelor of Luxembourg.If the plan goes through, the new company, Mittal Steel, will have projected revenues of $31.5 billion in 2004 and operating income of $6.8 billion to $7 billion, and will ship some 57 million tons of steel this year. Arcelor shipped 40 million tons of steel in 2003.Analysts predict the deal will be a precursor for further mergers within an industry that has already had several consolidations, including the three-way merger of Usinor of France, Arbed of Luxembourg and Aceralia of Spain that created Arcelor in 2001.Mittal Steel will be created in a two steps. First, Ispat International, a publicly traded steel company headed by Mr. Mittal that is 75 percent owned by his family, will issue 525 million new shares and purchase LNM Holdings, a privately held company completely owned by Mittal family members, in a deal worth $13.3 billion. LNM, one of the world's five largest steel producers, shipped 19 million tons of steel in the first nine months of 2004.Then the merged firm, with the new name Mittal Steel, will buy International Steel in a cash and stock bid that values Mr. Ross's company at approximately $42 a share -- 42 percent higher than Friday's close in New York. International Steel shareholders will get $21 in cash and from 0.4793 to 0.6087 of a share of Mittal, depending on where it is trading, for each of their shares. The Mittal family will control about 88 percent of the new company."The transaction we're announcing will change the world's steel map," Mr. Ross said in a conference call with analysts and investors.The transaction is Mr. Ross's latest high-profile example of how to thrive in industries that others shun. The back-of-the-envelope calculation is startling: The five deals that created International Steel cost $2.165 billion, including debt. But the total price Mr. Mittal will be paying for International Steel is $5.1 billion, including $600 million in debt. International Steel makes a variety of hot-rolled and cold-rolled steel as well as wire rod and rail products.Mr. Mittal said the deal signaled "the creation of a new global powerhouse" in the steel sector. The new company will have 165,000 employees in 14 countries. Mr. Mittal said it planned to actively participate in further consolidation, by purchasing other producers and buying access to raw materials like coke and coal.Like Mr. Ross, Mr. Mittal, an Indian-born financier, has a pattern of buying undervalued companies. He transformed Ispat from a local, family-run metals business based in Calcutta to a global company by buying up moribund steel assets in Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Mexico and Trinidad and coaxing them into profitability."We're both very entrepreneurial groups," Mr. Ross explained in a later interview. "Neither of us understood what we were trying to do was impossible according to the rest of the steel industry, and not knowing it was impossible we went ahead and did it."The market reacted by pushing shares up for the industry. Ispat shares closed up 27 percent, or $6.96, to $32.30 in New York trading, while International Steel Group rose 19 percent, or $5.57, to $35.25. Other steel companies also gained. AK Steel Holding rose 73 cents, or 8.2 percent, to $9.59. Nucor advanced $1.54, or 3.8 percent, to $41.71. U.S. Steel Corporation jumped $2.24, or 6.7 percent, to $35.85. The deal also comes as prices for many types of steel have more than doubled since early 2003, and demand has increased steadily. International steel consumption in 2004 is expected to reach 918 million tons -- a 5.3 percent increase from a year ago -- according to MEPS International, a consultancy that provides steel prices and production data to the industry. In comparison, finished steel consumption rose an average of 2.5 percent a year in the 10 years to 2002.Analysts said Mr. Ross's deal, while unexpected, looked smart."He sold at the right time," said Mary O'Connor, an analyst at Locker Associates in New York, a consultancy that does not buy, trade or rate stock. "This is probably the top of the market." Still, she added, global demand is unlikely to fall to the lows of 2001 or 2002 anytime in the near term.The buyout is expected to close in the first quarter of 2005 and is subject to approval by regulators. When it closes, Mr. Mittal will become chairman and chief executive, and Mr. Ross will become a director. Aditya Mittal, Lakshmi Mittal's son, who is vice chairman of the LNM board and the company's head of mergers and acquisitions, will be president and group chief financial officer, and Malay Mukherjee, president and chief operating officer of Ispat, will be chief operating officer.International Steel's president and chief executive, Rodney Mott, will become chief executive of Mittal Steel's United States operations, which include the operations of Inland Steel, which Ispat purchased in 1998.Mr. Ross, a former Rothschild banker, is widely credited with reviving the United States steel industry by buying up dead or dying companies and then persuading their powerful union, the United Steelworkers of America, to cut costs, streamline operations and agree to pension reforms.In April 2002, W.L. Ross & Co. purchased the steel mills of LTV Corporation in Cleveland, then added on Acme Steel Corporation, the Bethlehem Steel Corporation and Weirton Steel. In December, International Steel became the first United States steel company to hold a public offering in seven years. The company's stock rose 26 percent on its first day of trading.Analysts said that the deal could be followed by other bids for American steel companies. "This is an about-face from what we've seen, with small producers selling at or below costs," said Brian Rayle, an analyst with FTN Midwest, who has International Steel rated a neutral (and does no business with the company.)Mr. Ross said he thought that it could also spark American companies to look beyond their borders. "Those American companies that have done nothing overseas will feel compelled to do something," he said.Citigroup and HSBC represented LNM in the deal. Credit Suisse First Boston represented Ispat, and Goldman Sachs represented International Steel.