http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/world/americas/Iguala-mayor-wife-missing-students-mexico.html
Investigators in Mexico Detain Mayor and His Wife Over Missing Students - The New York Times
Abarca  Jose Luis,Pineda Villa  Maria de los Angeles,Mexico,Missing Persons,Murders and Attempted Murders,Iguala (Mexico),Guerrero (Mexico),Corruption (Institutional),Guerreros Unidos (Gang),Escuela Normal Rural Raul Isidro Burgos (Guerrero  Mexico)
Nov. 4, 2014
8226
MEXICO CITY —  The fugitive mayor of a southern Mexican town where 43 college students were apparently abducted in September after he reportedly ordered the police to attack them was detained Tuesday along with his wife in an early-morning raid here, federal officials said.President Enrique Peña Nieto, who in the face of public outrage called the case his highest priority as it threatened to overshadow an agenda focused on economic uplift, saluted the police and expressed hope the arrests would “contribute in a decisive way to clearing things up and to the investigation.”The case has been notable, however, for scores of arrests — more than 50 so far — that have not turned up the whereabouts of the students, but have led to several mass graves that suggest deeply entrenched organized crime in the area. Yet the mayor and his wife may know more than most others captured so far.They were detained by an elite unit of the federal police in a run-down, apparently abandoned house in the working-class district of Iztapalapa, 120 miles north of Iguala, the town where the students disappeared and which the couple presided over in collusion with the Guerreros Unidos drug gang, the authorities have said.The mayor, José Luis Abarca of Iguala, who stepped down from his post and fled last month as the police focused on him, and his wife, María de los Ángeles Pineda Villa, were taken to the federal attorney general’s office for questioning. Another woman accused of helping them hide was also taken into custody.On Sept. 26, an outbreak of violence in Iguala left six people dead, including three students. The students, who were part of a large group from a left-wing teachers’ college with a history of activism and protest, were soliciting donations and stealing buses for transportation to a demonstration.Concerned that the students would disrupt a speech his politically ambitious wife was giving in the town’s central plaza, Mr. Abarca ordered the police to “teach them a lesson,” Mexican news media reports said, citing documents in the investigation.After the police opened fire, witnesses reported that several students were put in police vehicles and driven away. The authorities have said they believe that the students were eventually turned over to the drug gang. All 43 of the missing students remain unaccounted for.The previous arrests have included large numbers of police officers, and have uncovered several graves containing 38 bodies in and around Iguala. Initial tests, however, showed that the bodies were not those of the students, and the relatives of those missing, who recently met with Mr. Peña Nieto, and their supporters are angered by the lack of progress.Last week, after arresting members of Guerreros Unidos, the gang believed to have been directly involved in the abduction, investigators rushed to a garbage dump near Iguala, stoking a news media frenzy. But the search did not turn up the remains of any of the students.Federal officials said Guerreros Unidos regularly paid off the mayor for his cooperation and that of the police force, which acted as muscle for the gang. The mayor received up to $220,000 every few weeks, the officials have said, while his wife was described as a top operative of the gang. It is an offshoot of the larger, better-known Beltrán Leyva crime group in which Ms. Pineda Villa’s brothers — two of whom were killed in 2009 — have acted as leaders.The mayor is also a suspect in the killing of a political activist last year, the authorities said.Guerreros Unidos specializes in kidnapping, extortion and growing and preparing opium poppies to be refined into heroin for the American drug market.