https://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/08/world/middleeast/a-syrians-evolution-from-carefree-to-revolutionary.html
A Syrian’s Evolution From Carefree to Revolutionary - The New York Times
Syria,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Assad  Bashar al-,Palmyra (Pa),Lebanon,Zeid  Abu
July 7, 2012
5871
BEIRUT, Lebanon — To the tourists he took on sunset camel rides, Abu Zeid seemed like the freest man on earth.He was a young Bedouin who worked with his camel, Casanova, among the ruins of ancient Palmyra, in the Syrian desert. He spent his days roaming Palmyra’s bare hills and stone colonnades, and his nights chatting online with foreign friends. In recent years, his biggest complaint with the government was that the police demanded bribes.So his friends were astonished when he told them that he had joined the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad.Abu Zeid’s evolution from carefree tour guide to revolutionary offers a rare glimpse of a single life transformed by an uprising that has jolted thousands from their daily routines, and of the ambivalence many Syrians feel toward a revolution that has already brought so much chaos.Abu Zeid and several friends took up arms after security officers shot demonstrators in Tadmur, the modern town near Palmyra. Now, alternately passionate and confused, Abu Zeid has only the dimmest idea of an endgame, swept up in a wave heading nowhere clear.He wavers, unsure whether joining the revolt was his life’s proudest moment or its ruin — or both.His exploits, sometimes more Keystone Kops than Che Guevara, left him feeling empowered but morally conflicted. He stole money and weapons, something he struggles to justify to himself. He endangered his neighbors, beat up an informer and narrowly escaped a raid that killed some of his friends after one drew attention to their hide-out by getting stuck in an elevator. Even his beloved camel ended up dead.Now he is a jobless fugitive in a country bordering Syria, heartsick for a life in which, he said, “I felt like a king in my own way.”Like someone who grew up near the sea and is drawn to water, Abu Zeid spends hours visiting ancient ruins, quizzing people about his new country’s tourist industry. He worries that unrest will harm his family, or Palmyra’s antiquities. One moment he vows to go back and fight; the next he disavows violence.“I hate my life this way,” he told a friend in a recent message.Yet he will be proud if Mr. Assad leaves office, he said: “They can’t keep talking as if we are nobody — we are citizens.”This account of one man’s struggle is based on interviews with Abu Zeid, a fellow fighter and two women who have known Abu Zeid for years. One is a Syrian-American who met him while touring in Palmyra in 2008 and says she is neutral toward the uprising. The other is Abu Zeid’s girlfriend, a French citizen who has worked in Syria. All asked not to be fully identified to protect family and friends in Syria.Abu Zeid’s account could not be confirmed because of Syria’s restrictions on journalists. It is, however, consistent with what the women said he told them earlier, and with previously reported events.Abu Zeid is not sure of his age; he estimates 23. He grew up in a tent with eight siblings. He began selling postcards at 4, got a camel at 11 and taught himself the rudiments of five languages.He fasted during Ramadan, but religion was not central to his life. The secular state suited him as a tourism worker and an occasional visitor to the bars of Damascus, where his brother met a Frenchwoman studying Arabic who became Abu Zeid’s girlfriend.In 2008, the Assad family visited Palmyra. Abu Zeid draped a kaffiyeh around Mr. Assad’s wife, Asma, refusing payment for a camel ride. He asked Mr. Assad to protect camel workers from bribetaking officials; the president told him to write a letter.When the uprising began in early 2011, Abu Zeid’s girlfriend recalled, “I was happy that he didn’t care.”But on April 10, Abu Zeid’s neighbor, a conscript named Mohammad Awad Qanbar, was killed in the southern city of Dara’a. His neighbors heard he had been executed for refusing to shoot protesters. His funeral in Tadmur swelled into protest, and Abu Zeid was pulled in.In August, troops opened fire on a demonstration in Tadmur, killing several people, including Haya Za’uby, 17, who was standing on her balcony.Abu Zeid and about 20 friends quietly started arming themselves. They camped at a desert oasis, calling themselves the Grandchildren of Zenobia, the queen of ancient Palmyra.“My mom told me to leave the resistance,” Abu Zeid confessed. “I said, ‘I must help.’ ”They surrounded four conscripts at a small post, urging them to defect. The soldiers demurred, but handed over rifles. Later, the young men stole cash from the convoys of rich businessmen and rifles from a customs post.“Do you think it’s wrong, what we did?” Abu Zeid asked, fidgeting anxiously during an interview outside Syria.The money bought weapons and aid for refugees from nearby Homs, a rebel center. The young men, now several hundred strong, used guns to guard demonstrations. On Feb. 20, after fierce shelling of Homs by the government, about 100 of the young men attacked a political security headquarters, killing several officers.“We lost our temper,” Abu Zeid said.The next day, tanks rolled into Tadmur. The young men realized they had to flee or risk harm befalling the town — an account echoed by another activist from Palmyra, interviewed in Damascus independently of Abu Zeid.“We hadn’t thought it through,” Abu Zeid said.He fled to Homs, only to learn that back home vengeful security men had shot Casanova, whom he still mourns as a camel who “liked to kiss the tourists.”Abu Zeid objected when Homs fighters wanted him to burn cars belonging to members of Mr. Assad’s Alawite sect.“They tried to turn us sectarian,” Abu Zeid said. “I am not against people, just against oppression.”Abu Zeid and five others headed to Damascus with their weapons hidden in a refrigerated truck.He kept in touch with a security officer from his tribe in Tadmur, speaking in code by phone, and he learned that there were informers in Damascus from the town. He abducted one, interrogated and beat him — he voices no qualms about having mimicked government tactics — and the man promised to stop.They hid in an apartment in the wealthy Mezzeh neighborhood, but the elevator mishap revealed their presence. On March 19, security officers knocked. Abu Zeid was out; two others left via a fire escape. Those still inside started a gunfight. All were killed or captured.Multiple rebel groups have claimed they carried out ambitious operations that day, when an unusual and still-unexplained gunfight rattled the normally secure Mezzeh. Abu Zeid’s account, less boastful than sheepish, fits the government’s description of a raid on a “terrorist hide-out” that killed two rebels.Days later, Abu Zeid fled Syria.In a recent meeting, he and one fellow fighter spoke little about democracy, offering no opinion on who or what should replace Mr. Assad. They said they acted in solidarity with the dead, and “for dignity.”Recently, Abu Zeid received a French visa. He will be safe in his girlfriend’s mountain village, but he is vaulting further into the unknown.