https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/16/nyregion/what-is-happening-at-rikers-island.html
What is Rikers Island? - The New York Times
Rikers Island Prison Complex,Correction Department (NYC),de Blasio  Bill,New York City
Dec. 15, 2014
7688
Mayor Bill de Blasio has declared that within the next decade, the jail complex at Rikers Island would be shut down. The mayor’s announcement was an acknowledgment that despite the hundreds of millions of dollars devoted to fixing the problems in recent years, the jail cannot be saved. An explainer to help get you up to speed:What is Rikers Island?Rikers is a 400-acre island in the East River across from La Guardia Airport that serves as the principal jail complex for New York City. There are 10 jails on Rikers Island, including facilities for women and adolescents, as well as an infirmary, power plant and bakery.Who is sent to Rikers Island?On average, Rikers Island holds about 10,000 inmates on a daily basis, with about 77,000 people cycling through in all each year. Most of the inmates — about 85 percent — have not yet been convicted of a crime; they are pretrial detainees, either held on bail or remanded to custody. The rest have been convicted and are serving short sentences. About 93 percent of the inmate population is male. The majority are African-Americans and Latinos from low-income neighborhoods in New York. The portion of the jail population that has been diagnosed with some sort of mental health issue has ballooned in recent years, rising to nearly 40 percent of inmates.How did Rikers Island become so violent?Rikers has always been a place of exceptional violence. During the crack epidemic in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the inmate population was nearly twice as large as it is today, weapons were abundant and rival gangs ruled the cellblocks. Slashings and stabbings among inmates at times exceeded 1,000 annually.Aggressive efforts during the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani drove violence down drastically by the late 1990s, but the brutality increased again under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. An influx of inmates with mental illnesses, a breakdown in discipline and years of neglect all culminated in the crisis facing Rikers today. The rise in brutality by guards has been particularly stark. During Mr. Bloomberg’s last term in office, use of force by officers against inmates jumped by 90 percent.A Times investigation published in July 2014 found that 129 inmates were seriously injured, requiring hospitalization, in an 11-month span in 2013, after altercations with correction officers. Guards were found to have pressured inmates not to seek medical help for these injuries and threatened them with further violence if they did. A report in August by the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan focusing on adolescent inmates had similar findings.What has been done to try to fix Rikers?Shortly after taking office, Mayor Bill de Blasio said that ending the pervasive violence at Rikers was a top priority of his administration, calling it a moral obligation. He outlined a host of changes the city has been putting in place at Rikers, including allocating $15.1 million to triple the number of surveillance cameras at the city’s jails, to 10,000. Many of the most brutal attacks at Rikers go on in areas without cameras.The city has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to to expand programs for inmates with mental illnesses and to better train correction officers to handle them. The Correction Department has ended the use of solitary confinement for all inmates under 22 years old and allocated funds to expand public health services throughout the criminal justice system, with the aim of diverting more people with mental health and substance abuse problems from Rikers.Why is the city planning to close Rikers?Despite the resources devoted to fixing Rikers, violence continues to spiral out of control, driven by gang rivalries, management issues and the miserable conditions in the jails, among other things. Over the last several years, a grass-roots campaign by criminal justice reform activists, former inmates and local politicians have held protests demanding that the jail complex be shut down. On March 31, a commission led by Jonathan Lippman, New York State’s former chief judge, and created by Melissa Mark-Viverito, the City Council speaker, released a report outlining steps to closing Rikers. The plan, which the mayor largely supports, calls for cutting the current daily jail population of 10,000 in half and moving the remaining inmates to new jails across the city. The Correction Department currently operates three borough jails in Manhattan, Brooklyn and the Bronx.