http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/16/health/policy/16health.html
In Health Care Lawsuits, Questions About Partisanship in Court - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Reform and Reorganization,Courts,Politics and Government,Law and Legislation
Dec. 15, 2010
4970
PENSACOLA, Fla. — With a loose web of conservative plaintiffs leading the charge, and judicial rulings breaking thus far along ideological lines, the drive to scuttle the Obama health care law is once again highlighting the role of partisanship in America’s courts.Legal scholars say there is nothing new and nothing particularly insidious about the use of the federal courts to revisit divisive policy debates once they have moved beyond Congress.What is different about the health care cases, they say, is that multiple filings in diverse districts have resulted in a constitutional conflict over a landmark law even before it has taken full effect. Ideologically driven disagreements are rare among judges at the lower court level, they say, but do arise in cases where the issues are novel and highly charged.On Thursday morning, the battle moves here to Pensacola, where attorneys general and governors from 20 states — all Republicans but one — face off against the Justice Department in a hearing before Judge Roger Vinson of Federal District Court. Judge Vinson has been hostile to the law in preliminary opinions and could become the second judge to find that a central provision is unconstitutional.Judge Henry E. Hudson, who sits in Richmond, Va., ruled on Monday that the law’s requirement that most Americans obtain health insurance exceeded Congress’s constitutional authority. That created a conflict with recent opinions by two other district court judges who upheld the same provision.In the meantime, the rollout of the law will continue. Judge Hudson did not suspend any part of it pending appeal, as the insurance requirement does not take effect until 2014. The Supreme Court is expected to settle the dispute before then.Like the Florida case, the Virginia lawsuit was filed by a Republican, Attorney General Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II. The list of other plaintiffs and law firms challenging aspects of the act in roughly two dozen cases reads like an index of conservative and libertarian interest groups: the American Center for Law and Justice, the Goldwater Institute, Liberty University, the Thomas More Law Center, the Pacific Justice Institute and the Pacific Legal Foundation, among others.The sweeping health care law, which aims to make coverage available to more than 30 million uninsured Americans, passed in March without a single Republican vote.The Florida and Virginia challenges to the law were filed in courthouses where conservative judges prevail, and where appeals would flow to the country’s most conservative circuits. Scores of Republicans in Congress have signed supporting briefs, as have conservative advocacy groups.Many of the plaintiff groups were created to press legal challenges precisely like the health care case, as the American Civil Liberties Union and similar groups do from the left.For instance, the Thomas More Law Center in Ann Arbor, Mich., which is appealing a health care ruling it lost in Detroit, is known for its unsuccessful defense of a Pennsylvania school district that hoped to teach “intelligent design” as an alternative to evolution. The Goldwater Institute, which has filed a health care lawsuit in Phoenix, is also challenging public campaign financing in Arizona in a case headed to the United States Supreme Court.Although there seems to be little coordination among the litigants or common fund-raising efforts, the groups’ leaders are often explicit in equating their constitutional concerns with their political goals.Nick Dranias, director of the Center for Constitutional Government at the Goldwater Institute, said his conservative group was doing its part by challenging a provision that creates an independent budgeting commission for Medicaid and Medicare.“We’re of the opinion here that the health care plan will not die in a single sweep,” Mr. Dranias said. “It will take a thousand cuts.”But others said it was frustrating that politics sometimes obscured what they saw as legitimate constitutional concerns.“I wish I could get Democrats to accept that this is not a partisan fight,” said Timothy Sandefur, a lawyer for the Pacific Legal Foundation, which is pressing its lawsuit in the District of Columbia. “This is a fight about how far the government can reach.”The two federal judges who have upheld the law were appointed by President Bill Clinton, a Democrat. Judge Hudson and Judge Vinson were appointed by Republican presidents — George W. Bush and Ronald Reagan, respectively.Judge Hudson has deep Republican roots as a state and federal prosecutor in Northern Virginia. He is also a passive minority owner of a Republican political consulting firm, Campaign Solutions Inc. Among its former clients is Mr. Cuccinelli, the attorney general who is the plaintiff in the Virginia case. Mr. Cuccinelli stopped using the firm this year after news accounts disclosed Judge Hudson’s investment.Although the science is imprecise and often disputed, some scholars have found patterns of partisan divisions at all levels of the federal judiciary, based on the appointing president. At the district court level, there is generally a high degree of consensus among judges in similar cases, except when they confront polarizing constitutional questions like abortion, campaign finance and now health care.“When the law is fairly clear, politics don’t matter much,” said Mark A. Hall, a professor of law and public health at Wake Forest University. “But when the law is unsettled, inchoate, undeveloped, let’s say, it’s natural that judges’ political, social and economic views will shape how they see things.”Andrew D. Martin, a professor of law and political science at Washington University in St. Louis, has studied the influence of ideology on judicial decisions. “Where district judges are presented with questions of first impression and have to make the type of constitutional judgments the Supreme Court does all the time, it’s not at all surprising to see those choices line up along party lines,” Professor Martin said.Liberal critics of Judge Hudson’s ruling have been quick to highlight his background, and to tweak conservatives.“It’s ironic, when Sarah Palin and others decry activist judges every other day, that a Bush appointee would make new law that strikes a critical element of a law properly enacted by Congress,” said Neera Tanden, a health policy expert at the Center for American Progress, a liberal research group.Representative Pete Stark, a California Democrat who leads the Ways and Means subcommittee on health, added, “Apparently Republicans are now for judicial activism after they were against it.”But David B. Rivkin Jr., a Republican lawyer from Washington who represents the plaintiffs in the Pensacola case, said those who label judges by presidential appointment “are delegitimizing the judiciary.” Mr. Rivkin said that it was “a matter of accident and irrelevance” that the health care rulings had broken down along such lines and that he had “not heard a single partisan remark” from his clients.“The people who brought this lawsuit,” he said, “are all about the law.”