http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/us/politics/hillary-clinton-to-outline-economic-policy-on-monday.html
Hillary Clinton Will Call for Economic Policy Changes to Lift Middle-Class Wages - The New York Times
Clinton  Hillary Rodham,American Federation of Teachers,Endorsements,Organized Labor,Presidential Election of 2016,Weingarten  Randi,Income Inequality,United States Economy
July 11, 2015
3782
A major teachers’ union voted on Saturday to give Hillary Rodham Clinton an early endorsement for president, a boost to her pro-labor credentials as she prepares to outline in more detail an economic vision focused on lifting middle-class incomes and tries to fend off a stronger-than-expected challenge from the left.The endorsement from the American Federation of Teachers was not a surprise. The group is led by Randi Weingarten, a longtime ally of Mrs. Clinton, and backed her in her losing primary battle against Barack Obama in 2008.But the union’s support comes at an opportune moment for Mrs. Clinton, who on Monday plans to give her first major speech on the economy, designed in part to neutralize criticism from her leading Democratic challenger, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Mr. Sanders has surged in the polls by appealing to the populist anger of many Democrats over economic issues.Mrs. Clinton will present a stark assessment of a middle class whose weekly earnings have virtually stalled for 15 years, and she will criticize “trickle-down” Republican policies as having contributed to a vast concentration of wealth among the richest Americans, according to campaign aides. They offered a preview of the speech, to be delivered at the New School in New York, on the condition of anonymity.The emphasis on what economists have called “the great wage slowdown” of the 21st century is the result of Mrs. Clinton’s months of conversations with more than 200 domestic policy experts and dozens of economists. She believes that increasing the wages of average Americans to reduce income inequality is the “defining economic challenge of our time,” a campaign aide said. To that end, Mrs. Clinton will present proposals that include paid family medical leave, an increase in the federal minimum wage and incentives for corporations to increase profit-sharing programs. She will also praise President Obama’s plan to make more workers eligible for overtime pay.Mrs. Clinton will highlight the economic record of the administration of her husband, former President Bill Clinton, when median family income, adjusted for inflation, increased to $56,080 in 1999 from $48,884 in 1993, according to census data. But she will also lay out a vision that contrasts with Mr. Clinton’s message of self-reliance and his assertion that the era of big government was over.Mrs. Clinton will also propose more investment in infrastructure, tax relief for small businesses, better access to child care, assistance to make college more affordable, stronger support for collective bargaining and tax increases on the wealthiest Americans.Many of these proposals are part of the economic agenda pressed on Mrs. Clinton by union leaders, in particular Richard Trumka, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Mr. Trumka has been privately urging individual unions like the teachers’ federation to hold off any endorsements until they are satisfied that this agenda has been fully embraced.But in an interview, Ms. Weingarten said the membership overwhelmingly supported Mrs. Clinton, which became clear in two town hall meetings and two polls of the membership in the last six weeks.The economic team that advised Mrs. Clinton included Jake Sullivan, Ann O’Leary and Maya Harris from her campaign; Neera Tanden, the president of the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank, and the policy director of Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign; and the former White House advisers Gene Sperling and Alan S. Blinder.The liberal economists Joseph E. Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics who has written extensively about inequality, and Alan B. Krueger, a co-author of “Inequality in America” and a professor at Princeton, also influenced Mrs. Clinton.Campaign aides said Mrs. Clinton planned to use Monday’s speech to present her overall assessment of the economy. She will delve more deeply into specifics, including her plans to change the tax code, regulate Wall Street and curb corporations’ emphasis on short-term profits rather than long-term investment in employees, in a series of future speeches, they said.It remains to be seen whether Mrs. Clinton’s emphasis on wage growth to alleviate income inequality will be enough to allay growing concerns over economic disparity. In a New York Times/CBS News poll conducted in late May, two-thirds of Americans said they thought the distribution of money and wealth in this country should be more even.Two of Mrs. Clinton’s opponents for the Democratic presidential nomination, Mr. Sanders and former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland, are trying to appeal to liberals concerned that Mrs. Clinton will not go far enough in addressing inequality and that her $200,000 paid speeches to Wall Street have made her overly cozy with the top 1 percent.Both Mr. Sanders and Mr. O’Malley met with the teachers’ union. At her meeting, Mrs. Clinton said teachers shouldn’t be the “scapegoat” for society’s ills — an acknowledgment that education policy remains one of the few areas of unsettled debate within the Democratic Party. President Obama’s education agenda has often infuriated teachers’ unions, and last year the head of the National Education Association, another union representing teachers, called for the secretary of education, Arne Duncan, to be fired.Months ago, Ms. O’Leary, an adviser to Mrs. Clinton, said the candidate would listen to both sides in the education debate. In a statement after the endorsement from the American Federation of Teachers, Mrs. Clinton said that teachers’ voices “and voices of all workers are essential to this country.”