https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/world/middleeast/talk-grows-about-who-will-succeed-palestinians-fading-mahmoudabbas.html
Talk Grows About Who Will Succeed Palestinians’ Fading Mahmoud Abbas - The New York Times
Palestinians,Abbas  Mahmoud,Palestine Liberation Organization,Palestinian Authority,Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,Hamas,Arafat  Yasir
Feb. 27, 2016
8683
RAMALLAH, West Bank —  The past five months of Palestinian attacks on Israeli Jews have undermined the already weak political position of Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, who rules ineffectively over a divided people and failing institutions.The attacks that have killed more than two dozen Israelis and several others are an angry, frustrated response among Palestinian youth to ongoing Israeli occupation of the West Bank and expansion of its Jewish settlements, even as Mr. Abbas’s Palestinian Authority continues to cooperate with the Israelis on security and other matters.Talk of who will replace the nearly 81-year-old Mr. Abbas, and when, has surged. Arab countries like Egypt, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have provided financial and political support to Abbas rivals, including the former Gaza strongman, Muhammad Dahlan, now in exile in Abu Dhabi. Nathan Thrall, a senior analyst for the International Crisis Group, recently published a piece titled “The End of the Abbas Era.” There is discussion now of a more collective leadership, perhaps led by Nasser al-Kidwa, a nephew of the revered Yasir Arafat and a former foreign minister and Palestinian representative to the United Nations, alongside Majid Faraj, the current intelligence chief, and Salam Fayyad, the former prime minister and finance minister.Mr. Faraj, who was born in 1962, is highly considered by both the United States and Israel as a discreet and trustworthy partner. He recently told Defense News that his forces had disrupted at least 200 attacks against Israel since October. That led to criticism from Hamas, the Islamist rival to Mr. Abbas’s Fatah Party and organizer of some of the attacks, and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, but some Palestinians understood it as an effort to save Palestinian lives, since scores have been killed by Israelis during attacks or attempts.Mr. Fayyad, who never joined Fatah, is also respected by Israel and by the West, but has been cast out by Mr. Abbas as a perceived threat to his rule. Names of other potential successors also circulate, including Jibril Rajoub, a former Palestinian security boss who is said to have support from Qatar, and in January called on Mr. Abbas to name a deputy.Mr. Dahlan’s name always surfaces. Now in lavish exile in Abu Dhabi, Mr. Dahlan, 54, was expelled by Mr. Abbas from Fatah in 2011 after Mr. Dahlan accused him, bizarrely, of helping to murder Mr. Arafat. Mr. Dahlan has a reputation for corruption but is well funded, reportedly with backing from Egypt and the Emirates, speaks Hebrew and English, and is believed to pump money into Palestinian refugee camps and Fatah’s militant wing, the Tanzim, which has sometimes clashed with the security forces.The other inescapable figure is Marwan Barghouti, 56, sometimes called the Palestinian Mandela for his long period in an Israeli prison and his efforts to bring Hamas and Fatah together. Mr. Barghouti is the only Fatah leader who outpolls the Hamas leader in Gaza, Ismail Haniya, when Palestinians are surveyed about an Abbas successor.Saeb Erekat, whom Mr. Abbas installed in September as secretary general of the Palestine Liberation Organization, told the German broadcaster Deutsche Welle this month that he would support Mr. Barghouti should he run for president.But Mr. Barghouti is serving five consecutive life terms for murder, so he may be less candidate than kingmaker, operating from behind bars through his influential wife, Fadwa, and a network of supporters.Mr. Abbas might go sooner rather than later, said a former Palestinian negotiator who spoke on the condition of anonymity in order to be frank. Facing this new wave of violence, Mr. Abbas is typically paralyzed, said this former negotiator. “He can neither support it nor oppose it,” he explained, “so he shuts up and does nothing, which further enhances the perception that drives all this, that he and Fatah have produced nothing and will produce nothing, and that they are useless.”A December poll by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research found that 65 percent of Palestinians wanted Mr. Abbas to resign. A similar portion favored another armed intifada, having lost faith in a negotiated peace and the Oslo accords on which Mr. Abbas has staked his career. “Abu Mazen has achieved nothing,” Sheikh Taha Qattanani, 43, said in a recent interview. “We Palestinians deserve a stronger leadership, regardless of whether it’s Fatah or Hamas.”Ramiz Hassouna, 45, a Fatah supporter, said: “Now Fatah has no strategy or plan for the Palestinian people, and Fatah members have lost their dedication to the land and to the Palestinian cause. They’re more interested in their bank accounts — money for them, and for Abu Mazen and his family.”While most believe Mr. Abbas intends to die in office, his isolation is increasing. “Abu Mazen is like a tree in the wind, with leaves blowing off everywhere,” said a former aide. “He thinks everyone is listening to him, but no one is listening anymore.”Palestinian institutions and finances have deteriorated, with a 2015 budget deficit estimated around $700 million. Fatah and Hamas remain as divided as ever, with Fatah running the West Bank under an Israeli umbrella and Gaza securely in the hands of Hamas. Mr. Abbas and his allies have grown old in office without bringing in younger Palestinians.Writing in the Gulf News this month, Diana Buttu, a former Palestinian negotiator, said these failures “are not solely the fault” of Mr. Abbas, but also rest “on those who continue to allow this deteriorating and divided situation to exist.” Still, Ms. Buttu said the president’s “rule has been dismally marked by deflecting blame onto others, consolidating powers unto himself and destroying Palestinian institutions.”The political weakness of Mr. Abbas became painfully clear in September, when he called a meeting of the Palestinian National Council after removing another former ally and now critic, Yasser Abed Rabbo, whom he accused of conspiring with Mr. Dahlan and Mr. Fayyad.Mr. Abbas had called the session, the first since 1996, to “realign” the P.L.O.’s Executive Committee and banish Mr. Abed Rabbo. But it never materialized. Mr. Abbas also said he would make an important declaration about Palestinian tactics and hinted he would dismantle the Palestinian Authority. But he did neither. At the time, Tawfiq Tirawi, a member of Fatah’s Central Committee, said there was an internal struggle over nominations.But in another sign of the sensitivity about succession, Mr. Tirawi, along with other key Fatah members like Qadura Fares, refused interview requests.“We worry that the Palestinian Authority is getting weaker,” said Gilad Erdan, Israel’s minister of public security and strategic affairs. “It’s very hard to decide who will be the leader because if you say who you prefer, you damage him in the eyes of those there.”