https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/us/politics/obama-supreme-court-aca-ruling-health-care.html
Obama Gains Vindication and Secures Legacy With Health Care Ruling - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court (US),Obama  Barack,Decisions and Verdicts,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Republican Party,Boehner  John A,United States Politics and Government
June 25, 2015
5791
WASHINGTON —  For years, President Obama has faced the sneers of political adversaries who called his health care law Obamacare and assailed his effort to build a legacy that has been the aspiration of every Democratic president since Harry S. Truman.But on Thursday, Mr. Obama walked into the Rose Garden to accept vindication as the Supreme Court, for a second time, affirmed the legality of a part of the Affordable Care Act. Mr. Obama said the law “is working exactly as it’s supposed to” and called for an end to the vitriolic politics that have threatened it.“The point is, this is not an abstract thing anymore,” Mr. Obama told reporters, with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. smiling broadly beside him. “This is not a set of political talking points. For all the misinformation campaigns, all the doomsday predictions, all the talk of death panels and job destruction, for all the repeal attempts — this law is now helping tens of millions of Americans.”Mr. Obama’s plea to stop “refighting battles that have been settled again and again and again” met on Thursday with immediate resistance. House Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, promised to “do everything we can” to undermine the law. Jeb Bush, a Republican candidate for president, vowed “to repeal and replace this flawed law” if he succeeds Mr. Obama in the Oval Office.Mr. Boehner said he will continue to move forward with a lawsuit against the president that argues that Mr. Obama overstepped his legal authority in carrying out the health care act, although the case is in its early stages at the district court level and could take years to come before the Supreme Court. Other Republicans mused on Thursday about using parliamentary maneuvers to chip away at the law.But for Mr. Obama, the ruling was a personal affirmation of the wisdom of engaging in a costly political fight that began almost as soon as he took office. The court’s ruling, Mr. Obama said Thursday, cements the Affordable Care Act in American history as the logical extension of Social Security and Medicare.“This generation of Americans chose to finish the job,” Mr. Obama said, reading from one of two sets of remarks — one written as if the Supreme Court upheld the subsidies and another as if the court did not. Cody Keenan, Mr. Obama’s chief speechwriter, had prepared both sets before the court announced its decision.Once the decision was announced, and just before walking into the Rose Garden, Mr. Obama signed the set of remarks for Mr. Keenan that were written as if the court had ruled against the administration. “Didn’t need this one, brother!” Mr. Obama scrawled across the bottom.The White House soon released photographs of Mr. Obama and Denis McDonough, the president’s chief of staff, performing celebratory fist pumps outside the Oval Office.The court ruling came as Mr. Obama is heading toward another major legislative accomplishment, the passage of powerful new authority that will allow him to finish negotiations on a historic trade agreement with Pacific Rim nations. That bill, which he pushed over the objections of many in his party, will be on his desk for his signature this week.But the Supreme Court decision is the bigger victory at home for Mr. Obama, whose domestic policy legacy has always depended on the Affordable Care Act’s becoming a permanent part of the American health care system by the time he leaves office in 2017.Unable to halt the implementation of the law in Congress, Republican lawmakers, governors and others turned to the courts, betting that successful legal challenges would prevent Mr. Obama from establishing the Affordable Care Act as an accepted companion to Medicare and Medicaid.Instead, the two main legal challenges to the law have largely failed. In 2012, the Supreme Court slowed the law’s expansion of Medicaid, but let stand the individual mandate that requires people to purchase health insurance. And in Thursday’s ruling, the court said the federal government could provide subsidies to people purchasing coverage through a federal insurance marketplace.The court decision ended months of speculation and worries among administration officials, health experts, lawmakers from both parties and insurance company executives about the potential for chaos in the insurance markets if the justices had gone the other way.Officials had predicted a cascading series of events if the subsidies were invalidated: Premiums for millions of people would have doubled or tripled. That would have forced many to drop insurance altogether, causing insurance companies to drastically raise rates or stop selling plans. In the worst-case scenario, officials predicted a collapse of the individual health insurance market in many states.Republicans said they would have welcomed such a ruling because it would have forced Mr. Obama to negotiate with them and, they hoped, to abandon the Affordable Care Act for something more to the liking of conservatives. Mr. Obama had repeatedly said that Republicans — who supported the filing of the court case — would be responsible for addressing the effect if the court ruled against the administration.The court’s decision means that Mr. Obama’s administration will continue to enroll people in private, but subsidized, health insurance. About 10 million people have already bought insurance from state or federal marketplaces. Officials are hoping to enroll millions more by the time the president’s term ends.Despite writing the decision, Chief Justice John Roberts also made a point of chiding the lawmakers who drafted the law and, by association, the president who pushed them to do it.Early in his tenure, the president had said he hoped for bipartisan cooperation on fashioning a new approach to health care that would lower costs for the government while providing health coverage to the tens of millions of uninsured Americans. But when the Republicans balked, the Democrats — who then held majorities in the House and Senate — went ahead and passed the law.Chief Justice Roberts said it would be “charitable” to accuse the authors of “imprecision,” and noted that the bill was written in secret and passed with special parliamentary procedures that limited opportunities for input or revision. He said the resulting law “does not reflect the kind of care and deliberation that one might expect of such significant legislation.”Chief Justice Roberts quoted a 1947 lecture by Justice Felix Frankfurter, in which he refers to a cartoon of a senator telling his colleagues: “I admit this new bill is too complicated to understand. We’ll just have to pass it to find out what it means.” It appeared to be a pointed allusion to a statement then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi made about the health care legislation, which is often cited derisively by Republicans as proof that the measure was rammed through without proper consideration.But, Chief Justice Roberts added, “Despite all that, we must do our best to understand the statute as a whole.”