http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/28/us/politics/money-flows-down-ballot-as-donald-trump-is-abandoned-by-big-donors-even-himself.html
Money Flows Down Ballot as Donald Trump Is Abandoned by Big Donors (Even Himself) - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Campaign Finance,Political Action Committees,Federal Election Commission,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,United States,Elections  House of Representatives,Elections  Senate
Oct. 27, 2016
8264
With Donald J. Trump facing a potential rout at the hands of Hillary Clinton, a river of cash from some of the Republican Party’s biggest donors has begun to flow down to Senate and House races in the final days of the 2016 campaign.Disclosures filed with the Federal Election Commission on Thursday revealed tens of millions of dollars in late donations and transfers to Republican “super PACs” focused on down-ballot races, suggesting a significant last-ditch effort to protect Senate and House candidates against Mrs. Clinton’s surge. Relatively little new money has come into outside groups supporting Mr. Trump.And Mr. Trump appears to have lost the support of his biggest donor: himself.Mr. Trump contributed no cash and just $31,000 worth of rent and staff salaries to his campaign in the first three weeks of October, a fraction of the $2-million-a-month self-funding pace he had set since winning the Republican presidential nomination.As of mid-October, according to the disclosure, Mrs. Clinton was raising $2.8 million each day and had $62 million in her campaign account, four times as much as Mr. Trump.“I hear that people are concerned that Hillary’s going to be president, so you’d better get Republicans in the Senate so you have a firewall,” said Stanley Hubbard, a Minnesota billionaire who became one of the country’s biggest Trump donors this year. “I think people are done giving. It’s too late.”Thursday’s filings are a clear sign that the Republican establishment has all but abandoned Mr. Trump — a painful concession that Mrs. Clinton’s electoral advantage may be insurmountable. And the biggest beneficiaries are Republicans in the Senate and the House, who have been goaded by Democrats in recent weeks to declare allegiance to the Republican nominee or renounce him.In the first three weeks of October, ESA Fund, a super PAC tied to the family of Joe Ricketts, the TD Ameritrade founder, took in $5.5 million, more than half of it from Mr. Ricketts’s wife, Marlene. The group’s advertising in that time has focused on the Senate races in Louisiana and New Hampshire and a House race in Nevada.The Wisconsin roofing magnate Diane Hendricks, whom Mr. Trump named to his economic policy council in August, poured $4 million this month into a lesser-known group called the Reform America Fund. The super PAC’s chief focus in the past two weeks has been attacking Russ Feingold, the former Democratic senator who is seeking to reclaim his old seat from Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin.And the Senate Leadership Fund, a group closely tied to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, took in $18 million during the first three weeks of October, much of it transferred from an affiliated nonprofit group that does not disclose its donors. On Thursday night, the group announced that it had taken in an astonishing $25 million during the past week; the source of that money will remain secret until after Election Day.“For the past few weeks, Democrats have been pouring money down ballot as they appear to view the presidential race as being in the bank,” said Ian Prior, a spokesman for the Senate Leadership Fund. “Fortunately our donors were willing to saddle up and ride into the final battle of the election to try and hold the Senate, even against tough odds.”Democrats have also enjoyed a late surge of money into groups supporting Senate candidates. Senate Majority PAC, a group founded by former aides to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, reported raising $19.2 million during the first three weeks of October, much of it from wealthy liberals who are also investing in Mrs. Clinton’s campaign.The group is resuming advertising in Florida, where the Democratic Senate candidate, Representative Patrick Murphy, has struggled in recent weeks against Senator Marco Rubio.“With the success of our fund-raising, we’re able to put additional resources into the state,” said Susan McCue, the group’s co-chairwoman.The few conservative billionaires who rallied around Mr. Trump appear to have closed the spigot. Rebuilding America Now, which took in $4.4 million from a few wealthy Republicans in September, raised $214,000 in the first weeks of October. Make America Number 1, a super PAC controlled by the family of the New York investor and multimillionaire Robert Mercer, raised just $25 — which seems, at first glance, like a typo by Mr. Mercer’s standards.His family was influential in revamping Mr. Trump’s campaign over the summer, but Mr. Mercer has invested barely any money in his own pro-Trump PAC since July.