https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/17/upshot/what-a-clinton-landslide-map-would-look-like-and-how-trump-could-still-rally.html
What a Clinton Landslide Map Would Look Like, and How Trump Could Still Rally - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Kasich  John R,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party
Aug. 16, 2016
6247
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor in New York, discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.Toni You wrote Monday: “The possibility of a landslide victory for Mrs. Clinton — one larger than any since 1984 in the national popular vote — is larger than the chance that Mr. Trump will pull it out.”I’ll post a map of the landslide that would occur if Hillary Clinton won every state where she’s leading in The Upshot forecast model, in addition to one of the red states (Georgia) where she’s competitive. She would beat Donald Trump in electoral votes, 363 to 175.But the argument for why the race isn’t over seems to boil down to:1) The polls are wrong (we can address that in a future discussion, because I have a feeling we’ll be hearing a lot more about this in the next few months).2) Republicans can come back into the fold, over issues like choosing Supreme Court justices. As you pointed out in your article, Republicans eventually came back to Gerald Ford in 1976, and Democrats to Hubert Humphrey in 1968, making those two elections extremely close. But whether they return may depend on No. 3 below.3) Trump could change his approach, becoming more disciplined and staying on message.4) Unexpected events, like national or world calamities, whether violence or economic shocks.Am I missing anything?Nate I guess I’d split No. 4 into two groups: exogenous shocks, like a major terrorist attack, and those that are related to the candidates, like revelations about the Clinton Foundation, emails or WikiLeaks.Toni But there’d be no guarantee that Trump would benefit from a terrorist attack, or at least benefit significantly.Nate Well, who knows what would happen. But that’s the point.I think it’s at least imaginable that it would reset the race on terms favorable to Trump, and give him another chance to present himself as a plausible president.Toni We just got a comment from a reader, David from Toledo, on Trump’s terrorism speech in Ohio:Nate I didn’t watch much of it. I do think that he’s lost his swagger, at least in the speeches and interviews that I’ve seen over the last week.Toni The latest reporting from Alexander Burns and Maggie Haberman essentially shows a candidacy in crisis:Trump has said he won’t change, and it seems far-fetched at this point to think he could.He loves to go on the attack. The Upshot, I think, has documented this well, with a compilation of his Twitter insults, conceived by our colleague Kevin Quealy. By now, people think they know Donald Trump. But you don’t quite get the full effect unless you look at this file. Whether you’re a fan of Trump or not, it’s stunning.Nate It’s interesting, because back when this was published, I think it was mainly viewed as something that was pretty hilarious: Trump’s antics were entertaining. That’s not how it seems to go over anymore.Toni Insulting Chuck Todd by calling him “Sleepy Eyes,” to take just one example, just seems bizarre. And now we’ve learned, from an analysis, that the insults on his Twitter feed are generally from him, and that the noninsults seem mostly to be from staffers.Nate  I think the big picture here is that Trump’s shtick has never worked well with the general electorate, and it seems to play worse than it used to, for good measure, and I think he knows it. And he doesn’t know what else to do.Toni Let’s imagine that John Kasich or Marco Rubio were the nominee. I think it’s overstated to say that they’d be in the lead. But they’d certainly be closer, right?Nate Well, I think those are pretty different cases.I think Marco Rubio was a fairly generic Republican, who might have had a little extra appeal to Latino voters but who would have had a lot of the same vulnerabilities that Mitt Romney had among working-class white voters and social liberals. I think it would be a pretty classic “Democrat” v. “Republican” race, and I think you can make an argument either way about who would have been favored.John Kasich, in my view, was not a generic Republican. Now, that’s why he never won a state other than his own. I don’t think it’s very realistic to imagine that he could have won the nomination without adopting a tone that would have been more problematic in the general election. If he could have, I think he might have had a lot of upside against Mrs. Clinton, who would have had to spend a lot of time and money trying to turn him into a generic Republican.Toni I’m sure Clinton’s team is happy not to face Kasich. But what shot did Kasich have? Liberal editorial boards of the mainstream media loved him!Nate I don’t think John Kasich could have won the nomination without significantly cutting into his own general election appeal. And that’s a lot of the G.O.P.’s problem right now.Toni That makes sense. Trump won for a reason. His attacking style worked with the G.O.P. primary electorate. But this gets us back to: Can Trump change for the general election? If he can’t, it makes his road extremely difficult. The Wall Street Journal editorialized: “If they can’t get Mr. Trump to change his act by Labor Day, the G.O.P. will have no choice but to write off the nominee as hopeless and focus on salvaging the Senate and House and other down-ballot races.”Can he stay calm during the debates? Can he stay calm as other Republicans defect and criticize him?Nate I have no idea. And I don’t think anyone else knows for sure either.Toni Clinton and Biden campaigned in Scranton on Monday. (It almost doesn’t feel like an official Cohn-Monkovic chat unless we use the word “Scranton.” Drink.) We’ve talked about Scranton as an example of where Trump could make gains among working-class whites, with people struggling in the new economy in the Rust Belt.And now? Pennsylvania seems out of reach. Colorado seems out of reach. Virginia seems out of reach. Wisconsin seems out of reach. I think New Hampshire may well be out of reach. That would put Clinton over the top — more than 270 electoral votes — if she retained the usual blue states, even if she lost Florida and Ohio and Iowa and Nevada.Nate Well, Clinton’s up by eight percentage points or so in the national polls right now. So, yes, most of the battleground states are out of reach for Trump. I still think that if Trump ever did mount a comeback or win, it would probably involve outsize gains in a place like Scranton.Toni Which brings us back to the circumstances through which Trump could rally. He’ll have a chance at the debates, although it doesn’t seem likely that he can make much headway there — Clinton has proved to be a good debater. And it doesn’t seem that he will fundamentally change his approach. And that leaves us with external events.Nate I will say that if Trump studied up, he could blow past low expectations.Toni Some readers didn’t get your recent Ryan Leaf/Trump football analogy. Ryan Leaf’s career ... those would be really low expectations for Donald Trump.Nate I was watching some YouTube clips of Ryan Leaf. It was billed Ryan Leaf “highlights,” from this game in his second season when he almost won and threw a few touchdown passes. The commentator at one point says something like: ‘Well, they’re going to hold on to him for another week now’ — even though he completed less than half of his passes in the game. It looked like progress.Toni The Chargers did hold onto him, for the rest of the year, but that was his final season in San Diego. It didn’t end well.In the last few weeks, Nate and Toni have discussed whether Republicans actually need the Hispanic vote (not as much as you might think, but what about the future?) and Mr. Trump’s contention that the election will be rigged.