http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/04/us/politics/state-focus-and-infusion-of-funding-buoy-gun-control-advocates.html
State Focus and Infusion of Funding Buoy Gun Control Advocates - The New York Times
Gun Control,States (US),Obama  Barack,Bloomberg  Michael R,United States Politics and Government,Connecticut,Delaware,National Rifle Assn,Everytown for Gun Safety,McPike  Jeremy (1975- ),Law and Legislation
Jan. 3, 2016
1758
ALEXANDRIA, Va. —  With President Obama poised to act on his own authority to try to stem gun violence, his gun control allies are using big-money donors and shifting tactics to try to remake the political landscape in the national gun debate, challenging and sometimes even besting the powerful National Rifle Association in state-by-state battles.The newfound momentum reflects a strategy to steer clear of a Republican-led Congress that has proved unwilling to touch existing federal gun laws after years of intense lobbying on both sides of the debate.With tens of millions of dollars to spend thanks to backers like Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, gun control groups have secured a number of surprising recent successes in Connecticut, Delaware and elsewhere. And they are now looking to state and local officials to win approval for tougher background checks and other measures from Nevada to Maine.The N.R.A. remains the dominant force in much of the country, spending more than $32.5 million last year on campaigns and lobbying. It has shown continued muscle in stopping new restrictions and loosening existing ones in many localities. But the political landscape has become more hotly contested as a result of the gun control groups’ shift in focus and infusion of cash, operatives on both sides say. The axiom that gun control is a losing political issue does not always hold true anymore.“The money was almost exclusively on the pro-gun side of the fence before, and we were always accused of spending our way to victory,” said Richard Feldman, a former N.R.A. executive who leads the Independent Firearms Owners Association. “Now the other side has these resources from Michael Bloomberg to get involved in these state and local races, something they didn’t have before.”The organization Everytown for Gun Safety — which received $36 million in contributions last year, with the biggest chunk coming from Mr. Bloomberg — has eclipsed a number of older gun control groups in publicity and influence. In its latest push, the group is funding an ad campaign for players from the National Basketball Association to speak out against gun violence.The group, created in 2014 after the slaughter in 2012 of 26 children and adults at an elementary school in Newtown, Conn., says its supporters have now grown to three million nationwide, including survivors of shootings, mayors, police officers, celebrities, and rank-and-file supporters. It has chapters in all 50 states, with registered lobbyists in 31 of them, adopting a structure used to great effectiveness by the N.R.A. itself. Mr. Bloomberg has pledged to spend at least $50 million of his own money in the group’s push for tougher gun restrictions — a level of spending that Jennifer Baker, an N.R.A. official, called “obscene.”In some races, gun control advocates are outspending the deep-pocketed N.R.A. And after the mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., and earlier rampages at a Planned Parenthood facility in Colorado, a community college in Oregon and a church in Charleston, S.C., gun control advocates said they planned to expand their push for stiffer local restrictions still further. They believe their cause was buoyed last month when the Supreme Court let stand an ordinance in a Chicago suburb that bans semiautomatic assault weapons.Mr. Obama is expected to move ahead as soon as this week with a series of executive actions modifying federal gun laws. On Tuesday, gun control activists are expected to gather at the White House to discuss possible action, and on Thursday — a day before the fifth anniversary of the shooting of former Representative Gabrielle Giffords in Arizona — he will participate in a town-hall-style meeting on gun violence that will be shown on CNN. But the measures he is considering would be a modest tweaking of the law compared with the more sweeping changes that gun control groups are pushing for at the state and local levels.The growing importance of state gun laws was made clear last month when Gov. Dannel P. Malloy of Connecticut announced that he would act on his own to bar anyone on the government’s terrorism watch lists from buying a gun. Congress refused to take that step nationwide.Mr. Malloy, a Democrat, said in a telephone interview that afterward, other governors looking to follow his lead on the issue had contacted him.Changing gun policies “is easier to do on a state-by-state basis than it is on a national level, because Congress is gerrymandered to such an extent,” Mr. Malloy said.Gun control supporters gained another big win in Virginia last month when the state’s attorney general, Mark R. Herring, a Democrat, barred anyone who holds a concealed-handgun permit in 25 other states from using it to carry a firearm in Virginia.Virginia, despite its reputation as a pro-gun state, also produced a victory for gun control supporters last month when Jeremy McPike, a Democrat from suburban Washington and a political novice running on a gun control platform, was elected to the State Senate. Mr. McPike’s campaign was helped by $1.5 million from Everytown. The group blanketed the area with ads promoting Mr. McPike’s record on gun control, and he was elected despite an F grade from the N.R.A.“It takes muscle to counteract the muscle of the N.R.A.,” he said in an interview.Mr. McPike grew up in a family of hunters, and as a volunteer firefighter he said many of his colleagues were vocal gun-rights advocates. But his views have been shaped by his own history: He said he remembered responding to an emergency call for a teenager who had accidentally shot himself in the groin, and he said his brother had committed suicide at the age of 16 with a family gun.“At some point, you can’t sit on the sidelines anymore,” he said. “You’ve got to find a way to effect change.”In the closing weeks of his race and two other campaigns in Virginia that hinged on guns, the N.R.A. and gun control groups all sent people to the local districts to rally voters. Candidates backed by the N.R.A. won both of the other races, helping Republicans hold a majority in the State Senate. The N.R.A. saw the results as a rebuke of Mr. Bloomberg’s organization.“They got their butts kicked in Virginia,” Ms. Baker said. “You spend all that money, and all you have to show for it is one win? That’s complete and utter failure.”Gun control advocates have not given up on Washington completely. They have met repeatedly with White House officials to urge Mr. Obama to issue an executive order to tighten some gun measures, and the president will meet with Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch and the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, on Monday to discuss his options. He is limited in what he can do, however, and the advocates see their best chance for change at the state level — particularly in pushing ballot initiatives that put gun control questions to voters.The shift away from Washington is rooted in Congress’s rejection in 2013 of expanded background checks that were proposed in the wake of the shootings in Newtown.Mr. Obama said the failure to pass gun control legislation after the Connecticut tragedy was one of the biggest disappointments of his presidency, and gun control advocates said the jolt from that rejection made them realize that changes were all but impossible in Congress.After that defeat, “we took a step back, and we realized we had to go state by state,” said John Feinblatt, the president of the Everytown group.Everytown’s big footprint, however, worries even some fellow gun control advocates. They say some local officials in Massachusetts, Rhode Island and elsewhere have resented the perception of a high-profile, billionaire liberal like Mr. Bloomberg trying to change their gun laws.“I see them as a lightning rod,” said an official with another gun control group, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of concerns about alienating supporters. “They’re stirring up this opposition, and the N.R.A. as a result is putting more resources into its state strategy.”Mr. Feinblatt said Everytown was changing the nature of the debate. He likened the focus on the states to the push for same-sex marriage, which began with a small number of states approving it before the Supreme Court struck down the Defense of Marriage Act in 2013 and it spread more quickly.The strategy carries risks. The N.R.A. has five million members and boasts of a political base that is willing to turn out at the polls for a single issue: gun control.With policies varying from one jurisdiction to the next, each side has a scorecard of victories to show why it believes it is winning the debate.The N.R.A. points to 95 bills passed last year nationwide that it considers favorable to gun enthusiasts and hunters.Mr. Bloomberg’s group can point to laws passed in nine states last year to keep guns out of the hands of domestic abusers, the defeat of numerous bills that would have facilitated concealed-carry permits and, most critically, approval of a measure that expanded background checks in Oregon. It was the sixth state to pass a background check measure after the shootings in Newtown, and the 18th over all.In Delaware, Gov. Jack Markell, a Democrat, signed a measure in October aimed at keeping guns out of the hands of domestic abusers; it was personally pushed by Ms. Giffords, who started a gun safety group after she was shot in the head in a mass shooting in 2011.In Michigan, Gov. Rick Snyder, a Republican, vowed in November to veto — for a second time — a hotly debated bill that would allow permit-holders to carry concealed weapons in schools.The next big battleground is Nevada, where a record number of signatures set up a vote this year on an initiative to impose a statewide background check. After that on the list of targets is Maine, where gun control advocates say they are confident they will soon have enough signatures to get a background check initiative on the state ballot.N.R.A. officials say they are not worried.“We’ll see what happens,” Ms. Baker said. “We know they’re going to spend a lot of money, but I don’t see any groundswell of support.”