https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/08/arts/music/the-three-sisters-in-haim-release-days-are-gone.html
The Three Sisters in Haim Release ‘Days Are Gone’ - The New York Times
Music,Haim (Music Group),Haim  Alana,Haim  Este,Haim  Danielle,Haim
Sept. 6, 2013
6334
Before Haim was Haim, a rock band made up of three sisters, its members — Este, Danielle and Alana, surnamed Haim — were three-fifths of Rockinhaim, a covers band made up of three sisters and their parents.“Playing in a family band really was the best lesson in songwriting,” Danielle said one afternoon last month. “It taught us what classic songs were, how they worked.” The sisters were calling from Los Angeles, where they live and were raised, and they were on their way to the doctor — Este at the wheel — having finally become sick after a tumultuous summer on tour through Europe. Their doctor, for what it’s worth, is a distant relative, too.In Haim (rhymes with “rhyme”), Este, 27, plays bass; Danielle, 24, plays guitar; and Alana, the baby at 21, plays guitar and keyboards. Danielle sings lead, and the others harmonize. (The group’s drummer, Dash Hutton, is not known to have Haim blood.)Their parents were fans of Prince, Earth, Wind & Fire, the Cars, Tina Turner — the rock and soul of the late 1970s and early 1980s. “It’s not a conscious thing,” Danielle said, “but we definitely pulled from those influences.”Certainly, the songs on the group’s exuberant and riveting full-length debut album, “Days Are Gone” (Columbia), have a lot in common with the music of that time. It was produced largely by the band with Ariel Rechtshaid, who’s one of a small clique of recent savants who have figured out how to deliver the immediacy of pop but also the refined distance of indie rock.“Days Are Gone,” full of reverb, chubby synthesizers and crisp digitized percussion, harks back to the early to mid 1980s, when club music was making its mark on radio rock. The music is lean and direct, with enough nostalgic haze to pass for commentary.But Haim isn’t trying to be obscure, and pure pop courses through its history. The two older sisters were briefly in a prefab major-label pop group in the mid-2000s, and Alana recalled gazing longingly at the extravagant pop idols of the late 1990s and wondering, “Is that what it’s like to be a grown-up?”Not quite, but maybe a little. Pop stars don’t look the way they used to. Maybe there’s even hope for Mom and Dad. At shows, one of them may join the kids onstage for a bit. And at home, their father might knock on the door while they’re noodling around, “and he’ll say, ‘I have a great idea for a drum part,’ ” Danielle said. “Sometimes it works, and sometimes it’s like, ‘This is like Miami Sound Machine.’ ”