https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/21/us/politics/donald-trump-women.html
A 10th Woman Accuses Donald Trump of Inappropriate Touching - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Allred  Gloria,Women and Girls,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Debates (Political)
Oct. 20, 2016
6385
The day after Donald J. Trump said accusations of inappropriate sexual contact with nine women were “totally false,” a new accuser came forward on Thursday and described an encounter in which she said Mr. Trump grabbed her arm and fondled her breast.Karena Virginia, a yoga instructor and life coach from the New York region, said she was 27 at the time and was waiting for a car to take her home outside the United States Open tennis tournament in 1998.She overheard Mr. Trump, who she said she had never met, speaking to a group of men about her legs.Mr. Trump approached and grabbed her right arm, Ms. Virginia said. “Then his hand touched the right inside of my breast,” she added.She flinched, she recalled. Mr. Trump said, “Don’t you know who I am?”After her car pulled up, “my shock turned to shame,” Ms. Virginia said. “I felt ashamed that I was wearing a short dress and heels.”Ms. Virginia, the 10th woman to accuse Mr. Trump of inappropriate sexual advances since the release of a tape on which he boasted of such behavior, fought back tears while speaking at a news conference called by the activist lawyer Gloria Allred, who was a Hillary Clinton delegate at the Democratic National Convention in July in Philadelphia.A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, Jessica Ditto, called Ms. Allred a “discredited political operative” who “in another coordinated, publicity seeking attack with the Clinton campaign, will stop at nothing to smear Mr. Trump.”“Give me a break,” Ms. Ditto said in a statement. “Voters are tired of these circuslike antics and reject these fictional stories and the clear efforts to benefit Hillary Clinton.”At the presidential debate in Las Vegas on Wednesday, Mr. Trump accused the Clinton campaign of orchestrating the parade of women who have come forward in the past two weeks to accuse him of forcibly kissing and groping them. “I didn’t know any of these — I didn’t see these women,” Mr. Trump said.Ms. Allred, asked if she had been in contact with the Clinton campaign about Ms. Virginia, responded “100 percent no.” Ms. Virginia had contacted her independently, Ms. Allred said, after the leak of the 2005 “Access Hollywood” recording of Mr. Trump describing grabbing women by their genitals and forcing kisses on them.Ms. Allred held a similar event last week to introduce another accuser, a former “Apprentice” contestant named Summer Zervos.During Wednesday’s debate, Mr. Trump claimed the women’s stories had been “debunked,” and he accused them of seeking fame or being put up by the Clinton campaign. “And I didn’t even apologize to my wife, who’s sitting right here, because I didn’t do anything,” he said.The recording that surfaced 13 days ago, and the parade of accusers, have damaged Mr. Trump with voters like no other episode in his 16-month campaign, which has been full of seemingly disqualifying gaffes and statements.Ms. Virginia writes a self-improvement blog for The Huffington Post, where her biography describes her as a “lifestyle and wellness expert, TV personality, mom, empowerment guru for the modern world.”Ms. Virginia said that she had told her husband about her encounter with Mr. Trump, which took place when she was still single. It came up again, she said, when her husband asked why she did not enjoy dress shopping. For years she was “ashamed” to wear short dresses or high heels or other revealing clothes, she recalled.Reading from a statement, Ms. Virginia addressed the Republican candidate directly: “Mr. Trump, perhaps you do not remember me or what you did to me so many years ago. But I can assure you that I remember you and what you did to me as though it was yesterday. Your random moment of sexual pleasure came at my expense and affected me greatly.”