http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/30/fashion/30STELLA.html
The Many Faces of Stella Schnabel - The New York Times
Schnabel  Stella,Actors and Actresses,Movies
Dec. 29, 2010
3322
LEAVING the premier of “You Wont Miss Me,” in which Stella Schnabel plays an unstable actress recently released from a psychiatric hospital, a young woman was overheard to mutter to a friend, “Oh, Stella, she was just playing herself.”Really? And just which self would that be?In the hours that elapsed after her movie opened at the Cinema Village in Manhattan earlier this month, at least three distinct versions of Ms. Schnabel had emerged. There was Stella as Shelly, the film’s central character — abrasive, audacious and rabidly insecure; her Shelly smokes incessantly, rides roughshod over friends and insists on giving herself to a succession of feckless young men.There was sullen Stella, unsmiling and standoffish, staring down her audience at a post-screening question-and-answer session and refusing to answer queries about her next career move.And there was open-hearted Stella, swinging through glass doors of the Waverly Restaurant in the West Village the day after the premiere, sliding into a counter stool, chattering affably about her friends, family and career.“I wish there were more places in New York like this,” she said, glancing around wistfully as the restaurant, an archetypal New York City diner festooned in holiday tinsel, filled with oddly assorted regulars in winter wraps and seasonal revelers dressed in Santa Claus suits. “New York is becoming Yuppieville, and it’s boring,” she lamented.Was she slumming, having picked out a meeting place both hectic and homey enough to pass as a slice of Authentic New York? Ms. Schnabel, after all, is no Stella from the block. Her mother is Jacqueline Beaurang, who opened an Azzedine Alaïa boutique in SoHo in the late 1980s and is a designer herself. Her father is the painter and filmmaker Julian Schnabel, who has cast his daughter in several films, including “Basquiat,” “Before Night Falls” and, most recently, the heatedly debated “Miral,” told from the point of view of an orphaned Palestinian girl. That film, in which Ms. Schnabel takes on the emblematic role of a young Jewish woman, is scheduled for release in March.Ms. Schnabel, 27, is a member of that elite coterie of New Yorkers, graduates of Saint Ann’s School in Brooklyn, the spawning ground for Young Creatives like the actress Paz de la Huerta; the musician Michael Diamond; and friends of Ms. Schnabel, including the filmmaker Lena Dunham (“Tiny Furniture”), who had a brief role in “You Wont Miss Me,” and the fashion designer Zac Posen, whose front row Ms. Schnabel has graced.On the Web, Ms. Schnabel is most often portrayed as a privileged gadabout, one in a roster of “Arty Party People,” listed by Women’s Wear Daily, a crowd that frequents Bar Pitti and the Boom Boom Room and includes Ms. Schnabel’s sister, Lola, an artist and sometime filmmaker; her brother Vito, an art dealer and events producer; and fixtures of Manhattan’s haute bohemian party circuit like Chiara Clemente, Chloë Sevigny, Yvonne Force Villareal, Terry Richardson and Terence Koh. Ms. Schnabel herself has been romantically linked with Olivier Sarkozy, a French-American businessman and the half-brother of French President Nicolas Sarkozy.Given those associations, and her splashy pedigree, it is somewhat startling to find that with this — her first starring role in a film, directed by her friend and fellow Saint Ann’s alumna, Ry Russo-Young — Ms. Schnabel seems to have embarked on a serious career. “I was lucky enough to get opportunities” she said, referring to her work in her father’s films. “There are a lot of people who don’t get the chance to exercise these things.” She told her father nothing about the project. “This movie happened,” she insisted, “because I got up and made it with Ry.”She is well aware that her standing breeds resentment, particularly among inveterate society bashers, who portray her as a classier — and artier — Kim Kardashian. “She’s a real actress, don’t you know,” read a posting on Gawker last month. The Web site had earlier branded Ms. Schnabel a “scenester,” a label she detests. “If I put on a pair of blue jeans to go dancing,” she said, somewhat disingenuously, “they write about that, even though I’m no different from any other girl who may be dancing at a club.“If I wasn’t Julian Schnabel’s kid, I wouldn’t have to hear these things.”Fair enough. In conversation, she is no frivolous downtown princess, the girl you would most love to hate. Nor is she the willful, self-indulgent dilettante she embodies in “You Wont Miss Me.” Shelly, the screen alter ego she conceived with Ms. Russo-Young, is both warmly engaging and, at times, trash-mouthed, needy and repellent.So persuasive was Ms. Schnabel’s performance that, during the filming, a fellow actress mistook her improvised tirade in an Atlantic City hotel room for genuine hostility, Ms. Russo-Young recalled. “No, she is acting,” she was quick to assure the young woman.“Stella has a lot more empathy than Shelly Brown does,” Ms. Russo-Young said in an interview. She is miles apart from the character, she added, describing Shelly as “reckless, violent and addicted to confrontation.” She acknowledged, however, that “often with actors, it’s hard to know what they’re drawing on — what’s them and what’s not.”In “Rampart,” due out late next year, Ms. Schnabel plays a rookie policewoman opposite Woody Harrelson. So captivated was Oren Moverman, the film’s director, by her performance in “You Wont Miss Me” that he rewrote the part, originally conceived for a man, to exploit, he said, “the gorgeous raw quality to her acting.”On screen, Ms. Schnabel appears to draw on a bottomless reservoir of rage. “From the time she was very, very small, she seemed to be tortured and angry about some things,” her father said. “These things are in us before we ever get born. They leave a kind of psychogenetic imprint on you.” In his view, acting has lent Ms. Schnabel “a vehicle to both exercise, and exorcise, these kinds of complicated demons.”In her film roles she can flaunt parts of herself she might otherwise keep under wraps. She parries attempts to probe her feelings about Rula Jebreal, the Palestinian author of “Miral,” for whom Mr. Schnabel left his second wife, with an oddly canny little-girl smile.“I can’t talk about that,” she said. “I don’t want to make my father mad.” Her expression darkened when she was asked to describe her relationship with Olivier Sarkozy, which she dismissed as a media fabrication.So many questions. Ms. Schnabel began to chafe, confiding that she has yet to adjust to a surfeit of public scrutiny. “Can’t people just watch this movie, where I’m extremely exposed,” she said of her role in “You Wont Miss Me.”“Even when you’re acting, you’re exposed.”