https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/20/us/politics/who-is-karen-pence.html
Who Is Karen Pence? A Brief Introduction to the Second Lady - The New York Times
Pence  Mike,Pence  Karen (1957- ),United States Politics and Government,Indiana
Jan. 20, 2017
6267
Karen Pence was there with her husband, incoming Vice President Mike Pence, at almost every stop on the campaign trail. And she is with him in Washington on Friday.But many Americans may not yet be familiar with Mrs. Pence, the former first lady of Indiana and now second lady of the United States.Here’s a brief introduction to Mrs. Pence, based on her public statements and interviews over the years.In a 2013 interview with Community Newspaper Holdings Inc. in Indiana, Mrs. Pence spoke fondly of her decision to move with her three young children to Washington when her husband was first elected to Congress. It allowed the family to stay together, which helped keep them all grounded, she said.“He’d come home at night, and I’d ask him to walk the dog or take out the trash,” she said. “It was a very normal life.”That desire for normalcy is a theme for Mrs. Pence, who reportedly returned to her wedding dress designer to make new gowns for inaugural celebrations on Thursday and Friday.She has also long worked to shield her family from her husband’s political life, she said in a local radio interview a few years ago.“I’m not going to let what’s happening out there affect what’s happening in here — that’s kind of always been my mantra,” she told the radio host Amos Brown for his “Afternoons With Amos” show.“The political world, the political life, is all out there,” she said. “Our family has to come first.”Mrs. Pence has been vocal about her faith, even influencing her husband, who grew up Catholic but is now an evangelical Christian.“She’s been very much a part of his faith journey,” said Mark Bailey, who often started his day praying with Mr. Pence when they worked together at an Indianapolis law firm in the mid-1980s. “He would refer to his wife as the prayer warrior of the family.”At a church gathering in late 2010, Mrs. Pence talked about her faith, sharing a story about recognizing idolatry in her own life, according to The Greensburg Daily News.Early in their marriage, she had asked Mr. Pence to carefully move a refrigerator, when she noticed a rip in the kitchen’s newly installed linoleum floor.“I just melted like the Wicked Witch of the West,” Mrs. Pence said, according to the paper. “Then I took a look at myself, sitting on the floor like that, and was disgusted with myself, so I picked myself up off the floor.”The rip became a permanent reminder to maintain perspective, she said.Mr. and Mrs. Pence met at church, according to reports, and spent their first date ice skating at the Indiana State Fairgrounds.“It was love at first sight,” Mrs. Pence said in a campaign ad for her husband’s run for governor.She was so sure of their relationship that she began carrying a gold cross with the word “Yes” engraved on it for when he proposed.Around their nine-month anniversary, it happened, according to a 2012 profile in The Journal Gazette of Fort Wayne, Ind.When she said she wanted to go feed ducks, Mr. Pence saw an opportunity: He brought along two large loaves of bread, one of them hollowed out to hold a small bottle of Champagne and another to conceal a ring box, the newspaper reported.Mrs. Pence said yes and gave him the cross, according to the profile.They reportedly even kept the leftover bread, which they shellacked. They married in 1985.Mrs. Pence attended Butler University with plans to teach, but the school also required students to declare a minor, so she decided to try something new, according to a 2013 profile in The Indianapolis Star.“I thought, ‘Gosh, I’d like to learn more about art,’” she told The Star. “I pulled it out of the air.”She earned Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in elementary education and spent decades teaching, according to a presidential transition biography.But she also maintained a connection to art, according to The Star. While raising her and Mr. Pence’s first child, she took a class in watercolors and soon started a business selling her paintings.Her art even made its way into the Indiana governor’s mansion before she and her husband did, according to The Star: After Mrs. Pence painted a portrait of the residence as a party favor for a holiday dinner, Cheri Daniels, her predecessor as first lady, had it mounted in the foyer. For a time, Mrs. Pence had a “towel charm” business and a charitable foundation.She has helped raise funds for an art therapy initiative at a hospital in Indiana and serves as a board member for Tracy’s Kids, an art therapy program for children’s hospitals in Washington, according to the transition biography.In the “Afternoons With Amos” interview, Mrs. Pence explained how she became a pilot.She was born on an Air Force base, her father worked for United Airlines, and when she was in her teens, her godfather would let her fly with him in his plane.“It just kind of got in my blood,” she said, but added that she hadn’t kept it up because flying is both expensive and dangerous.