http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/04/us/politics/donald-trump-campaign.html
Donald Trump Says a Strong Defense Against Cyberattacks Is Essential - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Cyberwarfare and Defense,Virginia,Veterans,Computers and the Internet,United States Defense and Military Forces
Oct. 3, 2016
6663
HERNDON, Va. — Donald J. Trump on Monday called for strengthening the nation’s defenses against cyberattacks, saying that as president he would create a joint law enforcement task force to handle both cybersecurity as well as offensive cyberwarfare.“Cyberattacks from foreign governments — especially China, Russia, North Korea, along with nonstate terrorist actors and organized criminal groups — constitute one of our most critical national security concerns,” Mr. Trump told a group of retired military veterans on Monday. “The scope of our cybersecurity problem is enormous. Our government, our businesses, our trade secrets and our citizens — most sensitive information — are all facing constant cyberattacks and reviews by the enemy.”Mr. Trump, who once suggested that Russia hack Hillary Clinton’s emails, also stressed the importance of being able to wage “crippling” cyberattacks against the nation’s adversaries, calling it “the warfare of the future.” “We should turn cyberwarfare into one of our greatest weapons against the terrorists.”Mr. Trump’s remarks came after a damaging week of largely self-inflicted missteps, underscored by a drop in many polls, which began last Monday with a shaky debate performance against Mrs. Clinton and went on to include a late-night Twitter rant against Alicia Machado, a former Miss Universe who is Hispanic.His comments on Monday, which he delivered from teleprompters before taking several questions from a friendly audience, seemed to be an effort to present a more disciplined front before the next presidential debate, in St. Louis on Sunday.In the first debate, Mr. Trump gave a rambling response to a question about cybersecurity, ranging from fears of lone wolf hackers (“It also could be somebody sitting on their bed who weighs 400 pounds, O.K.?”) to his 10-year-old son’s technological prowess (“He has computers. He is so good with these computers, it’s unbelievable”).On Monday, Mr. Trump offered a more tightly focused speech on the need for increased cybersecurity. If elected, he said, he would instruct the Department of Justice to create a task force, in conjunction with international, federal, state and local law enforcement, “to crush this still developing area of crime.” And he said he would ask his secretary of defense and the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to present recommendations “for strengthening and augmenting our cybercommand.”During a question-and-answer session, the Republican nominee addressed the issue of post-traumatic stress disorder, calling for a “very, very robust” mental health program for veterans. Then Mr. Trump seemed to imply that handling the trauma of war was a question of strength.“When you talk about the mental health problems, when people come back from war and combat, they see things that maybe a lot of the folks in this room have seen many times over,” he said. “And you’re strong and you can handle it, but a lot of people can’t handle it.”He also hinted at returning to criminal profiling, citing Israel as an example of a country that engages in successful profiling efforts, and called for a “more old-fashioned” method of law enforcement.“You know in our country lately we’re more interested in protecting the criminals than we are in making sure that we’re strong and powerful and know what we’re doing,” he said. “We’re so, so interested in protecting criminals and people that want to do us harm, and I think that we have to go back to a little more old-fashioned method of thinking, if that makes sense. I will appoint an attorney general who will reform the Department of Justice like it was necessary after Watergate.”