https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/02/us/closing-arguments-given-in-north-carolina-voter-rights-trial.html
Closing Arguments Given in Key Voter Rights Trial - The New York Times
North Carolina,Voter Registration and Requirements,Identification Devices,Voting Rights Act (1965),National Assn for the Advancement of Colored People,Justice Department
Feb. 1, 2016
5750
WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. —  In the final session of a trial that could yield a crucial decision about a policy that has been disputed for years, a federal judge heard closing arguments on Monday about North Carolina’s voter identification law.The arguments capped a six-day bench trial, before Judge Thomas D. Schroeder of Federal District Court, that included emotional testimony about voting rights and technical analyses of the law’s impact. The outcome will be seen as an important measure of what voting-related laws federal courts might allow states to pursue and enforce.The North Carolina chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. and other plaintiffs argued Monday, as they have for months, that the Republican-controlled General Assembly drafted the voter identification law in 2013 as a surreptitious way to curb the influence of black and Hispanic voters. The N.A.A.C.P. has argued that those voters are less likely to have one of the six accepted forms of identification required and often face more hardship in obtaining them.“They knew that all these provisions, taken individually and together, have racially discriminatory intent,” said Catherine Meza, a lawyer for the United States Justice Department, which joined the N.A.A.C.P. in the litigation.The state has insisted that the voter identification standard was approved solely to reduce the risk of election fraud, and it has argued that the measure’s critics could merely speculate about its harms. Any difficulty in obtaining identification, which can include a driver’s license or a passport, is reasonable and falls equally across races, state officials said.“It’s not a burden; it’s a minor inconvenience,” a lawyer for the state, Thomas A. Farr, said on a day when Judge Schroeder frequently interrupted for questions. “If you want to vote, you should be able to navigate that burden.”The fate of the law, before inevitable appeals, is in the hands of Judge Schroeder, an appointee of President George W. Bush. Judge Schroeder is also considering a challenge to other changes that Republicans have made to elections laws, including the elimination of same-day registration and a significant reduction in early voting days.The General Assembly first approved those modifications in 2013, after the United States Supreme Court struck down a crucial part of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, freeing certain jurisdictions, including a handful of Southern states and 40 North Carolina counties, to change their election laws without advance federal approval. State lawmakers further changed the voter identification law in 2015. With that amendment, state officials decided that residents who could not obtain identification could submit “reasonable impediment declarations” and vote with provisional ballots.The amendment failed to satisfy the plaintiffs, who also said Monday that the burden of issuing acceptable identifications had largely fallen to the Division of Motor Vehicles, which they described as a bureaucratic cog with a spotty service record. Lawmakers “knowingly put this basic and fundamental right of voters in the hands of an agency that is historically unable to serve its customers,” said Penda D. Hair, a lawyer for Advancement Project, which represents some of the challengers.Many legal experts expect Judge Schroeder to uphold the voter identification law, particularly because of last year’s amendment that allowed for the impediment declarations.It is not clear when Judge Schroeder will reach his decision and whether it might precede this state’s presidential primaries, which will be March 15, or the general election in November, when a competitive race for North Carolina’s 15 electoral votes is expected. In January, he refused the N.A.A.C.P.’s request to block the voter identification law temporarily and said the group had “failed to clearly demonstrate that they are likely to succeed on the merits.”Much of the evidence that Judge Schroeder will consider is included in the court record, which runs thousands of pages, and he heard less than 40 hours of testimony in the trial. Last summer, at a separate trial about the other challenged provisions, more than 100 witnesses appeared over about three weeks. The judge has not yet issued a ruling from that trial.