https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/18/world/americas/joaquin-guzman-loera-extradition-request.html
U.S. Sought ‘El Chapo’ Extradition Before Escape - The New York Times
Prison Escapes,Extradition,Guzman Loera  Joaquin,Mexico,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Murillo Karam  Jesus
July 17, 2015
8282
MEXICO CITY —  Less than three weeks before Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the infamous drug kingpin known as El Chapo, escaped from Mexico’s highest security prison, the United States issued a formal request for his extradition, according to a statement by the Mexican attorney general late Thursday night.The request, issued on June 25, was made public after testimony by the attorney general, Arely Gómez González, raised new questions about the relationship between the nations.The United States government has been frustrated by the Mexican authorities, who have delayed a decision on whether to accept an American offer of unconditional support to track down Mr. Guzmán, including the use of drones, advanced intelligence equipment and a task force.Long before the escape, Mexican officials also appeared resistant to the idea of extraditing Mr. Guzmán, who faces indictments in at least seven American federal courts on charges that include narcotics trafficking and murder.But the Mexican government indicated that it would keep him in its custody, wanting to prosecute and imprison Mr. Guzmán in what many viewed as a show of sovereignty. In January, Mexico’s previous attorney general, Jesús Murillo Karam, suggested that Mr. Guzmán would never serve time in the United States.“El Chapo must stay here to complete his sentence, and then I will extradite him,” Mr. Murillo Karam was quoted as saying at the time. “So about 300 or 400 years later — it will be awhile.”Mr. Guzmán escaped from prison on July 11, using a mile-long tunnel burrowed into the floor of his bathroom that experts say took more than a year to dig.The Mexican government has struggled to explain how Mr. Guzmán managed to pull off such an elaborate prison break from what was meant to be the country’s most secure facility. The Mexican president, Enrique Peña Nieto, said last year after the drug lord’s arrest that losing him again — Mr. Guzmán had escaped Mexican custody once before — would be unforgivable.Whether Mr. Guzmán had been warned about the American extradition request, or whether that had any influence on the timing of his escape, is unclear.The Americans did not formally request the extradition after Mr. Guzmán’s arrest in February 2014, by Mexican forces with American help.“It is the practice of the United States to seek extradition whenever defendants subject to U.S. charges are apprehended in another country,” said Peter Carr, a Justice Department spokesman.The statement from the Mexican attorney general’s office indicated that Ms. Gómez González gave orders for her office to review the extradition request to ensure that it complied with all legal requirements and then submit them to the nation’s Justice Department for consideration.On Friday, Mr. Peña Nieto returned from a trip to France and faced a barrage of criticism and mocking jabs.In response, he said: “We will not solve the issue through fights and anger, and by filling ourselves with rage.”“We fully assume the responsibility for it.”Later on Friday, the attorney general’s office said seven prison officials had been arrested in connection with the escape but offered no details about the investigation.