https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/17/world/canada/canada-asylum-seekers-refugees.html
Canada Today: Asylum Seekers, Conservative Choices and Your Thoughts - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Canada,United States Politics and Government,Trudeau  Justin,Trump  Donald J,United States
Feb. 17, 2017
5337
The image associated most commonly with refugees arriving in Canada is that of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and members of his cabinet greeting Syrians at Toronto’s airport late in 2015. But the global chaos created for many asylum seekers by President Donald J. Trump’s executive order on immigration has brought attention to another and potentially more dangerous path to Canada. Catherine Porter, Dan Levin and I looked into the migrants who sometimes crawl through snow to reach Canada from the United States.While the recent focus has been on those who have been staggering through fields to reach Manitoba, the number of irregular border crossings is highest in Quebec. Regardless of where they enter, these migrants are taking risks because of a loophole in Canadian immigration rules, which many people now want suspended at the least. Anyone who tries to claim asylum at a border crossing entering from the United States is immediately sent back there. But those who enter Canada illegally are granted a hearing on their claim. Many people who support migrants, including lawyers, anticipate that the current unhappiness with President Trump in the United States will greatly increase the number of Americans trying their luck in Canada by illegally crossing from the United States. We’ll continue to follow this.Mr. Trump’s order has also created a growing apprehension among some Canadians about crossing the border into the United States. That’s even the case, Catherine Porter reported, in Windsor, Ontario, my hometown. It sits across the river from Detroit. The quick trip by bridge or tunnel to the United States has always been a routine part of life. Now, however, the Windsor area board of education has suspended all student field trips to the United States. Those trips to places like the Detroit Institute of Arts were a highlight of my school days.Savvy Trader Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was on the road most of this week. Monday brought his first meeting with Mr. Trump. As expected, Mr. Trudeau avoided directly criticizing the president and his policies. To the relief of many Canadian companies, Mr. Trump said that he did not have any significant concern about the trade situation between the United States and Canada.We asked Canadians who read The Times on Facebook what they thought of Mr. Trudeau’s assertion that the country did not want him to lecture or directly criticize Mr. Trump or Americans while he was in Washington. More than a thousand people posted replies (viewable only to Canadian users), with the vast majority of them supporting the prime minister’s approach.Here are some selected comments:“Canadians would not take kindly to other countries lecturing on policy so this was the right approach,” Sue Tucker wrote from Ottawa. “I am very proud of my classy prime minister.”“Challenging Trump on controversial policy points isn’t a good way to build bridges between our two countries, which are governed by leaders who are separated by a massive ideological chasm,” wrote Alex Glista, a history and political science student at Western University in London, Ontario. “Trudeau focused on issues that matter to everyday Canadians, and that he can have an impact on, such as trade and women in the work force.’“It’s not Trudeau’s job to lecture other world leaders no matter how incompetent they are,” wrote Jeanette Michelle Nolan of Kelowna, British Columbia. “I think it’s better for him to keep a positive dialogue while still protecting our best interests. I do like how he made it clear that it is possible for a leader to help those that need it, and still keep their citizens and their country safe.”But some people were disappointed by Mr. Trudeau’s approach, including Jennifer Lynn, who wrote: “The prime minister’s statement does not reflect how I feel as a Canadian, or how many Canadians feel. His actions today showed great cowardice. Many Canadians have been organizing in protest of the Trump administration’s policies, and have been calling on Mr. Trudeau to speak out against them.”A Storyteller Stuart McLean, whose gentle humor made his radio program, The Vinyl Cafe, one of the longest running hits of Canadian broadcasting, died this week at the age of 68. I looked back on his life and how he reminded Canadians that even the smallest events are worthy of their attention. .A Songwriter For Travel, Rose Maura Lorre takes readers through the Montreal neighborhood that she shared with Leonard Cohen, who died in November. “Sotto voce and sly-humored, polite and without airs, Mr. Cohen exuded a big-hearted bonhomie for the people and for the places he loyally patronized,” she found.A Novelist Graham Bowley contacted Jean-Pierre Sirois-Trahan, a professor at Laval University in Quebec City, who believes that a snippet of film from a Paris wedding in 1904 fleetingly shows Marcel Proust. If the professor is correct, it is the only known video of the author.Leading the Right An unusually large field of 14 candidates are vying to replace former Prime Minister Stephen Harper as the Conservative leader in May. As I wrote this week, the complicated election system the party will use makes it difficult to handicap its leadership race. I’ve profiled four of the contenders who have received the most attention.A Return Visit Susanne Craig, the investigative reporter for The Times who revealed that portions of Mr. Trump’s tax returns showed he legally avoided millions of dollars in income tax, is a native of Calgary, Alberta. She was back in Canada this week to appear along with David A. Fahrenthold, who reported on Mr. Trump’s business and financial dealings for The Washington Post, in talks organized by the Canadian Journalism Foundation. I attended the session in Ottawa. A podcast of the discussion will be available here. It’s worth a listen it gives a sense of what it’s like to deal with the new president as well an understanding of his business dealings.