https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/arts/design/what-soft-market-resiliency-rules.html
What Soft Market? Resiliency Rules - The New York Times
Art,Auctions,Bemelmans Bar (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Carlyle Hotel (Manhattan  NY  Hotel),Christie's,Sotheby's,Stingel  Rudolf
Nov. 17, 2016
9569
To grasp the unpredictability of the art market, one need only look to this week of fall auctions.Despite a tumultuous presidential election and the constant drumbeat of predictions about a softening art market, the sales at Sotheby’s, Christie’s and Phillips set highs for a range of artists, including Wassily Kandinsky, Willem de Kooning, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, John Currin and Carmen Herrera, not to mention Monet, whose grainstack sold for  $81.4 million.And the drama of the salesroom — largely drained over the years by a growing number of phone bidders — occasionally delivered, from the deadly silence as the Sotheby’s auctioneer Helena Newman struggled to sell Munch’s 1902 painting “Girls on the Bridge” to the expectant hush as the Christie’s auctioneer juggled five competing bids over 14 minutes for Monet’s 1891 canvas “Meule.”At the same time, several lots had only one bidder, which made for less buoyancy over all. (The Sotheby’s contemporary sale Thursday night had yet to take place at press time.) And many say the shrunken supply of trophies at Christie’s and Sotheby’s represents an expected reining in of a runaway art market and is likely to last for a while.“It wasn’t bad; it wasn’t good,” said the financier and longtime collector David Ganek. “It’s like going to a zoning meeting, it’s just not that exciting.”“The market has been outperforming, so there’s got to be a reversion,” he added. “That doesn’t mean there aren’t great things.”Indeed, art experts agree that there were some great things for sale this week, namely de Kooning’s “Untitled XXV” (1977) which sold for $66.3 million with fees to an unidentified bidder, and Moholy-Nagy’s “EM 1 (Telephone Picture)” (1923), which sold for $6.1 million to the Museum of Modern Art.“Each time a collector’s item comes along, you’re going to see a strong market,” said the art adviser Abigail Asher. But, she added, “Is there enough to support the rest of the market?”Ann Temkin, MoMA’s chief curator of painting and sculpture, said she was thrilled to be able to acquire Moholy-Nagy’s piece, given that the museum already owns the other two from that series. “It’s completing a story that we had not been able to tell in full,” she said.But art experts also agree that the material surrounding these works would in past years have been relegated to the lower-stature day sales. In Christie’s contemporary auction on Tuesday evening, for example, “things in that sale should not have been in that sale,” said the dealer Lucy Mitchell-Innes. “People started leaving and wandering off.”Ms. Mitchell-Innes cited in particular the protracted bidding that took place for the 2011 oil by the Italian painter Giuseppe Gallo — though it ultimately went for $367,500, well over the low estimate of $40,000 — which she said “took 10 minutes.”At a time when auction houses have struggled to find good Impressionist and Modern material to fill their sales, both Sotheby’s and Christie’s managed to unearth a few masterpieces this season. But even though the Munch represented the second-highest auction price for the artist — selling for $54.5 million — Ms. Newman was unable to attract another bidder besides the guarantor.“It’s like, if a gentleman is wearing a sharp Savile Row suit, but he hasn’t showered in two months,” said Todd Levin of Levin Art Group. “It looks good, but it sort of smells funny.”While the auctions attracted new buyers — who was that guy at the back of the room who won Adrian Ghenie’s “Bridge” for $3.9 million at Christie’s? — it also made clear how important it is to know what you’re buying.How else to understand why two de Koonings of the same size in the same sale at Christie’s on Tuesday sold for such disparate amounts: “Untitled VI” (1985) at $5.4 million and “Untitled XXV” (1977) for $66.3 million?“That’s the mystery of the art world — what we call a great painting or average or poor painting,” the Chicago collector Stefan Edlis said. “In some ways, it’s very subjective but sometimes there is consensus.”This subjectivity helps explain why the art market is unlike any other, experts say, despite frequent attempts to tie it to other asset classes. While some buyers are in it for the investment, die-hard aficionados remain active regardless. “Collectors are addicted,” the Miami collector Donald Rubell said. “In good markets or bad markets, they are going to buy.”The artist Rudolf Stingel has always admired those whimsical murals in Bemelmans Bar at the Carlyle Hotel. “They’re like frescoes, even though they’re on canvas — absolutely charming,” he said in an interview. (He also admitted that he is “really fond of martinis.”)Mr. Stingel was inspired to create four of his own versions of those murals that had been painted by Ludwig Bemelmans, who was best known for his Madeline children’s books. The paintings are now installed at Larry Gagosian’s small gallery on Park Avenue at 75th Street.“We went to the bar and photographed all the walls,” Mr. Stingel said. “I just copied them. It’s photorealistic painting.” At the same time, he added, “My works are my own creations.”“The paintings are inspired by — and in many ways are a tribute to Bemelmans — and to a special place in this city that shows his art,” Mr. Stingel said. “The transformation in scale, painting them in black-and-white, as well as embedding the lighting of the bar into the paintings are transformations that make the works communicate differently, that make the works mine.”Mr. Stingel has collected Bemelmans’ work for some time — he said his young daughter is particularly fond of it. But while he was attracted to Bemelmans’ depictions of animals and the seasons, he mainly wanted to summon the clubby atmosphere of the Carlyle.“My thing was more about capturing the bar, the vibe of the bar,” Mr. Stingel said. “Like when you have a drink and you gaze at the wall.”