https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/02/upshot/an-even-more-nuanced-breakdown-of-the-supreme-court.html
An Even More Nuanced Breakdown of the Supreme Court - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Decisions and Verdicts
July 1, 2014
5680
Last week, my colleagues Adam Liptak and Hannah Fairfield wrote about the divisions among Supreme Court justices. In showing the justices on a spectrum from more to less liberal, they found “a series of clusters, a few loners and several telling gaps,” not a steady progression from left to right.But a one-dimensional spectrum may not be enough to capture some of the more interesting divisions. For example, in the latest term, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (a member of the court’s liberal wing) was slightly more likely to agree with Justice Antonin Scalia (a member of the conservative wing) than with Justice Anthony M. Kennedy (in the center).For a slightly more nuanced look, we’ve moved to two dimensions. In the accompanying chart, the distance between a pair of justices represents roughly how often they disagreed this term. It’s impossible to get all 36 of the distances exactly right — you’d need more than four dimensions to do that — so we’ve also included curvy lines showing the exact distance between some of the pairs. The justices are placed so all 36 lines are as straight as possible. This includes the lines connecting the liberal and conservative wings, which we haven’t shown.Justice Clarence Thomas and Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. were the closest pair this term. They disagreed only in a case about securities fraud, a case about child pornography restitution and one other case. (All of the disagreement percentages here refer to the outcome, but not necessarily the reasoning behind a decision.)With more unanimous outcomes  than normal, including major rulings about presidential recess appointments, buffer zones around abortion clinics, and warrants to search cellphones, the justices are all relatively close. A year ago, the average distance between a pair of justices was 1.5 times as long.