http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/25/magazine/25FOB-q4-t.html
Questions for Vicente Fox - The New York Times
Fox  Vicente
July 23, 2010
2567
You’re the former president of Mexico. What do you think of the Arizona immigration bill that is scheduled to take effect this week? It would require immigrants to carry their registration papers at all times and risk jail for not complying.  I think there’s a big misunderstanding on the value of migrants. Unfortunately, since Sept. 11, that very sad day, we have not advanced on the issue. On the contrary, xenophobes have taken over; governments like the one in Arizona are taking negative decisions with a very blinded look at the future.Are you saying America has become less tolerant?  Yes, yes. And maybe the best way to qualify it is “fear.” That fear has been promoted by those who want to go back to the past, to nationalistic attitudes, to building walls and isolating themselves from the rest of the world.What do you think the U.S. should do about the estimated 11 million immigrants who live here illegally, about 59 percent of whom are Mexican, according to a report from the Pew Hispanic Center?  Document them! As long as they are working, they should be legalized. I admire so much each and every migrant. They are the most loyal workers in the U.S. economy. They build the homes of those who are attacking them.What do you make of John McCain, who, in 2005, helped craft a bipartisan immigration reform bill, but has lately been feeding anti-immigration sentiment. He just said on television that Phoenix is “the No. 2 kidnapping capital of the world,” a fact that various groups have disputed.  Yes. It’s a total shame, the new position that he’s holding. When he campaigned for president, he tried to gain votes from Hispanics by positioning himself very positively around migration. I don’t understand his position today. It’s very selfish. It’s incredible that a politician of his stature, of his matureness and age, can be such a traitor to his own ideas.I’m sure you’re aware that the U.S. Department of Justice has sued the state of Arizona to overturn its immigration law, which may well be invalidated by the time this interview appears.  That’s a good intent. President Obama is committed to Hispanics and migrants. That’s a promise I had from President Bush, and six years went by and nothing happened. I don’t want to be negative, but I’m seeing the same story repeating again. It’s been two years now, and nothing has happened in relation to migration.What do you think Mexicans have contributed to American culture?  Oh, starting with Mexican food! The jalapeños and the tacos and the rest. I think they have contributed family values. And then we have our culture. When you were killing Indian Apaches there, we had built Mayan cities, the pyramids, Mexico City.Is there anything to be done about the drug wars that are terrorizing Mexicans today and that have reportedly caused 25,000 deaths in the past three years?  That has to be dealt with together by the United States and Mexico. It’s a joint problem and a joint challenge. The U.S. provides the markets and guns that come back to Mexico and allow the cartels to be active.You think the United States is causing Mexico’s crime wave?  Absolutely, yes. The cartel gangs are nourished through the drug consumption in the United States. That’s why my position is that we should move as fast as possible into legalizing drug consumption.What are you working on these days?  I am at the ranch, and we built here in Guanajuato the first presidential library in Mexico. It’s built at the old dairy cow stable with modern facilities, and we’re doing think-tanking actions. Let me give you news. We’re going to have Elton John in October.What for?  To sing, to fund raise for scholarships! We know that for building leadership, there is nothing better than that part of our brain dedicated to art, to culture.How do you get along with your successor, President Felipe Calderón?  Muy bien. We have lunch every other month.Do you give him advice?  No, no advice. I just express my opinion.