https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/04/us/politics/president-trump-health-care.html
Ceding to One Side on Health Bill, Trump Risks Alienating Another - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Trump  Donald J,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Pence  Mike,House of Representatives,Republican Party,House Freedom Caucus,United States Politics and Government,Law and Legislation
April 4, 2017
7883
WASHINGTON — The White House stepped up its push on Tuesday to revive legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act by placating the most conservative House members, but the effort risked alienating more moderate Republicans whose votes President Trump needs just as much.Vice President Mike Pence met for about two hours on Tuesday night with lawmakers, including leaders of three groups of House Republicans. But lawmakers leaving the conclave in the basement of the Capitol said that no deal had been reached and that talks would continue on Wednesday.“It was a very good exchange of ideas, with concerns that represent the broad spectrum of our conference,” said Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina and the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus. “There were no agreements tonight, and no agreements in principle,” he added.Mr. Pence has been meeting continually with House Republicans this week to rework and resuscitate the repeal bill that collapsed on the House floor on March 24. But the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, acknowledged that changes intended to gain support on one side of the House Republican Conference could lose votes on another.“It’s important that we don’t just win the votes of one caucus or one group, but that we get the votes and the consensus of 216 of our members,” Mr. Ryan said.In negotiations with members of the Freedom Caucus this week, administration officials have discussed allowing states to opt out of two bedrock requirements in the Affordable Care Act. One requires insurers to cover a standard minimum package of benefits, known as essential health benefits. The other generally requires insurers to charge the same price to people of the same age who live in the same geographic area, with a possible surcharge for tobacco users. Under this provision, known as community rating, insurers cannot vary premiums based on a person’s health status, insurance claims history or gender.Mr. Meadows said earlier Tuesday that he was pleased the administration was willing to eliminate more of the mandates in the Affordable Care Act, which Republicans have been trying to repeal ever since it was signed by President Barack Obama in 2010.“Lower premiums have to be our first and only priority,” Mr. Meadows said. “By repealing community rating and the essential health benefits, it allows for lower premiums across the board.”But Mr. Meadows said Freedom Caucus members wanted to see the language that would be added to the repeal bill before promising to vote for it, and no such language was made available at the meeting on Tuesday night.At the same time, more moderate Republicans were expressing concern for other reasons. Administration officials say they want to preserve one of the most popular provisions of the Affordable Care Act, which bars insurers from denying coverage to people with pre-existing medical conditions. But without a requirement for some form of community rating, insurers could effectively do that, simply by increasing the cost of policies for sick or risky customers.“I don’t think we will have something that eliminates community rating,” said Representative Tim Murphy of Pennsylvania, a member of the caucus of moderate Republicans known as the Tuesday Group. “That just can’t be.”Mr. Murphy, a psychologist, has successfully championed legislation to improve treatment for mental illness and drug abuse, including opioid addiction. He said he wanted to be sure that any changes to the bill protected mental health care and treatment for substance abuse disorders, as well as maternity care — benefits that are guaranteed under the Affordable Care Act.Mr. Ryan and the White House tried to play down expectations of a breakthrough, saying the talks on a new health care bill were at a preliminary, conceptual stage.Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said the vice president and the chief of staff, Reince Priebus, were “very optimistic” about the possibility of developing a health care bill that could win a majority of votes in the House.“The president would like to see this done,” Mr. Spicer said. “If we can get a deal and it gets to those votes — which, again, I’m not going to raise expectations, but there are more and more people coming to the table with more and more ideas about how to grow that vote.”New York adopted community rating under a state law in the 1990s, and the policy caused serious problems in the individual insurance market, but state officials have come to accept it.Representative Tom Reed, a New York Republican who supported the original version of the repeal bill last month, said on Tuesday: “Community rating is one of those things that is a very significant reform in the Affordable Care Act. I appreciate the states’ rights argument, but recognize that there is a reason behind community rating and the benefit that it brings to the insurance reforms.”Democrats say that relaxing federal standards for benefits and rates would, in effect, eviscerate protections for people with pre-existing conditions.And some Republicans appear to share that concern. Allowing states to opt out of the federal requirements for minimum benefits and community rating “could greatly erode the safeguards Obamacare put in place for those with pre-existing conditions,” said Representative Leonard Lance, Republican of New Jersey, who opposed the earlier House repeal bill and has not moved from that position.Representative Chris Collins of New York, a Trump ally and member of the Tuesday Group, said he too was concerned about allowing states to obtain waivers from the community rating requirement.“It’s one thing if you have car crashes and you pay higher car insurance,” Mr. Collins said. “Health is a different animal.”The version of the repeal bill that went to the House floor last month died after Republican leaders, in a bid for conservative support, agreed to eliminate federal standards for minimum benefits. Under the proposal now under consideration, states could obtain waivers from the federal requirements.