https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/07/us/before-attack-san-bernardino-was-on-the-verge-of-a-turnaround.html
San Bernardino Community Struck by Massacre Seemed on Verge of Turnaround - The New York Times
San Bernardino  Calif  Shooting (2015),San Bernardino (Calif),Terrorism,Council on American-Islamic Relations,Malik  Tashfeen,Farook  Syed Rizwan
Dec. 6, 2015
5816
SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. — Erika Flores knows this city’s struggles, and she knows its reputation. She has lived here for five years. Five years pummeled by bankruptcy. A recall aimed at its elected city officials. Gangs, crime, high unemployment and recession.“It’s always been a crazy city,” said Ms. Flores, 26, who like many here found work in the warehouses that fill the landscape. “It’s always had a bad rap.”Four days after a massacre that left 14 people dead at a developmental disability center here — an act of violence that would have challenged even the most vibrant city — this struggling community was a study in emotional contrasts on Sunday.There was, understandably, a sense of darkness — a feeling that the terrorist attack at the Inland Regional Center on Wednesday was another blow for this working-class city an hour from Los Angeles, and just at a moment when things seemed to have been turning around.But at the same time, from church pulpits to makeshift street corner memorials, there was hope and optimism that the massacre, which the police said was carried out by a Muslim couple who lived on a quiet street in nearby Redlands, would give San Bernardino a new reason to continue its struggle for recovery.“People want to see the city emerge and have a vibrant future,” said Mayor R. Carey Davis of San Bernardino, “even though it’s not as vibrant as it could be today.”Ms. Flores brought her four children to a park for a holiday event, despite being afraid. “Everybody usually does their own thing,” she said. “But after this, I’m seeing a lot of people coming together.”This community sought to absorb the news of the attack as investigators pursued numerous questions — in particular what motivated the accused couple, Tashfeen Malik and her husband, Syed Rizwan Farook, to launch an attack that left them both dead after a gun battle.The latest twist came in La Stampa, an Italian newspaper, which reported that Mr. Farook’s father said in an interview that his son had always been more conservative in his religious beliefs than much of the family and had become “fixated against Israel.” But Hussam Ayloush, the executive director of the Los Angeles chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said that Mr. Farook did not remember speaking to an Italian reporter.“He is under a lot of stress and he actually does not recall saying any of the things that were quoted,” said Mr. Ayloush, speaking outside the home of one of Mr. Farook’s daughters.The two assault rifles used in the shooting are believed to have been sold to the younger Mr. Farook by a former neighbor of his family in Riverside, Enrique Marquez, federal officials said. After the shooting, Mr. Marquez checked himself into a mental health facility, the officials said. At this point, investigators are not treating Mr. Marquez as a suspect as they do not believe he knew at the time he sold the rifles that Mr. Farook had plans to use them in an attack. F.B.I. agents searched the Marquez home on Saturday and returned again on Sunday to collect additional items, an agency spokeswoman, Laura Eimiller, said.The aftermath of the attack, and how it has unsettled this community, could be seen across the valley Sunday. There were the Christmas decorations along Orange Show Road — but also the piles of flowers and wreaths just up the road in front of the center where the attack took place. There was the perpetual sunshine and intoxicating light of Southern California — but also the 14 flickering candles in front of framed photos of the 14 victims at the Islamic Community Center, where a woman, her head covered by a scarf, wiped away tears at an interfaith memorial service.“We all pretty much felt that we had been kicked while we were down,” said Gary Saenz, who was elected the San Bernardino city attorney in the recall elections of 2013. “We have a number of challenges already. We are in bankruptcy. We have a lot of financial issues.”“We certainly didn’t need to be attacked by terrorists on top of the difficulties that we were already confronting,” he said.San Bernardino, with a population of just under 220,000, slightly more than half of it Latino, has become the symbol of the beleaguered inland California city left behind as much of the rest of the state has marched back from the recession.It has certainly suffered a series of blows to its self-esteem, from having to declare bankruptcy — and suspending payments to the state employee pension funds — to the arrest of a college professor on charges of running an expansive methamphetamine smuggling ring. The San Bernardino-Riverside area, known as the “Inland Empire,” is the largest metropolitan area without its own professional sports team.“We always felt like they looked at us like stepchildren,” said Rikke Van Johnson, a city councilman, who represents the west side of the city, which has long been known for gang violence, referring to the reputation of this region.“It’s sad that we get the spotlight like this,” said Manuel Cortez, 39, a disc jockey and father of two who was born and raised here. “We get a lot of negative press from all the homicides and gang violence, the corruption. The city’s now bankrupt for a couple years. But we’re going to be all right.”Still, parts of the city are expanses of open lots, with piles of tires and heaps of trash. Vacancy signs are posted on buildings near the massacre site. “It’s suffering,” said Lewis Callahan, 56, a lifelong resident and a retired Los Angeles police officer. “It’s a broke city.”The mayor, aware of that reputation — and intent on rebutting it — arranged an hourlong tour of the city for a reporter Sunday morning to show off what he said were signs that San Bernardino was on the mend. “People, as they walk through the community, they’re picking up trash,” Mr. Davis said.Asked if this was, in part, because city services had been cut back so much, the mayor said no, while Mr. Johnson, the City Council member, said yes.This has also been a low point for this city’s police department. From 350 sworn officers in 2009, the bankruptcy and budget cuts have reduced the force to 228 officers, with at least 20 vacancies. Yet the police have been widely praised for their fast and effective response to the attack.Jarrod Burguan, the police chief — who has become nationally known as the calm voice providing rigorously evenhanded updates on the investigation — said there was reason to draw hope from this tragedy.“Our city truly rallied around us and around this event,” Chief Burguan said. “Suddenly, people were proud to say, ‘I’m from this city.’ Things that you wouldn’t necessarily expect to hear, because there’s the daily grind of San Bernardino, the economic issues, the poverty, the crime rate.”“I don’t know where those people have been for the last few years, but that’s neat,” he said.Joan Beall-Eppley, 57, who was born and raised here, said she was resigned to the fact that “a lot of people want to write us off.“But there’s a lot of good people that live here,” she said. “It’s not as bad as people say. And that’s one of the good things that’s come out of this — people see us standing up and being proud, and being there for our neighbors.”