https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/23/books/review/stop-reading-my-fiction-as-the-story-of-my-life.html
Stop Reading My Fiction as the Story of My Life - The New York Times
Writing and Writers,Books and Literature
March 23, 2017
7271
The panic starts in London. I’m there publicizing my last book, and at a small press lunch, my British publicist tells me that she’s just read the novel I’ve recently finished writing. She leans close to me and says, quietly, “You should prepare yourself for invasive publicity.”Oh, dread, I remember you. There are authors who blur the boundaries between themselves and their work: Rachel Cusk, Sheila Heti and Ben Lerner come to mind. Elif Batuman has described her new novel, “The Idiot,” as a “semi-autobiographical novel.” But I’ve always found the presumption of autobiography when applied to my work a little lazy and a lot unfair.I went through it with my book “The Middlesteins,” which was about a Midwestern Jewish family whose matriarch was morbidly obese. In interviews, at festivals, at readings, journalists and readers alike would ask me — Jewish, Midwestern — if anyone in my family was obese. Or, worse, readers would greet me by looking me up and down. “Why, you’re not fat at all,” one woman said. Thanks?My new novel is about a single, childless woman living in New York City — which I was at the time (I have since moved to New Orleans). But I’ve no interest in acting as a spokesperson for the single life, or for anything, really. I write fiction because it is a beautiful place to hide. If I had wanted to talk about the single life in a grand, public way, I might have written something like Rebecca Traister’s “All the Single Ladies” or Kate Bolick’s “Spinster,” which look at the lives and contributions of single women in America.But that is not what I wrote. I wrote a story about a woman, and her friends, and her family, and her art, and it is more than just one idea. It is not a sound bite or a talking point. It is a fictional universe. And how do you even explain the creative process, that there are all these little bits and pieces, that a work of fiction can be a kaleidoscope of your life, looking nothing like the original whole, just made up of shattered bits. Why can’t people let fiction be?The question of autobiographical fiction seems to have been with us always. Here’s Wallace Stegner in a 1990 interview with The Paris Review: “The very fact that some of my experience goes into the book is all but inescapable, and true for almost any writer I can name. Which is real and which is invented is (a) nobody’s business, and (b) a rather silly preoccupation, and (c) impossible to answer. . . . The kind of roman à clef reading determining biographical facts in fiction is not a good way to read. Read the fiction.”Why don’t people just read the fiction, though? What is behind the fascination with the real-life connection between authors and their work? The more cynical side of me thinks it’s the reader’s sense of entitlement to any piece of information she desires. The more forgiving side imagines the reader views it as a mystery to be solved, an added pleasure upon pleasure. Or perhaps it’s something more obvious: Discussing autobiographical elements is much simpler than focusing on craft. It’s easier to assume that Junot Díaz is Yunior from “Drown” than to think about how and why Yunior feels so real on the page. Incidentally, it’s nearly impossible to find an interview with Díaz where he is not asked whether his work is autobiographical. He seems to be a good sport; from a 2007 interview in Bookslut: “As a fiction writer, that’s always a great question for a very different reason, because instead of guiding our reading as a reader, what it tends to guide is how willing we are to believe someone who basically makes their living off of lies?” Like me, though, Ann Patchett is more wary of the question. “I have a real fear that the whole publication of this novel is going to center around questions of autobiography, which isn’t nearly as interesting as whether or not the book is any good,” she said of her novel “Commonwealth” in Literary Hub. “Most of the things in this book didn’t actually happen, but the feelings are very close to home. Or, as my mother said, ‘None of it happened and all of it’s true.’ ”Perhaps this issue of “truth” is where my irritation lies: I have the possibility with fiction to make a character feel more real than with nonfiction. I have access to her secrets and interior longings and the power to display them at every step of her life, from birth until death. Nonfiction, while more “true” than fiction, is bound by limitations in part because of its responsibility to that same truth. You can know only so much in nonfiction. But with fiction, you can have it all.Or perhaps I need to snap out of it. “I have many writer friends who get offended when they’re asked about the story behind the story,” Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie said in Boston Review. “I don’t. Imagination doesn’t fall from the sky; you have to work with something. My fiction borrows from my life, but even more so from the lives of other people. . . . I don’t feel threatened when I’m asked that.”I’m going to try to make grudging peace with the question. Maybe it’s only natural to want a glimpse behind the curtain. Fiction is a magic trick of sorts. But at its best it doesn’t just conjure up an imaginary world; it makes the real one disappear, it makes the author disappear. Only a book can do this — let you lose yourself so completely. So, if you can, forget about everything else. Just be there with the book.