https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/world/canada/justin-trudeau-canada-unga-2016-united-nations.html
Justin Trudeau’s Message to U.N.: ‘We’re Canada and We’re Here to Help’ - The New York Times
United Nations,General Assembly (UN),Trudeau  Justin,Canada
Sept. 19, 2016
5381
As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada made his first address to the United Nations General Assembly on Tuesday, he spoke before not only an enthusiastic audience, but one whose agenda largely mirrored his own.Two hallmarks of Mr. Trudeau’s government since it took power 10 months ago have been admitting Syrian refugees and promising action on climate change.While he raised both of those issues in his speech on Tuesday, Mr. Trudeau also used the occasion to underscore another two of his favorite themes: optimism and internationalism.“We need to focus on what brings us together, not what divides us,” Mr. Trudeau said. “For Canada that means re-engaging in global affairs.”Later, after acknowledging Canada’s relatively limited role on the world stage, Mr. Trudeau pledged to work with other countries on migrants, the environment and economic disparity. “We’re Canadian and we’re here to help,” he said.During last year’s election, Mr. Trudeau, the Liberal Party leader, promised to again make Canada an active participant in global affairs and at the United Nations.Stephen Harper, his Conservative predecessor, focused on domestic politics and was seen as being less engaged on most global issues. Mr. Harper once skipped a General Assembly session to tour a research center operated by Tim Hortons, the ubiquitous Canadian coffee and doughnut chain.Specific announcements were absent from Mr. Trudeau’s speech, which was greeted with cheers and flashing cellphones. Instead, he used much of his time to challenge other politicians for, in his view, exploiting anxiety.“Fear has never created a single job or fed a single family,” Mr. Trudeau said. “People want their problems solved, not exploited.”After taking office, the Trudeau government began a large airlift to bring Syrian refugees to Canada. The program has now brought in 31,000 people.Mr. Trudeau used his address to boast of that effort and promise that the refugees would be given every possible resource to become members of Canada’s middle class. “In Canada we see diversity as a strength, not a weakness,” he said.