http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/20/upshot/why-insurance-doesnt-always-prevent-giant-medical-bills.html
Why Insurance Doesn’t Always Prevent Giant Medical Bills - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Commonwealth Fund,Polls and Public Opinion,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
May 20, 2015
9268
Health insurance is supposed to help you pay for your health care, but it’s also supposed to protect you from financial ruin. A large new survey finds that, for nearly a quarter of insured adults, insurance has provided flimsy protection against huge medical bills.The survey, from the health research group the Commonwealth Fund, looked at around 3,000 adults who had been insured all year, and found that in 2014, 23 percent of them were “underinsured,” according to a definition of financial exposure developed by the researchers. The group in the study included people with Medicaid, Medicare and their own health insurance, but also the large percentage of Americans with insurance through their jobs.Many recent changes in the health care system — good and bad — tend to get pinned on the Affordable Care Act. But the Commonwealth study shows that the proportion of insured people with substantial medical costs has been essentially unchanged since 2010, the year the health law passed. In 2010, 22 percent of insured people met the definition of underinsured. In 2014, when many of the law’s major provisions went into effect, that proportion was 23 percent.The big change in the country’s experience of health insurance appears to have happened between 2005 and 2010; five years before Obamacare passed, only 13 percent of insured Americans met the fund’s definition of underinsured. Since then, the study shows, the number of adults expected to pay a certain amount (a deductible) for their medical care before insurance kicks in has increased. So has the size of those deductibles.Health plans that ask patients to reach a deductible before insurance foots the bill have become increasingly popular among employers that offer coverage to their workers. The plans are cheaper because they pay out a smaller share of bills. There is also evidence that having people pay for more of their health care out of pocket limits how much care they seek, and thus reins in insurance costs.But those high deductibles can come with a downside, especially for lower-income customers: a big financial exposure when they get sick. Among those who qualified as underinsured, 23 percent had medical bills in collections and 22 percent had to “change way of life” to pay the bills.The Commonwealth Fund defined someone as “underinsured” if they had paid more than 10 percent of household income in medical bills in the last year or had a deductible that was at least 5 percent of their income (or, in the case of very low income, spent more than 5 percent of it on medical bills). That definition includes both people who became ill and faced big bills, and people who might not have used their insurance but could have gotten into financial trouble had they faced a health crisis.Because of the timing of the survey, few people who were newly covered by the Affordable Care Act last year were included in its sample. The researchers focused on people who had been insured for a full year at the time they interviewed them, and coverage in the new Obamacare marketplaces and through the Medicaid expansion in most states didn’t begin until January 2014. The survey was conducted from July through late December 2014.Sara Collins, a vice president at Commonwealth and one of the survey’s authors, says she expects that the new Obamacare coverage will help pull down the rates of underinsurance in future surveys, though she’s not certain.The study highlights how merely having insurance is not necessarily enough to protect you from financial stress. For the relatively low-income Americans who have tended to buy the new marketplace plans, subsidies provided under the law are intended to limit how much of their incomes people can be asked to spend on medical care. Higher-income buyers who don’t qualify for those subsidies, however, could join the ranks of the underinsured; many of the popular marketplace plans include high deductibles. (The subsidies to help with medical bills, along with subsidies for the sticker price of insurance, could be erased in a majority states by a pending Supreme Court case, fundamentally reshaping that market.)As for the much larger number of people who get insurance through work, Ms. Collins remains worried about how much medical care insured people are being asked for pay for. “These are probably not the best designs for people, particularly people who have chronic conditions and low incomes, to encourage them to get the care they need,” she said.