https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/05/sports/tennis/wimbledon-coco-vandeweghe-pat-cash.html
30 Years Later, Pat Cash Helps Another Player Chase Wimbledon Dreams - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Cash  Pat,Vandeweghe  CoCo
July 5, 2017
4436
WIMBLEDON, England — The signature checkerboard headband was back on court at Wimbledon on Wednesday, wrapped snugly around the dynamic mind of Pat Cash on the 30th anniversary of the day he scored his first and only major title.But Cash was not serving to Ivan Lendl on this day, as he did so brilliantly on July 5, 1987. Instead, he was pounding balls over the net to CoCo Vandeweghe, his newest pupil, whom he hopes to take to the top of the women’s game.Vandeweghe is a talented 25-year-old American, ranked 25th in the world. She reached the semifinals at this year’s Australian Open and the quarterfinals at Wimbledon two years ago. But other than that, her results have not matched her potential, at least in Cash’s eyes.“I don’t understand why she is No. 25 in the world,” Cash said after running her through a workout on the No. 1 practice court. “She should be No. 5 in the world. I know she’s had some injuries and that doesn’t help.”He added, in an almost fatherly tone: “She needs to step up. It’s time to step up.”There was, he said, no disrespect intended toward Vandeweghe’s previous coach, Craig Kardon, who Cash said did a “great job” with Vandeweghe. But Cash said every coach can bring a unique perspective and a fresh approach; his will be to demand that Vandeweghe be aggressive, work diligently in practice and impose her will on the court.Cash joined Vandeweghe after the French Open, where she lost in the first round. Kardon quit, much to the young player’s surprise. More often, it is the player who fires the coach.“From what he said when we sat down, it was just a relationship that wasn’t working anymore,” Vandeweghe said after she lost to Elise Mertens in the first round. “I mean, it wasn’t my decision, so it’s all what he decided.”Soon after, Stephanie Lopez, Vandeweghe’s agent and a longtime friend of Cash’s who had previously worked with him, called to offer him the job. Cash, who has a tennis academy in Australia, had previously coached on the men’s tour for players like Greg Rusedski and Mark Philippoussis. Cash said he was immediately intrigued, but required some assurances.He gave Lopez specific areas that he was concerned about, some having to do with a level of seriousness in practice. Lopez assured him about Vandeweghe.“I’m not messing around,” Cash said. “She needs to be focused, work hard and do the things champions need to do. She’s said she’s ready to do it.”In their first practice, Cash said, Vandeweghe was a bit shocked by the intensity level. But she noticed how it paid off in the Birmingham tournament last month, when she scored two good victories before retiring from her third match with a toe injury.On the practice court on Wednesday, Cash did not like the way Vandeweghe moved for a drop shot. She did not have the unyielding commitment he demands. He reminded her of a similar ball she missed during her match with Mertens, and used it to impart one of his essential concepts. “You can have fun, but there is no jerking around on the practice court,” he insisted. “You jerk around on the practice court, you jerk around on the match court.”Cash has long believed that once the hard work and preparation are achieved, the score will take care of itself. When Daniel, his 31-year-old son, recently discovered a book by the former N.F.L. coach Bill Walsh called “The Score Takes Care of Itself,” he gave it to his father.Thirty years ago, an infant Daniel was being held in one of his father’s hands while the other carried the Wimbledon trophy after Cash shocked Lendl, then the No. 1 player in the world, in straight sets.“He was serving so well that day, I did not have a chance on his serve,” Lendl recalled, rattling off the 7-6 (5), 6-2, 7-5 score line as if it had happened yesterday. “The grass was really fast, and Pat took advantage. I don’t remember winning a point on his serve in the second set.”Cash was an innovator at the time, using the Australian sports psychologist Jeff Bond to steel his mental approach, and the art of visualization to picture himself winning. Back then players did not have teams or entourages, as they do now. But Cash made use of a trainer, a coach, his father, his sister and an uncle, all of whom squeezed into his box for the final that Sunday.Cash broke with protocol in another way, too. Upon winning, he scrambled up the walls and into the box to celebrate with his supporters, something no one could remember seeing before.“It was the first team, really,” Cash said. “There was nothing like that before. That climb was basically a thank you to them.”Three decades on, Vandeweghe, who plays Tatjana Maria in the second round on Thursday, would love to visualize a similar scene. As demanding as Cash can be on the practice court, he also has a fun side, and after their workout on Wednesday, she teased Cash about his 1987 mullet haircut.“I would say he’s actually on the side of dorky a little bit sometimes,” she joked. “I mean, it’s a different generation. So for me, it’s like sometimes the things that he says are like, ‘Dude, that’s a dorky reference.’”When asked about that characterization, Cash laughed. But his reply was not a sizzling return of serve. Instead, he offered a soft lob.“It’s funny,” he said. “She’s like my daughter. She reminds me of my daughter.”