http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/16/us/politics/elizabeth-warren-emerges-as-trade-bills-detractor-in-chief.html
From Senate Sideline, Elizabeth Warren Is Face of Attack on Trade Bill - The New York Times
Warren  Elizabeth,Trans-Pacific Partnership,United States Politics and Government,Obama  Barack,International Trade and World Market,Senate
May 15, 2015
6772
WASHINGTON —  Senator Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts Democrat whose vituperations against Wall Street have helped push her party to the left, has no official role opposing President Obama’s trade agenda.She does not sit on the committee where the trade package was written. She has never taken part in negotiations over its legislative language. When Democrats held a news conference after the measure failed on a procedural vote Tuesday, she was not there, nor did she speak on the floor after it passed on Thursday, as many of her colleagues did.Yet it is Ms. Warren who has become the national face of opposition to Mr. Obama on the trade package. She was the focus of the president’s ire last week when he attacked fellow Democrats as wrongheaded after his efforts to woo his party on the issue went nowhere.“The truth of the matter is that Elizabeth is, you know, a politician like everybody else,” the president said in widely quoted remarks.On Thursday, he ignored some members of his own party who deemed his criticism of Ms. Warren sexist and disrespectful and brought her up once again. “You know, the issue with respect to myself and Elizabeth has never been personal,” he said at Camp David.Ms. Warren may be a convenient foil for Mr. Obama, but the path forward on the proposed trade bill, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership, has been forged largely by the Democrats’ legislative policy brains: Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon and Senator Patty Murray of Washington. The opposition to an agenda that many Democrats and labor groups believe will cost American jobs has been led by Senators Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Charles E. Schumer of New York and Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Yet away from the Capitol, it is all Elizabeth Warren. Her public relations strategy has been textbook Warren: near exclusive use of liberal news media outlets like Rachel Maddow of MSNBC as receptive sounding boards for her ideas, appearances at academic forums and liberal think tanks, and a narrow focus on her favorite targets — in this case, her concerns that the bill would fray signature financial regulations.Those tactics have drawn attention away from her colleagues who have been working the committee chambers and back rooms of Capitol Hill.“She has sought the spotlight the most,” said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri. “I’m as confused as you are,” she added, when asked why Ms. Warren had emerged as a central player on the trade issue. For example, she said: “No one has worked harder on these issues over the years than Sherrod Brown. But I remember what my father told me when I got into politics: ‘Remember what you’re doing is not always fair.’ ”But many others have welcomed the spotlight on Ms. Warren. “I support anyone who has been helpful on this,” said Mr. Brown, who at a news conference on Tuesday defended Ms. Warren against the president’s comments. Ms. Warren was not at the news conference, and neither she nor her staff would comment for this article.Ms. Warren’s conspicuous role in the trade fight reflects her rising profile among liberal Democrats, many of them disappointed that she has declined to challenge Hillary Rodham Clinton in a run for the White House. She has filled a void on the progressive left as liberal stalwarts in Congress have either retired or been defeated in the last few years.“You’ve got the energy of the Elizabeth Warren faction kind of driving the agenda,” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said in an interview this week. He added, “She’s a very effective spokesman for a very far-left position.”Ms. Warren was wooed to run for the Massachusetts Senate seat against the Republican incumbent, Scott Brown, after Mr. Obama determined that she faced too much Republican opposition for confirmation as head of the Consumer Financial Protection Board that she had helped establish. She cruised to victory in 2012 on a campaign of middle-class advocacy and fiery criticism of banks and corporations.Now, she can often be seen racing through the halls of the Senate, waving off reporters and talking nonstop as she jogs alongside a frantic-looking aide.Although Ms. Warren’s voice in the trade debate has largely been outside Congress, she gave a floor speech in March narrowly focused on a section of the trade bill on investor dispute resolution, in which corporations can challenge regulatory changes made by member countries if those changes diminish the value of the company’s investments. Ms. Warren said that particular section of the trade accord “fundamentally tilts the playing field further in favor of big multinational corporations.”In April, she appeared at a union rally against the president’s trade agenda, and on May 12, she gave an interview to National Public Radio. Last week, at the Institute for New Economic Thinking, a liberal policy organization, she opened up a new front against granting Mr. Obama accelerated power, called fast-track, to complete the trade accord, saying that the fast-track bill as written would extend it as long as six years into the next — and possibly Republican — administration. Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, took up that line of argument on Thursday.Ms. Warren has largely shied away from writing large-scale bills, preferring to spend her time rallying progressives around middle-class issues and trying, at times successfully, to flatten Mr. Obama’s nominees. Her fight at the end of last year to maintain part of the Dodd-Frank financial industry regulatory law failed, even though Democrats were still in charge.Fans and foes have noted her bookend similarities to some Republican senators who have made their names with their own fiery rhetoric and ideology, among them Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas.Her voice has at times served the administration well. At the end of the last Congress, Senate Democratic leaders were quietly negotiating a package of tax extensions that fell short of what the White House wanted. Although Ms. Warren was overseas, administration officials called her and got her to hammer her Democratic colleagues, which helped kill the negotiations.But she has nearly as often been a thorn, going after any of Mr. Obama’s nominees who have previously worked on Wall Street. She most notably led the charge last year in preventing Antonio F. Weiss from becoming undersecretary of the Treasury for domestic finance, despite his advocacy of liberal economic policies, because he had been a senior investment banker at Lazard and she opposed naming a key Wall Street executive to the post. Mr. Weiss is now working for the Treasury secretary, Jacob J. Lew, as counselor, a position that does not require confirmation.Ms. Warren was also one of only four senators who voted against the confirmation of Michael Froman as United States trade representative in 2013, citing what she called his lack of transparency on trade talks.“She seems to be trying to take scalps and embarrass the administration without knowing what she is talking about,” said Tony Fratto, a former White House and Treasury official in the George W. Bush administration. “No one would ever question Antonio Weiss’s progressive Democratic credentials.”But while many of her colleagues grumble about the bright spotlight on her, others say she is an overall positive force for the issues Democrats care about most — income equality, tax fairness and workers’ rights. “Whether people agree with her or not,” said Mr. Schumer, who helped recruit her for the Senate, “everyone respects her intellect, her hard work and her passion. Her longtime commitment to these issues makes her a very effective senator.”