http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/02/nyregion/trump-taj-mahal-atlantic-city-strike.html
Workers Strike at Trump Taj Mahal in Atlantic City - The New York Times
Trump Taj Mahal,Strikes,Casinos,Atlantic City (NJ),Trump  Donald J,Icahn  Carl C,Unite Here,Presidential Election of 2016,New Jersey,Organized Labor
July 1, 2016
6646
On the boardwalk in Atlantic City, the holiday weekend began Friday morning with the chanting of disgruntled employees of the Trump Taj Mahal who walked off their jobs at 6 a.m.The workers, members of Unite Here Local 54, went on strike after contract negotiations with the owners of the Taj broke down late Thursday night. The union reached tentative agreements with four other casinos this week.The Taj casino floor remained open on Friday morning. The dealers and gaming staff members, who are not members of Unite Here, continued working. But all of the resorts’ waiters, cooks, bartenders, dishwashers, porters and room attendants walked out.As the sun rose over the boardwalk, dozens of the striking workers were walking a picket line outside the doors of the casino, chanting “All day, all night, Taj Mahal, shut it down.”Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, opened Trump Taj Mahal to great fanfare in 1990. But he no longer has a stake in the casino, which emerged from bankruptcy court protection this spring with a new owner, the financier Carl Icahn. Mr. Trump still owned a small stake in the casino when the company that ran it, Trump Entertainment Resorts, filed for bankruptcy in 2014.Chuck Baker, who has worked as a cook at the Taj since it opened 26 years ago, said his pay, now $20 an hour, had increased by only 20 cents an hour in the last 10 years. Mr. Baker, 56, said he and his fellow workers were demanding pay increases. More important, he said, they wanted the company to restore the health benefits they lost in the bankruptcy.Ben Begleiter, a spokesman for the union, said that the workers at the Taj earned an average of less than $12 an hour and that many of them could not afford to provide health insurance for themselves or their families. He said a recent survey of the workers found that about one-third of them had no health insurance.Mr. Trump sued Trump Entertainment Resorts in 2014, demanding that his name be removed from the Taj and another Atlantic City casino, Trump Plaza. He later reached an agreement with Mr. Icahn to keep the Trump name on the Taj. Trump Plaza was one of four Atlantic City casinos to shut down in 2014, amid a severe downturn in the city’s gaming industry.Mr. Icahn, whom Mr. Trump has suggested as a possible Treasury Department secretary in a Trump administration, also controls the Tropicana casino, which was the last of the casinos to come to terms with the union on Thursday.