https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/22/world/americas/reaction-to-obama-trip-reflects-change-in-cuban-americans.html
Reaction to Obama Trip Reflects Change in Cuban-Americans - The New York Times
Cuba,Cuban-Americans,Miami (Fla),Obama  Barack,Castro  Raul
March 21, 2016
6192
HIALEAH, Fla. —  As he took a final bite of his ham croqueta at Morro Castle cafeteria, Carlos Sanchez distilled the significance of President Obama’s visit to Cuba into one word: hope.“Any change is good, because it couldn’t get worse than what it was before,” said Mr. Sanchez, 50, who arrived here from Havana when he was 15. “Trying is better than nothing. But it takes time for people to change. They don’t want to change. They have to be forced to change.”In Miami, the United States’ most Cuban city, where many residents have relatives in Cuba, most Cuban-Americans welcomed Mr. Obama’s journey to the island as the latest breakthrough in the stalemate between the two countries. It is a position that not long ago would have seemed as unimaginable as Monday’s historic presidential meeting of the once-avowed Cold War enemies.Nowhere are United States-Cuba politics more personal than in this Miami suburb, home to longtime Cuban exiles and freshly arrived Cuban immigrants, former political prisoners who have never returned to the island and apolitical cafeteria and supermarket workers who go back every chance they get. And while some Cuban-Americans in this area still harbor bitterness and anger toward both the repressive Castro government and Mr. Obama’s outstretched hand, many more see the shift and the visit as a logical development that stands to benefit the Cuban people in the long run.Far-reaching change on the island is still elusive. But even minor change in Cuba, a country seemingly frozen in time, reverberates in ways it may not in other places. There are cracks now in communism’s grip on the island, seen in newly available Internet access, the growing number of small private businesses, and the possibility of travel for generations of Americans who knew nothing about Cuba and vice versa. All of that has been felt here, too. Families feel more connected. Relatives here feel more empowered to help relatives there.Barbara Gonzalez, 54, said her life had long been divided: Half her family is here, and half is in Cuba. To her, what matters after 50 years of hostility between the countries is not political gamesmanship but the chance to help her relatives and the everyday Cuban who hustles to put food on the table and find a job that pays more than a pittance.“At least in the way people think in Cuba, there has been a change,” said Ms. Gonzalez, a nurse’s assistant who arrived in Hialeah in 2000, as she put butter in her shopping cart at Publix Sabor, a popular supermarket in Florida that offers a large selection of Cuban products.“Cubans there can now see this other world, this other way of being,” she said. “It’s very important. And it’s good for Americans because they can see the reality of Cuba. They can see that the Cuban people have nothing to do with the government.”The excitement in Cuba over Mr. Obama’s visit is palpable, she said. “The father of my children, who still lives there, even went to the airport to welcome Obama,” Ms. Gonzalez added.Here, where life is too busy to pause for even historic moments, the anticipation is less obvious but no less felt by many. “Obama is the best man in the world to have gone there,” she said.Still, concerns about life in Cuba abound. The path to democracy is plodding, at best. And unabated acts of repression by the government, which played out on Sunday when dissidents were rounded up and detained before Mr. Obama’s visit, are denounced by both opponents and supporters of re-engagement with Cuba. The claim by Raúl Castro, the Cuban president, during a news conference on Monday that Cuba has no political prisoners only inflamed their anger.Mirell Diaz, 28, sat in her purple uniform waiting for her shift at El Palacio de Los Jugos, where tropical fruits are juiced and Cuban food is piled high, and spoke about her own transformation. Six months ago, she was in Cuba, biding her time until she could leave the island and jump-start her future. Now, she has a job and the hope of bringing relatives here.Despite Mr. Obama’s visit and the breathless media coverage surrounding it, Ms. Diaz said the changes in Cuba were skin deep: Many freedoms, like the ability to protest, remain taboo, and too many people there still see the United States, not Cuba, as their only hope for a better life, she said. That was underscored over the weekend when nine Cubans died out of a group of 27 trying to reach Florida during a 22-day trip aboard a 30-foot boat.“Not that much has really changed,” Ms. Diaz said. “I’m not really optimistic. I’m more doubtful.”And others still feel the old fury and see Mr. Obama’s visit as a betrayal.A few blocks away at the Publix Sabor, an incensed Margarita Quintero, who arrived here 37 years ago on the Mariel boatlift, gulped down her cafecito and railed against Mr. Obama, his visit to Cuba and the atrocities of President Castro and his brother Fidel.“It’s an embarrassment,” she said. “All the killing, the way they pushed us out, the hunger, the lack of freedom. Fidelismo is immoral. If he had been one minute in our shoes, he would have never negotiated with the Castro government.”The visit, she said, made her swear to never vote for a Democrat — not that she ever had much inclination to do so.“If Hillary Clinton is the winner, Castro will be here, drinking coffee,” she said, gesturing toward the coffee counter. “Never did I imagine the American government would be doing business with the Communist government.”