http://www.nytimes.com/2000/04/23/us/elian-gonzalez-case-overview-cuban-boy-seized-us-agents-reunited-with-his-father.html
THE ELIAN GONZALEZ CASE: THE OVERVIEW; CUBAN BOY SEIZED BY U.S. AGENTS AND REUNITED WITH HIS FATHER - The New York Times
MIAMI (FLA),CUBA,FLORIDA,IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE,GONZALEZ  ELIAN,RENO  JANET,GONZALEZ  JUAN MIGUEL,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,CUBA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US,CHILD CUSTODY AND SUPPORT,IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES,SEARCH AND SEIZURE,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,CUBAN-AMERICANS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
April 23, 2000
6197
Armed United States immigration agents smashed their way into the Little Havana home of Elian Gonzalez's Miami relatives before dawn today, took the sobbing 6-year-old boy from a bedroom closet and flew him to a reunion with his father outside Washington.As demonstrators wept in rage and coughed from pepper spray and tear gas, the agents wrapped the child in a blanket and carried him to an airport to fly him to Washington. The action touched off a fury in the streets outside the home where Cuban exiles have kept a vigil since November.''What's happening? What's happening?'' Elian said in Spanish as he was taken away. ''Help me. Help me.''The raid ended a bitter standoff between the federal government and the boy's defiant great-uncle, after federal officials finally gave up fruitless negotiations with an exile community that saw Elian as a symbol of freedom and a precious victory, now perhaps lost, over President Fidel Castro of Cuba.''God, how could you have performed only half a miracle?'' asked a frantic, weeping Marisleysis Gonzalez, a 21-year-old cousin who had been the boy's closest companion since he was rescued at sea on Nov. 25 on a failed crossing from Cuba that drowned his mother.The United States Justice Department said this morning that Elian was taken safely from the home at about 5:10 a.m. and was flown to Andrews Air Force Base near Washington, where his father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez, waited.Later in the morning, Mr. Gonzalez was seen carrying Elian from a car at the base. ''They are together,'' said Myron Marlin, a Justice Department spokesman.Within minutes of being reunited with his father, stepmother and 6-month-old half-brother, Elian was ''totally at ease'' and laughing, said Gregory B. Craig, Juan Miguel Gonzalez's lawyer.Photographs released by the lawyer showed a beaming Elian. The family will be taken to an undisclosed location in the Washington area, where it can be assured of privacy, officials said.Elian, one Justice Department spokesman said, was subdued and calm on the flight from Miami, as federal agents gently explained what was happening.Hundreds of unhappy Cuban-American demonstrators clashed with the police here this afternoon, and by late in the evening, The Associated Press reported, more than 260 people had been arrested. The distraught Miami relatives, saying they wanted to assure themselves that the boy was happy and safe, boarded a plane to Washington, seeking a meeting with Mr. Gonzalez, who had not yet decided whether to grant one.The relatives -- Lazaro, Delfin and Marisleysis Gonzalez -- were met at Reagan National Airport by a police escort. They had hoped to go directly to Andrews to see Elian, but were told they would be turned away at the gate.They drove to Capitol Hill, where they met with Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire. The family and Mr. Smith then drove to the Air Force base, where they were turned away.Attorney General Janet Reno told reporters this morning that she had tried until the final moment of the standoff to try to find some other way that father and son could be reunited, but that no agreement could be reached.Ms. Reno also defended the decision to use force, and armed agents, saying there were reports that people in the crowd or the neighborhood had weapons.She had no other choice, she said, but to order the raid on the home of Lazaro Gonzalez. ''Elian is safe and no one is seriously hurt,'' she said.This does not mean Elian is on his way back to Cuba. Under an order by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta, Elian's father cannot take the boy home before a decision in a hearing on Elian's application, filed by his relatives, for political asylum. The hearing is scheduled for May 11.But at the two-bedroom house in Little Havana, where Elian has lived under the constant watch of television cameras and of demonstrators who have turned him into an almost saintlike presence as well as a prize in the 41-year-old cold war with Mr. Castro, people wailed, sank to the ground and cursed the United States government for what it had done.''They're animals,'' screeched Marisleysis Gonzalez to the swelling crowd this morning.While exiles here had kept vigil in anticipation of such a raid for months, the timing -- the morning after Good Friday and the day before Easter in a heavily Roman Catholic community -- and the violent, sudden nature of it, left them in as much disbelief as rage.A crowd of demonstrators had slowly dwindled overnight from hundreds to about 50 people, some sleeping behind police barricades, when three white unmarked vans sped down the dark street and stopped in front of the house.''They're here! They're here!'' demonstrators shouted.About 20 agents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service leaped from the vans and tore through a chain-link gate. Eight broke through the front door and, displaying automatic weapons, stormed through the tiny house in search of Elian.Cesar Camejo, a cousin of Lazaro Gonzalez, was in the house with the family watching television as the agents burst in. ''They held Marisleysis down and told her not to move in Spanish,'' Mr. Camejo said. The agents shouted at the others not to move or interfere, as Marisleysis pleaded: ''Don't take the boy. Don't take the boy.''The boy was hiding in a closet in the arms of Donato Dalrymple, one of the two fishermen who rescued Elian from the Atlantic Ocean and who has been a constant presence at the house.An agent in helmet and body armor, holding an automatic rifle, pulled the boy from Mr. Dalrymple's arms. The agent, Mr. Dalrymple said, pointed the rifle at him as Elian cried ''No! No! No!''An Associated Press photograph, sent around the world, showed the gun close to Elian's face, but Ms. Reno said that the barrel was never pointed at the boy and that the agent's finger was not on the trigger. The photograph bears out that description.The boy was handed to a female agent who cradled him in her arms and, with help from another agent, raced out into the din and confusion of the street and quickly through the side doors of a van.Elian's eyes were wide open. He cried and seemed terrified as all around him people screamed, cursed and fought against a line of federal agents who formed a wall with shields and automatic weapons as a cloud of tear gas and pepper spray wafted down the street.In all, the operation took about three minutes.A few protesters tried to form a human chain to block the front of the house and keep the agents from taking the boy. Ramon Saul Sanchez, an exile in Miami who has become the leader in the demonstrations, said he was struck by an agent's gun butt. He bled from an ear as a young man held him upright.Moments after Elian was taken from the bedroom closet, he was aboard a plane and headed for Washington and his father. A female United States immigration agent comforted him.''This may seem very scary,'' the agent told him in Spanish, officials said. ''It will soon be better.''Ms. Reno called for giving father and son privacy to become reacquainted. ''Let us give him and his father the space, the calm, the moral support they need to reconnect and reaffirm their bond between father and son,'' Ms. Reno said.After taking Elian from the house, agents had whisked him to nearby Watson Island, where they boarded a helicopter to Homestead Air Force Base in southern Miami-Dade County. A doctor examined him to make sure the boy had not been injured.Continuing an extraordinary voyage for a boy who was shipwrecked off Florida and had never flown before, Elian was then put on a United States Marshals Service plane for Washington.The immigration agent who comforted Elian on board was joined by a psychiatrist, a flight surgeon and the Immigration and Naturalization Service agent who had led the rescue operation, officials said.''All of our reports so far are that the child has been very calm, has not been anxious, has not been thrashing, has not been crying,'' said Doris Meissner, commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. ''And the basic feedback that we have from a series of people now, who have been directly with him, is that he is a real terrific, tough kid.''Few details had been ignored.The immigration agent at Elian's side, whose name was not released for security reasons, soothed him with prearranged words cleared by psychologists. He was offered food and drink. He was also offered a few toys: some Play-Doh, an airplane, a map and a watch, an administration official said.Juan Miguel Gonzalez rushed to the Andrews base in a convoy of vehicles to await Elian's arrival. He had been staying at the residence in Bethesda, Md., of Cuba's top diplomat in the United States.''They need more space,'' Mrs. Meissner said. ''And they need more privacy.''Mr. Craig, Juan Miguel Gonzalez's lawyer, reiterated his client's pledge to remain in the United States while the Miami relatives seek a political asylum hearing on his behalf.The raid apparently came as a shock to the family in Miami. The family had thought that negotiations would continue, said family members and their lawyers, but Ms. Reno said that it had been obvious the family was not going to budge.President Clinton said this morning that ''the law has been upheld.''''When all efforts failed,'' Mr. Clinton said, ''there was no alternative but to enforce the decision by the I.N.S. and federal court that Juan Miguel Gonzalez have custody of his son.''I think that it was the right thing to do,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''I am very pleased with the way she handled it.''But in Miami, people compared the raid to something that might happen in Communist Cuba and swore that the United States government would regret its actions.''We never expected the federal government to come in like they did, like thieves in the night,'' said Carlos Brito, who demonstrated outside the house almost every night for months. ''I've always been proud of being an American, but this morning I wish I were a citizen of any other country. I've always defended this country, but to take this boy in the middle of the night? Today, the federal government has betrayed me.''Rosa de la Cruz, 58, said she was knocked to the ground by an armed man, near a gardenia bush in front of the house. ''I was praying,'' Ms. Cruz said.Outside the house, in the minutes after the raid, three young men held each other and sobbed. One woman sat in a ditch, crying and holding her face in her hands. People rushed back and forth yelling, unsure whom to vent their anger on. An American flag was flown upside down in disrespect.In the city, protests gradually swelled as groups for blocks around the house burned tires in intersections and snarled traffic by standing or marching in the road. Protesters punched, kicked and spat at the police, and hurled bus benches into streets, which soon clogged with backed-up traffic, ambulances and fire trucks. Protesters blocked the access roads to the Miami International Airport, and traffic backed up for miles.The Associated Press reported that by late afternoon protesters started more than 207 fires, mostly burning tires and trash, and emergency crews had answered at least 69 injury calls while a nearby hospital treated 11 people, all for minor injuries.Earlier in the morning as the raid was being conducted, the police appeared to have no presence at all at the house. Miami police had stood watch at the house for months, but as the federal agents moved in, there seemed to be no uniformed officers there to aid with the operation.Only several minutes later, after the federal agents had left, did the Miami police move in.Mayor Joseph Carollo of Miami said he had not been told about the raid, but that was not a surprise. Mr. Carollo has made it clear that he sides with the exile community in this fight.That community, he said, is ''destroyed, emotionally destroyed.''Mayor Alex Penelas of Miami-Dade County, who had also sided with the exile community, said he, too, had not heard about the raid until after it was over. Mr. Penelas had pledged that his officers would not aid the federal government in any attempt to take Elian.Later in the day, police officers responded to try to keep the peace.But the paralyzing of Miami that some people here had feared if the government seized the boy never really happened. By late afternoon, the crowds had dissipated.What many people talked about was a sense of something lost.''My heart was taken out,'' said Ledia Chavez, 38, who came from Cuba in 1962.