http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/29/nyregion/rat-summit-no-joke-conferees-new-laws-are-proposed-rodents-increase.html
A Rat Summit Is No Joke To Conferees; New Laws Are Proposed As the Rodents Increase - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,LHOTA  JOSEPH J,FIELDS  C VIRGINIA,RATS,WASTE MATERIALS AND DISPOSAL
Nov. 29, 2000
6150
It is a struggle between beauty and the beast.On one side are defenders of the common plastic garbage bag, that highly popular container for orderly trash removal and recycling, beautiful in its simplicity and in most ways preferable to the metal can. On the other are crusaders against the common Norway rat, that highly populous city dweller that gnaws through plastic garbage bags like pie crust.Such is the backdrop of the Rat Summit, ''War on Rats,'' a conference today at Columbia University where experts from academia and pest control are to meet with officials from City Hall, the Department of Health and the City Council. The intent is to find solutions to what many have called an explosion in the rat population this year, or at least in rat sightings on subway platforms, public housing playgrounds and in an unsettling array of other locales, like Central Park.Although the conferees will look at many options, including the increased use of rodenticides and better ways to clean up construction sites, a main focus promises to be the ticklish question of how New Yorkers package their trash.Like the rat itself, this could get ugly.''For years, communities have suffered in silence, but now they are being loud and demanding,'' said Bill Perkins, a member of the Council from Harlem who will be the Rat Summit's master of ceremonies.Along with the Manhattan borough president, C. Virginia Fields, he is leading the charge down the city's political corridors for tougher regulations on rodent control. Mr. Perkins has proposed a law requiring that all garbage be enclosed in metal or heavy plastic cans with attached lids.So far, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has declined to say whether he supports the proposal, though the Health Department has begun an advertising campaign that urges people to put trash in cans to control the rat population.''We make unprecedented efforts to kill rats,'' the mayor said at his daily news conference on Monday. ''We kill more of them than any place else. We probably lead the country in rat killing.'' On the proposal to require cans, Mr. Giuliani added, ''We are looking at what kind of impact that actually would have.''A chorus of office building managers, real estate executives and restaurateurs say that enclosed garbage containers may be fine for other cities, which have basements, loading docks, back alleys and room at curbs, but not in the cramped confines of New York City. And just imagine, the opponents say, the stink of soiled cans and the deafening din as they are strewn about the street.''Start putting everything in cans with lids and they will take up entire city blocks,'' said Ronni Lynn Arougheti, president of Heron Ltd., a real estate company that manages 100 large apartment buildings, mostly in Manhattan. The buildings dispose of garbage by shredding, crushing and packing it into small mountains of plastic bags, with barely a can in sight.Warren Wechsler, first senior vice president of the Real Estate Board of New York, a group whose members include most of the largest landlords and developers in Manhattan, agrees.''This would be a heavy lift in every way,'' Mr. Wechsler said. ''Even though there is a problem that has to be attended to here, this doesn't seem to be a feasible way of protecting ourselves from rats.''The Columbia conference comes in the aftermath of a year in which rats repeatedly surfaced as the focus of contentious debate at City Hall. Ms. Fields, among others, has accused the mayor and his staff of making the rat problem little more than the butt of jokes.Mr. Giuliani is to be represented at the summit by Joseph J. Lhota, his top deputy mayor, who since July has presided over a rat control task force of health and sanitation officials and has engaged in a tongue-in-cheek exchange with the mayor over his role. For months, the door to Mr. Lhota's City Hall office has had a sign reading ''The Rat Czar: Allied Command Headquarters.''City Hall has begun an advertising campaign, budgeted at $600,000, in which television spots and posters on buses and sanitation trucks depict cartoon rats gleefully feasting from plastic bags and uncovered cans. But the campaign, financed from a $14 million allocation in the Health Department's annual budget for rodent control that has remained almost unchanged in three years, has not been accompanied by any increase in extermination or by more rat control efforts.''This is a problem that has to be taken seriously by the mayor,'' said Ms. Fields, whose staff has answered a rat complaint hot line since July and has forwarded 473 complaints to the Health Department.For its part, the Health Department says it, too, has been receiving telephoned rat complaints, so many as to make Ms. Field's efforts redundant. Sandra Mullin, a department spokeswoman, said its line had fielded more than 10,000 complaints since May.Whether the flood of calls means that New York City's rat population is surging remains unclear, since experts say there is no way of estimating how many of the rodents lurk in the city's dense labyrinth of pipes, foundations and tunnels. Pest control experts say one reason for alarm is the city's high level of construction, which has simply forced underground rats to the surface, but few dispute that their numbers are growing.''Anecdotally, it makes sense to say that the rat population grows as urban America becomes more congested, and New York City is at the extreme end of the spectrum,'' said Bruce A. Colvin, a biologist who has advised cities around the world, including Boston and Washington, on rat control. He is to give the keynote speech today at the Columbia conference.Dr. Colvin said that because of its density, New York should consider several new regulations, including the garbage can law proposed by Mr. Perkins. Vacant lots should be cleaned up, and restaurants required to adhere to stiffer rules of cleanliness, he said, but he acknowledged the difficult political hurdles those measures would present.''To get the job done, you need restaurant associations, building owners, health officals and municipal agencies on board and willing to communicate,'' he said.To that end, the conference will feature sessions like ''Creating a Rat-Free Environment'' and ''Getting Business and Government Involved.''But whether such cooperation can be forged in New York may depend first on whether Mr. Giuliani backs the proposed rules on garbage collection, and how forcefully.But Health Department officials, apparently with the backing of the mayor and Mr. Lhota, have attended several public meetings across the city in recent months, often accompanied by Mr. Perkins.''We recognize that rodent-proof containment of waste will remove the primary source of food sustaining the rodent population and is the single most effective action,'' said James H. Gibson, the assistant commissioner for veterinary and pest control, at a Nov. 4 meeting at Queens Borough Hall. He said the department ''strongly supports the concept'' of Mr. Perkins's bill.Mr. Lhota declined repeated requests for comment.The bill, introduced as an ordinance on Oct. 10, would not do away with plastic bags. It would actually compel their use, but would also require them to be placed inside metal or heavy plastic cans. Another bill  before the Council, which has provoked far less controversy, would require developers and contractors to bait their construction sites with rat traps and rodenticide.In interviews, several business people and building managers said the proposed requirement for enclosed garbage cans could complicate recycling efforts, which now rely almost entirely on plastic bags.''We've worked assiduously on recycling,'' said Steven Bernardo, the vice president of the Association of Riverdale Cooperatives, an organization of 13,000 apartment owners. ''I don't know that this wouldn't tip the balance,'' he added. ''Just think how all those cans would smell.''Several restaurateurs declined to comment, apparently unwilling to associate their restaurants with any discussion of rats. One who did comment was Richard Shipley, assistant manager of Gabriel's on West 60th Street in Manhattan. Gabriel's puts its garbage on the street in plastic bags late at night, to be picked up by private carters, so not to create unsightly obstacles on the sidewalk.''If we were compelled to do this we could,'' he said of the proposed requirement for cans. ''It would create a major logistical hurdle.''But proponents of the rule on garbage disposal harbor few reservations.''I have heard some complaints, but I don't know if there is any middle ground,'' Ms. Fields said. ''My viewpoint is that if you compare the two, the sight of garbage cans is much better than the sight of rats.''