https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/28/sports/soccer/fifa-pulls-back-the-curtain-but-will-it-ever-see-the-light.html
FIFA Pulls Back the Curtain, but Will It Ever See the Light? - The New York Times
World Cup (Soccer),Soccer,International Federation of Association Football (FIFA),Garcia  Michael J
June 28, 2017
8324
The only respite comes on Page 99. It is brief: only four lines, three sentences, among many thousands. The prose is dry and stolid, accompanied by neither rhetorical flourish nor lavish praise.It would, in ordinary circumstances, be the most unremarkable statement. In the context of the rest of Michael J. Garcia’s long-secret report into how the sites of the 2018 and 2022 World Cups were awarded, though, it becomes quite the opposite.“The Belgium/Holland bid team provided full and valuable cooperation in establishing the facts and circumstances of this case,” Garcia writes. “Witnesses were made available for interviews; documents were produced; and follow-up requests were likewise accommodated. No issues were identified.”And then, after that brief detour into normality, that simple “nothing to see here,” it cranks up again. That one paragraph apart, Garcia’s report spends 430 pages painting the bleakest picture of FIFA’s world, what its author labels its “culture of entitlement.”The tag is inadequate: What Garcia depicts is the cravenness and venality, the arrogance and anger, the greed and the grasping of soccer’s governing body and the men who had come to dominate it.He does it so relentlessly that, by the end, the effect should be so draining, so head-spinning and soul-sapping, as to be faintly dystopian. That it is not is only because so many of the demands made by FIFA’s self-enriching, self-interested guardians of the game are so comic.There is the story of Jack Warner trying to persuade England’s bid team to get his banker’s son a job, and then taking umbrage when the employment was not quite good enough. He did the same when England agreed to stage two games involving Trinidad and Tobago’s under-20 team, but did not think to pay its airfare.There is Nicolás Leoz, the Paraguayan delegate, playing the role of a particularly unconvincing Bond villain by asking England for the chance to meet the Queen, a knighthood and that the F.A. Cup be named after him.Or Michel D’Hooghe, FIFA’s chief medical officer, receiving a painting as a gift from Vyacheslav Koloskov, an adviser to the Russian bid and a “close personal friend” to the Belgian for 20 years. D’Hooghe attempted to stave off allegations of corruption by declaring that he found out the painting was worthless and that he hated it so much that he tried to palm it off on his secretary, who also hated it.There is Harold Mayne-Nicholls, head of FIFA’s bid evaluation team, trying to persuade Qatar’s Aspire Academy, its state-of-the-art training center, to let his son and another player go there and train, a request so brazen that the Qataris, whose methods take up the vast majority of the report, had to tell him it was improper.There are Ángel María Villar Llona and Julio Grondona, executive committee members from Spain and Argentina, in states of righteous fury that they might even have to answer questions. There are allegations — dismissed by Garcia — that countries competing against each other had traded votes. There is the hoaxer who gets in touch to say that Grondona and Sepp Blatter, the former FIFA president, had a joint bank account, in the United States, in their own names. As ridiculous as that would be, by the time the charge appears in the report, the amorality of the characters involved is so normalized — and so unapologetic — that it comes as a bit of a surprise that Garcia scotches it.For all that he uncovered, though, what is not unearthed — after 18 months of investigation and then three years of ill-explained secrecy — is proof that either Russia, host of next year’s World Cup, or Qatar, which will hold the tournament in 2022, had bribed their way to victory.Garcia could not, given the environment in which he was compelled to work, be expected to have succeeded. Only a handful of the members of the executive committee who cast the final votes, the only men who would have conclusive proof of bribery, agreed to cooperate with him, and Russia — desperately, unfortunately, completely accidentally — destroyed all of the computers it had used during the bidding process.That should not diminish the overall effect — or the historical significance — of Garcia’s findings, though. He might not have found any evidence that anyone broke the law, but he did find that almost without exception, everyone involved in the bidding process at some point transgressed the spirit of it.Nobody — with the possible exception of the Dutch and the Belgians — could possibly read all 430 pages of the report and believe they come out looking good. Nobody, that is, except Russia and Qatar.The latter rushed out a statement on Tuesday declaring Garcia’s report represented “a vindication of the integrity of our bid.” Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s deputy prime minister and organizer in chief of next year’s World Cup, said it proved his country had “done nothing that has violated the ethics code or the general norms and principles of the application rules.”Those reactions were, in their own way, just as indicative of the problems facing FIFA as it attempts to reform itself as the contents of the report itself.For three years, the Garcia report was concealed. FIFA released a redacted summary, and Blatter, its former president, said that was the end of it. FIFA’s new president, Gianni Infantino, then declared he could not do more because of the need to protect the privacy of some of those involved, or because of active investigations by FIFA’s ethics committee. For two and a half years, the organization obstructed and obfuscated, fudged and fumbled.This week, as soon as the German newspaper Bild disclosed that it had obtained a copy, all of those reservations miraculously fell away. When the full report was published on Tuesday afternoon, FIFA claimed doing so proved its commitment to “transparency.”If that is a rather generous interpretation, combing through Garcia’s findings, one finds it hard to understand why FIFA did not go public sooner. Infantino has made much of his credentials as the reformer a rotten organization required. Over 430 pages, Garcia shows exactly what he is up against; the lack of contrition, in Russia and Qatar, in response to the report’s publication proves how slow the going will be.This was a world, after all, in which on a trip to Tokyo to assess the Japanese bid for 2022, several executive committee members were presented with state-of-the-art digital cameras, worth around $1,200. Reynald Temarii, the subsequently disgraced delegate from Oceania, said he forgot he ever received it. He was also given a yakusugi ball, a fine piece of craftsmanship made from Japanese cedar. It, too, was worth $1,200. He described it as “a little wooden trophy.” At FIFA, gratitude did not exist, only the expectation of more. Its grandees knew neither the cost nor value of anything.Infantino — as anyone would — will need time to change that culture, to transform FIFA into a place where those four lines describing Holland and Belgium’s bid are the norm, not the exception. Garcia’s report exposes much — though not everything — of what went on in FIFA’s shadows. But in doing so, it shows how long, how deep they were, and how hard it will be for light to penetrate.The temptation is to see publication as the end of something. If FIFA is to change, it must see it instead as a start.