https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/insider/the-fact-is-they-still-went-fishing.html
‘The Fact Is, They Still Went Fishing’ - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 15, 2017
136
Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment. Some comments were edited for length and clarity.1. If a person takes their fishing pole down to the lake, casts a line hoping to catch a fish, and winds up not catching anything, the fact is, they still went fishing.— Charles C Caro on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about emails detailing Donald Trump Jr.’s meeting in June 2016 with a Russian lawyer who promised him damaging information about Hillary Clinton.2. This is a businessman father teaching his children how to win. It doesn’t matter how you win, just that you win.— Slime2 in New Jersey. 3. Mr. Liu literally lived his words of protest in a country hostile to his hopes for democracy. I did not know much about him but am impressed with his courage and eloquence in the face of great personal danger.— Eric in New York, reacting to an article about the death of Liu Xiaobo, a Chinese dissident who won a Nobel Peace Prize while imprisoned. 4. The hopes and dreams of the victims are never even considered. Being accused of rape ruined your career plans? Wonder what being raped would have done to them.— Celeste in San Francisco, reacting to an article about a planned review of campus rape policies by Betsy DeVos, the secretary of education.This comment received more than 200 reader recommendations.5. I think it’s pretty common for men to tell women they look beautiful when they meet them. Considering her age, he was being generous and thoughtful. I think a lot of women are not used to compliments so the idea seems more threatening than it is.— Kristin Hugs on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about President Trump telling Brigitte Macron, the wife of French president Emmanuel Macron, that she is “in such good shape.”6. Maybe he could’ve just kept it simple. How about, “Hello, it’s a pleasure to meet you”? Commenting on the physical appearance of a stranger is totally inappropriate and creepy. And then turning to her husband to repeat himself makes it even creepier. It implies a sense of ownership. It’s very telling of how he views women.— Isabel Abdai on The Times’s Facebook page.7. It is extremely difficult to take a swing at so-called “bad mothers” without the blow landing on their children. In this case, we have a mother who was actually in treatment, but Kentucky Child Protective Services authorities were more interested in punishing her than in what was really best for her child.— Richard Wexler in Alexandria, Va., the executive director of the National Coalition for Child Protection Reform, reacting to an article about doctors who are rethinking ways to treat children born addicted to opiates.8. Step 1: Understand that you are a sheep in a grand experiment. Step 2: Willfully ignore your sheep role and continue stare into your phone to fulfill superficial fixation.— Scott Smith on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about location sharing on smartphones. 9. Recently I took a friend with doctoral degree to lunch. Insensitively I led him into a McDonald’s. Suddenly I saw his face freeze up as he was confronted with menu items like “Hamburger” and “Fries” and ingredients like ketchup, mustard and a sesame seed bun. I quickly asked him if he wanted to go somewhere else and he anxiously nodded yes and we ate gluten-free vegan Thai.— SB in New York, reacting to an op-ed column by David Brooks in which an Italian sandwich menu served as an anecdote to explain cultural barriers constructed by the upper classes. This comment received more than 3,500 reader recommendations. 10. Cost breakdown:Homemade mac and cheese: $16.35 ($10.22, adjusted for partial ingredient use).Box of Kraft mac and cheese: $1.89 ($0.99 on sale, which is often).Time breakdown:Homemade mac and cheese: 1 hour, 40 minutes.Box of Kraft mac and cheese: 10 minutes (shorter for the microwaved version).Homemade mac and cheese is not trivially easy to make, either time-wise or cost-wise. Add in a dinner that’s got to be made sometime after you pick up your kids from school and bathtime, and it’s even less trivial. So yes, a reasonably practical solution is to try to minimize phthalate contamination in these products.— Orthodromic in New York, reacting to an article about harmful chemicals found in the powdered cheese mix inside many brands of boxed macaroni and cheese. This comment received more than 100 reader recommendations. 