http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/09/us/politics/09michigan.html
In the Race for Governor of Michigan, the Struggling Economy Is Topic A - The New York Times
Michigan,Granholm  Jennifer M,DeVos  Dick,Unemployment,Economic Conditions and Trends,United States Economy,Elections,Stabenow  Debbie
Oct. 9, 2006
6798
THREE RIVERS, Mich., Oct. 4 — If for much of the country the economic signs seem relatively healthy, they do not in places like this town. A plastics plant nearby closed  days before Christmas, a company that makes mirror parts for cars has shrunk and the mayor says he heard talk, just this month, of possible cuts at a factory that makes drive shafts.And so, while elections in other regions have turned to matters like national security, the war in Iraq and Congressional scandal, Michigan’s races for governor and, to a lesser degree, the United States Senate are hinging this year almost entirely on the struggling economy and the question of who is to blame for it.In the state’s cloud of sinking numbers, Republicans hope for an opportunity to pick up two   positions. In other states with once-robust industrial bases, including Ohio, Indiana and Pennsylvania, economic worries are playing a similar, if far more subtle and layered, role this fall.“We’ve thought about moving south,” said Deb Hallock, 44, who said she had lived in Three Rivers for 20 years but lost her home about a year ago when she and her husband could no longer pay the mortgage. Ms. Hallock makes pizzas at a fast-food restaurant; her husband makes cargo trailers at a factory but had no job when they were evicted. “I don’t really know what a governor can do to stop all of what’s happening here, but I wish someone would do something.”Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm, an enormously popular Democrat when she took office four years ago, now faces a serious challenge from Dick DeVos, the former president of the Amway Corporation and the son of a co-founder.While campaigning, Mr. DeVos regularly ticks off dire statistics: with major cuts at the Detroit-area automobile companies, Michigan’s unemployment rate of 7.1 percent is one of the worst in the nation; the state has lost 85,000 jobs in the last four years; and it has ranked second in the number of young people moving elsewhere.In a testy first debate between the candidates in early October, the answers to questions on almost every topic seemed to circle back to this single issue. Mr. DeVos, who says his own business acumen is just the medicine Michigan needs, said  Ms. Granholm was responsible for failing to create “the atmosphere” for job creation in Michigan despite the economic recovery plan she talked about at nearly every campaign stop.“I find it amazing,” Mr. DeVos said in the debate, “to hear the governor say the plan is working when the people of Michigan aren’t.”Ms. Granholm, who said hers was the most aggressive economic recovery plan in the nation, seemed to sidestep responsibility for what has happened here, saying she had “stepped into this current” in a state that had long depended on cars for its livelihood.“The question is, Why did we get here, and how are we going to get out?” Ms. Granholm said.Elsewhere, the economic questions are less extreme, less consuming and, in some cases, far more ambiguous. For the most part, challengers in nearby states have bemoaned economic failures, while incumbents have pointed to opposing, upbeat economic signs or stayed mainly silent on the matter.In Ohio, the loss of manufacturing work, along with political corruption and scandal, has contributed to “a generally sour atmosphere” among voters, said Herbert Asher, a political science professor emeritus at Ohio State University.Sherrod Brown, the Democratic challenger to Senator Mike DeWine, has worked to remind voters of their economic portrait, “a thriving manufacturing base dismantled piece by piece,” in the words of Mr. Brown’s spokeswoman, Joanna Kuebler.Indiana’s economy has improved. But Russell L. Hanson, a political scientist at Indiana University, said the recovery had been slow and spotty in parts of the state, especially where the auto industry’s troubles had affected Indiana’s component suppliers —  something  the  challengers in several competitive House races have made an issue.A complicated picture has also emerged in Pennsylvania, with candidates, even those from the same political party, pointing to opposing signs as evidence of the relative healthiness, or the horror, of the state’s economy. Gov. Edward G. Rendell, a Democrat, has boasted of new job creation. But Bob Casey, another Democrat and an ally of Mr. Rendell, who is running against Senator Rick Santorum, a Republican, has complained of an environment in which tuition and health care costs are rising while incomes cannot keep up.In Michigan, meanwhile, no candidate is boasting.Mr. DeVos and Ms. Granholm pepper their speeches, commercials and Web sites with proposals for reversing the economic tide. Mr. DeVos has pressed for change, proposing that the state speed the granting of permits for businesses and that the tax on businesses known as the Single Business Tax be ended.His campaign has scoffed at Ms. Granholm’s efforts, like a Cool Cities program to give grants to cities for economic development, as too paltry. He has also suggested she did not try hard enough to persuade the Japanese to open a Honda factory in Michigan.“A cool city is one where you get a job,” said John Truscott, Mr. DeVos’s director of communications. “We never thought we would surpass Mississippi in a race for the bottom, but we’re there.”Mr. DeVos, a relative political newcomer from Ada who aides say has poured about $17 million of his own money into the race, began advertising in February, which helps explain how every voter interviewed in towns in the Kalamazoo area, like Three Rivers, and near Lansing said they knew his name.For a time, polls showed Mr. DeVos even or slightly ahead of Ms. Granholm, but more recent surveys suggest she has pulled ahead slightly. In a survey of 600 likely voters taken this month for The Detroit News and several television stations, Ms. Granholm was leading, with 46 percent saying they would vote for her, compared with 40 percent for Mr. DeVos; the margin of error was four percentage points. But of those polled, 12 percent said they were undecided.Ms. Granholm, a former federal prosecutor and a former state attorney general, said she was pressing to diversify the state’s economy into fields like alternative energy, life sciences and domestic security; wanted to double the number of college graduates in Michigan within a decade; and hoped to change the way the state handles work force training for those without jobs.And while Mr. DeVos has tried to blame Ms. Granholm for the state’s struggles, in an interview, she directed the blame elsewhere: to circumstances beyond her control (“No other state is the automotive capital of the world”); to the Bush administration (“He has sat idly by while the industry reels”); and even to Mr. DeVos, who supported the trade agreements, Nafta and Cafta, that she said had helped leave the Michigan economy in a wreck.“If we had diversified our state 10 years ago, we wouldn’t be here,” Ms. Granholm said. “I’m going to go anywhere and do anything to change the economy of Michigan.”Similarly, in the Senate race here, Debbie Stabenow, the Democratic incumbent, and Mike Bouchard, a sheriff and her Republican challenger, have each touted economic recovery plans: “Jobs Agenda” for her and “Renewing Michigan’s Economy” for him.But at a Laundromat in Three Rivers, all the plans in the world could not convince Steve Brunn that Michigan could be turned around. Like others here, Mr. Brunn, 54, said he was doubtful that any campaign promise would add up to jobs after all the commercials were over and the votes were in.“We’re being batted back and forth between the Republicans and Democrats,” he said. “DeVos is talking like everybody else — he wants to make change — but what is he really going to do to change this? We’re competing with these other countries, and there are no answers.”Thomas Lowry, who for 11 years has been mayor of Three Rivers, said this town of 7,400 still had its share of manufacturing companies, though the numbers, he said, seemed to shrink little by little each year. The echoes reach far beyond the factories, Mr. Lowry said. The diner downtown loses business. More and more “for sale” signs fill front yards along quiet streets.Even his own business, a bookstore in the center of downtown, has seen the sale of magazines, a minor luxury item for many, fall off. “It ripples everywhere,” he said.Mr. Lowry, who said he expected to vote for Ms. Granholm, said he was not sure to what extent the voters would hold their political leaders responsible for all that had happened — and all that had not.  “There’s something about our species, though, that wants a scapegoat,” he said.