https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/08/us/politics/democratic-debate-highlights.html
Democratic Debate Takeaways: Clinton and Sanders Grow Tired of Each Other - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Race and Ethnicity,Democratic Party,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,Flint (Mich)
March 7, 2016
4024
It lacked the vulgarities and, most likely, the ratings of the Republican debate on Thursday. But the Democratic face-off in Flint, Mich., on Sunday provided revealing moments and insights into the candidates and their campaigns. Two days before the Michigan primary, there were displays of impatience, passion, policy knowledge and, perhaps, fatigue.Here are some takeaways from the debate:Asked a provocative and difficult question — what racial blind spots do you have? — Hillary Clinton dodged with all the elegance of a supertanker, instead answering a previous question before being pushed again by a moderator.Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont detoured “briefly” to a not-at-all-brief story about being with a black lawmaker who could not catch a cab, and then he explained awkwardly that “when you’re white, you don’t know what it’s like to be living in a ghetto.” While each candidate spoke with conviction about the need to tackle incarceration rates and economic opportunity for African-Americans, both seemed to be walking on eggshells.Dispense with the idea that Mrs. Clinton will try to patiently outlast Mr. Sanders while she piles up enough delegates to wrap up the nomination. This debate showcased both candidates leveling their strongest attacks at each other.Mrs. Clinton, in particular, showed that her team was still carefully evaluating Mr. Sanders for vulnerabilities, as when she assailed him for voting against the 2008 auto-industry bailout. Whatever concerns her team has about alienating Mr. Sanders’s voters — whose support will be needed in a general election — were not evident on Sunday.There were moments Sunday night when Mrs. Clinton was clearly exasperated by questions focused on issues from the 1990s and policies — such as the overhaul of the welfare system — enacted under her husband, President Bill Clinton. But Mrs. Clinton has also turned toward her husband’s administration, whether to rebut Mr. Sanders’s attacks or to bolster her own.Criticized over the welfare changes, Mrs. Clinton mentioned the rousing job growth of the 1990s and its positive effect on African-Americans’ income. Whether by choice or necessity, Mrs. Clinton is running as a defender of not only President Obama’s legacy, but also her husband’s.While Mr. Sanders’s direct rhetoric is an enduring source of his success, Mrs. Clinton has a way of meandering legalistically through thickets of caution and temporization.Asked whether she would fire the head of the Environmental Protection Agency for failing to remedy water problems in Flint, Mrs. Clinton gave a nearly 200-word response emphasizing the need for a full investigation to “determine who knew what, when.” Mr. Sanders’ 16-word response drew enormous applause: “President Sanders would fire anybody who knew about what was happening and did not act appropriately.”The CNN moderator Anderson Cooper asked both candidates whether teachers’ unions protect bad teachers. Mr. Sanders did not come near answering the question, instead talking about his plan to provide free college tuition. Mrs. Clinton came only slightly closer. “Teachers do so much good, they are often working under the most difficult circumstances,” she said. “So anything that could be changed, I want them to look at it.”The early debates were feats of elaborate politesse by two candidates each pretending that the road to the White House did not run through the other. Now, every response of Mrs. Clinton’s to a Sanders attack betrays a barely concealed weariness.For all the talk from her campaign last spring that Mrs. Clinton expected the march to the nomination to be a long one, her manner is that of a contender who cannot quite believe the other guy is still at it. Mr. Sanders has grown no fonder of Mrs. Clinton. General insinuations that she is too close to the country’s powerful and financial elite to govern well have given way to harsher and more direct attacks — suggesting that Mr. Sanders believes that she truly is corrupt.In her 2000 Senate race in New York, Mrs. Clinton managed to turn a debate challenge from Rick A. Lazio, a House Republican, into a major stumble. After he approached her lectern with a written pledge to abstain from spending so-called soft money in the campaign, her aides cast his move as inappropriate, even bullying.On Sunday, Mrs. Clinton and her team seemed eager to bait Mr. Sanders — whose long arms and bellowing urgency leave him physically dominating their shared television space — into a similar moment. When Mrs. Clinton tried to talk over one of his answers, Mr. Sanders snapped back, “Excuse me, I’m talking.” Her campaign later blasted out an email suggesting Mr. Sanders had a problem with his “tone.”To a nation still wondering why the Republican candidates are publicly debating penis size and incontinence, the Democrats offered a largely substantive debate about domestic policy. There were deep dives into gun control, trade policy and the environment. Mrs. Clinton gave voters the most vigorous defense of the Export-Import Bank presented in either party’s race.Whether voters like the ideas or not, they are at least being discussed. The danger for the Republicans is not optical, but political: Mr. Trump’s insult-comic approach to the campaign has made it impossible for the party’s candidates to discuss and debate their best ideas on issues like education and job growth.