http://www.nytimes.com/2005/01/21/us/nationalspecial2/inaugural-diary.html
Inaugural Diary - The New York Times
BUSH  GEORGE W,INAUGURATIONS,MAYORS,UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,PRESIDENTS AND PRESIDENCY (US)
Jan. 21, 2005
6443
A Two-Step, Or Maybe Just OneIT became clear again last night that this is not a president with happy feet.At the "Constitution Ball," President Bush told the crowd, "I love my wife, Laura, and I'm hoping to have a dance with her, maybe for the first time in four years."On cue, the band began to play "I Could Have Danced All Night" and the president shuffled with his wife in a circle for exactly 30 seconds. Then it was on to the next gala.As at all the parties, the guests in strapless gowns and gleaming tuxedos were lining up at cash bars for drinks and at a photo op where they could be snapped in front of an inaugural seal -- not all that different from a high school prom photograph.Dismay about the security lines was a constant, with women in open-toed dancing slippers wondering why they had to wait more than an hour to pass through the security checks, especially when their tickets cost up to $5,000. But no Republicans wanted to be quoted complaining about too much security.The "Commander in Chief Ball," honoring the military, was the standout event. It was filled with men in uniforms, rather than tuxedos, dancing with women whose gowns did not all come from expensive boutiques.The first President Bush and Barbara Bush took to the stage early in the evening and said it was the only dance they would attend. The elder Mr. Bush said they were "the proudest parents in the world."That ball was the last stop of the evening for their son, who was scheduled to appear shortly before 11 p.m. But he dispatched with the other balls so quickly that he showed up more than an hour early. He didn't linger. By 10:03 he was back at the White House, presumably with his dancing shoes none the worse for wear.For Ball Admission, Everyone's SpecialONCE upon a time, it is said, Washington's elite craved admission to the inaugural ball. "Anyone who is anyone is here," said Theodore Roosevelt's daughter Alice, "and a lot of people who are no one try to get in as well."But that was in an age when there was one inaugural ball. Now there are nine balls for tens of thousands of people, a triumph of egalitarianism that does not thrill some Washington power brokers. Offering an inaugural ball ticket to a Georgetown socialite is a bit like offering an Upper East Sider the chance to spend New Year's Eve in Times Square."We had to go when Clinton was inaugurated and I can tell you they are all cattle calls," said Melanne Verveer, who was Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff in the White House."I went to an inaugural ball once," said Justice Stephen G. Breyer of the Supreme Court. "They're terrible. I'd rather be home in bed."The Other Guy Returns to His SeatMORE than a few eyes this week were on Senator John Kerry, who attended the inauguration and sat next to Senator Tom Harkin, the influential Iowa lawmaker who supported Howard Dean in his state's caucuses.The eve of the inauguration was the bittersweet anniversary of Mr. Kerry's turnaround victory in Iowa and he made a surprise appearance at a gathering of his former Iowa staff at a Capitol Hill bar, the Hawk and Dove. He was still in the role of his party's standard-bearer yesterday when he released a statement saying, "I'll be ready to reach across the aisle anytime we can work in good faith to make our country stronger."The White House may not be so quick to accept his gesture. During the inaugural festivities Andrew H. Card Jr., the president's chief of staff, told CNN that Mr. Kerry's vote against Condoleezza Rice for secretary of state was petty politics.But last night, at least, Mr. Kerry was out of the glare -- a big family dinner was planned.The Prudent Speech Is Always a WinnerA week before Mr. Bush's inaugural speech was delivered, Rick Shenkman had a good idea of what he would say. Professor Shenkman, a historian at George Mason University and editor of the History News Network Web site, had concluded that inaugural addresses sound so much alike because America has a "civil religion" that forces presidents to recite tenets from "a national template first cast at the time of the founding fathers."Professor Shenkman helpfully published a scorecard for the speech, a list of the recurring themes in previous addresses. Sure enough, by our count, yesterday's speech touched on seven of the themes: deference to God; America's mission to spread freedom, democracy and peace around the globe; America as an example for the world; commitment to tolerance; requirement for national unity; faith in the people's wisdom; and worship of the founding fathers.Two other themes on the list were the idea that the president is the instrument of the people (which Mr. Bush left unsaid) and the requirement that Americans make sacrifices. While Mr. Bush praised the sacrifices made by soldiers, he didn't explicitly call on the public to make sacrifices -- an omission that did not surprise Professor Shenkman.Before the speech, he predicted that Mr. Bush would leave out that particular tenet. As he reasoned on Tuesday, "Can't call for sacrifice with all those tax cuts."When Texans Party, Oil Meets WaterLET us now praise all things Texan, except their new cocktail.In the third, and reportedly the largest, such migration since 1989, Texans descended on Washington this week. They brought an armadillo and alligator from the Fort Worth Zoo, which were on display at the "Black Tie and Boots Ball" Wednesday, as was a wild array of Texas-flag ties, hats, necklaces and cummerbunds worn by the 12,000 guests.The president appeared long enough to get in a dig at a fellow Texan, asking whether Tom DeLay, the House majority leader, was present. "If he is, he didn't get a very good seat," Mr. Bush said, looking out at the crowd for Mr. DeLay. He had another crack for former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, who was made an honorary Texan."I understand Rudy Giuliani is here," Mr. Bush said, setting off chants of "Rudy, Rudy!" Mr. Bush added, "He's not exactly a Texan."Texans overtook the city's largest hotel, transforming the Marriott Wardman Park Hotel near the National Zoo into a mini-Texas complete with vases of long-stemmed yellow roses in the lobby, a map of the United States highlighting Texas, themed signs and exhibits in the hotel hallways and a "Texas Fair" in the lobby with home-state vendors offering items like belt buckles and barbecue sauce.The most surprising Lone Star delicacy, at least to some locals watching in dismay, was a new drink ordered by a group of Texans: merlot with 7-Up. It was described as a Texas version of sangria. As a teetotaler, Mr. Bush may be glad that is one bit of Texicana he won't have waiting for him back home.