https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/trump-inaugural-lunch-menu.html
Inaugural Lunch Menu: Lobster and Beef, but No Fries - The New York Times
Inaugurations,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,Pence  Mike,Capitol Building (Washington  DC)
Jan. 18, 2017
6269
An inaugural luncheon for 200 elected officials and dignitaries on Friday will feature a three-course meal that will be notable for what is missing: side orders of French fries.President-elect Donald J. Trump, a fast food aficionado, has made plain his appetite for the meals on the run that are popular with many Americans. In social media posts, Mr. Trump has been shown devouring a bucket of Kentucky Fried Chicken, feasting on a McDonald’s burger and fries and chowing down on a taco bowl.At a CNN town hall-style meeting last year, Mr. Trump extolled the virtues of McDonald’s. “The Big Macs are great,” he said. “The Quarter Pounder. It’s great stuff.”The inaugural luncheon at the United States Capitol, a tradition dating to 1897, will be a far cry from fast food fare.Instead of Diet Coke — a bottle of which was in a photo of the McDonald’s meal on Mr. Trump’s Instagram account — the luncheon will feature J. Lohr 2013 Arroyo Vista chardonnay, Delicato Black Stallion 2012 Limited Release Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon and Korbel Natural “Special Inaugural Cuvée” California Champagne, according to the committee. (Whether Mr. Trump will have any is unclear; he shuns coffee, tea and alcohol.)The first course will include Maine lobster and Gulf shrimp with saffron sauce and peanut crumble, followed by grilled Seven Hills Angus beef with dark chocolate and juniper juice, accompanied by potato gratin. The Smithsonian Chamber Players and the United States Coast Guard Brass Quintet will provide musical selections.And for dessert? McFlurries? Forget it. Guests will be served chocolate soufflé and cherry vanilla ice cream.Another difference from fast food: Unlike Kentucky Fried Chicken, which calls its fried chicken recipe “one of the biggest trade secrets in the world,” the organizers of the luncheon are making the recipes for its courses available online.The luncheon will take place in the National Statuary Hall of the Capitol, after Mr. Trump has taken his oath of office and delivered his inaugural address.“The inaugural luncheon provides an opportunity for members of both parties to come together and, in the same spirit of all our inaugural events, show the world how uniquely American we are in our peaceful transfer of power,” Senator Roy Blunt of Missouri, the chairman of the committee, said in a statement.Members of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies and Design Cuisine, a catering company in Arlington, Va., compiled the menu. Members of the company were not available to comment. The committee said the wines were from California, home to Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, and Kevin McCarthy, the House majority leader.The tradition of a luncheon at the Capitol began in 1897, when the Senate Committee on Arrangements held one for President William McKinley and several guests. The joint committee, which took over planning inaugural activities in 1901, started organizing the luncheon in its current form in 1953, when President Dwight D. Eisenhower and 50 guests dined on creamed chicken, baked ham and potato puffs in the Old Senate Chamber.In the second half of the 19th century, presidents used to leave the Capitol after the inauguration ceremonies and go to the White House for a luncheon prepared by the departing president and first lady, according to the committee. After the luncheon, the president watched the inaugural parade from in front of the White House.As the parade grew larger and lasted later into the afternoon, organizers began to look for ways to hasten its start. In 1897, they proposed that the president go directly from the Capitol to the reviewing stand and have lunch there.Instead, the presidential party dined in the Capitol as guests of the Senate Committee on Arrangements. In 1901, the president again had lunch at the Capitol, and parade delays continued.In 1905, the luncheon returned to the White House, again with the hope that the parade could start earlier. Organizers focused on shortening the parade rather than the luncheon.The White House luncheons became more and more elaborate. In 1945, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the first lady, Eleanor, hosted more than 2,000 guests in what would be the last White House postinaugural luncheon.In 1949, the secretary of the Senate, Leslie Biffle, hosted a small lunch for President Harry S. Truman in his Capitol reception room. They dined on South Carolina turkey, Smithfield ham, potato salad and pumpkin pie. In 1953, the committee began its current tradition of hosting a luncheon for the president, vice president and their spouses, Senate leaders and other invited guests.The program includes speeches and gift presentations.The committee will present Mr. Trump and Mike Pence, the vice president-elect, with hand-cut, etched crystal bowls made by Lenox. The one for Mr. Trump features an illustration of the White House on one side and the Jefferson Memorial on the other, and Mr. Pence’s has an illustration of the Capitol on one side and the Lincoln Memorial on the other.