http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/14/dining/reviews/acme-signals-the-arrival-of-new-nordic-cuisine.html
Acme Signals the Arrival of New Nordic Cuisine - The New York Times
Restaurants,NoHo (NYC),Acme Bar and Grill (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant)
March 13, 2012
9553
SOME chefs storm into the city like an invading navy, gunships of publicity thundering on the horizon.Mads Refslund slipped into town in January as quietly as a canoe.Word was that new owners had taken over the Acme Bar and Grill on Great Jones Street, which had dished up jambalaya under strings of chile-pepper lights for more than two decades. From the sidewalk, it looked as if nothing had changed. The red-and-blue awning still advertised “Authentic Southern and Cajun Cookin’. ” When the double doors opened in January, Eater, the usually all-seeing restaurant blog, reported that the menu “still has a Southern accent.”Soon, clued-in diners were filing ecstatic reports about Mr. Refslund’s food, which was non-Southern in the extreme. He was tucking a spooky tartare of bison and raw shrimp into endive and radicchio leaves. He was roasting sunchokes in a bed of hay, then setting the hay on fire. For dessert, there were chewy dried pears strewn around a green mulch of frozen wheatgrass juice.As some of those diners realized, the gentle and thoughtful cooking at Acme has nothing to do with Louisiana and quite a lot to do with Denmark. Along with René Redzepi, Mr. Refslund had been a founding chef of Noma, the Copenhagen restaurant that is the current center of the culinary universe.He was present at the creation of the new Nordic cuisine, an experiment in restricting the kitchen to ingredients that can be grown or caught or foraged locally, leading to a new appreciation for humble grains and edible weeds that nobody in Scandinavia had thought about eating for many years.Bits and scraps of this movement have drifted across the Atlantic, touching down on plates at Isa and Frej in Brooklyn, but the new Acme was the stealthy arrival of the genuine thing.Acme doesn’t look or act like a restaurant for gastronomic mandarins, which is one of its more appealing features. The owners have cultivated a constituency among the kind of gallery circulators and style trackers who turn up in Paper magazine. During Fashion Week, the arching mirror that runs nearly the length of the dining room reflected men in expensive-looking flannel and women in expensive-looking everything, nearly all of them angular and underfed.The servers are lean, too, in stiff, narrow-waisted jeans, their skinny ties tucked into the plackets of crisp white shirts. They do not intone psalms about Chef’s wisdom or explicate every last item on every last plate. Half the diners probably wouldn’t want to hear it, and the other half are having fun discovering it on their own.The food invites that. What looks like a bowl of sea foam subsides into a milky sauce of roast sunflower seeds bathing open clamshells embedded in sand-colored barley. It’s a small, intimate landscape that you eat. In fact, you might choose to eat it each time you come to Acme, noticing that it’s a little different each night, now with scallops, now with razor clams. Mr. Refslund cooks intuitively, by look and feel and perhaps by mood, but in three meals this dish was always cozy and comforting, with a sophisticated sense of balance.A painter’s hand is at work in a plate of carrots, too, though this time the genre is a botanical still life. The kitchen roasts them with pine needles and slices them in half the long way, serving them under a see-through sheet of lardo. The carrots, stretched out in a tart pool of blood-orange sauce, are knobbly and crooked, ugly but radiant.But to find real beauty in homeliness, order those blackened sunchokes. They might remind you of marshmallows that got too close to the campfire, or more appetizingly like fresh-dug truffles, but either way they are undeniably strange. And undeniably wonderful, enriched with butter, melted Gruyère and actual winter truffles.The nature-trail quality is turned down a notch in the main courses (“Sea/Land” in the menu’s language), although you never know where a craggy leaf or weedy flower is going to turn up next. The main courses are generally simpler and, almost without exception, excellent, particularly a chicken breast with a refined giblet sauce, and anything where fish is involved. There is black sea bass with pickled green tomatoes; there is arctic char with snow-white leeks; there was, at one point, turbot in a simple butter sauce with green fennel, and the kitchen seemed to nail them every time.None of these ingredients sound particularly Scandinavian, which is part of the point. “I think it would be very stupid to import things from Denmark,” Mr. Refslund said over the phone last week. “My whole philosophy is to tell the story of where you are right now.”This was his philosophy in Copenhagen as well. He and Mr. Redzepi were roommates and best friends who became co-chefs, heading off on a four-month tour of the Nordic region. Their hunt for puffin eggs and reindeer moss was the starting point for Noma’s cooking, although Mr. Refslund is the first to say that he had no hand in what the restaurant became.About five months after the opening, it became clear to both men that there was one chef too many, and Mr. Refslund left. “The whole cuisine today is René’s,” he said.Acme is not Noma in NoHo, nor is it MR, Mr. Refslund’s rarefied Copenhagen restaurant, now closed. The cooking is greatly simplified and meant to be shared. (This isn’t always successful; four people can’t split two fried eggs, and even perfectly cooked fish can cool on its trip from platter to plate to mouth.) The aim is to avoid startling the tables discussing Hedi Slimane’s move to YSL, while not boring the ones debating the chef César Ramirez’s move to Manhattan.The second group must be wondering if Mr. Refslund is going to be allowed to cook at his full capacity. And I’m wondering what will happen when he begins to make friends with local farmers and foragers. While the kitchen has been getting steadily more precise, I have the sense that the raw ingredients are holding it back somewhat.The salt-baked beet salad, for instance, can seem like a sketch not fully colored in yet. (Mr. Refslund also has a thing for al dente vegetables, as if he didn’t want to tame them with too much heat. Sometimes it works and sometimes, as when the sunchokes or carrots are crunchy and raw-tasting, it doesn’t.)One night as I left, two young European travelers were out front, peering at the awning.“Excuse me,” one said. “What is ... ca-joon food?”The restaurant is serving another kind of cuisine now, we explained. What kind, they asked.One of my companions hazarded, “Modern Danish?”But no. It’s modern New York, it’s fascinating and it’s going to be a blast to watch it grow. There were no trumpets playing when Mr. Refslund landed, but you can hear them now, and they’re going to get louder.