https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/05/us/politics/not-even-catharsis-is-seen-in-senate-vote-to-repeal-health-law.html
Not Even Catharsis Is Seen in Senate Vote to Repeal Health Law - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),United States,United States Politics and Government,Senate,Republican Party,Obama  Barack,Price  Thomas E (1954- ),Ryan  Paul D Jr,Democratic Party,Congress
Dec. 4, 2015
5963
WASHINGTON —  Senate Republicans have finally fulfilled their long quest to pass legislation repealing President Obama’s landmark health care law, and Congress will soon send the measure to the White House, where it might have a chance of being folded into origami or a fleet of paper airplanes, but no possibility of being signed into law.While a veto is certain, putting the repeal measure on Mr. Obama’s desk will fulfill a pledge by Republicans, highlighting how fiercely they still oppose the law nearly six years after it was passed solely by the votes of Democrats, the only bill of such consequence in modern American history to be approved on a strictly party-line vote.So, what next?It is unclear that lawmakers have drawn constructive lessons from the experience, and there is no sign that either party will use the repeal vote as a cathartic turning point onto a more cooperative path. Republicans say they will spend the election year using the vote as part of a broader call to elect a president of their party to get rid of the Affordable Care Act altogether. Democrats concede cooperation from their side is unlikely.The vote on Thursday night was the first time since enactment of the health care law in March 2010 that the Senate was able to clear a repeal measure. And Republicans were able to do it only by using a special legislative vehicle called a budget reconciliation bill, which is not subject to a filibuster, and their vote, too, was strictly party line. (The House by contrast has voted at least 61 times on bills to repeal the law, or dismantle core components of it.)For Representative Tom Price, Republican of Georgia, who is also an orthopedic surgeon and one of the toughest critics of the health care law, the Senate bill was such a momentous occasion that he walked across the Capitol to watch the proceedings.“It’s good stuff, good stuff,” Mr. Price said. “This is simply the majority in Congress, representing the American people.”That same point was driven home earlier in the day by Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who vowed to put forward alternatives to the health care law next year, mainly as an appeal to voters, neither seeking nor expecting any cooperation from Democrats.“There are a lot of other ideas out there, but what all conservatives can agree on is this: We think government should encourage personal responsibility, not replace it,” Mr. Ryan said. “We think prices are going up because people have too few choices, not because they have too many. And we think this problem is so urgent that, next year, we are going to unveil a plan to replace every word of Obamacare.”Democrats, too, said they had little hope of any change in the dynamic and expected to continue to have to beat back Republican efforts to gut the Affordable Care Act.“I wish they would work with us, I really do,” said Senator Bob Casey, Democrat of Pennsylvania, adding that he had no hope that would happen in an election year.Veteran lawmakers in each party said that there was an underlying lesson about the crucial need for bipartisanship on major legislation — even in an era of encrusted polarization. Not having a single Republican vote for the law, lawmakers said, made it politically difficult for Democrats to acknowledge the flaws that are inevitable with any major piece of legislation, and virtually impossible for them to seek Republican support to repair it.“Surely one of the great lessons to learn here is you need to do whatever is necessary to get some people’s views from the other side into what you are doing so that they buy into what you are doing,” said Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri.Democrats have long said that many Republican ideas were included in the health care law, particularly proposals drawn up in lengthy negotiations led by former Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, which included the participation of some Republican senators — Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, Mike Enzi of Wyoming, and Olympia J. Snowe of Maine. None of the three ultimately voted for the bill.Only a small minority of lawmakers, including Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who joined Democrats in voting against the repeal bill on Thursday night, have voiced any willingness to work constructively to improve the health care law.Ms. Collins said that lawmakers needed to recognize that the law is now a fact of life for many Americans, particularly the more than 17 million people who have gained medical coverage paid for by tax subsidies or through Medicaid, and that some parts of the law were truly popular.“I firmly believe that we have to replace it, with something, that repeal alone is not sufficient even though I oppose the law,” Ms. Collins said. “But it’s now years later and unraveling it, completely unraveling it would be difficult if you don’t have a plan to replace it. You have millions of people in this country who now are dependent on the subsidies that are in Obamacare or who are receiving help through Medicaid in those states that did adopt the expansion. And you have to recognize that that’s a reality.”Ms. Collins said she had been working on legislation with Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana and also a physician, on legislation that would fix some problems in the health care law and allow states to make changes, provided they develop alternative policy proposals.Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee and chairman of the Health, Education Labor and Pensions Committee, said that he would advocate an incremental approach going forward.“We’ve made our point about repeal,” Mr. Alexander said, summing up how each side feels about the law. “He’s for it. We’re against it. Now let’s move on to what we are going to do next.”Other Republicans said that while limited improvements might be possible, they viewed the health care law as too flawed to be fixed, and Mr. Obama as unwilling to entertain big changes.“We actually are looking for things we can do on a bipartisan basis, but I think people don’t hold out a lot of hope that Obamacare will be one of them,” said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican. “It’s just too identified with the president.”Mr. Cornyn said adopting the repeal measure was important even knowing a veto was inevitable.“We recognize that we are not going to be able to change the Affordable Care Act until we get a new president, but I think it was an important statement to make,” he said.Ms. Collins said she agreed the repeal bill would send an important message to Mr. Obama, even as she opposed another provision that would cut off financing of Planned Parenthood and potentially force the group to close clinics all across the country.“Everyone will know we sent it to the president,” Ms. Collins said. “And maybe now we can move on.”