https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/books/review/jane-austen-at-home-lucy-worsley.html
Jane Austen’s Stuff, and What We Learn From It - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Austen  Jane,Jane Austen at Home (Book),Worsley  Lucy
July 12, 2017
4620
JANE AUSTEN AT HOME By Lucy Worsley Illustrated. 387 pp. St. Martin’s Press. $29.99.“Where shall I begin? Which of all my important nothings shall I tell you first?”— A letter from Jane Austen to her sister, Cassandra“And a friend of mine, who visits her now says that … till ‘Pride and Prejudice’ showed us what a precious gem was hidden in that unbending case, she was no more regarded in society than a poker or a fire screen.” — A letter from Mary Russell Mitford to Sir William Elford, April 13, 1815“Jane Austen at Home” is more than just an account of pokers, fire screens, writing desks, Jane’s round spectacles, handsome carriage sweeps in front of handsome houses, some very good and some very disappointing apple pies, the elm-lined walks of the Steventon rectory and the flimsy doors and uneven stairs of a rented house in Bath. But it’s not a great biography, and if it hadn’t been described as one on the cover, I would find even more to praise in these pages.It may not be possible to spend days reading Jane Austen and reading about Jane Austen without writing phrases like “I would find even more to praise in these pages.”Lucy Worsley is a British historian the way Julia Child was an American cook. She is history on the BBC. She’s been popularizing innumerable aspects of it on British television, everything from “If Walls Could Talk: The History of the Home,” “Dancing Through the Blitz,” “Empire of the Tsars” and “Mozart’s London Odyssey” to “Reins of Power: The Art of Horse Dancing.” This last program focuses on manège, the royal art of making horses dance, a subject she encountered while researching her Ph.D. thesis on William Cavendish. (The project is, in Worsley’s own words, “bonkers.”) She has done these shows with a bright, impish smile, a wealth of information and open delight in dressing up and re-enacting.Worsley is like Child in her thoroughness; her fascination with the process and the product; her memorable, energetic style of speaking, which is quite like her writing style — lively and “educated but not too posh,” as one of her producers put it — and in her wild, often contagious, occasionally exhausting enthusiasm for her subject. Her previous books include two charming, engaging novels for children, “Eliza Rose” (a girl at the Tudor court) and “My Name Is Victoria” (as you’d expect) and many that derive from her television shows. She also wrote the introduction for “Tea Fit for a Queen,” which has recipes from various royal palaces, including one for Henry VIII’s mead cake. If you haven’t even a mild interest in mead cakes or the orange-scented scones served at Kensington Palace or the unexpectedly reasonable price of butter and cheese in Bath in 1804 and the kinds of dances the Austens attended, “Jane Austen at Home” may not be for you. “I’m an entry-level historian,” Worsley has explained. “It’s my job to lead people to that sort of thing. … When it comes to history, I am shameless.”In “Jane Austen at Home,” Worsley is shameless, occasionally ebullient (there are some un-Austenlike exclamation points) and sometimes a little breathless. (“This is, unashamedly, the story of my Jane, every word of it written with love.” “It was love; indisputably love.”) Worsley is also given to some speculative writing (“She must have”; “Whatever Mr. Austen’s hopes might have been”; “I believe that”), which is understandable since so much of Jane Austen’s insightful, acerbic correspondence was burned by her devoted, discreet, possibly envious, slightly overbearing older sister, Cassandra.Worsley’s speculation is, above all, about Jane Austen’s motives and emotions. Austen is wonderfully free and sharp in her opinions and observations in the letters that remain, but she doesn’t say much about her feelings. In the manuscript of “Persuasion” (which Worsley calls a “short, sweet and perfect” novel), Austen writes of her self-effacing heroine, Anne Elliot: “She had been forced into prudence in her youth, she learned romance as she grew older — the natural sequel of an unnatural beginning.” Cassandra, reading the manuscript, underlined this passage. (“Dear, dear Jane … this deserves to be written in letters of gold.”)Worsley offers us much that Austen’s admirers wish to know: Jane Austen had suitors. At least five of them! And she turned them all down, even the one with money (Harris Bigg-Wither, homely but “a fine big man” and definitely rich), to whom she first sensibly said “yes” and then, more romantically, said “no” the next day. Worsley writes about this with humor and poignancy and common sense, just as Austen would have wished. Worsley’s argument is that the suitors were turned down because Jane Austen wished to be a writer, believed in her talent and understood that being a wife and mother and an author wasn’t likely. (“If she had married, she would doubtless have produced human rather than paper progeny.”)The thread that runs through Worsley’s chapters describing the many homes, the many residences, rarely grand, often inadequate (the unsteady little writing desk and the three hard chairs Austen turned into a makeshift sofa bother me more than I can say) and sometimes grim, is Austen’s longing for a place of her own, a safe haven in which she can live a little longer, afford a good lamp and comfortable seating and enough time.In this, the book’s central thesis, Worsley is entirely convincing. When she described Jane Austen’s end, when she can no longer write and dies, with her head in her sister’s lap, I cried and felt as Cassandra did: “She was the sun, … the gilder of every pleasure, the soother of every sorrow, … and it is as if I had lost a part of myself.”