http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/29/us/eddie-johnson-new-chicago-police-leader-has-deep-roots-in-a-city-adrift-in-turmoil.html
Eddie Johnson, New Chicago Police Leader, Has Deep Roots in a City Adrift in Turmoil - The New York Times
Chicago (Ill),Police,Johnson  Eddie (Chicago  Ill  Police Officer),Emanuel  Rahm,Appointments and Executive Changes,Police Department (Chicago  Ill)
March 28, 2016
5756
CHICAGO —  Eddie Johnson grew up in Cabrini-Green, perhaps this city’s most notorious public housing project. At 9, his family moved to the South Side, where he still lives. And during the last three decades, he has held just about every rank at the Chicago Police Department, from ordinary cop to chief of patrol.On Monday, Mayor Rahm Emanuel highlighted those roots as he named Mr. Johnson the new leader of the Police Department — at least for the moment — discarding all the applicants the mayor’s own police board had recommended he consider.The unlikely ascent of Interim Superintendent Johnson, who is African-American and had not applied, reflects how tense and complicated relations have grown between this city and its police. Mr. Emanuel’s decision to reject the Chicago Police Board’s suggestions and declare his own choice appeared aimed at satisfying black and Latino aldermen, who had voiced concerns about outside candidates, as well as at shoring up sinking morale among the police even as murders and shootings have soared.“I believe Eddie Johnson has everything that the city needs,” Mr. Emanuel said, as he stood beside Mr. Johnson at a news conference at Police Headquarters on Monday afternoon. The mayor said Mr. Johnson was uniquely qualified to rebuild officer morale at the helm of the nation’s second largest municipal police force and to tamp down violence while also being a “bridge to the community.”“I think Eddie Johnson is the right man at the right time,” Mr. Emanuel said.Community leaders described Mr. Johnson, 55, who was promoted to chief of patrol in December, as liked by residents and respected by his fellow police officers. City Hall officials also credit Mr. Johnson with having a history of tamping down crime: In 2013, the region he oversaw led the city in lowering gun violence, murders and shootings.It was uncertain exactly when the mayor had approached Mr. Johnson, but he said that he had known Mr. Johnson since his tenure as a South Side district commander, and had been impressed as he earned promotions. The mayor praised Mr. Johnson’s integrity, recalling a recent meeting with command staff in which Mr. Johnson said he would wear a body camera and expected other top officials to do the same.Yet Superintendent Johnson’s appointment is not permanent — at least not yet. By city ordinance, Mr. Emanuel must pick a permanent superintendent from choices recommended by the police board. In announcing Mr. Johnson’s interim appointment, Mr. Emanuel said he planned to call on the police board, which is selected by the mayor, to start its search all over. This time, Mr. Emanuel said, he will encourage Mr. Johnson to apply.Mr. Johnson becomes the second interim replacement for Garry F. McCarthy, who was fired in December after outrage and protests followed the release of video showing a white officer fatally shooting Laquan McDonald, a black teenager, in 2014. John J. Escalante, the department’s interim superintendent until Monday, applied for the permanent job but was turned down.As recently as last week, Mr. Emanuel was conducting interviews with three finalists who had been recommended by the board from among 39 applicants. The mayor appeared at points to be seriously considering Cedric L. Alexander, the chief of police of DeKalb County, Ga., who met with the mayor and who said in some reports that he believed that he had been offered the job late last week before the offer was rescinded. But Mr. Emanuel said no job offer had been made.Leaders of the City Council’s Latino and black caucuses, who had called for a chance to meet with the finalists before the mayor made a selection, had praise for Mr. Johnson at a joint news conference on Monday. A majority of the city’s 50 aldermen is required to approve Mr. Emanuel’s permanent appointment.Alderman Roderick Sawyer, who leads the Council’s Black Caucus and said he knew Mr. Johnson from his time as a high-ranking officer in his ward, said that he considered Mr. Johnson to be a “gentleman of high integrity” who is a “hard-nosed police officer” with an ability to act independently.Alderman George Cardenas, the Latino Caucus leader who had pushed for Mr. Escalante, and Mr. Sawyer said they had concerns about the selection process, and Mr. Cardenas was especially critical that no Hispanics were among the three finalists. He said he would push for more Latino officers to be promoted to command ranks.Standing beside Mr. Emanuel, Interim Superintendent Johnson said he wanted Chicagoans to know, “I’m one of you.”He acknowledged frayed trust between the police and residents, and said he was committed to repairing it.“Countless incidents of courage and professionalism far outweigh the few examples of excessive force,” Mr. Johnson said. “Nevertheless, these incidents, no matter how isolated, undermine our entire department and our relationship with the community. We have to own it, and we have to end it.”