http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/29/politics/joshua-brewster-bolten-longtime-ally-now-a-top-aide.html
Joshua Brewster Bolten: Longtime Ally, Now a Top Aide - The New York Times
CARD  ANDREW H JR,BUSH  GEORGE W,BOLTEN  JOSH,BOLTEN  JOSHUA B,UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
March 29, 2006
6864
WASHINGTON, March 28 - Joshua B. Bolten, the incoming White House chief of staff, would appear to have the insider credentials and ability to soothe Congress that the White House desperately needs.He grew up in establishment Washington, the son of a C.I.A. officer, and graduated from the elite St. Albans School, former Vice President Al Gore's alma mater. As White House budget director, he amused his 500-member staff by renaming his weekend rock band Deficit Attention Disorder for a performance at the Office of Management and Budget. He has nurtured relationships on Capitol Hill, and is personally close to President Bush.But the question is whether Mr. Bolten is the man to right a listing presidency, and whether his skills, instincts and access to Mr. Bush are enough to overcome public anger over the war in Iraq and the growing questions in Washington about the competence of the West Wing staff. Mr. Bolten, after all, has been with Mr. Bush from his first days as a presidential candidate, and in the last three years has presided over the biggest budget deficits in the history of the United States."The last time Josh was in here, I said, 'How can a guy as smart as you are come up with such bad results?' " said Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota, the ranking Democrat on the Budget Committee. "He said, 'You can't pin this one on me.' "Republicans in Congress reacted positively to the appointment but with barely stifled yawns."It's an indication that they're turning the page, which I think will be received favorably, but I don't think there's going to be any significant change in the way things are done over there," said Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, who two weeks ago said that the White House staff lacked passion and urgency.Still, Mr. Thune said, "he probably will do a better job of reaching out to Congress."Supporters of Mr. Bolten insisted he would revitalize a moribund policy operation at a White House that failed in the past year to push a Social Security overhaul through Congress and is now facing strong resistance to Mr. Bush's plan to change immigration laws. They said Mr. Bolten, the influential but publicly invisible White House deputy chief of staff in Mr. Bush's first term, would help formulate and drive legislation in a way that Andrew H. Card Jr., the outgoing chief of staff, did not.As deputy chief of staff, Mr. Bolten scheduled the president's almost daily 45 minutes of domestic "policy time" in the Oval Office, and determined what issue was discussed, who was invited and in large part how it could be sold on Capitol Hill. In the first term he drove an agenda dominated by the tax cuts that the White House relentlessly pushed through Congress."Josh would have a calendar up in his office, where he would, in consultation with everybody else, map out when the president would be briefed on an issue, then tie it to events on the Hill and major announcements," said Cesar V. Conda, Vice President Dick Cheney's former top economic policy aide who worked closely with Mr. Bolten. "He was really the maestro of the policy process. I was there a month after Harriet Miers took over, and it wasn't the same."Mr. Conda was referring to Mr. Bolten's replacement, now the White House counsel.On Capitol Hill, Mr. Bolten, who worked in the White House Congressional liaison office of Mr. Bush's father, regularly stepped in as this administration's deal closer."I worked closely with him on everything from Medicare to the tax cuts," said Rob Portman, the United States trade representative and a former Republican congressman from Ohio who was a White House point man on Capitol Hill. "He was the one who ultimately pulled together the agency and White House folks and said, 'How do we get a result here?' He's not an ideologue."Exactly what Mr. Bolten believes is something of a mystery, although he was considered a pragmatist who liked tax cuts and not a supply-side true believer in nearly six years at Goldman Sachs in the 1990's. He spent most of those years based in London, as the investment banking firm's chief lobbyist at the European Union's headquarters in Brussels, although he also worked for a short time there as the chief of staff to Jon Corzine, then the firm's co-chairman and now the Democratic governor of New Jersey.When Mr. Bush named Mr. Bolten his budget director three years ago, Mr. Corzine, who was a United States senator from New Jersey at the time, called Mr. Bolten "on message and loyal to a fault."Mr. Bolten, who described himself as a "policy geek" in an interview with Brian Lamb of C-Span late last year, has whitish-gray, closely cropped hair, round wire-rimmed glasses and the prosperous, buttoned-down look of a Washington corporate lawyer. At 51, he retains a slightly youthful look. At the White House, he is considered relatively mellow and more comfortable with reporters than Mr. Card.Unlike other members of Mr. Bush's inner circle, Mr. Bolten makes occasional forays to the dinner parties of establishment Washington. He has turned up at the home of Ben Bradlee, the former executive editor of The Washington Post, and the writer Sally Quinn and has regularly dated women in the Bush administration. He distinguished himself at the 2000 Republican National Convention by appearing with the actress Bo Derek.Mr. Bolten is also known for his motorcycle collection, although he most often rides a Harley."I've ridden motorcycles for a long time; it's not just a midlife crisis adoption," Mr. Bolten said on C-Span. "I've been riding motorcycles for about 25 years. And I enjoy it now I think especially because it's a form of relaxation and diversion that's beautiful and exhilarating. But you have to concentrate. So you need to clear your mind of everything else because if you're not concentrating properly when you're riding a motorcycle, you're putting your life in danger."Joshua Brewster Bolten was born on Aug. 16, 1954. A graduate of Princeton and Stanford Law School, he grew up knowing little about the duties of his father, who worked in the C.I.A.'s directorate of operations, the agency's covert espionage arm. He plays bass guitar in his band, normally called the Compassionates. The lead singer is Tabitha Mueller, Mr. Card's daughter.