https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/13/world/americas/joaquin-guzman-loera-el-chapo-mexican-drug-kingpin-prison-escape.html
Mexican Drug Kingpin, El Chapo, Escapes Prison Through Tunnel - The New York Times
Guzman Loera  Joaquin,Mexico,Prison Escapes,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Drug Cartels,Pena Nieto  Enrique,Altiplano Prison (Almoloya de Juarez  Mexico)
July 12, 2015
2552
Shortly before 9 p.m. on Saturday, Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the Mexican drug kingpin whose capture last year had been trumpeted by his country’s government as a crucial victory in its bloody campaign against the narcotics trade, stepped into the shower in his cell in the most secure wing of the most secure prison in Mexico.He never came out.When guards later entered the cell, they discovered a 2-by-2-foot hole, through which Mr. Guzmán, known as El Chapo, or Shorty, had disappeared.The prison break humiliated the government of President Enrique Peña Nieto, which had proclaimed the arrest of Mr. Guzmán and leaders of other drug cartels as crucial achievements in restoring order and sovereignty to a country long beleaguered by the horrific violence associated with organized crime.The opening in the shower led to a mile-long tunnel leading to a construction site in the nearby neighborhood of Santa Juanita in Almoloya de Juárez, west of Mexico City. The tunnel was more than two feet wide and more than five feet high, tall enough for him to walk standing upright, and was burrowed more than 30 feet underground. It had been equipped with lighting, ventilation and a motorcycle on rails that was probably used to transport digging material and cart the dirt out.A few days after Mr. Guzmán’s arrest in February of last year, Mr. Peña Nieto told the Univision television network that he would be asking his interior minister every day if Mr. Guzmán, who had broken out of a Mexican prison once before, in 2001, was being well guarded. “It’s the government’s responsibility to ensure that the escape that occurred a few years ago is never, ever repeated,” Mr. Peña Nieto said.A video camera watched over the notorious prisoner’s cell, but apparently did not record how Mr. Guzmán was able to tunnel out undetected.In the hours after the breakout, the government began a sweeping manhunt, calling states of emergency in the surrounding areas and shutting down the airport in the nearby city of Toluca. The police and military personnel, many wearing body armor and carrying automatic weapons, stopped vehicles near the prison, Altiplano, which is about 55 miles west of Mexico City, and tightened security along the borders of Mexico State, where the prison is. The authorities also held 30 prison employees for questioning.Though this was perhaps Mexico’s most spectacular prison escape since the previous one by Mr. Guzmán, the country has seen many breakouts, which have often occurred with the collusion of the authorities.Mr. Peña Nieto, on a state visit to France, issued a statement on Sunday afternoon saying that the escape “represents without a doubt an affront to the Mexican state.” Though he said he would remain in France to finish the visit, he dispatched his interior minister to personally oversee the operation to recapture Mr. Guzmán.Experts on the drug underworld were left dumbfounded and predicted the escape could bolster American demands to extradite top crime figures, particularly when United States law enforcement personnel have played major roles in many cases, and not without personal risk.“It’s shocking, embarrassing, a huge blow, almost everything under the sun,” said Eric L. Olson, a scholar at the Mexico Institute of the Wilson Center who follows crime trends in Latin America. “It is almost Mexico’s worst nightmare, and I suspect many in U.S. law enforcement are apoplectic right now.”“Mexico is going to be under increasing pressure from the U.S. in terms of extraditing these top people,” he said.Mexico has long struggled to reshape its police forces and root out corruption, but Mr. Olson said the prison system often takes a back seat as “the last thing in the chain of law enforcement.”Mr. Peña Nieto told Univision last year that if Mr. Guzmán were to escape again, “it would be more than unfortunate, it would be unforgivable.”That was the sentiment among analysts and ordinary people alike in Mexico on Sunday, as they struggled to grasp how a kingpin already known for burrowing tunnels was able to do so under what was supposed to be an impregnable prison. For many, it displayed the challenge of applying justice against overwhelming narcotics wealth.“Chapo’s escape is spectacular as a blatant example of the corruption and complicity inside the prison system,” said Eduardo Guerrero, a security analyst in Mexico. “The people who worked on the construction of the tunnel took their time to do it, calmly, with no worries, apparently. They equipped it perfectly, with everything necessary for a secure escape.”In addition to pioneering the use of tunnels to smuggle drugs across, or rather under, the United States border, Mr. Guzmán built a warren of them in Culiacán, the capital of the state of Sinaloa, where his cartel was based and where he was believed to have been hiding for years.Days before his capture last year, Mexican marines and American law enforcement officers raided the home of his ex-wife in Culiacán, only to find that he had fled though a secret door beneath a bathtub that led to a network of tunnels and sewer canals connecting to six other houses.Mr. Guzmán was finally caught in an apartment he used in the Pacific seaside city of Mazatlán.Before his arrest, Mr. Guzmán presided over a vast network that smuggled cocaine and marijuana into the United States and stretched as far as Europe and Africa. His wealth was estimated by Forbes magazine at more than $1 billion.Mr. Guzmán, who is believed to be in his late 50s, began his criminal career by selling marijuana with his father in the mountains of Sinaloa, never studying past third grade. In the years after his escape from prison in 2001, he became a mythical figure, surrounded by urban legends of sightings. Security agents closed in on him a couple of times, only to find that he had slipped away just hours before, often through tunnels built into the homes he frequented.He faces indictments in at least seven American federal courts on charges that include narcotics trafficking and murder. In October, a new indictment in Federal District Court in Brooklyn linked him and his associates to hundreds of acts of murder, assault, kidnapping and torture.In January, however, Mexico’s attorney general, Jesús Murillo Karam, told The Associated Press that Mr. Guzmán would never serve time in the United States. “I could accept extradition, but at the time that I choose. El Chapo must stay here to complete his sentence, and then I will extradite him,” Mr. Murillo Karam said then. “So about 300 or 400 years later — it will be a while.”The United States never filed a formal extradition request, though American officials did discuss it with their Mexican counterparts, who made it clear that they would not readily give him up, American law enforcement officials said not long after Mr. Guzmán’s arrest.In a statement on Sunday, Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch said, “We share the government of Mexico’s concern regarding the escape of Joaquín Guzmán Loera ‘Chapo’ from a Mexican prison.”“The U.S. government stands ready to work with our Mexican partners to provide any assistance that may help support his swift recapture,” the statement added.The rule of law has long been a challenge for Mexico, and Mr. Guzmán’s case was but the most recent example. While Mr. Peña Nieto has tried to move away from the law and order concerns of his predecessor, Felipe Calderón, pressing significant economic reforms engineered to position Mexico as a success story, violence connected to the drug trade, and the impunity that accompanies it, has dogged his administration.There was perhaps no more striking example than the deaths of 43 university students in the restive southern state of Guerrero. A mayor, his wife and more than 45 police officers have been arrested in connection with the killings, accused of working on behalf — or being members of — the gangs that control the region.