http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/29/nyregion/four-years-after-a-deadly-night-on-long-island-no-answers.html
4 Years Later, Still No Answers in Killing of a Long Island Laborer - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Suffolk County (NY),Tum  Antonio,Sanchez  Jose Fermin,Hispanic-Americans,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Immigration and Emigration,Hate Crimes,LatinoJustice PRLDEF
July 28, 2014
8451
SHIRLEY, N.Y. —  On a cool October night in 2010, two immigrant laborers went on a drinking spree in a stand of trees by the side of a road in this suburban hamlet on Long Island. Beer flowed. So did tequila. By the following afternoon, one of the men was dead, his body lying in the woods. The other was in a hospital bed, badly hurt, with a bladder injury and deep cuts in and around his rectum.Nearly four years later, the events of that night remain mostly a mystery, at least publicly. The family of the dead man, José Fermín Sánchez, say they still do not know how he died. The surviving laborer, Antonio Tum, claims to have only a hazy recollection of events and says that he and Mr. Sánchez were attacked by strangers.The police, meanwhile, refuse to comment on the case because, they say, the investigation remains open. And the Suffolk County district attorney’s office has rebuffed the Sánchez family’s request for the autopsy report, also citing the open investigation, according to LatinoJustice PRLDEF, a legal defense and advocacy group that represents Mr. Tum as well as Mr. Sánchez’s family.LatinoJustice believes that the two men were the victims of a racially motivated hate crime, and have accused Suffolk officials of failing to investigate the episode in a timely and thorough manner.“The delay seems to be part of a pattern of disregard for Latinos by the Suffolk County police,” said Foster Maer, senior litigation counsel for LatinoJustice. “The evidence raises a genuine question as to whether there has been some sort of cover-up of this horrific crime.”The group has been pressing federal prosecutors to look into the case for more than a year. And while agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation have interviewed Mr. Tum and other potential witnesses, a spokesman for the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York, which includes Long Island, declined to comment on the matter.Mr. Tum, 37, an immigrant from Guatemala, said in a recent interview that he and Mr. Sánchez, who was from El Salvador, had known each other for about a year and were roommates in a house in Mastic, N.Y., at the time of the attack. On Oct. 5, 2010, he recalled, he met up with Mr. Sánchez, who was 33, and several other acquaintances, all of them Latino immigrants, in Shirley around 4 p.m. The gathering place was a small trash-strewn stand of trees wedged between the back of a bowling alley and William Floyd Parkway, a busy four-lane road.Sitting on an old, torn mattress in a spot about 50 yards from the road and 25 yards from a parking lot, they downed tequila and Bud Light.Hours later, Mr. Tum said, he passed out on a small mound of dirt, several yards away from the other men. He remembers waking up to find someone’s hands on him. He said it felt like someone was trying to insert a needle in his arm. And then, he said, he felt people punching him. He lurched to his feet, bolted from the woods and ran to the Mastic Shirley train station, about a mile north along William Floyd Parkway, to seek help.Paramedics found him “lying on the ground at the train station,” according to his admission report at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital Medical Center in Patchogue, where Mr. Tum was brought at 5:24 a.m. on Oct. 6. “He admits to being intoxicated with alcohol for the past two days,” the report continued. “He does not remember what happened.”Doctors discovered a deep stab wound near Mr. Tum’s anus, according to a postoperative report, and removed between 20 and 30 pieces of wood from his anal canal. His sphincter had been “destroyed,” the report said.Mr. Tum said he did not remember suffering the injuries.It is unclear what investigative steps the police took following Mr. Tum’s appearance at the train station. According to a Suffolk County police news release, Mr. Sánchez’s body was not found until much later that day: A group of people walking through the stand of trees behind the bowling alley discovered the corpse and called the police at 5:25 p.m., the report said.José Zelaya, the owner of a diner located near where the men were drinking, said he had known Mr. Sánchez for several years and hired him from time to time to do small jobs around the restaurant, usually in exchange for food. When Mr. Zelaya was out of town, Mr. Sánchez — who was known by the nickname Chiquito — would stop by around closing time and walk Mr. Zelaya’s wife to her car to ensure her safety.“He was a very nice man,” Mr. Zelaya recalled. “He was getting along with everybody. He wouldn’t even have killed one mosquito.”At the time of the attack, Suffolk County was under scrutiny by the United States Justice Department, which had opened an investigation into allegations of discriminatory policing, including claims that county police officials had failed to thoroughly investigate allegations of crimes committed against Latinos.The inquiry had begun in 2009, prompted in part by the killing a year earlier of Marcelo Lucero, an Ecuadorean immigrant whom a group of teenagers stabbed to death. The Justice Department and Suffolk County signed an accord last December requiring that new policies be put in place to ensure nondiscriminatory policing and greater police outreach to the Latino community.Mr. Sánchez’s death came to the attention of the county’s hate crimes unit the day his body was found. At the time, Detective Sgt. Robert Reecks, who died in August 2011, was the head of the unit.According to his widow, Rita Reecks, Sergeant Reecks told her that an off-duty officer working as a security guard at a nearby library the night of the attack had spotted several teenagers entering and leaving the woods. Sergeant Reecks also told her that he had retrieved video from the library’s security cameras that captured the teenagers’ movements. But a couple of weeks after the episode, she said in an interview, he was pulled off the case. Sergeant Reecks later died when the car he was driving slammed into a bridge abutment. The authorities concluded that the death was a suicide.For his part, Mr. Tum said that while he was still in the hospital, he was questioned by a police officer. Shortly after he was discharged, he was interviewed again, this time by several police investigators, who, he said, showed him photographs of Mr. Sánchez on the mattress, a long, sharpened wooden stick by his side.“They said, ‘You killed José Sánchez,’ ” Mr. Tum recalled. “I said, ‘I’m innocent.’ ”He had no further contact with the police, he said, until one day this April, when county police officers riding in an unmarked car picked him up as he was coming out of a deli in Mastic and questioned him for two hours.His lawyers have accused the police of trying to intimidate him. They said they had moved him to a location outside New York State, which they declined to identify, for his protection.Mr. Sánchez’s relatives said they had no idea what was happening with the investigation prompted by his death. In a telephone interview from the rural municipality of Yoloaiqín in northeastern El Salvador, Merín Sánchez, one of Mr. Sanchez’s 10 siblings, said the Suffolk authorities had told the family nothing.“To the police, I want to say, ‘Please, we want everything clarified,’ ” he said. “We want information.”