https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/nyregion/new-york-today-staying-healthy-during-a-heat-wave.html
New York Today: Staying Healthy During a Heat Wave - The New York Times
New York City
June 13, 2017
9771
Updated, 7:42 a.m.Good morning on this sizzling Tuesday.Today will be another scorcher, with temperatures as high as 92. (Evening thunderstorms, if they materialize, will cool the city only a few degrees.)If the forecast holds, we’re looking at the final day of a heat wave.And during the first few heat waves of the season, heat strokes are a concern, said Dr. Amita Toprani, the medical director for the Bureau of Environmental Disease and Injury Prevention at the city’s Health Department.“Physiologically, your body gets used to the higher temperatures throughout the summer,” she added. “People are not yet acclimated, so it hits them a little bit harder.”Each year, on average, there are 13 deaths from heat stroke, 115 heat-related deaths, and 450 emergency-room visits for heat-related illness in New York, Dr. Toprani said.We asked her about the cause and signs of heat strokes and what can be done to prevent them. How do I know if I’m having a heat stroke?Heat strokes occur when the body’s temperature rises quickly. Signs include confusion, hallucinations, weakness, dizziness and nausea. Skin can be either hot and dry, or cold and clammy.Who’s at risk? “A lot of people think the heat affects people who are working outside or exercising, but actually most of our deaths occur with people who are inside their own home who are not using an air conditioner,” Dr. Toprani said. People age 65 or over are particularly vulnerable, as are those who have a chronic illness, have mental health issues, are homebound, or are substance abusers.How can we prevent heat stroke?“The most important thing is to stay in an air-conditioned environment,” Dr. Toprani said. She recommends setting the air-conditioner to 78 degrees, which will keep you cool without raising energy bills too much. Low-income residents can apply for a free air-conditioner through the Home Energy Assistance Program by calling 311.What about working, exercising or playing outdoors?Avoid exercising at the hottest points of the day, take breaks if you work outside, and stay hydrated. If the temperature rises above 95 for two consecutive days, or above 100 for a day, you can go to the fire department and request a spray cap, which will turn your local fire hydrant into a sprinkler, Dr. Toprani said.Can certain foods help prevent a heat stroke?“It’s fine if you want to eat ice cream, but that’s not going to be a health or safety measure for you,” Dr. Toprani said. “You’re not trying to externally cool down your body — your goal is to make sure your body’s mechanisms can cool itself down,” she said. “You just have to drink a lot of water.”Here’s what else is happening:• A cyclist was killed by a bus in Chelsea in the city’s first Citi Bike fatality. [New York Times]• Long Island Rail Road announced travel options for the coming “summer of hell.” [New York Times]• Weigh in: Will the Penn Station track closures affect you this summer? Your response could be included in our coverage. [New York Times]• A Cardinal in Newark welcomed gay worshipers at a recent Mass. The gay members embraced a “miracle.” [New York Times]• In New York, and across the country, police leaders are taking on bigger roles in reversing the opioid crisis, and not through mass arrests. [New York Times]•  Mayor Bill de Blasio wants more control of the city’s schools. In exchange, state Republicans want more charter schools, and Democrats want tax increases. [New York Times]• A high-school teacher in New Jersey was suspended after parents complained that references to President Trump had been removed from a yearbook. [New York Times]• How outrage built over the Public Theater’s depiction of Mr. Trump. [New York Times]• Developers want to move a submarine in Hackensack, N.J. But how? [New York Times]• A state lawmaker proposed a bill that would prevent brokers from renaming traditional neighborhoods in the city. [DNAinfo]• The 9/11 Tribute Center is tripling its size. [Wall Street Journal, subscription required]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “The Redemption of Cassidy Quinn”• Scoreboard: Mets club Cubs, 6-1. Yankees debauch Angels, 5-3.• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Tuesday Briefing.• Stroll down a Fifth Avenue without cars and get free admission to seven museums at the Museum Mile festival between 82nd and 105th Streets on the Upper East Side. 6 to 9 p.m.• Wind down at an after-work yoga session in Randalls Island Park. Bring your own mat. 6:30 p.m. [Free]• Celebrate Prince’s birthday and his legacy during a tribute concert at Brooklyn Bowl on Wythe Avenue. 8 p.m. [$10]• An outdoor screening of director Martin Scorsese’s “Shine a Light” at the Long Meadow at Prospect Park. 8:30 p.m. [Free]• Stand-up comedians improvise TED talks in a show at Q.E.D. in Astoria, Queens. 9 p.m. [$7]• Mets host Cubs, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Angels, 10:07 p.m. (YES).• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until June 25.It’s music month in New York.Our city has long been at the forefront of musical creativity and innovation — think Broadway show tunes, hip-hop, jazz, punk rock and salsa, to name a few.This June, New York is celebrating its $21 billion music industry with hundreds of concerts, workshops, films and walking tours.A few (free) events this week:Today: Catch a performance of “Cinderella” by the New York City Opera in Bryant Park. 4 and 6 p.m.Wednesday: Enjoy an al fresco concert of classical music by the New York Philharmonic on the Great Lawn of Central Park. 8 p.m.Thursday: Bring a blanket and take in a lunchtime performance by the flamenco and jazz artist Raul Midón at the MetroTech Commons in Brooklyn. Noon to 2 p.m.Friday: Learn how to tango, or watch the pros, in Union Square. 6 p.m.Saturday: Join a walking tour of Latin music in the South Bronx, hip-hop in Harlem, folk and punk rock in Greenwich Village, or classical music at Lincoln Center. Times vary.Find more events that complement your musical tastes here.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.