http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/us/politics/mike-lee-donald-trump.html
Senator Mike Lee Unloads on Why He Can’t Embrace Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Lee  Michael S (1971- ),Trump  Donald J,Republican Party,Endorsements,Utah,Mormons (Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints)
June 30, 2016
6679
Donald J. Trump has asked Republicans who do not have anything nice to say about him to not say anything at all.But Senator Mike Lee, the Republican from Utah, could not help himself.Mr. Lee, a close friend of Mr. Trump’s former primary opponent, Senator Ted Cruz, let his true feelings be known on Wednesday night in an interview with Newsmax when he was asked why he had not endorsed the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. Faced with the prospect of a Hillary Clinton presidency, how could he not?“Well, we can get into that if you want,” Mr. Lee said. “I mean we can get into the fact that he accused my best friend’s father of conspiring to kill J.F.K.”The comment was a reference to Mr. Trump’s insinuation that Mr. Cruz’s father was involved with the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963.Not finished, Mr. Lee went on to express concern about things that Mr. Trump has said about Muslims and how that turns off voters in his state, which has a large Mormon population.“We can go through the fact that he has made some statements that some have identified correctly as religiously intolerant,” Mr. Lee said.He added: “We can get into the fact that he is so unpopular because my state consists of members who were a religious minority church — a people who were ordered exterminated by the governor of Missouri in 1839, and statements like that make them nervous.”The remarks from Mr. Lee reflect the raw feelings among some Republicans toward Mr. Trump that are lingering after a primary race that devolved into ugly personal attacks and conspiracy theories dished out by the Manhattan businessman. That, combined with Mr. Trump’s vague and shifting mix of positions on issues that are held dear by conservatives, have left many Republicans in a tough spot.Mr. Lee said that he was still open to backing Mr. Trump and that he would not vote for Hillary Clinton. But he remains concerned about Mr. Trump’s faith in facts and uncertain about where he stands.“I would like some assurances that he is going to be a vigorous defender of the U.S. Constitution, that he is not going to be an autocrat, that he is not going to be an authoritarian,” Mr. Lee said. “That is not an unreasonable demand.”