https://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/13/world/middleeast/13baghdad.html
Heavy Absentee Voting by Iranians in Iraq - The New York Times
Iraq,Iran,Absentee Voting
June 12, 2009
5131
BAGHDAD — Streams of Iranian pilgrims, many of them women wrapped in the gray and white cloaks favored by Persians, made a special stop on Friday to vote at absentee polling places in the shadow of Iraq’s most renowned Shiite shrines in Baghdad, Najaf, Karbala and Samarra.“It is a religious duty to vote,” said Safar Ali Darwish, 55, who arrived at the  Imam Khadhim shrine in Baghdad wearing a paint-stained shirt and pants.Mr. Darwish comes from a family of craftsmen in the Iranian pilgrimage city of Qum skilled in the art of gilding holy sites, and he was visiting Iraq as part of a charitable project to help restore the shrine’s golden dome. His vote went to the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. “He is the one who gave people services, and the one who gives people the services will win,” Mr. Darwish said.Almost every one of the dozen Iranians interviewed at the shrine seemed to support Mr. Ahmadinejad. One exception was Ali Sadiq, 21, who said he voted for the main opposition leader, Mir Hussein Moussavi.“I voted for him because he has his roots in the revolution of Imam Khomeini,” Mr. Sadiq said, “and he used to be a former prime minister, while Ahmadinejad went straight to the presidency.”Estimates varied about how many Iranians would vote in Iraq. Abbas Shakuri, the Iranian Embassy’s political attaché, said that on any given day there were about 20,000 Iranian pilgrims in Iraq. Thousands more Iranians married to Iraqis have lived here for many years.With that in mind, the Iranian Embassy worked with the Iraqi Foreign Ministry and the Interior Ministry to set up polling places in seven cities.In Najaf, where election officials estimated that 12,000 Iranians voted, people thronged to two hotels favored by pilgrims, within walking distance of the Imam Ali shrine, where polling places had been set up.“Voting is a religious right, and I hope the next Iranian president will care about living conditions and the youth and how to develop Iran,” said Zahra Moussawi, 33, who had traveled from Tehran and voted as she left Friday Prayer.“I see Ahmadinejad as the one for this task,” she said.