https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-democrats-backlash-executive-orders.html
As Democrats Take to the Streets, Lawmakers Rush to Keep Up - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Trump  Donald J,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Democratic Party,Schumer  Charles E,Warren  Elizabeth
Jan. 29, 2017
9717
WASHINGTON — Senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania left the Philadelphia Orchestra’s 160th annual Academy of Music Concert and Ball and rushed to Philadelphia’s airport, still clad in white tie and tails.Senators Cory Booker of New Jersey and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts tore up their schedules to shout their way through impromptu speeches in airport concourses thronged with protesters.And some of those vying to lead the Democratic National Committee, sensing where the energy of the party was, made a beeline for Houston’s airport on Saturday night after appearing at yet another desultory candidate forum at yet another hotel.Legislators facing re-election next year, potential presidential candidates and would-be leaders of the party all scrambled this weekend to give voice to the fury over President Trump’s executive order temporarily barring refugees and some other migrants from coming to the United States. They had little choice.The swelling anger over Mr. Trump’s week-old administration is fueling a surge of spontaneous activism that some Democrats say they have not seen since the Vietnam War. The growing and seemingly organic energy offers Democrats a prime opportunity to ride a backlash to electoral success this year and next, the same way Republicans capitalized on Tea Party rage against President Barack Obama in 2010.But the fury is also spurring liberal voters to demand uncompromising confrontation and resistance from their elected officials to a president they believe poses an existential threat to the country. The Democrats’ increasingly assertive base wants the party’s leaders to eschew any cooperation with Mr. Trump: They are already expressing rage at some senators for confirming the president’s cabinet appointees, and for their willingness to allow a vote on his pick for a vacant Supreme Court seat.Addressing activists on Sunday at a rally in Lower Manhattan, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, shed tears as he lamented Mr. Trump’s refugee ban as an affront to democracy and pluralism. Later, he was met with chants of “vote down his nominees!” and a scattering of hecklers shouting “vote Schumer out.”“The Tea Party didn’t really become a force until it started ousting Republicans it didn’t feel represented them. That’s clearly going to have to happen here,” said Markos Moulitsas, the progressive activist who founded the Daily Kos website. “Democrats either need to feed, nurture and aggressively champion the resistance, or they need to get out of the way in favor of someone who will. The usual rules no longer apply.”Some party elites are clearly getting the message. Mr. Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, hastily scheduled a Monday rally for House and Senate Democrats on the steps of the Supreme Court.The rush of Democratic governors and senators, both moderates and progressives, to airports this weekend also showed that they recognized that the outpouring of protesters for the women’s marches on inauguration weekend was only the start of a new movement.“I think the key for the Democratic Party is to show to a very powerful and dynamic coalition that we are hearing them and connecting to their issues,” said former Representative Tom Perriello, who made a surprise entry into the Virginia governor’s race after Mr. Trump’s election and drove to Dulles International Airport from Richmond, Va., on Saturday to join the protests.The demands for purity from Democratic leaders are likely to grow only more unequivocal, and standing in solidarity with sign-waving protesters may prove insufficient. A rising chorus of liberals is pressuring senators to filibuster Mr. Trump’s selection for the Supreme Court, which he has said he will announce this week.“When it comes to the Supreme Court, eight is enough,” said Representative Keith Ellison, a Minnesota Democrat who is one of the top contenders to be the chairman of the Democratic National Committee. “They literally stole a Supreme Court justice from President Obama, so I see no reason why we should facilitate them putting in some right-wing extremist.”But some Democratic senators, including those facing re-election next year, are uneasy about forming a blockade against Mr. Trump’s pick, as Senate Republicans did last year against Mr. Obama’s nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland. Doing so could be fruitless, anyway. Mr. Trump has already encouraged Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, to ram through new Senate rules that would allow a Supreme Court pick to be seated with a simple majority of 51 votes — the same rules change Democrats engineered in 2013 to end filibusters of virtually every presidential appointment besides a Supreme Court justice.“I believe we must fulfill our constitutional responsibility to have a hearing and a vote,” said Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, a member of the Judiciary Committee, while urging Mr. Trump to choose a nominee “in the mainstream.”Ms. Klobuchar, who stood on Sunday with members of her state’s large Somali population, said she was not concerned that the party’s base would turn on its elected officials.“As a whole, the 48 Democratic senators share their anger and passion and will pull the emergency brake on such things as the executive order, but also some compromise if there are areas we can find common-sense agreements,” she said.In truth, fissures are already emerging among Senate Democrats. Some of the newer senators, including those who may be eyeing the presidency, are taking a more confrontational line. Senator Kamala D. Harris of California, who was elected last year, opposed the confirmations of Gen. John F. Kelly as secretary of homeland security and former Representative Mike Pompeo of Kansas as Central Intelligence Agency director. The senior senator from her state, Dianne Feinstein, who was first elected in 1992, supported them both.Even some of the Democrats most beloved by the left are proving vulnerable to increasingly pointed criticism about their handling of Mr. Trump. Ms. Warren faced searing anger from liberals last week over her willingness to vote for the confirmation of Ben Carson, the neurosurgeon and former Republican presidential candidate, for secretary of housing and urban development. Some activists at the national committee’s meeting shouted that she had “sold us out” when her name was mentioned.Ms. Warren was forced to write a Facebook post explaining her vote that began, “OK, let’s talk about Dr. Ben Carson.”The scale and ferocity of the anger coming out of the Democratic base has astounded even some party veterans.“There is much more energy opposing Trump than there ever was in reaction to George W. Bush and the Iraq War,” said Paul Begala, a longtime Democratic strategist. “I have never seen so much spontaneous grass-roots energy on the left.”Elected Democrats have sought to harness the anger, with even some of the more mild-mannered lawmakers intensifying their rhetoric. But when Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, the Democrats’ vice-presidential nominee last year, warned Sunday on Twitter, “If we turn our backs on widows and orphans fleeing the very evil we despise, we do not defeat our enemies; we surrender to them,” the greeting from Democrats was not all sweetness and warmth.“Tim, this is great,” former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont responded on Twitter, “but the Dems in the Senate actually have to do something about this stuff. You are being left behind by your base.”