http://www.nytimes.com/1972/08/01/archives/successor-sought-obrien-and-muskie-in-running-dakotan-to-address.html
SUCCESSOR SOUGHT - The New York Times
EAGLETON  THOMAS F,PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 1972,VICE PRESIDENTS,PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 1972,VICE PRESIDENTS
Aug. 1, 1972
9431
WASHINGTON, July 31— Senator Thomas F. Eagleton, yielding to a request from Senator George McGovern, withdrew tonight from his cam paign for the Vice‐Presidency. He said that he did not wish to “divide the Democratic party” by continuing as its nominee.Eighteen days after choosing Mr. Eagleton as his running  mate, Senator McGovern, the Democratic Presidential nomi nee, announced that they had agreed that the “best course” would be for Mr. Eagelton to step aside and thereby termi nate a national debate over his health.Thus Mr. Eagleton became the first Vice‐Presidential nom inee ever to withdraw from candidacy, other than by death.Democratic leaders across the country, after learning of Mr. Eagleton's withdrawal, said that while the action was sad personally, it would strengthen the party's chances in the No vember election.May Pick O'BrienSenator McGovern said that he did not have a new nominee in mind, but there were reports that he would recommend to the Democratic National Com mittee that it select its former chairman, Lawrence F. O'Brien, to take Mr. Eagieton's place.Among other names men tioned was that of Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine, whose associates said that he would be available if Mr. Mc Govern were to ask him to become the new Vice‐Presiden tial nominee.Mr. McGovern said at a news conference at which he and Mr. Eagleton announced the decision that “health was not a factor” in making it. But he added that Senator Eagle ton's disclosure, six days ago, that he had been hospitalized in 1960, 1964 and 1966 for treatment of nervous exhaus tion and fatigue had “domi nated the political dialogue of the country” and threatened to obscure the real issue of the campaign.Committee to ChooseMr. Eagleton said he would write a letter in the morning officially informing Mrs. Jean Westwood, the chairman of the national committee, of his deci sion. Mrs. Westwood will then convene a meeting of the com mittee, which has the respon sibility of choosing a new candidate.Mr. McGovern announced that he would go on nation wide television at 9 P.M. to morrow “to discuss the events of the campaign to date.” But he said he did not expect to announce a Vice‐Presidential nominee tomorrow.It was clear that Senator Eagleton had yielded to Sen ator McGovern in agreeing to withdraw at a two‐hour private meeting in the Marble Room off the United States Senate chamber earlier tonight.“I would have preferred to remain on the ticket,” Mr. Eag leton said at a news confer ence an hour later in the high ceiling Caucus Room of the Old Senate Office Building.He said that he had “mar shaled my arguments in law yer‐like fashion” in seeking to persuade Mr. McGovern that his continued candidacy would be a plus for the Democratic ticket. But he and Mr. McGov ern both noted that there had been, as the Presidential nom inee described it. “growing pressures” both for and against Senator Eagleton's presence on the ticket.“I will not divide the Demo cratic party, which has already too many divisions,” Mr. Eagle ton said.Grim‐faced as he began to read from a prepared state ment, Senator McGovern dis closed for the first time that he discussed Mr. Eagleton's health with three doctors who had treated the 42‐year‐old Missourian for mental depres sion.“I am fully satisfied that his health is excellent,” he assert ed. Nonetheless, he said, “the public debate over Senator Eagleton's past medical history continues to divert attention from the great national issues that need to be discussed.”To Campaign for McGovernBoth men spoke of the need to unite the Democrats for the campaign against President Nixon, and Mr. Eagleton said that he would campaign on Mr. McGovern's behalf.In addition to Mr. O'Brien and Senator Muskie as possible choices for the Vice‐Presidential nomination, several other pos sibilities were being mentioned tonight. They included Gov. Patrick J. Lucey of Wisconsin, Gov. John J. Gilligan of Ohio and R. Sargent Shriver, the brother‐in‐law of Senator Ed ward M. Kennedy and a former Ambassador to France.But a senior executive of the McGovern campaign said this morning that Mr. O'Brien, who is now the national chairman of Mr. McGovern's campaign, was the “fallback choice” if Mr. Eagleton should step down.Technically, the decision to withdraw was Mr. Eagleton's. Nothing in the Democratic party's rules would permit his removal against his will. And although he had spoken in the last several days of being ada mantly committed to remaining a candidate, members of his staff said that he could not refuse a direct request to step down.Mr. Eagleton was red‐eyed and nervous as he made the announcement.“My conscience is clear, my spirits are high,” he said, and he managed to joke with well wishers when they interrupted his prepared statement with ap plause.“I've got more to say,” Sen ator Eagleton interjected, forc ing a smile. “Please be patient, the best is yet to come.”Senator McGovern said that the final decision was not made until he and Mr. Eagleton, joined by Senator Gaylord Nel son of Wisconsin, sat in the Marble Room to weigh the fate of their joint campaign.But an authoritative Senate source said when the meeting began that Mr. McGovern had told him earlier today, “Unhap pily, Torn has to go.”Furthermore, it was known that Mr. Nelson was attempting throughout the day—when Mr. McGovern was attending the funeral in Houma, La., of Senator Allen J. Ellender and Mr. Eagleton was marshalling support here in Washington— to work out an agreement for Senator Eagleton to withdraw.Representative Henry S. Reuss of Wisconsin and Senator Nelson had met separately with Senator Eagleton this morning, after Mr. Reuss had told friends that he would propose that Mr. Eagleton drop out of the race but continue to campaign for Mr. McGovern.Mr: Eagleton told newsmen that he had attempted to per suade Mr. McGovern that the issue of his past health would have “run out of gas” in two or three weeks.But Mr. McGovern reportedly stressed the narrowness of any likely victory margin in Novem ber and the compulsion to avoid any risk that the health issue might thus endanger the prospects of winning.Although Mr. McGovern as serted tonight that he had “consistently supported Senator Eagleton,” he began hinting on Friday that the a pledge of “1,000 per cent” support for his running mate was being re assessed.Mr. McGovern told newsmen Saturday night, aboard the chartered airplane that brought him to Washington from a working vacation in his native South Dakota, that he was un sure how voters would react to Mr. Eagleton's health dis closures.“The one thing we know about Eagleton,” he said, “is that he's been to the hospital three times for depression.”But tonight, Mr. McGovern said he had been assured—he did not say when—by Senator Eagleton's doctors that “they felt he has made a full re covery” from the depression that had hospitalized him three times.In response to questions about the factors that led to his decision to seek Mr. Eagle ton's replacement, Mr. Mc Govern said: “As the days went on, it became clear to me that Senator Eagleton's past medi cal history has literally domi nated the news, it has domi nated the political dialogue of the country.”But Mr. Eagleton said that he wanted, in the words of Presi dent Nixon, to “make one thing crystal clear—this is definitely not my last press conference and Tom Eagleton is going to be around for a long, long time.”The prospects were that Mr. McGovern, in his television ap pearance tomorrow, would ap peal to Democrats and others for understanding of the rea sons behind the withdrawal of Mr. Eagleton. And it was clear that there were some within his own party who would have to be persuaded.At the funeral in Louisiana, Senator McGovern spent most of his time in the company of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who had been offered the Vice‐Presidential nomination and had declined it, Mr. Kennedy was consult ed by Senator McGovern be fore Senator Eagleton was chosen as the nominee, and the speculation today was that Mr. McGovern was again seeking advice, rather than a commit ment to become a candidate, from Mr. Kennedy.In his office this afternoon, Mr. Eagleton showed newsmen a copy of a book titled “Not Exactly a Crime” about the Vice‐Presidency.“Needless to say, I won't need this much longer,” he said, holding up the book. Then he paused and said, “Or maybe I will.”Despite his apparent And ac customed buoyancy, members of Mr. Eagleton's staff were less charitable toward Senator Mc Govern. One aide said that Mr. McGovern appeared to have pulled the rug out from under Mr. Eagleton just when the tide of public opinion was turning his way.“I don't really know whether I want to see him in the White House or not,” another Eagleton aide said of the Presidential nominee.