https://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/04/world/middleeast/04tehran.html
Iran Opposition Leaders Urge Rally on Anniversary - The New York Times
Iran,Karroubi  Mehdi,Moussavi  Mir Hussein,Politics and Government,Demonstrations and Riots,Freedom and Human Rights
Feb. 3, 2010
9120
Throwing up a challenge to the increasingly violent tactics of Iran’s ruling elite, the country’s two leading opposition figures are urging protesters to defy the government and take to the streets in an antigovernment rally on Feb. 11.The government announced on Tuesday that it would execute nine protesters;  two  were hanged last week. The prosecutor also asked Wednesday for the death sentence for a 24-year-old protester, having charged him with moharebeh, or waging war against God, for “throwing rocks during protests,” the news agency ISNA reported.The statements by the two opposition leaders, Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hussein Moussavi, appeared to reflect a unanimous decision to stand fast in the face of the brutal treatment of protesters by the government.The statement from Mr. Karroubi, posted Wednesday on his Web site, called for free elections, the release of political prisoners and an end to what he described as a police state created since the June 12 presidential election. He renewed his accusation that the results of the election were “engineered,” and dismissed claims that he was seeking a compromise with the government.“I will defend the legitimate and legal freedoms and rights of the people,” he said. “This is my unbreakable vow.”Mr. Karroubi’s statement followed by a day some of Mr. Moussavi’s harshest remarks to date against the country’s leaders and the government, which he called “dictatorial.”However, Mr. Karroubi urged protesters to stay calm, warning that their enemies wished to provoke them into acts of violence.“The opposition movement today includes groups with diverse demands,” he said. “We might agree or oppose some of the ideas, but we all agree over free elections, free press, unconditional release of political prisoners and a reformed way of political governance.“Without any doubt, increasing these demands can lead to more violent suppression of the movement.”Opposition Web sites reported Wednesday that the authorities had unleashed a new wave of arrests ahead of the planned rally on Feb. 11, the 31st anniversary of the 1979 Islamic Revolution. The opposition has used  patriotic and religious holidays and anniversaries to stage protests since the election, which touched off the antigovernment movement.Many student activists were arrested Tuesday night in Tehran and other cities, including many young women, the opposition Web site Jaras reported. One of the detainees is Sahar Ghasseminejad, 26, who had no political affiliation and had only participated in protests. Her father was a political prisoner executed in the 1980s, the Web site reported.The authorities also arrested Kaveh Ghasemi Kermanshahi, 25, a Kurdish human rights activist in the western city of Kermanshah, the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran reported.