https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/books/review/a-return-to-middle-earth-44-years-after-tolkiens-death.html
A Return to Middle-Earth, 44 Years After Tolkien’s Death - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Tolkien  J R R
June 9, 2017
4604
RETURN OF THE KING: On the hardcover fiction list of late, the dead are looking lively. Last week Michael Crichton, who died in 2008, debuted at No. 2 with “Dragon Teeth,” a cowboys-and-fossils thriller currently at No. 3. And this week J.R.R. Tolkien, who died in 1973, lands at No. 6 with “Beren and Lúthien,” about the Middle-earth romance between a human and an elf. Tempting as it is to picture the sentient heads of Crichton and Tolkien preserved in jars somewhere, “Futurama” style, spinning new stories, the reality is more mundane: Both books were exhumed from the authors’ files in varying states of readiness and prepared for publication by their estates. In Tolkien’s case that means readers will find copious notes from his third son, Christopher Tolkien, who traces the story’s evolution through a series of epic poems that are — like much of the Middle-earth canon — wildly inventive and technically flawless and also sort of insufferable at times. Had Shakespeare written Norse-inflected fantasies, they might have sounded something like this:Now ringed about with wolves they  stand,and fear their doom. Alas! the land,the land of Narog left behind!Foreboding evil weights their mind,as downcast, halting, they must goand cross the stony bridge of woeto Wizard’s Isle, and to the thronethere fashioned of blood-darkened stone.Et cetera. Then again, plenty of Tolkien fans over the years have been game to cross the stony bridge of woe wherever it led. One, apparently, was the distinguished British novelist Iris Murdoch, who sent Tolkien an admiring letter toward the end of his life. “I have been meaning for a long time to write to you to say how utterly I have been delighted, carried away, absorbed by ‘The Lord of the Rings,’” she wrote. “I wish I could say it in the fair Elven tongue.”UNBLOCKED: “Come Sundown,” new at No. 1 in hardcover fiction, is approximately the 200th Nora Roberts novel to become a best seller — it’s so easy to lose count that Roberts herself, in a recent appearance on the NPR show “Wait Wait … Don’t Tell Me,” couldn’t say just how many books she had written. “I don’t let myself believe” in writer’s block, she explained. “I feel very strongly writing is habit as much as an art or a craft. And if you write crap you’re still writing. … You can fix that. But if you walk away then you’ve broken the habit.”