http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/10/realestate/in-clinton-hill-brooklyn-from-broken-angel-to-condos.html
From ‘Broken Angel’ to Condos  - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Art,Clinton Hill (Brooklyn  NY),Restoration and Renovation,Brooklyn (NYC),Wood  Arthur,New York City
May 8, 2015
3248
Standing at Downing and Quincy Streets in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, one would never know that the handsome yet unremarkable brick building on the quiet corner was once a whimsical neighborhood mascot known as Broken Angel, with eclectic, stacked rooftop additions that reached ever higher.But as the neighborhood has evolved and real estate prices have climbed, Broken Angel was sold last year to a developer who converted the property to luxury condominiums, rechristening it 4 Downing. Sales began last month, with prices starting at $1.125 million for a two-bedroom apartment.The demise of Broken Angel, a building so unusual it once stopped pedestrians in their tracks, coincides with the rapid transformation of a neighborhood that was long associated with crime and poverty. Derelict brownstones have been restored, condos have replaced warehouses and vacant lots, and trendy eateries now pepper Fulton Street. But as Clinton Hill, like so many Brooklyn neighborhoods, reinvents itself as yet another gentrifying enclave, Broken Angel recalls a moment in city history when such a creation could seemingly rise out of thin air.“It was like no other building, and I don’t think there ever will be anything like that again,” said Margot Niederland, whose short documentary film about Broken Angel screened at the Sundance Film Festival in 1991. “It was like the Watts Towers, except L.A. saved that, but New York didn’t save Broken Angel.”The Watts Towers, a stand of craggy spires in Los Angeles that was once almost demolished by the city, is now a national landmark. But Broken Angel’s creator, an eccentric artist named Arthur Wood, certainly tried to save his life’s work.In 1979, Mr. Wood and his wife, Cynthia, bought the abandoned four-story building from the city for $2,100. They spent the next three decades transforming it into a topsy-turvy work of art. But after a series of unfortunate events, beginning with a mysterious fire in 2006, Mr. Wood lost the building to foreclosure and was permanently evicted by the city in 2013. Ms. Wood died in 2010.“It’s a great loss and I can tell you why,” said Mr. Wood, who is now 84 and lives with his son, Christopher, in Beacon, N.Y. “Architecture affects your mind, O.K.? If you live in a tiny box, you don’t have any ideas and you don’t have any future.”Broken Angel was certainly no tiny box. A series of ladders and planks traversed the building, which had a dirt ground floor. Stained glass windows were fashioned out of salvaged saltshakers, glass bottles and ashtrays. Mr. Wood planned to eventually suspend a whale made out of a Sea King helicopter from the roof; it would have been supported by a crane.Broken Angel rose at a time when the neighborhood was gripped by urban blight. No one could have imagined that a condo might sell here for $2.375 million, the list price for the three-bedroom triplex at 4 Downing before it was taken off the market last week. Longtime residents recall watching the Wood family, including the couple’s two children, Christopher and Elizabeth, collect stones, bricks and wood from the street, carrying the materials home in a wagon.“I used to say, ‘What are they doing?’ ” said Arnette Lloyd Andrews, a lifelong Clinton Hill resident who used to work at a day care center near Broken Angel. “And then all of a sudden, I noticed a beautiful structure near the top. I said, ‘Wow, he must really be an artist.’ ”The building eventually grew from its original 42 feet to a crooked 108 feet, with arches, windows and sloping rooftops that offered breathtaking (if precarious) views of Brooklyn. “It was quite a revelation; it was like stepping back into the 11th century,” said Schellie Hagan, who has lived in the neighborhood since 1983. The comedian Dave Chappelle used Broken Angel as a backdrop of his 2006 concert film “Dave Chappelle’s Block Party,” saying: “If I was a location scout and we needed a crack house, I might refer their place.”For longtime residents, seeing Broken Angel replaced with condos seems apropos, merely another example of how the neighborhood has evolved. “From an artistic and historical perspective, it’s definitely a loss, but Clinton Hill has changed,” said Eddie Hibbert, who owns a salvage shop on Greene Avenue, but is selling the building and retiring. “That’s progress. It might not be the progress that the average person would want, but people have got the right to live and be wherever they want. Change is inevitable. It is what it is.”Growing up inside Broken Angel was not always easy. Mr. Wood’s son, Christopher, recalled being teased at school because he smelled of wood smoke from fires the family burned to keep warm, a task that proved particularly difficult when exterior walls or parts of the roof were missing. But classmates who saw his house were stunned, if not frightened. “I brought two friends from high school in the middle of the night and they were terrified,” said the younger Mr. Wood, a stone carver who is working on the restoration of St. Patrick’s Cathedral in Midtown. “Their knees were shaking and they were like, ‘Can we go down now?’ ”As the neighborhood succumbed to the crack epidemic in the 1980s, people looking for quick cash would turn up on the family’s doorstep hoping to sell bricks, beams and other salvaged material. “It was like Beirut,” said Christopher Wood. “It was a very undesirable neighborhood.”But by 2006 the neighborhood had started to change, when a fire started in the upper reaches of the building. “I said, ‘Oh no, that’s going to be the end of Broken Angel,’ ” Ms. Hagan, a neighbor, recalled.After the fire, city officials evicted Mr. and Ms. Wood when a Buildings Department inspection deemed their unpermitted modifications unsafe. The couple set up camp in the neighboring lot, which they also owned, living out of a Volkswagen camper along with a dog, a white dove and a few cats. Mr. Wood soon entered into a partnership with a developer, Shahn Andersen, to convert the property to condos, preserving part of it as a home and studio for Mr. and Ms. Wood.But the relationship with Mr. Andersen unraveled, leading to litigation and acrimony as the bank called in a $4 million loan package that had been granted to the limited liability companies created by Mr. Wood and Mr. Andersen. Although Mr. Wood and Mr. Andersen had spent only about $700,000, they had completed significant work. They had removed the rooftop addition, restored the floors and prepared the space for plumbing and electrical work, according to both Mr. Andersen and Gregory B. Toledo, a contractor who worked on the project. Why the bank rescinded the loan remains a matter of debate, with Mr. Andersen and Mr. Wood blaming each other for the debacle. Mr. Wood sued the bank, Mr. Andersen and the city to no avail. The bank eventually foreclosed on the property.“I don’t even drive by that block anymore, I don’t want to see it,” said Mr. Andersen, who is currently working on a residential development nearby. “We had a great opportunity and it turned out badly and it didn’t have to.”Mr. Wood, however, still hopes to reclaim the property through litigation. “I told Alex, ‘Don’t put too much work into it, because I still have a chance of getting the building back,’” said Mr. Wood, referring to Alex Barrett, the developer of 4 Downing.Today, few remnants of Broken Angel remain. In a hallway stairwell, two 18-inch-tall moon-faced concrete masks in bas-relief face each other, remnants of a larger installation of an angel with wings built by Arthur and Christopher Wood. “It’s no longer what I designed and it no longer has anything to do with me,” Mr. Wood said. Apartments at 4 Downing will have white oak floors and kitchens outfitted with Corian countertops and glazed porcelain subway tile backsplashes. Some units have exposed brick fireplaces — the same ones the Wood family once used to keep warm.The apartments at 4 Downing are among the most expensive listings in the neighborhood, with the asking price for a 1,888-square-foot three-bedroom at $1.6 million. Yet interest in the development has been strong, with about 60 showings the first weekend it went on the market, according to Lindsay Barrett, an associate broker at Compass who is marketing the property and is also married to Mr. Barrett, the developer. Within a month, eight units were under contract.The two townhouses rising in the adjacent lot did not immediately sell and have been taken off the market until the fall, Mr. Barrett said. Listed at $2.375 million and $2.295 million, they were the most expensive units in the project. Few of the people who toured the property mentioned Broken Angel, according to Ms. Barrett, a detail that surprised her given the site’s colorful history. Units have been stripped of Mr. Wood’s artistic flourishes, and the publicity materials make no mention of Broken Angel, either.The decision to downplay Broken Angel was intentional. “This building has had a lot of history,” said Mr. Barrett, the developer. “Arthur and Cynthia Wood’s chapter is a portion of it, and a well-known portion, but it is not the entire story.”