https://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/08/us/politics/richard-lugar-battles-on-eve-of-primary-vote-in-indiana.html
Richard Lugar Battles on Eve of Primary Vote in Indiana - The New York Times
Lugar  Richard G,Mourdock  Richard E,Indiana,United States Politics and Government,Senate,Tea Party Movement,Primaries and Caucuses,Polls and Public Opinion,Elections  Senate
May 7, 2012
4966
In the final, frenzied days of campaigning, Richard G. Lugar, who has won six previous elections to the United States Senate, has not exactly soft-pedaled the size of his challenge in the Indiana Republican primary on Tuesday.“Register your vote because if you do not, I may not be able to continue serving you,” Mr. Lugar said bluntly at a news conference late last week. “So at this point, help, I would say, is very important — that people get there and get there fast.”While many had once assumed that Mr. Lugar, who at 80 is among the longest-serving members of the Senate, would breeze to a seventh term — not to mention the Republican nomination — presumptions have largely been turned upside down.Critiques have been aimed at him on all fronts, including claims that he is too moderate, too friendly with President Obama, too removed from his home state, too old. Money for advertising against him has flowed in from national conservative groups, including the Club for Growth, the National Rifle Association and FreedomWorks, an organization that has helped build the Tea Party movement. Many of these groups have questioned Mr. Lugar’s conservative credentials and positions he took in favor of Mr. Obama’s Supreme Court nominees, the Dream Act and the bank bailout and against a ban on earmarks.By last week, the Howey/DePauw Indiana Battleground Poll showed a lead for Richard E. Mourdock, the state treasurer, with the support of 48 percent of likely primary voters to Mr. Lugar’s 38 percent — a slide from the 42 percent to 35 percent lead Mr. Lugar had held in the same poll a month earlier.The entire situation suggests a remarkable and painful reversal for a man who, until now, had not faced a primary opponent since he first won election in 1976.Still, on the eve of the election, Mr. Lugar’s campaign was by no means in retreat, aides said. Mr. Lugar had campaign events, in places like Carmel and Fairland, planned through Tuesday afternoon. By late Monday, 1,000 volunteers in the campaign’s elaborate phone banking operation had made more than 1.5 million calls. In recent weeks, Indiana voters have been buried, unhappily in some cases, in what became an avalanche of television and radio ads, signs and phone calls. Outside organizations have spent more than $4 million on the primary race, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, the majority of that benefiting Mr. Mourdock’s effort. But Mr. Lugar’s campaign has spent more than $6 million in this election cycle, the center reported, compared with about $2 million by Mr. Mourdock’s campaign.Democrats, among others, were eagerly awaiting Tuesday’s results. While Indiana is viewed as a Republican-leaning state, some Democrats think a victory by Mr. Mourdock, who is seen as more conservative than Mr. Lugar, could improve the chances of the Democratic candidate, Representative Joe Donnelly.Tea Party organizers said they, too, were watching intently, in part as what they view as a larger referendum on the health and muscle of the Tea Party movement itself. In the thinking of some members in Indiana, who have held marches and door-to-door walks on behalf Mr. Mourdock, the defeat of Mr. Lugar would be a clear, national message to those who have tried to declare the Tea Party movement a memory of 2010.“This would prove that when we focus and work together and work hard, we can win,” Brendan Steinhauser, a FreedomWorks organizer, said last month.For his part, Mr. Mourdock, 60, a former coal executive who first won his post as state treasurer in 2006, has appeared at Tea Party events and says he appreciates its members’ support, but he also says he believes he has reached a wider audience as well.