https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/realestate/975000-homes-on-banbridge-island-washington-yarmouth-maine-and-ocean-springs-mississippi.html
$975,000 Homes in Washington, Maine and Mississippi - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Bainbridge Island (Wash),Maine,Biloxi (Miss)
July 12, 2017
9997
WHAT A five-story house with three bedrooms and three and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $954,000SIZE 3,118 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $306SETTING This 1978 house is in the Point White neighborhood on the southern tip of Bainbridge Island. It is about two miles from Lynwood Center, a community with stores, restaurants, an art-house theater and a bakery. It is about five miles from a ferry terminal, from which a trip to Seattle takes about 35 minutes.INDOORS This towering cedar-shake house was designed by its former owner, William Isley, a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects. It was built with many local and reclaimed materials, including Douglas fir flooring and beams recovered from an industrial building in Seattle and cedar pilings repurposed as columns. An exterior staircase leads to the main entrance on the second floor, which opens into the kitchen and dining area. The kitchen has a reclaimed leaded-glass window that looks out on the landscape, as well as industrial light fixtures, quartz counters and stainless steel appliances. There is a small breakfast area by a window and a larger dining area near French doors that open onto a deck. Beyond is a sitting room with a rotating Rais wood-burning stove and a living room with a built-in L-shaped sofa under a vaulted ceiling.On the first floor is a media room with sliding glass doors, a bedroom and a bathroom. The master suite on the third floor has a sleeping platform with a skylight, a sunroom and a bathroom with a double vanity and separate shower and tub. The fourth floor has another bedroom with a connected bathroom. The fifth floor has an office with windows on all sides looking out over the treetops.OUTDOOR SPACE The house is part of a community of seven homes, each of which has a circular lot 100 feet in diameter, within a larger forested parcel of land measuring about seven acres. The remainder of the land is shared between the homeowners and includes a basketball court-size covered outdoor area, a sauna and a vegetable garden. This house has a two-car garage with a wisteria-covered pergola, a carport, a koi pond and a chicken coop.TAXES $7,889 a year, plus a homeowners’ association fee of $100 a monthCONTACT Leah Applewhite, Realogics Sotheby’s International Realty, 206-387-0439; rsir.com •WHAT A three-bedroom house with two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $995,000SIZE 4,326 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $230SETTING This house is in a rural area about two miles north of the center of Yarmouth, an affluent town of historic homes and small businesses, with parks, trails and boat access to the Royal River. The city of Portland is about 14 miles away.INDOORS This cape-style clapboard house appears old but was built in 2009, primarily with contemporary materials and systems. There are historically accurate new wood windows with a Teflon coating, wide-plank pine floors milled by a local craftsman, reproduction wrought-iron hardware and two furnaces (one for each floor of the house). A front door with a bull’s-eye glass transom opens into the living room, which has a brick hearth flanked by blue-stained cabinetry with the look of old paneling. This room is open to a dining area and a kitchen beyond, where there is a peninsula and an island, exposed beams, pine cabinets and soapstone counters and sink. There is a separate butler’s pantry and a screened porch looking out to a field.The master suite is on the ground floor, with a large walk-in closet, a built-in ironing station and a long hallway with storage cabinets and drawers leading to a bathroom with a tumbled marble floor and walk-in shower. Upstairs, two bedrooms share a bathroom. There is also a media room and a large recreation room with a loft over the garage.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 4.46-acre lot that borders Pratt’s Brook. There is a patio made with bricks salvaged from Portland’s Old Port, as well as stone walls and gardens, an attached, insulated three-car garage and an additional parking space in a drive-in basement under the house.TAXES $12,486 a yearCONTACT Ann Cianchette, Keller Williams, 207-318-5318; mainedreamproperties.com•WHAT A house dating from the mid-1800s, with three bedrooms and two bathroomsHOW MUCH $985,000SIZE 2,700 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $365SETTING This single-story house is on an avenue with many older homes in downtown Ocean Springs, a small Gulf Coast city. A variety of stores and restaurants are within a few blocks, on Washington Avenue and Government Street. Front Beach is about half a mile south; Biloxi is about four miles west.INDOORS The Federal-style house — built in the middle of the 19th century and extended in the early 1900s — retains much of its original charm. The front door opens off a deep porch into a wide hallway with built-in bookcases and room for console tables. To the left is the living room, which has a wood-burning fireplace, hardwood floors and French doors opening to the porch. A second, connected room with another fireplace is currently used as an office, but could also serve as a formal dining room. The master bedroom is in the front section of the house, adjacent to a bathroom with a free-standing copper soaking tub and a vanity with a black marble top.Two small steps down is the newer section of the house, which has a renovated kitchen with tile counters, a Viking fridge and a La Cornue range. It is open to a sitting room with built-in bookcases, a window seat and French doors that open to the backyard. A sunny hallway with three more pairs of French doors opening to the backyard leads to a large tiled laundry room and two additional bedrooms that share a bathroom with another free-standing soaking tub.OUTDOOR SPACE The 0.35-acre lot has a lush backyard with mature trees and gardens. There is a vine-covered arbor with a brick walkway near the front of the house and a pebbled patio toward the back. There is also an outdoor shower, as well as an unfinished outbuilding with plumbing that could be transformed into more living space.TAXES $3,219 a yearCONTACT Jan Munn, Moran Realty Company, 228-875-5464; moranrealtyco.com