https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/28/upshot/ben-carsons-health-care-plan-new-and-more-confusing.html
Ben Carson’s Health Care Plan: New and More Confusing - The New York Times
Carson  Benjamin S,Presidential Election of 2016,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Medicare,Medicaid
Oct. 27, 2015
5310
For the last few years, Ben Carson has been talking about a very disruptive but simple plan to reform the health care system in the United States: replace Obamacare, Medicare and Medicaid with an easy-to-understand universal, cradle-to-grave annual cash allowance for health spending.But last weekend, in a series of interviews, Mr. Carson, who is now narrowly leading in some national polls for the G.O.P. presidential nomination, said he had discarded that idea, and was now presenting a new health plan. It’s less politically toxic, but much less coherent. It is also less likely to lead to the big changes to the health care system he seeks.Like the original plan, his new one would include health savings accounts, meant to encourage people to pay for their medical care directly. But it would also coexist with existing government health programs — and the degree to which the government would be involved is unclear. It’s very hard to determine who would benefit from the Carson plan or how much it would cost the federal government. It seems possible that it could actually cost more than the current system.“I’m a little bit confused,” said Chris Wallace, the “Fox News Sunday” host, in an extended interview with Mr. Carson about the proposal.Yes, Mr. Carson’s new plan is confusing.The new plan would still repeal Obamacare, but apparently not do away with Medicare and Medicaid, the big government health insurance programs that have been around since the 1960s. In previous statements, Mr. Carson has said he’d like to scrap them both as wasteful and inferior to his idea of a lifetime $2,000-per-year health care allowance for every American. On Thursday, Kyle Cheney and Jason Millman at Politico described that plan, including critical voices from Republican health policy analysts, who worried that ending the popular Medicaid and Medicare programs would be both politically and practically problematic.“No, that — that’s the old plan. That’s been gone for several months now,” Mr. Carson told Mr. Wallace on Sunday, adding that he’d recently consulted with “a lot of economists and various people” who helped him shape his new plan.Here’s what we do know:Mr. Carson would do away with tax incentives that encourage employers to offer insurance to their workers, a big government expenditure that is the underpinning of the country’s current system. When asked by a reporter at an Iowa event on Saturday about the tax exclusion, he said, “I actually am going to be looking at getting rid of all tax deductions and loopholes.” The elimination of that benefit for the 151 million Americans who are covered in the employer-based system amounts to a loss of approximately $2,200 for each person, according to estimates from the Kaiser Family Foundation.The plan will still include some sort of health savings accounts. Mr. Carson has been consistent about seeking to eliminate the middleman between patients and doctors, and he says that asking people to finance more of their health care using cash will encourage them to seek bargains and use the health care system more wisely. People would be encouraged to use a portion of the savings to buy a very high-deductible “catastrophic or bridge insurance” plan. (This YouTube video from the Carson campaign lays out this argument.)Here’s what Mr. Carson hasn’t explained:How health savings accounts would be funded, and by how much: Before this weekend, Mr. Carson had long been saying that the federal government would give every American $2,000 every year from birth to death, money that could be spent only on health care, but could be shared among family members. For context, $2,000 is much less than the government spends annually on health care for most Americans. The federal government currently spends, on average, more than $11,000 per year for every Medicare beneficiary; around $1,900 for an average child; around $12,000 for an average disabled beneficiary in Medicaid; an average of more than $3,200 for middle-income people subsidized through the new Obamacare exchanges; and about $2,200 in forgone taxes for people covered through the employer system.Altogether, the average American’s health care costs more than $9,200 every year, though not even Bernie Sanders, who recommends a single-payer health care system, suggests the government ought to pick up the entire bill.Now Mr. Carson is saying that the government wouldn’t necessarily fund the health spending accounts for everyone. “That is off the table,” he told Mr. Wallace. “We’re not having the government do that. I don’t want a big government program.” But he also said that people with Medicare or Medicaid coverage could get the money currently being spent for them in their account. What, if anything, he would offer people currently covered through the Obamacare coverage expansions is unclear.What would happen to Medicare and Medicaid: Mr. Carson says that once people see the advantages of the health savings accounts, they will freely choose them instead of the 1960s social insurance programs for the poor, elderly and disabled. He says that he wouldn’t abolish the government programs, but that Americans would voluntarily give them up in favor of the health spending accounts.As is the case with most insurance programs, there’s a wide range of health spending among people in those programs. Medicare, for instance, includes some hale 65-year-olds with few medical needs, and some people with complex health problems near the end of their lives. Medicaid covers poor children and childless adults, many of whom have low medical costs, and people with disabilities or long-term care needs, whose care typically runs more than $10,000 a year.In a system where people choose between cash or government insurance, healthier people will probably opt for the cash. But that preference is likely to change once they get sick and medical bills start piling up. This tendency of people to wait to join costlier programs until they get sick is a reason most government insurance programs provide financial incentives to get in early and stay in — so that risks and costs can be spread across a broad population. Medicare’s drug program, for instance, charges higher premiums to people who wait a few years to join. And Obamacare imposes fines on anyone who fails to obtain health insurance. Mr. Carson’s new plan, by contrast, appears to pay healthy Americans to stay out of the insurance pool.His original plan solved this problem by eliminating the more generous insurance programs, so people would be forced to either save in their spending accounts or forgo care. The new plan runs the risk of costing the government more than the current system, since people could game a two-choice system, sticking with a savings account when their spending is low, and switching to a government program once their medical costs rise.Mr. Carson is not alone in having some gray areas in his health care plan. Jeb Bush has said that he would encourage states to “develop a transition plan” for 17 million people he estimates are currently enrolled in Obamacare, without much discussion of what that transition would be or how it would be paid for. Marco Rubio has offered little more than a short op-ed sketching some health policy ideas. Of the Republican candidates in the race, only Bobby Jindal has published a detailed health proposal.Doug Watts, a spokesman for the Carson campaign, declined to answer questions about the details of Mr. Carson’s plan, saying only that the Politico report was inaccurate and that the candidate would release a fuller proposal in a few weeks. The answers to some questions raised by the new plan — like who would get government money in their health savings accounts, and how much — may be answered soon. But the basic problem with having two competing systems operating side-by-side may be trickier to resolve.