https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/opinion/a-turning-point-for-health-care-and-its-gop-opponents.html
A Turning Point for Health Care — and Its G.O.P. Opponents - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court (US),Medicaid,United States Politics and Government,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Social Security (US),States (US),Medicare,United States,Republican Party
June 25, 2015
5797
FOR the second June in four years, the Supreme Court, led by its conservative chief justice, John G. Roberts Jr., has affirmed the legal framework of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 — the signature achievement of the Obama-era Democratic Party and a national social policy landmark. In so doing, the Roberts court assured the permanent expansion of social protections in America, and also saved the Republican Party from a no-win explosion its own extreme right-wingers tried to ignite.For health reform, it is now steady as it goes, with wind at its back. The court’s June 2012 ruling that the Affordable Care Act was constitutional came at the price of a detour, because that ruling said states could choose whether or not to take federal money to expand their Medicaid programs to cover the near-poor.However, this new Supreme Court decision, rejecting an ultraright challenge to the nationwide subsidies that allow lower-middle-income Americans to buy affordable private health insurance on state-level exchanges established by the federal government, will speed the already remarkable implementation of health reform. And that progress has been truly rapid by historical standards.After Social Security was enacted in 1935, it faced a major revamp in 1939. Its taxes were stalled throughout World War II. Social Security remained politically vulnerable until the 1950s and did not become broadly popular or embedded in economic life until reforms under President Richard M. Nixon raised benefits for the poor and the middle class. In contrast, since full implementation of President Obama’s health law started in 2014, some 16 million additional Americans have gained health insurance coverage, and the national “uninsurance rate” has dropped to under 12 percent from 18 percent.The Affordable Care Act would have survived even if the Supreme Court had decided King v. Burwell the other way, but insurance markets would have trembled in dozens of states. And millions would have faced threats to new coverage that most consumers report liking. Now sign-ups on the exchanges will continue and many more Republican-led states will decide to take federal money to pay for Medicaid expansion. By the time President Obama leaves the White House in January 2017, as many as 34 million will be covered by the exchanges and Medicaid, and the uninsurance rate could drop below 10 percent.Of course the partisan clamor is not over. In coming months, many congressional Republicans and presidential contenders will continue to make loud promises about repeal (or “repeal and replace,” with replacements never specified), because the “Obamacare” label is unpopular with a majority of Republicans. But in 2016 general election campaigns the sound and fury will be muted, because most independents and Democrats do not want repeal or big disruptions and majorities of rank-and-file Republicans favor the tangible benefits. Even if a Republican takes the presidency and that party holds both houses of Congress in 2017, it will not be able to get rid of the insurance regulations in the Affordable Care Act with bare majorities — and it will not dare abolish coverage for tens of millions of Americans or slash profits for insurance companies and hospitals.This brings us to the second turning point wrought by the Roberts court ruling: a shift within the Republican Party itself. Again and again over the past century, Republicans and Democrats have gone to partisan war over major social programs — Medicare and Medicaid as well as Social Security — and over federal interventions like the Civil Rights Act that promise new gains for minority Americans. The wars over the Affordable Care Act from 2009 have been similarly infused with racial overtones, because the new benefits mostly help Americans of modest means, disproportionately minorities. And the battles have been unusually fierce, because partisan and ideological divisions are now more closely aligned than they were between the 1930s and the 1960s.But now, Republicans are going to move steadily toward the same sort of grudging adaptation they previously had to make to Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid, with pro-business interests pushing back against ideological purists and Tea Partiers. For Affordable Care Act politics, this shift has been underway in many states for some time, as Republican governors in Ohio, Nevada, Michigan, Indiana and beyond have parried ideological right wingers to find ways to accept the Medicaid expansion that so greatly benefits their white and black poor citizens and the bottom lines of hospitals. Now Chief Justice Roberts has abandoned ultras to his right, upholding subsidies in federal-run exchanges by pointing to the need to avoid throwing insurance markets into turmoil.As the King ruling came down on Thursday morning, we can be sure that sighs of relief spread among non-Tea Party Republican officeholders and in the halls of the Chamber of Commerce. Sure, the ruling assured the survival of Mr. Obama’s main domestic policy achievement, unhappily for Republicans now and in the future. But it also signaled a real setback for right-wing ideological bomb-throwers and gave a boost to Republicans who would like to get on with the business of winning government power to serve practical business interests. In the spirit of Justice Scalia, long live ObamaScotusCare.