https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/18/style/how-the-sony-corporation-hack-revived-the-lost-art-of-the-phone-call.html
How the Sony Corporation Hack Revived the Lost Art of the Call - The New York Times
Sony Corporation,Cyberwarfare,North Korea,Telephones and Telecommunications,Privacy,Computer Security,Cellular Telephones,Text Messaging,Cyberattacks and Hackers,Movies
Dec. 17, 2014
3226
­SCENE: LOS ANGELES — DAY­Two Hollywood executives walk along Sunset Boulevard sipping coffee. The Hollywood sign hangs in the distance, overlooking all of Tinseltown. The executives are discussing the Sony hacking scandal.­EXECUTIVE 1“Those emails aren’t really that bad. I mean, come on, I’ve sent much worse to people at other studios. Remember that thread on Tom Cruise?”Both executives laugh as they drink their coffee.­EXECUTIVE 2“I totally agree. And let’s be realistic. If you went through anyone’s email in America, you’d find a deluge of nasty stuff about co-workers. Imagine what the inbox of a Wall Street analyst looks like.”­EXECUTIVE 1“Well, I’ll tell you one thing, I’m not sending emails like that anymore. The next time I want to rag on Angelina Jolie, I’m picking up the phone.”In recent weeks, a cloud has hung over Hollywood as the hacking of Sony Pictures Entertainment has exposed one embarrassing tidbit after the next.While hackers have released Sony employees’ personal information, including some salaries, medical records, Social Security numbers and even unreleased movies, it has been the slew of private emails between executives that has generated the most titillating headlines.Which, while sad, is understandable. Mix celebrities, money and salacious gossip and you’ve got a potion very few people can stop themselves from taking a little sip from. (Some of the emails from Amy Pascal, co-chairwoman of Sony Pictures, for example, detail conversations where Angelina Jolie was called a “minimally talented spoiled brat,” and racially tinged emails about President Obama’s imagined movie tastes.)Movie executives I spoke with, all of whom declined to be named for fear that speaking out would entice hackers to target their inboxes, said the Sony emails were relatively tame by Hollywood standards. “I’ve seen much, much worse,” a well-known screenwriter said. “Heck, I’ve sent much, much worse.”One person reminded me of the vulgarity-spewing character Ari Gold from HBO’s “Entourage,” who is based on real Hollywood characters. And as my colleagues Michael Cieply and Brooks Barnes noted in an article Monday, “virtually nothing in Sony’s stolen emails looks different from what would likely surface if the hackers hit another studio.”But rather than change their trash-talking ways, the executives say the real lesson of the Sony hack is to assume that no email is safe from prying eyes. And so in recent days, when they had something vulgar or highly sensitive to share, they have found themselves going back to the old-fashioned phone call. Some are even walking down the hallway to deliver profanities in person.According to a producer in Hollywood, people have been staying clear of email and opting for cellphones over the past two weeks as studios have been bolstering firewalls and email systems. “Everyone has been doing business on their cellphone since this happened,” the person said, asking not to be named. “The reality is, every studio has emails in their system that would cause the chaos if they came out."Or as Jenni Konner, a writer and executive producer for HBO’s “Girls,” said on Twitter Tuesday night: “The worst thing about the Sony hacks is people using the phone again.”It’s not only people in Hollywood who are picking up the phone again in case of an email hack.For the rest of us, the Sony hacking is just another example of how our emails are highly insecure. “Don’t put anything in an email that you wouldn’t want to see on the front page of The New York Times the next day,” said Brian Krebs, who specializes in cybercrime and operates the website Krebs on Security. “It’s like putting a postcard in the mail.”“And you can’t unsay anything you’ve said on the Internet,” Mr. Krebs added.Anyone who thinks they are immune hasn’t been following the news this year. If I had to give 2014 a tech moniker, it would be The Year of the Hack, with numerous companies including Home Depot, JPMorgan Chase and now Sony the victim of cyberattacks in which millions of customers’ information were stolen.So what are we supposed to do: never utter a negative word about anyone ever again? That’s about as unrealistic as high school students not standing by their locker gossiping (or doing so via text message).“The most devastating part of this entire story is even if Sony Pictures employees did everything right themselves, using the best passwords and the best encryption, they are still at the mercy of their I.T. managers,” said Kevin Roose, an editor at Fusion who has spent weeks going through all the email in the Sony hack. “Every computer is a Pandora’s box of sensitive and incriminating data, and most of that data isn’t even ours.”Mr. Roose suggested we could learn from teenagers, who are flocking to privacy-minded services like Snapchat, where text and images can disappear after being read. “While it’s not perfect, it’s a lot better than email or text messages,” he said.Perhaps it seems appropriate to give the last word here to Ms. Pascal, who has been in the eye of the Sony hacking storm:­SCENE: LOS ANGELES — DAY­Amy Pascal being interviewed by a Deadline reporter about her leaked emails.­­DEADLINE“Is there something you hope people reading these emails will factor into their thought process?”­MS. PASCAL“What you’d like to say is, don’t read them. Can we all make a pact not to read these, whether they’re mine or somebody else’s? Because I’m not the last person this is going to happen to.”Fade to black.