https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/nyregion/new-york-today-newark-riots-hamilton-burr-duel.html
New York Today: A Schoolteacher Remembers the Newark Riots - The New York Times
New York City
July 12, 2017
9764
Good morning on this cloudy Wednesday.The Newark riots began 50 years ago tonight.The violence, which lasted for almost a week, started when a rumor spread across the city that white police officers had fatally beaten a black cabdriver. The resulting unrest left 26 people dead and hundreds injured.Harriet Knevals was a 24-year-old schoolteacher in Newark at the time.Each morning, in Room 109 at Quitman Street School, Ms. Knevals — then using her maiden name, Harriet Dolcemaschio — would ask her class of 20 prekindergarten students to sign in so they could learn to write their names. She’d host circle time, fill the classroom with art or music, and give lessons on the A B C.’s.Ms. Knevals, who is white, was teaching a Head Start summer program, and her students came mostly from black, working-class families.One morning, as Ms. Knevals and the children went about their daily activities in the room, which faced West Kinney Street and the Scudder Homes, they heard gunshots.“The parents dropped them off, figuring they’d be safe there,” Ms. Knevals said, remembering that day. “Then next thing we knew, the National Guard came in.” Ms. Knevals and her colleagues were instructed to walk the children to the cafeteria. “They said all of the white teachers had to leave because they didn’t feel like it was safe.”“I worried so much about my students,” she said. “I wanted to stay back and make sure they were safe.” But the National Guard members, she said, forced her from the building, saying they couldn’t guarantee her safety.While stopped at a traffic light as she drove home, she watched a protester hurl a Molotov cocktail through the window of a store on the corner. She made it home safely to Short Hills, N.J., and watched the riots unfold on television.The teachers returned to school several days later, challenged with figuring out how to explain the situation to 4-year-olds.“I basically just said that something happened, and that people were very angry and upset, and they did things that we would not normally do,” she said. “There wasn’t much more I could say. They had already been talked to and somewhat traumatized.”The teachers were a diverse bunch — different races, genders and sexual orientations, Ms. Knevals said. They were also friends outside the classroom and presented a united front during the racially charged riots.“Being a Caucasian teacher was never a problem,” said Ms. Knevals, who taught in Newark for nearly 40 years before retiring in 2003. “We were upset for the community, upset for the people, and we didn’t want to see anything burned or people hurt.”When the National Guard ordered Ms. Knevals to leave her students on that first morning of the riots, she remembers the teachers who stayed behind saying, “‘No worry, we’ll take care of them.’”The teachers had a shared goal for the children: “Make sure they understand that they’re safe,” she said.Here’s what else is happening:You should have your umbrella ready — just in case.There’s a chance of showers and thunderstorms after 9 a.m.But wear something comfortable. The high could near 87.• Thousands of police officers attended the funeral of Officer Miosotis Familia in the Bronx. [New York Times]• Prosecutors recommended no prison time for one of Gov. Chris Christie’s allies who provided testimony against co-conspirators in the Bridgegate scandal. [New York Times]• The death of two toddlers, who were siblings, is being investigated as a homicide. [New York Times]• The Brooklyn district attorney’s office plans to ask a judge to vacate the conviction of a man found guilty 20 years ago of committing a murder. [New York Times]• Elected officials and neighbors on the East Side are taking on a developer who plans to erect a 67-story supertower. [New York Times]• In “About New York,” Jim Dwyer tells us about how this summer in New York there’ll be fewer Playstreets — those public areas in neighborhoods with high crime rates that are closed off for children’s recreation. [New York Times]• An F train struck and killed a man at East Broadway Station. [DNAinfo]• A giant waterslide at Foley Square? Summer Streets returns to Manhattan for three days in August. [Gothamist]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “More Than One Way Out”• Scoreboard: American League subdues National League, 2-1.• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Wednesday Briefing.• “Up Close: Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel,” an exhibition with life-size reproductions of the artist’s work from the Vatican, at 185 Greenwich Street in Lower Manhattan. 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. [Prices vary]• The documentarian Clayton Patterson shares his 1980s photographs of drag performers at the Pyramid Club on Avenue A, in a conversation at Tompkins Square Library in the East Village. 6 p.m. [Free]• The Lyndon Achee Quintet performs a sunset steel drum concert at Wave Hill in the Bronx. 7 p.m. [$10]• Manhattanhenge returns to our skyline. The best places for watching are on 14th, 23rd, 34th, 42nd and 57th Streets in Manhattan, shortly before 8:20 p.m.• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until August 15.• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.On July 11, 1804, Aaron Burr shot Alexander Hamilton during an early morning duel on the cliffs of Weehawken, N.J.Dueling was, at the time, illegal in New York and New Jersey, but the Weehawken grounds — above the banks of the Hudson River, opposite what is now West 42nd Street in Midtown Manhattan — were isolated enough to make it a common battle spot. So Burr, the vice president, and Hamilton, the former Treasury secretary, journeyed by rowboat from Manhattan to the heights to settle their personal and political differences.Hamilton ended up with a .554-caliber ball in his spine and, despite treatment from the New York City doctor David Hosack, died on July 12, 1804, in what is now the West Village.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.