https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/dining/king-tut-pie-review-egyptian-food-brooklyn.html
Layers of Flaky Dough, and History, at King Tut Pie - The New York Times
King Tut Pie (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Restaurants,Bay Ridge (Brooklyn  NY),Egyptian-Americans
July 6, 2017
9513
Inside a former bodega in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, two immortal rivals — falcon-headed Horus, lord of the sky, and long-snouted Set, bringer of storms and disorder — pause in their war to bestow blessings on the pharaoh.The original bas-relief of the tableau lies across the sea, in a temple at Abu Simbel in Egypt. Here in Brooklyn, at King Tut Pie, the surroundings are humbler: a few sidewalk tables tucked under an awning and a room of efficient tile, with pale gold cushions on a lone banquette and burlap shades bearing the ghostly imprint of King Tut’s funerary mask.But there is a glimpse of divinity behind the counter in the making of feteer meshaltet, whose origins are said to date back to the pharaohs. Dough, extra wet and clingy, is slapped down on marble and patted flat with butter, then rolled and tugged into a gossamer pane, see-through and thinner than skin.This is folded and placed inside another pane of dough, which in turn is folded and placed inside another, and again, four, five, six times, like a series of Chinese boxes. Each is painted with margarine, a stand-in for Egyptian samna, pure butterfat.A few hours to chill, then into the oven, from which it emerges as a great mottled crepe with burnished whorls and, inside, close-set layers like an accordion’s pleats. It can barely wait to flake. All that butter and margarine have disappeared into crannies, leaving no more than a kiss of oil on the fingers.Feteer is sufficient unto itself. But here it comes with a choice of honey or gebna adeema, an aged Egyptian farm cheese inflamed by chile, whose orange hue, creaminess, tang and heat suggest an uncanny spiritual kinship to American pimento cheese. Other versions of feteer subtract a few foldings of dough to make room for stuffings of meat, cheese (slightly more prosaic mozzarella and Parmesan), olives in briny throbs and bell peppers for scattered brightness and crunch.Best is the house special, which unites three meats: ground beef simply salted in a sweat of onions; beef sausage warmed by baharat, Egyptian seven-spice, with sweet, musty contours of cardamom and cloves; and basturma, air-dried beef in thrall to garlic and fenugreek, so potent it’s a rebuke to pastrami. Somehow this tastes light, a loose commingling of salts, with just enough cheese to bind.Moamen Guirguis and his brother-in-law, Kamel Botros, natives of Cairo, opened King Tut Pie in December just off Fifth Avenue’s strip of halal grocers and Middle Eastern storefronts. (Bay Ridge is home to one of the city’s, and the nation’s, largest enclaves of Arab immigrants.) At night, their families sometimes stop by for dinner, graciously giving up their tables when customers arrive and insisting it’s no trouble.The menu cheerfully collapses the distinction between the cuisines of Egypt and the country Mr. Guirguis and Mr. Botros now call home. The pie of the restaurant’s name refers to both Egyptian feteer, which Westerners often liken to pizza, and actual Italian-American pizza. (One customer made the mistake of asking for “Egyptian pizza” and received the tomato-sauce variety.) Each is allotted its own oven, and each is sent forth into the neighborhood in identical white pizza boxes for delivery.I never tried the pizza, nor the Philly cheesesteaks, meatball heroes, mozzarella sticks and baked ziti also on offer. My table was already crowded with hawawshi, a meat pie denser than feteer, made of chewier, yeast-risen dough; small, earthy falafel called ta’ameya in Egypt, shaped from crushed fava beans, with bronzed shells and buoyant, parsley-green interiors; and a whole chicken for less than $10, rubbed down with seven-spice and made fervent overnight, then roasted on a spit and given a last spackle of char on the grill.For dessert, there is more feteer, filled with the likes of custard and Nutella. Ask what to choose, and Mr. Guirguis will gently steer you toward a sleeve of ishta, pillowy cream skimmed off the top of boiled milk. The pie’s surface is a snowy plain of powdered sugar, inscribed with honey.Above, King Tut looks off into the distance, his beard braided with lapis lazuli. But this is splendor, to eat such a thing off a tin platter, at a teetering table on a Brooklyn sidewalk in high summer.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.