http://www.nytimes.com/1996/05/21/us/gay-rights-ruling-ruling-gay-rights-laws-can-t-be-banned-high-court-rules.html
THE GAY RIGHTS RULING: THE RULING;GAY RIGHTS LAWS CAN'T BE BANNED, HIGH COURT RULES - The New York Times
COLORADO,COLORADO  USA,SUPREME COURT,SCALIA  ANTONIN,KENNEDY  ANTHONY M,DISCRIMINATION,CIVIL RIGHTS,CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS,LAW AND LEGISLATION,HOMOSEXUALITY,DECISIONS AND VERDICTS
May 21, 1996
5597
In a significant victory for gay rights, the Supreme Court today struck down  a provision of the Colorado Constitution that not only nullified existing civil  rights protections for homosexuals in the state but also barred the passage of new anti-discrimination laws."A state cannot so deem a class of persons a stranger to its laws," Justice Anthony M. Kennedy said in a forceful opinion for a 6-to-3 majority. He said the Colorado provision, known as Amendment 2, had placed the state's homosexuals "in a solitary class," singling them out in violation of the Constitution's equal protection guarantee for a legal disability so sweeping as to be inexplicable on any basis other than "animus."It is not within our constitutional tradition to enact laws of this sort,"  Justice Kennedy said in an opinion joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, Sandra  Day O'Connor, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen G. Breyer. [Excerpts, page A20.]Justice Antonin Scalia filed an equally forceful dissent, accusing the majority of taking sides in "the culture wars" through "an act not of judicial judgment but of political will." The process by which Colorado's voters adopted  Amendment 2, by 53 percent to 47 percent in 1992, was the "most democratic of procedures," Justice Scalia said.While no other state has such a provision in its constitution, petitions to place a similar referendum on the November ballot are now circulating in Idaho,  Oregon and Washington.  Voters in Maine defeated a similar proposal last year. Local governments in Florida, Oregon and Ohio have taken the same approach through local ordinances. A Federal appeals court last year upheld a Cincinnati  ordinance that stripped homosexuals of civil rights protections in a case that is now on appeal to the Supreme Court.Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas joined Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion today, accusing the majority of "inventing a novel and extravagant constitutional doctrine to take the victory away from traditional forces." The Colorado amendment, Justice Scalia wrote, was an "eminently reasonable" means of preventing the "piecemeal deterioration of the sexual morality favored by a majority of Coloradans."The decision, Romer v. Evans, No. 94-1039, does not necessarily portend victory for homosexuals in other cases working their way through the legal system, including the constitutional challenge to the current policy on homosexuals in the military or -- much farther down the road -- the question of  homosexual marriage. Nor does the ruling provide affirmative rights for gay people; a constitutional shield rather than a sword, it does not require states  to offer new civil rights protections.Nonetheless, the decision was a strong statement, coming from a conservative  member of a basically conservative Court, that prejudice is not a valid justification for a policy that singles out gay people for special burdens not placed on others.Justice Kennedy said the Colorado amendment did not meet even the lowest level of scrutiny accorded an official action that is challenged as a violation  of the constitutional guarantee of equal protection. Under that test, as Justice Kennedy described it, "a law must bear a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental purpose, and Amendment 2 does not."He said the provision "is a status-based enactment divorced from any factual  context from which we could discern a relationship to legitimate state interests; it is a classification of persons undertaken for its own sake, something the Equal Protection Clause does not permit."Suzanne B. Goldberg, a lawyer for the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, who worked on the case said the decision marked "a historic shift in the Court's response to anti-gay discrimination." Ms. Goldberg said the Court had rejected "gay-bashing by referendum" while making it clear that "discrimination  is discrimination and that anti-gay sentiment is not a justification for discrimination by government."Many of those who responded to the decision today noted that it came 10 years after the Court refused in Bowers v. Hardwick to overturn state laws that criminalized homosexual sex. The majority opinion did not refer to that decision, although Justice Scalia did so at length, arguing that if it was constitutionally permissible for a state to make homosexual conduct a crime, it  was certainly permissible to adopt a provision "merely prohibiting all levels of state government from bestowing special protections upon homosexual conduct."In defense of Amendment 2, Colorado had argued that it did not amount to discrimination but rather a removal of special protections, ordinances that had  been adopted in Aspen, Boulder, and Denver to extend civil rights protections to homosexuals. Amendment 2 nullified these laws, as well as a range of statewide policies, and barred their re-enactment unless a new majority of Coloradans voted to amend the state constitution again.In many respects, the "equal rights" versus "special rights" debate was the crux of the case; the Cincinnati organization that successfully sponsored the similar referendum there is in fact called Equal Rights, Not Special Rights, Inc. Justice Kennedy's majority opinion strongly rejected the characterization of Amendment 2 as only taking away "special rights.""We cannot accept the view that Amendment 2's prohibition on specific legal protections does no more than deprive homosexuals of special rights," Justice Kennedy said. "To the contrary, the amendment imposes a special disability upon  those persons alone."Justice Kennedy added: "We find nothing special in the protections Amendment  2 withholds. These are protections taken for granted by most people either because they already have them or do not need them."Matt Coles, director of the Lesbian and Gay Rights Protect of the American Civil Liberties Union, said the Court appeared to "go out of its way to take on  the 'special rights' rhetoric." Mr. Coles said the Court's conclusion that "anti-discrimination protections are not special rights, they are equal rights,  has enormous implications because the Court speaks not only to the parties in this case but to the entire country about what's right in a democratic society."Gov. Roy Romer of Colorado, who opposed the amendment but defended it in court, said in an interview today that the Court had given the "right answer" and that he would "do everything I can to get Colorado to accept that answer.""Let's stop litigating and legislating and see if we can bring people together," Mr. Romer said.Reaction from groups that have been active in support of the amendment and similar proposals was as sharp as the reaction on the gay rights side was exultant. Gary L. Bauer, president of the Family Research Council, said the decision was the product of "an out-of-control unelected judiciary" and "should  send chills down the back of anyone who cares whether the people of this nation  any longer have the power of self-rule."Tom Minnery, vice president of Focus on the Family, said the effect of the ruling was to "disparage the moral views of the people of Colorado." Once again, he said, judicial activism has imposed itself upon the Constitution and the democratic process."The decision upheld a 1994 ruling by the supreme Court of Colorado, but its analysis was substantially different. The state court analyzed the amendment as  violating the fundamental right of "equal protection in the political process."  That was a tenuous argument to sustain before the United States Supreme Court, because the precedents on which it was based were, arguable, limited to measures that had stripped civil rights protections from black people. Justice Kennedy took a different approach, adopting a line of argument proposed in a brief filed by Prof. Laurence H. Tribe of Harvard Law School and several other constitutional scholars. That brief had suggested that "Amednment 2 is a rare example of a per se violation of the Equal Protection Clause," without much other anaylsis being needed. Today Justice Kennedy said: "A law declaring that in general it shall be more difficult for one group of citizens than for all others to seek aid from the government is itself a denial of equal protection of the laws in the most literal sense."Professor Tribe, who argued the losing side in Bowers v. Hardwick 10 years ago, said in an interview today that while the Court then "seemed incapable of applying its normal approach to the law where gays were involved," that was no longer the case.In his dissenting opionion, Justice Scalia seemed at times torn between belittling the rulint - he called it "terminal silliness" at one point and declared that "the Court has mistaken a Kulturkampf," German for "culture war,"  "for a fit of spite" - and describing it as a mistake of profound significance.  He described homosexuals as a group with " high disposable income" and "disproportionate political power" with "enormous influence in American media and politics."The decision could prove to be important beyond the area of gay rights, lending force to constitutional arguments against proposals to keep the children of illegal aliens out of public school, for example, as an instance of singling  out a particular population for a special burden.