https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/19/world/middleeast/iran-us-sanctions.html
As Freed Americans Rejoin Relatives, Mystery Surrounds One Who Stayed Put - The New York Times
Iran,Khosravi-Roodsari  Nosratollah,Political Prisoners,United States International Relations,United States,Missiles and Missile Defense Systems,International Relations,Embargoes and Sanctions,Mousavi  Mehdi,Ekhtesari  Fatemeh (1986- )
Jan. 18, 2016
9149
TEHRAN —  As relatives of American prisoners freed by Iran over the weekend reunited with them Monday at United States military facilities in Germany, most Iranian officials conspicuously avoided talking about the deal that had led to their release.At the same time, a mystery deepened over one of the freed American prisoners, who apparently chose to remain in Iran.Under the deal announced on Saturday and completed on Sunday, the Iranians released four dual-national Americans of Iranian descent, some held for years, and permitted a fifth American imprisoned in December — whose arrest had not been publicly disclosed before — to leave.The United States released seven prisoners — six dual-national Americans of Iranian descent and one Iranian — and scrapped arrest warrants for 14 others. All had been accused or convicted of violations of United States sanctions.The deal was completed as nuclear-related sanctions were lifted on Iran under a historic agreement reached with the United States and other major powers, a long-awaited moment for President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, who has described the change as a new economic era for the country of 80 million.But the good will darkened a bit when the United States announced new sanctions Sunday on Iran’s ballistic missile activities, which Iranian state media denounced as “devoid of any legitimacy and ethical values.”The main focal point of the prisoner deal on Monday shifted to American facilities in Landstuhl, Germany, where three of those freed by Iran — Amir Hekmati, 32, of Flint, Mich.; Saeed Abedini, 35, of Boise, Idaho; and Jason Rezaian, 39, of Marin County, Calif. — underwent medical checks at a military hospital. Relatives and supporters of Mr. Rezaian, The Washington Post’s Tehran correspondent, and Mr. Hekmati, a Marine veteran, saw them for the first time and released photographs of happy reunions. The wife of Mr. Abedini, a Christian pastor, was expected to arrive there on Tuesday.Iranian newspapers, radio and television basically ignored the prisoner deal. The first official Iranian reaction came on Monday from Hossein Jaberi Ansari, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, who said the deal “was concluded in the past few days and people have been notified of it.” Iran, he said, committed a “humanitarian action.”Later, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, who played a critical role in the nuclear agreement, described the prisoner deal as a good outcome for Iran. In an interview broadcast on Iranian television, Mr. Zarif said Iran had pressured the United States into releasing Iranians who had been unjustly held.“Wherever an Iranian is, as the Islamic Republic of Iran’s government, we feel that it is our duty to defend their rights,” he said.Still, most Iranian officials did not talk about the prisoner deal. Even Mr. Rouhani conspicuously omitted any reference to it in a news conference on Sunday.Political analysts in Iran said the silence reflected the delicacy of engaging in cooperative arrangements with the United States, which risks the perception of weakness in the face of a hostile power.“In Iran, negotiations with the enemy are done in secrecy,” said Nader Karimi Joni, an Iranian journalist. “Even years later, officials only reveal details when it is in their interest or when they are forced to react to revelations by the other party.”Iran’s silence also added to the unknowns surrounding the fourth freed Iranian-American, whose name was given by the State Department as Nosratollah Khosravi-Roodsari.It seemed that nobody in Iran knew he had been arrested, and nobody seemed to know any more about him. When the Swiss diplomats who had arranged for the departure of the other three Americans offered him a seat on their plane, they said, Mr. Khosravi-Roodsari opted to stay.It was not made clear how this offer had been communicated.In the hours after the news of the prison exchange broke of Saturday, the semiofficial Fars news agency, one of the few Iranian outlets reporting it, did not mention Mr. Khosravi-Roodsari’s name. Instead it reported that the fourth Iranian-American was Siamak Namazi, a business consultant arrested in October.Later, Fars altered the name to Nosratollah Khosravi-Roodsari, without explanation — a common practice in Iranian media. Mr. Namazi remains in prison.Mr. Khosravi-Roodsari has been referred to as a businessman in several media outlets, but has no social media profile.“I have never heard of this man,” said Hamidreza Taraghi, a usually well-informed political analyst with close ties to the political establishment.The fifth American who was released, Matthew Trevithick, a researcher and student from Hingham, Mass., returned to the United States on Sunday night. Relatives said he was well but not ready to speak with reporters. It remained unclear why Mr. Trevithick, 30, had been detained.“They grab people and you don’t really know why,” said his stepfather, Scott Armstrong. “He was very careful.”While the families of all five were notified by American officials about the prisoner deal before it was announced, the family of Robert A. Levinson, a retired F.B.I. agent missing in Iran since March 2007, was not. Mr. Levinson’s relatives, who believe he is still alive in Iran, expressed deep disappointment.“We found out about the release the same way that everyone else did, from TV,” said one of his sons, Daniel Levinson.Mr. Levinson was last seen alive in a hostage video made in late 2010. Iran has claimed to know nothing about his whereabouts or fate. American officials said Saturday that they were pressing Iran to keep looking for him.