https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/upshot/women-on-the-board-quotas-have-limited-success.html
Women on the Board: Quotas Have Limited Success - The New York Times
Women and Girls,Discrimination,Boards of Directors,United States Economy,Corporations
June 19, 2014
9384
This article appeared in June, but we resurfaced it because the German parliament on Friday, March 6, passed a law that mandates giving 30 percent of supervisory board seats in some of Europe’s biggest companies to women starting next year. One of the most perplexing questions about women in business is how to increase their numbers in the upper ranks, where their progress to the top has stalled.An increasingly popular idea in Europe is affirmative action for executives — requiring companies to include a certain percentage of women in management, particularly on their boards. Improvement at the top, the thinking goes, is likely to filter down at companies, improving the pay and representation of women at lower levels.Norway passed a law in 2003 requiring that women make up 40 percent of the boards of public companies. Many countries, including Spain, Iceland, Italy, Finland and France, followed suit. Advocates have proposed quotas in the United States, though companies here tend to bristle at the idea that the government could tell them whom to hire. In April, two dozen American companies, including Bloomberg, DuPont and Deloitte, opened the United States branch of the 30% Club, which was started in Britain as a group of companies that aims to voluntarily appoint boards in which 30 percent are women.Do quotas help crack the glass ceiling for women in business? The most comprehensive study to date, led by Marianne Bertrand of the University of Chicago, shows that at least in the short term, they’ve had little effect beyond the obvious: placing more women on boards. In Norway, the quotas have not led to an increase in the overall number of female executives, or to a decrease in the gender pay gap, a boom in the number of young women pursuing careers in business, or to more family-friendly workplace policies.Increasing the number of women on boards can have multiple benefits. Several studies  have shown that diversity on boards improves decision-making and profits, yet women are often not considered for boards simply because they are not part of the old boys’ club. But the quotas’ limited effects show that just getting some women at the top doesn’t remove all the obstacles blocking other women from the upper echelons.“This paper tells us that board quotas might just not be the policy engine for rapid changes for women in business,” said Ms. Bertrand, who is one of the foremost economists studying women and work. She wrote the paper — which has not yet been published, and the conclusions have not been previously reported — with Sandra E. Black of the University of Texas, Sissel Jensen of the Norwegian School of Economics and Adriana Lleras-Muney of U.C.L.A.Still, their study rebutted one of the biggest criticisms of affirmative action for executives — that the women who serve would be unqualified or viewed as token appointees.Norwegian companies so resisted the idea of appointing women to their boards that 384 of the 563 publicly traded companies subject to the quota became private to avoid complying. Yet as women’s representation on Norwegian boards increased from 5 percent in 2000 to 40 percent in 2007, the quality of the women on boards also increased, the study said.“Previously untapped networks of top business women were activated by the policy,” the authors wrote, including through a database the government started of qualified women. They were also paid more equitably, and the number of women among the very top executives at companies increased.The authors expected to find that these women, in turn, would mine their networks to appoint lower-level women executives, add workplace policies like child care or inspire younger women to delay having children to stay on the business fast track. But in the decade since Norway passed the law, none of these things occurred.“One explanation may be that it just takes more time,” said Linda A. Bell, an economics professor who is provost and dean of the faculty at Barnard College. In a 2005 study, she wrote that affirmative action at the very top helped the careers of women, because female executives and directors hire more women and pay them more. “My research really does show those networks work, women do help women, and they’re doing it in subtle and quiet ways,” she said.But how long will women be willing to wait? In the United States, women hold just 16.9 percent of board seats at the 500 biggest companies, according to Catalyst, a nonprofit research firm studying women in business, and that number is not growing.“There’s still a mentality at a lot of companies that, ‘We’ve got a woman, that’s fine,’ but there isn’t this march to get to a third or half women,” said Ilene H. Lang, a senior adviser and a former chief executive at Catalyst.If imbalances are not being righted naturally, women’s advocates may need to find an outside motivator — if not government-mandated quotas, then maybe activist investors. Persuading companies to tap the entire pool of talent, not just half of it, seems as if it would only be good for business.