http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/13/us/man-in-the-news-economic-adviser-from-other-side-of-the-deficit-stephen-friedman.html
Man in the News; Economic Adviser From Other Side of the Deficit -- Stephen Friedman - The New York Times
NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL,BUSH  GEORGE W,FRIEDMAN  STEPHEN,UNITED STATES ECONOMY
Dec. 13, 2002
6862
In choosing Stephen Friedman as his chief economic adviser, President Bush is getting a Wall Street veteran who is tenacious in pursuit of his ideas but will probably maintain a markedly lower profile than his predecessor, Lawrence B. Lindsey, friends and former colleagues of Mr. Friedman say.Mr. Friedman, 64, is following the path of his former partner, Robert E. Rubin, in leaving Wall Street for Washington. The two were co-chairmen of the Goldman Sachs investment bank from 1990 to 1992, when Mr. Rubin resigned to lead President Bill Clinton's National Economic Council.Though the presidents who called them to Washington are poles apart politically, Mr. Friedman, 64, is close to Mr. Rubin, and the two men are similar in style. At Goldman Sachs, each man routinely fostered debate among the firm's partners to ensure that everyone's voice had been heard before a decision was made. Mr. Friedman, who colleagues said exudes more energy than the reserved Mr. Rubin, had a habit of rolling up his shirt sleeves and taking notes on a legal pad as he listened.''Steve is as good a partner as anybody could have,'' Mr. Rubin, who became Treasury secretary and is now chairman of the executive committee of Citigroup, said in an interview this week. ''He's very good at working with people and trying to draw out all the pluses and minuses in whatever is being considered.''People who know Mr. Friedman said they doubted that he would serve simply as a salesman for an already formed economic plan. As a director and financial supporter of the Concord Coalition, a nonpartisan group that says it advocates fiscal responsibility, Mr. Friedman has lent his voice to arguments against deficit spending by the federal government.''I will be surprised if he isn't a moderating force,'' said Bob Kerrey, a former Democratic senator from Nebraska who is president of the New School University in New York. Mr. Kerrey, who is co-chairman of the Concord Coalition, said he believed that Mr. Friedman could convince President Bush that unconstrained deficits would threaten economic growth.''I believe he knows how to do that,'' Mr. Kerrey said. ''He knows you don't do it publicly, you make your arguments privately.''Around Goldman Sachs, Mr. Friedman is remembered for having built the firm's lucrative practice of advising companies on mergers and acquisitions. During the takeover boom of the 1980's, he developed Goldman Sach's strategy of representing companies under siege by hostile acquirers, rather than the buyers. He counseled chief executives to anticipate what the raiders would do and beat them to the pass, either by courting friendlier acquirers or putting up defenses.Goldman Sachs, which was a private partnership until May 1999, was famous on Wall Street for keeping its internal squabbles to itself. Mr. Friedman was chairman in 1994 during one of the rare instances in which turmoil within the firm was on display.After earning a record profit of $2.6 billion before taxes in 1993, Goldman Sachs ran into trouble when the bond market tumbled the next year. Big losses on some bets on the direction of interest rates cut the firm's 1994 profit to about $500 million. The reversal brought about an exodus among Goldman's senior partners, most of whose personal wealth was tied up in the firm. Mr. Friedman himself surprised his partners by announcing his resignation in September 1994. He said that running the firm alone, after Mr. Rubin's departure, had exhausted him.Mr. Friedman later joined MMC Capital, the investment arm of the Marsh & McLennan Companies, an insurance and investment firm, as a senior principal.Stephen Friedman, born Dec. 21, 1937, in Brooklyn, graduated from Cornell University and Columbia University's law school. He was chairman of Columbia's board of trustees from 1997 to 2001.George E. Rupp, former president of Columbia, said Mr. Friedman had deftly managed a crisis in the delivery of health care by hospitals affiliated with the university. The university was squeezed by the rising cost of providing care to low-income patients, Mr. Rupp recalled.''The way Steve Friedman deals with issues is to assemble all relevant data and then work out alternative scenarios that make the most of the assets in the equation,'' Mr. Rupp said. ''He's very imaginative in sizing up alternatives.''Some people who know Mr. Friedman trace those skills to his days as a wrestler. His athletic exploits at Cornell University in the late 1950's -- he was Eastern champion at 157 pounds in 1959 -- earned him a spot in the university's hall of fame.Goldman Sach's current chairman, Henry M. Paulson, was a protégé of Mr. Friedman's in the mid-1970's when he made the mistake of challenging his mentor to a wrestling match at a gathering of the firm's executives. Mr. Paulson, a tall, broad-shouldered former wrestler and football player, went to the mat with Mr. Friedman, unaware of the wiry Mr. Friedman's accomplishments.Mr. Friedman repeatedly pinned Mr. Paulson, who frequently recounts the story, adding the lesson that he learned: Always do your homework.Just off a plane from Tokyo last night, Mr. Paulson applauded the choice of Mr. Friedman, who has been a director of Goldman Sachs since May.''This job provides Steve with a tremendous opportunity by bringing his management skills and financial savvy to the White House,'' Mr. Paulson said. ''We lose a director but the country gains a great financial strategist.''PROFILEStephen FriedmanBORN: Dec. 21, 1937, BrooklynHOMETOWN: New York CityEDUCATION: Oceanside High School, Oceanside, N.Y.; B.A., Cornell University, 1959; LL.B., Columbia Law School, 1962CAREER HIGHLIGHTS: 1966-1994 Goldman Sachs, partner 1973; vice chairman and chief operating officer 1987; chairman and senior partner, 1990; 1998-present MMC CapitalOTHER: Chairman emeritus, Columbia University; chairman emeritus of the executive committee, Brookings Institution; chairman of the finance committee, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; director, National Bureau of Economic Research.FAMILY: Wife, Barbara, and three childrenHOBBIES: Wrestling, chess, collecting and reading books on military history