https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/world/canada/canada-today-a-showcase-of-journalism-by-the-new-york-times.html
Canada Today: A Showcase of Journalism by The New York Times - The New York Times
Canada,Newsletters,New York Times
June 16, 2017
2479
It’s safe to assume that readers of this newsletter know that The New York Times covers Canada. But practically every week someone I’m interviewing expresses surprise that The Times is even interested in the country.The idea that one’s own country is of little fascination to the rest of the world is something very Canadian. (The source of that is a subject too complex for analysis here.) But the opposite is true: The Times (and the world) is very interested in Canada and the current global political climate has only increased the number of eyes on the country.Canada is The Times’s largest source of both readers and subscribers outside of the United States. Clearly you come for the range and depth of our news report, along with offerings like recipes, arts reviews, opinion pieces and fashion analysis. And I know from your emails that you also appreciate seeing yourselves reflected in the articles.This relationship, between Canadian readers and The Times, will be on heightened display over the next two weeks as Canada approaches the 150th anniversary of confederation. We’ll be rolling out special stories, visual features and reader contributions. Let’s call it a showcase of journalism by The Times about, and relevant to, Canada.I’ll run through some details below. But first, a note of background.About a year and a half ago, while other news organizations were retrenching, The Times decided to invest in expanding its footprint around the world, particularly in countries like Canada where it has a strong readership. The Times also put money into new ways to tell stories, like 360 video, virtual reality and podcasts. Have you subscribed yet to The Daily? It’s a must listen.The new international effort has been especially robust in Canada. After a decade when I was the only reporter covering the country full-time, we now have four. Joining me are Catherine Porter, our Toronto bureau chief, who recently told the moving story of John Shields and his decision to die; Dan Levin, who sparked debate in British Columbia on campaign fund-raising; and Craig S. Smith, whose travels have taken him under Arctic Ice and to a part of Cape Breton that’s giving part of itself away to survive. Critics and reporters from the Culture department of The Times now come here regularly (see these pieces on opera and theater), along with reporters who are specialists in areas like sports, science and technology.Ruth Fremson, one of our staff photographers who has been part of Pulitzer Prize-winning teams, recently went to British Columbia to photograph the preproduction of the world’s first Haida-language feature film. And we have also given assignments to some of Canada’s best young freelance photographers — notably Ian Willms, Aaron Vincent Elkaim and Cole Burston. The photos in this week’s newsletter are ones I took while traveling throughout Canada on various assignments over the last couple of years, including the uncontrolled wildfire that forced the residents of Fort McMurray, Alberta, to flee and a political decision that forced the two surviving Dionne quintuplets, who were media sensations in the Great Depression, back reluctantly into the spotlight.Now, here is a preview of what’s coming in the next two weeks:Perhaps as soon as next week, it will arrive in your inbox under a new name. I can’t reveal it yet but it will deal with an issue many of you have raised: the discordant note struck by using the word today in the title of a weekly newsletter.In recent weeks, the newsletter has been evolving to include more photographs and more of your voices. Going forward, I’m going to be experimenting with other ideas, like delving into the archives of The Times to find Canada stories from the past and new ways for you to contribute to its contents.Please let me know what you think about these changes, and our Canada coverage generally, with an email to nytcanada@nytimes.com. If you like the newsletter, please send it to a few friends who might also be interested, and encourage them to sign up.For the last several weeks, the Canada team has been working on some great stories that will appear in the coming days. Here’s some of what you’ll see. Ms. Porter went to the University of Saskatchewan to see how it has become the country’s most welcoming campus for indigenous students, and also see the tensions that has created. I’m digging back 50 years to Canada’s centennial through Expo 67. And Mr. Levin examines a less than celebrated part of Canada’s immigration policy: the treatment of temporary migrant farm workers.One of the most successful new features in The Times is The Interpreter, an explanatory column about world affairs. The authors, Max Fisher and Amanda Taub, have been traveling in Canada and have articles coming on President Trump, populism and one of Canada’s greatest exports, comedy. (You should, by the way, also sign up for their newsletter.) Writers from the Style and Culture departments are also weighing in with stories about raising binational children and a bold move by Toronto’s Soulpepper theater company.Mr. Smith has produced a dazzling 360 video from Nunavik, Quebec, in which a local Inuit man builds an igloo around, up and over the camera. The illustrator Graham Roumieu delivers a gently skewering piece of graphic art about Canada Nice. He suggests ways to give the nation a slightly more edgy image.Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is coming to a session organized by The Times and the Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto on Thursday. Peter Baker, our chief White House correspondent, and Ms. Porter will be doing most of the questioning but you’ll also have opportunities to address Mr. Baker.Mr. Trudeau will take questions from the crowd. The event is sold out, but for those of you not in Toronto or without tickets, there will be live video coverage on the Times’s Facebook page. We’ll also submit some questions you send us through Facebook directly to the prime minister. I’ll be monitoring your comments as well and I will try to answer questions that don’t make it to him.We have a new page laying out The Times’s expanded role in Canada. It includes, among other things, biographies of the four of us. Everything else Canada-related can be found at our new Canada collection page, which is compiled by editors, not software.As all this comes to light, please let us know what you think, again, at nytcanada@nytimes.com.In addition, new technology means that The Times is greatly expanding the number of stories open to comments.— There are perhaps only 20 fluent speakers of Haida in the world. But the first Haida language film,  “Edge of the Knife,” is now in production. Ms. Porter went to Hiellen, British Columbia, to explore how the film may help revive an almost lost language and play a role in efforts by Canada to reconcile with indigenous people over past injustices.— With the United States under the Trump administration increasingly sitting out world affairs, I looked at Canada’s efforts to distance itself from its neighbor and to lead efforts to protect the international system set up after World War II.— In The New York Times Magazine, Mitch Moxley writes that the Canadian Football League (the current champions, the Ottawa Redblacks, play a few hundred meters from my home and office) is “like American football in the way Canada itself is like America: just similar enough to arouse what Freud called the ‘narcissism of small differences.’”— The Stratford Festival is performing a steamy, feminist version of “Bakkhai.” How steamy? It called in an adviser on matters like faking orgasms.