https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/education/preparing-emerging-adults-for-college-and-beyond.html
Preparing ‘Emerging Adults’ for College and Beyond - The New York Times
Anxiety and Stress,Psychology and Psychologists
June 7, 2017
6186
Rachel Ginsberg is a clinical psychologist at the NewYork-Presbyterian Youth Anxiety Center, a research and clinical program that brings together experts from NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, Columbia University Medical Center and Weill Cornell Medicine. She is part of its Launching Emerging Adults Program aimed at teenagers and young adults.Dr. Ginsberg works with clients on lack of emotional readiness and academic and “adulting” skills, as well as on social anxiety — issues that can become more apparent in college and can lead to students’ lives’ unraveling.So how can a person develop these skills? Below is a list of “exposure tasks” to help students develop strategies for coping with possible challenges and “assertively get their needs met, or manage circumstances that do not go the way that they wished,” Dr. Ginsberg said.Some of these tasks may seem oddly fundamental, and they aren’t all relevant to everyone. For example, Dr. Ginsberg may ask a perfectionist to turn in an imperfect assignment, she said, “so that they learn to tolerate the anxiety — that it was not so bad after all, that the outcome does not define them and that the incident did not propel catastrophic consequences, as they might have predicted.”For people wary of speaking to classmates or professors for fear of being embarrassed or judged as stupid, she might suggest that they place an order at a restaurant and then change it.“These tasks help them validate themselves and not be scared to ask for what they want,” Dr. Ginsberg said. “In essence, these tasks help to shrink anxiety and avoidance down to size.”• Identify what you’re feeling and communicate it to others.• Delay gratification and complete a less preferred task first.• Practice “making room” for imperfection by turning in an imperfect assignment.• Email your teacher or professor to clarify something on your own.• Raise your hand in class and, when called on, start your sentence with “I’m having trouble understanding. …”• Order food and then change your order.• Approach a group of similar-age peers and ask them a question.• Adhere to a schedule consistently.• Ask for help with or clarification on an assignment or test material.• Walk into a class that’s already begun, rather than skipping it because you were running late.• Speak to your teacher or professor after class.• Make a phone call and ask basic (including “obvious” or “awkward”) questions.• Call and make your own doctor and dentist appointments.• Make your bed daily.• Clean your room on your own.• Regulate your sleep by sleeping seven to eight hours a night, and going to bed and waking up at decent hours.• Cook three basic meals. (Eggs, cereal and pasta don’t count.)• Return something to a store.• Get up on your own with an alarm.• Know the basics of finance (paying bills, writing checks and so on).