http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/us/politics/republicans-lead-congress-with-two-distinct-agendas.html
Republicans Lead Congress With Two Distinct Agendas - The New York Times
Ryan  Paul D Jr,McConnell  Mitch,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Senate
Jan. 13, 2016
7107
WASHINGTON —  Speaker Paul D. Ryan has been pressing House Republicans to develop an aggressive, conservative policy blueprint that sets the contours of the presidential campaign.Across the rotunda, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, says the greatest thing Congress can do this year is only slightly less anodyne than naming a post office: appropriate money. “We do intend to give that floor time,” Mr. McConnell said this week, far less evocative than Mr. Ryan’s passionate call for Republicans to “lift their gaze from here.”While the two men are set to stand together Thursday at a retreat for congressional Republicans in Baltimore and cheerfully announce their unity against President Obama in his final year in office, they are operating on starkly different political planets in this election year, with little harmony in their legislative agenda.Mr. Ryan wants to finally offer a Republican alternative to Mr. Obama’s signature health care law. Mr. McConnell does not. Mr. Ryan would like to see his chamber explore authorizing military force against the Islamic State. Mr. McConnell would not.Mr. Ryan loves tax reform. Mr. McConnell loves it too — when there is a Republican in the White House to sign it, even though some Republicans and Democrats see a path forward this year. Mr. Ryan has long championed new policies to lift poor Americans out of privation. Mr. McConnell has said little about this. Many members of both parties would like to see changes to the criminal justice system, which Mr. Ryan supports; Mr. McConnell has hedged.Indeed, nearly every item on Mr. Ryan’s ambitious policy agenda for the year has been welcomed by Mr. McConnell with all the appreciation of a cup of black coffee after 8 p.m. Thanks, but no.Their differences stem less from ideological divides and more from the political realities of their respective chambers. Mr. Ryan, who leads a comfortable majority in the House with little threat of losing power, can afford to come up with an agenda — if not necessarily actual legislation — that defines the values of his party.Mr. McConnell’s tenuous hold on the majority is threatened by onerous re-election fights facing several Republican senators who won their seats in swing states during a Tea Party insurgency in 2010.“I think it’s a constructive activity in the House,” Mr. McConnell said of Mr. Ryan’s agenda. “But what we take up with in Senate will be different, with special eye toward our incumbents.”As such, any significant policy legislation signed into law this year is likely to come out of the Senate, and will almost certainly be bipartisan. “There is no reason for us to take the year off,” said Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee and the chairman of the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, who is at work on several bipartisan bills to address mental health issues, biomedical research and the streamlining of Pell grants.“If I’m looking at Republican principles,” Mr. Alexander said, “advanced biomedical research is an important part of a Republican agenda that I am comfortable with. So is giving students more access to worker training programs and education.”Mr. Alexander and Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, shared a large bipartisan victory last year when they worked to change the nation’s elementary and secondary education law.The Senate led the way on a number of bills that became law last year, including the education measure, the renewal of a highway funding act and a broad defense bill. And it was the Senate’s version of a bill to repeal the health care law that made it to the White House for Mr. Obama’s inevitable veto.In an interesting twist, it is not a sure bet that the Senate will pass a budget this year — after years of banging on Democrats for failing to do just that — because to satisfy the right flank of the Republican party, it would need to pepper its budget with large cuts to programs that could become a liability for incumbents from swing states.Democrats view these differences in leadership styles with glee masked as outrage. If Congress accomplishes little this year, they assume it will reflect poorly on Republicans. “It’s a given that the right and the hard right will be fighting with each other once again this year,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York, who has much to gain from Republicans losing the Senate because he would be vaulted into Mr. McConnell’s job. “But if there are fault lines also forming within the G.O.P. establishment, it makes the chances of getting things done even smaller.”Although Mr. McConnell’s reluctance to go big may be part of his incumbent protection plan, some of those members seem ambivalent. “If you’re looking at the presidential primary right now, you will see that you can’t play it that way,” said Senator Richard Burr, Republican of North Carolina, who is up for re-election this year. “You may lose because of the perception that you’re not willing to do anything. So you have to be bold.”Senator Pat Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, who surfed into the Senate on the Tea Party wave and is now among the most vulnerable of incumbents, more or less concurred. “I have always preferred offering solutions,” he said. “I’m comfortable articulating ideas across the range of issues we face.”Should Republicans maintain both chambers of Congress and win the White House this year, they will no doubt offer their own agenda, and Mr. Ryan will face his first real opportunity — and challenge — of taking the lead on policy that actually has a chance of becoming law.Control of the Senate will be narrowly held by either party, and should a Democrat reach the White House, Republicans will once again be forced to choose between an conservative agenda, to please the party base, and one that is possible, which tends to be Mr. McConnell’s touchstone.For now, each chamber will protect its own. Conservatives will have a voice in the House, and Senate Republicans up for re-election will have the protection of Mr. McConnell in the role of “Mr. No.”“I think this is a short-term issue,” said Brian Walsh, a Republican strategist and former Senate aide. “Anytime one party does not control the White House and is out in the wilderness, there is not always the cohesion. Democrats won’t win back the House, but there is an opportunity to win back the Senate. So someone like Speaker Ryan is looking much further down the road while Republicans in the Senate have to get through the next election.”