http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/08/upshot/a-clinton-embrace-is-near-but-is-sanders-ready-for-prime-time.html
Bernie Sanders Is Set to Embrace Clinton, but Does He Deserve a Prime-Time Speech? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,Trump  Donald J,Gingrich  Newt
July 7, 2016
6766
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor based in New York, discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.This week: Hillary Clinton’s emails, the Sanders rapprochement, Trump’s troubles and vice-presidential possibilities.Toni I suspect that the Clinton email fiasco, in the end, will matter less than a lot of people think. We all suffer from recency bias. So many things will happen between now and November, including conventions and vice-presidential picks. It’ll make for good attack ads by Republicans, but some of the damage is already priced in, and some of the effect will wear off if the G.O.P. goes the “Benghazi” route and overplays its hand.Nate Yeah, I don’t think it changes much. It was all priced in, and there is some upside: The investigation doesn’t hang over her anymore. Maybe I’m giving Republicans too much credit in assuming they’re not going to blow it by turning a rebuke from the nonpartisan F.B.I. into a partisan fight, but it does seem that there’s a real risk the G.O.P. overplays its hand.If I were the G.O.P., I’d be very happy with where this all ended up.Toni What do you mean?Nate Well, Clinton is pretty damaged, and the F.B.I. publicly rebuked her. It’s hard to see how much more damage the issue can do to her. Or put differently: Republicans have gotten a lot out of this, and I don’t think they can get anything more. They can try to keep it in the news with more hearings and investigations, but that carries the risk of turning it into a partisan issue that rallies Democratic-leaners to her side. I’m not sure an indictment would have been necessarily great for the G.O.P., either. Who knows: Maybe it would have ended with an undamaged Joe Biden as the Democratic nominee, who could have been very tough in the general.Toni After the announcement by James Comey, Donald Trump said “it was a rigged system.” Sound familiar?Nate I assume you’re making a comparison to Bernie, and I take your point — though Sanders didn’t exactly press this issue.Toni Yes, Bernie was the original “sick and tired of hearing about your damn emails” guy.Trump was trying to win over Bernie supporters. But we have some news: “Hillary Clinton’s campaign announced plans on Wednesday to eliminate college tuition at in-state public colleges and universities for families with annual incomes under $125,000 — a significant nod to a core position of Senator Bernie Sanders, who had pledged to make tuition at public institutions free for all students.”Nate I had a feeling that something like this might happen. It’s a place where they were already close on policy, and Bernie’s position, frankly, just sounds a lot better even though it’s not substantively too far away.Toni It was always a little odd that, in Bernie’s plan, a son of a millionaire or billionaire could go to college for free.Nate I don’t think it’s that odd to propose universal free college. I think there are some societal benefits to encouraging upper-middle class families to send their kids to public college, and universal programs generally enjoy broader political support than means-tested ones. But it was weird to see Sanders pushing a program that wasn’t especially redistributive, since affluent families are more likely to send their kids to college.It’s a pretty impressive legacy for Bernie. Four years ago, the Democrats didn’t have anything like this in their agenda. Then, President Obama proposed free community college. Now Bernie Sanders has pushed Hillary Clinton to free college for most Americans.Toni It will be tough for Trump to peel away voters if this cooperation between the Clinton and Sanders camps continues, and it looks as if it will continue. It will be quite a sight at the convention when Bernie gives a speech supporting Hillary — the drama heightened because Sanders has denied that support so long (Bernie even got booed by House Democrats on Wednesday).It’s like that moment in a romantic comedy when the two lead characters, after sniping at each other for most of the movie, find they have a love connection — they both would love to beat Trump.Nate It could be, though I just don’t know what kind of endorsement he’ll ultimately give her. At this point, I doubt he’ll get a prime-time speaking slot, which might lessen the drama a bit, too.Toni But that’s the speech everyone would want to hear. I think he gets a prime slot as long as he signals to the Clinton camp that he will support her in broad outline.Nate It’ll be tough to fit it all in: Hillary Clinton, Bill Clinton, Barack Obama, Joe Biden, her eventual vice-presidential nominee, the “keynote” speaker and Elizabeth Warren all have very good claims to a prime-time slot.Toni Just tell Bill to cut his speech to 15 minutes; that’ll be no problem.Nate Ha. I’m sure there will be plenty of people in the Clinton campaign who would love that.Toni Tuesday seemed to be another reminder that Trump seems to be a gift for Democrats. On a day when Clinton was supposed to take all the heat, Trump accused her of a bribe and later talked about the positive side of a fellow named Saddam Hussein. Over the weekend, there was the retweet with the Star of David. (Update: On Wednesday night, Trump angrily defended the image and regretted that it was deleted). It makes you wonder what would have happened if, say, John Kasich were the nominee. You wrote an article this week about how Trump could easily lose Florida. I suspect someone like Kasich, who wouldn’t offend Hispanics, could have fared better there.Nate Well, obviously Trump is an especially weak general election candidate. But I don’t think that a strong but “generic Republican” — a Kasich or Paul Ryan or Marco Rubio, for instance — would have a clear advantage. I don’t think there’s someone who could have plausibly won the Republican primary who would be an especially clear favorite to win.Toni It’s worth noting that despite a fair share of dissent among G.O.P. officials (past and present) and some journalists, a recent poll showed that if Republicans had a revote, Trump would still win.Nate That doesn’t strike me as much of a surprise.Toni Kasich and Rubio won’t even speak at the convention, as of now. But Scott Walker has declared that he will participate. About a year ago, Walker was considered one of the favorites to win the nomination, maybe even the favorite. Do you ever think back to those days and think it was maybe just a dream?Nate Ha, it is amazing how abruptly it all changed. Oddly, I left the United States on June 10 of last year to go to China, where there isn’t Gmail, Twitter, Facebook or The New York Times (officially), so I didn’t really pay much attention to all that was going on. Donald Trump announced — which I remember seeing on a television through a storefront — on the 16th, and when I came back in July, everything just seemed completely crazy.Everything up until that point went more or less as expected. After that, nothing really did.Toni But there’s an argument, advanced by the political scientist Alan Abramowitz and others, that one thing that didn’t really change was the electoral map. This whole year seemed like a social science experiment to test how strong polarization was. It turns out, it’s pretty darned strong. Republicans have mostly rallied around Trump. Yes, he’s winning more working-class whites, but he’s losing wealthier whites, canceling those gains. And we’re mostly right back to the same states that matter.Nate Yeah, that’s how it looks. If anything, I’d say that Trump v. Clinton may prove to be even more polarizing, at least in demographic terms. It’s probably less polarizing in a traditional partisan sense, since I suspect a fair number of people who considered themselves Republicans or Democrats four or 12 years ago will be voting the other way. But if you’re looking for big education, gender and race gaps — this is the year.One thing I’d note, though, is that I do think there’s a case that a national landslide is still in play and could put a few states into play that you wouldn’t expect, like Utah.Toni Barring that landslide ... As you’ve pointed out, it’s hard to overstate how important Florida is to Republicans. And Jewish voters, though relatively small in number, are important in Florida. So you could make the argument that Trump might have had just as bad a week as Clinton because of one anti-Semitic tweet.Nate Maybe. I think Trump was probably poised to seriously underperform with Jewish voters for a while.Toni What are the qualities that Trump should want in a vice-presidential pick? A Washington insider, a woman, someone more conservative?Nate Someone who will take the job, who hasn’t said terrible things about him, who ideally has a record and sensibility fairly consistent with his populist message, and then if you can get anything beyond that — a woman, the right experience — you’d have to be pretty happy about that, right?Toni That sounds good, but who would that person be? Newt Gingrich is the leading pick in prediction markets. Among women, it could be Joni Ernst or Mary Fallin. I think Chris Christie would be a poor choice — too much like Trump in manner, for one thing.Nate Gingrich makes sense to me. He isn’t popular, but he does have credibility among conservatives — even well-educated ones. He has said nice things about Trump and can complement Trump’s politics.If Ernst is ready, she could be an interesting choice. I don’t think Fallin makes as much sense — I don’t think she’s as compelling; she’s not as engaged with national politics; and she’s not from a swing state. [Update: Ernst was chosen for a prime-time speaking slot, a signal that she won’t be the running mate, and Gingrich appears closer to getting the nod.]Toni Mike Pence of Indiana is apparently another serious contender.Nate I don’t see the utility of Pence, except to placate social conservatives.Toni For the Democrats, Tim Kaine, maybe surprisingly, leads by a wide margin in prediction markets.Nate I still think Gary Locke would be a great pick, but I’ll concede that Kaine is a safe and good choice.Toni Nice try with the Gary Locke reference. (I hope this isn’t part of a drinking game.) He hasn’t exactly caught fire since you started talking him up.Nate I guess not. I would have taken full credit for it, too!In recent weeks, Nate and Toni wondered whether Donald Trump would concede if he lost; questioned why he wasn’t campaigning in swing states; and looked at the potential terms of surrender for Bernie Sanders.