https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/us/politics/congress-debt-limit.html
Government Set to Default Weeks Earlier Than Forecast - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),National Debt (US),United States Politics and Government,United States,Boehner  John A,Lew  Jacob J,Treasury Department,House of Representatives,Senate
Oct. 1, 2015
5782
WASHINGTON — As the government nears a potentially devastating default, the White House and congressional leaders have begun bipartisan talks aimed at reaching a two-year budget deal, seizing on what could be their final chance at consensus before Speaker John A. Boehner’s exit ushers in what is expected to be more combative leadership in the House.The opening of negotiations, which started this week with a closed-door meeting of senior White House and Capitol Hill staff members, came as Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew warned on Thursday that the United States would exhaust its ability to borrow on Nov. 5 if lawmakers refuse to increase the amount of money the government can legally borrow.That default date is weeks before lawmakers had expected, and it immediately increased the pressure to avoid a new fiscal crisis and break the gridlock that has become business as usual in Washington. Officials from both parties tamped down expectations for success, but the timing of the economic threats may provide a rare opportunity for cooperation.“This back and forth, going to the brink all the time, it’s bad governmentally, it’s bad for the markets and it’s bad politically,” said Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York. “The average voter out there just thinks we’re crazy.”The talks are unlikely to include Representative Kevin McCarthy, the California Republican expected to succeed Mr. Boehner as speaker, with whom the White House has never worked closely. By contrast, Mr. Obama’s advisers regard Mr. Boehner as a familiar and straightforward — if not always entirely cooperative — negotiating partner.The outlines of the long-running disagreements between the parties remain the same: Mr. Obama and Democrats insist on lifting strict spending limits on domestic programs, while Republicans continue to say any increased domestic spending must be offset by savings in other social programs not subject to Congress’s annual discretion. Proposals such as raising the eligibility age for Medicare and changing the way Social Security retirement benefits are indexed to inflation are nonstarters for many Democrats and the White House. More likely, negotiators will look for trims to obscure government programs.With Mr. Boehner’s abrupt announcement that he will step down at the end of this month, White House officials believe the House speaker, who President Obama once said had repeatedly left him “at the altar” when they were on the brink of a deal, may now finally be in a political position to close one.Administration officials say they are eager to test Mr. Boehner’s willingness to defy the most conservative members in his party on a compromise, which, if reached, would require the votes of Democrats to pass. The White House plans to push for an increase in the federal debt limit, and separately, a long-term transportation funding bill and a reopening of the Export-Import Bank.“We are interested in seeing what the speaker is prepared to do,” said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary.It is not clear whether Mr. Boehner shares a desire for a fiscal compromise — and if he does, whether he and Mr. Obama can agree on the details. But Mr. Boehner has suggested that he would like to leave his successor a relatively clean slate, devoid of the most politically difficult votes that plagued his speakership.The prospect of success in the next 30 days is tantalizing: Mr. Obama could end budget fights for the rest of his presidency. Mr. Boehner could send a message to the conservatives who have tormented him for years that they do not control him. Republican leaders could demonstrate they can govern just as their presidential candidates enter an election year. And Democrats could win welcome relief from spending caps that threaten to hobble government programs. Still, most cautioned against too much hope that bipartisanship was about to break out.And several lawmakers predicted that the likelihood of an agreement would fade after Mr. Boehner’s departure.“It’s hard to paint a scenario where it gets better,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the No. 3 Democrat.The lame-duck House speaker demonstrated this week a willingness to work with Democrats and buck his most conservative members by allowing approval of a spending bill that keeps the government operating until Dec. 11. The spending measure passed with the support of 186 Democrats and 91 Republicans.But reaching a broader deal on government spending through 2017 will be more complicated.Lawmakers are scheduled to take a weeklong recess to mark Columbus Day, Oct. 12. Also, talks could be sidelined during the political dramas surrounding next week’s Republican leadership elections and Hillary Rodham Clinton’s testimony at a Benghazi hearing this month.Senator Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, said Thursday that a budget and debt deal is “worth exploring,” but he said there is little time to complete one.Mr. Boehner, freed from catering to a restive conservative wing that repeatedly demanded government spending cuts and policy changes certain to draw Mr. Obama’s veto, no longer has to choose between keeping his job and engaging in the kind of legislative bargaining that until a few years ago was commonplace in Washington.Mr. Obama has long seen Mr. Boehner as a pragmatic and rational figure, the kind of business-minded Republican with whom he often cut deals during his years in the Illinois State Senate. His surpassing flaw from the president’s perspective, White House officials have said privately, has always been Mr. Boehner’s inability to persuade his rebellious Republican colleagues to accept the agreements he negotiates.“I do think that Speaker Boehner sometimes had a tough position because there were members in his caucus who saw compromise of any sort as weakness or betrayal,” Mr. Obama said last week after Mr. Boehner notified him by phone that he would be relinquishing his post.There is almost no chance, Mr. Obama’s advisers concede, that Mr. Boehner’s imminent exit will yield breakthroughs on some of the president’s other policy priorities, such as an immigration overhaul, a plan to make community college free or a major revision of the tax code.But officials at the White House and on Capitol Hill argue that the Republican shake-up has provided a rare opening for Mr. Obama and Mr. Boehner to agree on a modest package that would address some pressing issues.Citing Mr. Boehner’s recent comment that he is interested in “cleaning out the barn” before he leaves, Mr. Earnest said Thursday that if Mr. Boehner wants to work in a bipartisan fashion, “he’ll find partners at the White House willing to pick up their mops.”