https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/04/us/insurgent-candidacies-shaking-up-the-gop-also-dog-democrats.html
Democrats Find That Anti-Establishment Isn’t Just a G.O.P. Theme - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Sanders  Bernard,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Liberalism (US Politics),United States Politics and Government,Democratic Party,Tea Party Movement,Income Inequality
Oct. 3, 2015
7293
Anger at the political establishment has overtaken the Republican presidential race, embodied in the candidacy of Donald J. Trump. But it is also coursing through the Democratic electorate, fueling the popularity of Bernie Sanders, inspiring liberal challenges to party-backed congressional candidates and spurring activism on causes from the minimum wage to the Keystone XL oil pipeline.Nowhere was the discontent on the left — which has made targets out of banks, billionaires and backers of the status quo — more evident than in the stunning news last week that Mr. Sanders, who calls himself a democratic socialist, was raising money nearly as fast as Hillary Rodham Clinton.Interviews with three dozen Democrats in key early states — a mix of undecided voters and Sanders and Clinton supporters — laid bare a sense of hopelessness that their leaders had answers to problems like income inequality and gun violence. It is frustration that Mr. Sanders, a senator from Vermont, and other progressive candidates are channeling and that Mrs. Clinton has addressed with increasing passion, as when she responded to Thursday’s massacre at an Oregon college by saying she was “just sick of this.”While alienation among Republicans has drawn more attention, given the fiery language of the race’s front-running celebrity, Mr. Trump, the anti-establishment mood on the left is just as intense and potentially just as consequential to the selection of a Democratic nominee.Mrs. Clinton has tried to lift her declining poll numbers by highlighting endorsements from governors and lawmakers — but such establishment backing has yet to do much good. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. could face the same anti-establishment headwinds if he enters the race, given his four decades in Washington, although allies believe he has the personal touch to win over angry Democrats. Mr. Sanders castigates “the entire political and economic establishment” regularly, by contrast, a message that has drawn 650,000 donors and huge crowds of fervent supporters, like the 20,000 people at his Boston rally on Saturday evening.“I volunteered for Hillary when she ran for president in 2008, but her time is past, I think,” said Nikky Raney, 25, a Democrat from Dover, N.H. “And it’s Bernie who seems most genuine about universal health care and getting big money out of politics.”Though Mrs. Clinton remains popular in the party, especially among those who want to see a first female president, Mr. Sanders’s call for a “political revolution” and his consistently left-wing policy ideas are inspiring to younger voters, seniors and liberals who would prefer to see a true believer overcome an establishment goliath.“Income inequality has been growing for so many years that a lot of young people feel their Democratic leaders aren’t fighting hard enough on the issue,” said Brandon Lemay, the president of the Plymouth State University Democrats, after attending a speech by Mrs. Clinton near the campus in central New Hampshire.Mr. Lemay said he was undecided between her and Mr. Sanders. “Hillary has definitely been refining her message to sound more liberal,” he said, “but Bernie’s convictions are just very strong, very intense.”Impatience with politics-as-usual has also led liberals to enter Democratic Senate primaries and mount more aggressive and well-financed challenges than in years past to candidates backed by the national party establishment.In Florida, Representative Alan Grayson, a self-styled “progressive champion,” is portraying Representative Patrick Murphy, the Democratic Party’s preferred candidate for the seat being vacated by Senator Marco Rubio, as a “lightweight, empty-suit errand boy for Wall Street.” A former president of the Chicago Urban League, Andrea Zopp, is running in Illinois against the party-backed Representative Tammy Duckworth. And former Representative Joe Sestak is running as a liberal anti-establishment candidate in Pennsylvania.“Democrats are experiencing a taste of what Republicans experienced in 2010, when so-called Tea Party candidates ran against establishment favorites,” said Jennifer Duffy, who tracks Senate races for the Cook Political Report. “More progressive or anti-establishment candidates are jumping into Senate primaries, often at the urging of more progressive voters who are tired of the status quo and want candidates who will run on issues like income equity.”The contested primaries extend to House races. In New Jersey, a 24-year-old Sanders supporter, Alex Law, is challenging Representative Donald Norcross, portraying him as a machine politician.“Democrats have enjoyed watching Republicans fight among themselves for the last five years, but there are anti-establishment and ideological divisions in the Democratic Party that will grow larger in the years to come,” said Nathan L. Gonzales, editor of The Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report.The disaffection among Democrats flows mainly from three sources, according to interviews with voters and strategists. Disappointment lingers with President Obama over the failure to break up big banks after the Great Recession and fight for single-payer health insurance, among other liberal causes. Fatigue with Mrs. Clinton’s controversies endures, as does distaste with her connections to the rich. And anger abounds at party leaders for not pursuing an ideologically pure, economically populist agenda.“Establishment Democrats like Hillary could end up heavily outspending people like Sanders, but it may not matter as much as usual because voters are searching for someone off the beaten path,” said Paul Maslin, who was the pollster for Howard Dean’s 2004 presidential race.Tom Henderson, the Democratic chairman in Polk County, Iowa, which includes Des Moines, said the most widely shared frustration among Democrats there was “the manner in which the economy has bounced back” under Mr. Obama: Wall Street returns look strong and unemployment has declined, but wages and benefits are largely unchanged.“I think Sanders is pulling in voters who aren’t typical rank-and-file Democrats, but rather folks who have become energized over the last few years to change the country’s direction,” said Mr. Henderson, who is currently neutral in the race. “The question for Sanders is whether he can get those people to show up and vote in February.”Across the country, discontent on the left is bubbling up in scattered ways.Liberal activists in Iowa and elsewhere have pushed local Democratic officials to enact minimum-wage ordinances in the face of inaction from state and federal government officials in both parties. Environmentalists put enormous pressure on Mrs. Clinton to come out against the Keystone pipeline project, which she did last month. Many progressives in New York City complain that the Democratic mayor, Bill de Blasio, appears to have lost his appetite for a criminal justice overhaul.And last week, about 80 Democrats in New Hampshire banded together to demand that the Democratic National Committee allow candidates to participate in more debates than the six that the party has sanctioned. Many activists see the limit as rigging the debates in favor of Mrs. Clinton, whose advisers wanted as few as possible.“There’s a level of anger among Democrats that the establishment has decided not to address, whether it’s about debates or other issues,” said Peter Burling, a former New Hampshire state senator who is supporting former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland in the presidential primary.If Mr. Sanders proves too liberal to capture the nomination, allies of Mr. Biden believe the vice president is positioned to seize on anger at the establishment if he enters the race — even though his long tenure epitomizes it. These supporters say the freely emotional Mr. Biden is more capable of soothing Democratic anxieties than Mr. Sanders, a flinty Vermonter, or Mrs. Clinton, whose attempts to appear more likable and funny can come across as overly calculated.Still, Mr. Biden has not decided on a run, and “Draft Biden” efforts have not yet caught on anywhere near the way Mr. Sanders has.“There’s just so much hopelessness about people having any real opportunity to just make a living, take care of their families, support themselves,” said Karen Bryant, a physician from New Boston, N.H. “Mrs. Clinton is floundering and Republicans like Jeb Bush are floundering because people see them as politicians whose messages change depending on who they are talking to or how much money they need to raise. If you live year after year not seeing politicians keep their promises, it leads you to support someone like Bernie Sanders.”