https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/16/arts/dance/diana-vishneva-to-leave-american-ballet-theater-in-june.html
Diana Vishneva to Leave American Ballet Theater in June - The New York Times
Dancing,American Ballet Theater,Vishneva  Diana,Onegin (Ballet),Mariinsky Ballet,Cranko  John
Sept. 15, 2016
5348
The Russian ballerina Diana Vishneva, a principal with American Ballet Theater since 2005, will give her farewell performances with the company, at the Metropolitan Opera House, on June 19 and June 23, 2017. She will dance the role of Tatiana in John Cranko’s “Onegin,” with Marcelo Gomes. Ms. Vishneva, 40, is also a principal dancer with the Mariinsky Ballet in St. Petersburg, and will remain with that company.In an email, she wrote, “I certainly don’t stop doing the big classics!” She said that she had made the decision to leave Ballet Theater because she felt she had “too many big demanding projects on my plate.”She added: “I am simply unable to give 100 percent of myself to A.B.T. — and this is not the way I function.” She said that she had chosen the role of Tatiana for her farewell because of its powerful dramatic component, and because it allowed her to dance with Mr. Gomes, “one of my best partners.”Ms. Vishneva said that although the June performances would be her official farewell, she did not rule out one-off guest performances with the company in the future. She has a large repertory to choose from: in her 12-years with Ballet Theater she has performed in an extensive range of work, from the 19th-century classics to pieces by George Balanchine, Frederick Ashton, Kenneth MacMillan, John Neumeier and Alexei Ratmansky.She has also performed independently in her own productions, commissioning pieces from contemporary choreographers like Moses Pendleton and Carolyn Carlson, as well as from ballet choreographers like Jean-Christophe Maillot and Mauro Bigonzetti.In 2013, she founded Context, an international festival of contemporary dance in St. Petersburg. This year, she said, the festival will expand to become parallel programs in Moscow and St. Petersburg, and she has commissioned the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin to create a work for herself and Aurélie Dupont, the former Paris Opera Ballet étoile who is now the director of that company.“I constantly monitor the contemporary dance scene for excellence and innovation,” she wrote. “And of course I’m always considering the possibility of creating my own ’bespoke’ projects with these choreographers.”Asked whether she would consider directing a ballet company in the future, she remained noncommittal. “Let’s wait and see,” she said.