https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/13/nyregion/investigating-political-hack-work-near-the-george-washington-bridge.html
Investigating Political Hack Work Near the George Washington Bridge - The New York Times
George Washington Bridge,Fort Lee (NJ),Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Christie  Christopher J,Roads and Traffic,Wildstein  David,Samson  David,Foye  Patrick J,Wisniewski  John S,Delays (Transportation)
Dec. 12, 2013
7662
Apparently — by which I mean, definitely — a political hack shut lanes entering the George Washington Bridge for five days in September and ruined traffic.The motive remains a matter of speculation, as no credible explanation and only several false ones have been put forward by the agency operating the bridge, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.In the interests of informed speculation, please note the following circumstances. First, the mayor of Fort Lee, N.J., the borough adjacent to the bridge and the one that suffered most from the sudden shutdown of two of its three access lanes, had just failed to come through with an expected endorsement of Gov. Chris Christie for re-election.And second, the hack who closed the lanes got his job at the Port Authority through the patronage of Governor Christie, a high school classmate. Governor Christie’s man was on a corner in Fort Lee at 7 a.m. on the first day of the lane closings, watching the traffic monstrosity build, according to recent testimony at hearings in New Jersey. So apparently — by which I mean, maybe — this was an act of retribution against the Democratic mayor of Fort Lee for his failure to join others of his party in making the case that Mr. Christie was irresistibly bipartisan.During the four and a half days of mayhem, elected officials pleaded for help from an aide to David Samson, the chairman of the Port Authority. Mr. Samson, another Christie appointee, has yet to talk publicly about what happened and did not respond to emailed questions on Thursday. (As The Record noted, Mr. Samson was openly outraged about jams on other bridges.)A New Jersey Assembly committee has subpoenaed phone, text and email records from the Port Authority, which could map out this episode in all its infuriating detail. The idea that a politician could use government resources to punish an enemy, perceived or otherwise, is not all that startling. But the surprise here is the blunt instrument that was used.By long custom — heck, by interstate pact — the Port Authority is a machine designed for the pleasure of politicians in two states. Jobs are split 50-50: The chairman is appointed by New Jersey’s governor, the executive director by New York’s. A police official from one state, a deputy from the other. It is the Noah’s Ark of patronage, and the agency’s bylaws spell out the order in which the two-by-twos are brought on board.The board is composed of gubernatorial contributors, cronies and lobbyists, who carve up billions in contracts and bond deals and construction projects, because the Port Authority is a whirlwind of revenues from tolls and fees. The George Washington Bridge alone brings in $646 million a year.Fully assembled, the whole Port Authority operation is a political orgasmatron, the machine Woody Allen imagined for the 22nd century in “Sleeper,” only without politicians.“It’s not like a sewage authority — it has a budget bigger than 26 other U.S. states,” said John S. Wisniewski, a Democratic assemblyman who has been running the hearings on the episode.  “It’s like Louisiana under Huey Long, except it’s a collective Huey Long — no one person can control the agency. You have rival gangs.”Mr. Christie shares control of the agency and its spoils with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, and the two have, for the most part, played nicely with each other. Mr. Christie, though, is said to have complained to Mr. Cuomo about the aggressive digging into the creation of the traffic jams by an appointee of Mr. Cuomo’s, Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority, according to The Wall Street Journal.Mr. Foye has testified that he did not learn about the lane closings — the agency’s professional staff had objected to them — until they had been in effect for four days, as the calls were going to New Jersey appointees. The official who closed the lanes, David Wildstein, resigned last week just before the legislative hearings began.He has yet to explain his action, though initially, the Port Authority press office announced that it was part of a “traffic study.” Mr. Foye has said there was no such study.So for what reason were tens of thousands of people delayed for hours, immense amounts of pollution added to the air, and ambulances, fire trucks and police cars slowed?Perhaps it was retribution.Or maybe it was sheer stupidity.A third explanation is that it was both dumb and nasty.That seems to exhaust the possibilities.