https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/dining/grilled-squid-recipe.html
The Best Thing You’re Not Grilling - The New York Times
Squid,Seafood,Grilling (Cooking)
July 7, 2017
9519
As a confirmed squid lover, I have happily eaten more than my fair share, at home and on the road, in places hither and yon.In Italy, it shows up in rustic fish soups, in fritto misto, simmered in a luscious squid-ink sauce for the most exquisite spaghetti or risotto. It’s also frequently found as perfectly fried calamari, served with a lemon wedge.Throughout Asia, fresh squid features in dishes of every sort. On my first trip to Thailand, I encountered air-dried squid as a favorite street-food snack. The vendor first toasts the squid over charcoal, then rolls it paper-thin with a hand-cranked machine. A large sheet of flattened squid emerges as crisp as a potato chip, ready to dip in a sweet-and-spicy sauce. In Japan, raw squid (or its cousin, cuttlefish) is a popular choice at sushi bars — beautiful white translucent slices draped over the sweet rice.In Spain, the squid is extraordinary, especially the tiny chipirones, which are fried whole. On tapas bar menus, squid is often prepared à la plancha: sizzled on a hot griddle with garlic and parsley. And there are amazing canned specialties.Here in the United States, most fish markets have cleaned squid among their offerings, either fresh or frozen. My fishmonger always has fresh-caught, which I prefer. You can choose between tubes (bodies) or tentacles — both are delicious — but I like a mixture of both.While everyone loves crisp, deep-fried calamari, it’s worth discovering other ways to cook squid. It’s marvelous grilled, and, with grilling season in full swing, now is the perfect time to give it a try.It’s a simple matter of coating the bodies and tentacles lightly with oil and laying them on the grill over a brisk bed of coals. If your grill rack has widely spaced bars, skewer the tentacles to keep them from falling through. The bodies can simply be turned with tongs.Depending on the size of the squid, you’ll need to cook them for about four minutes per side. Any size can be prepared this way, but meaty larger pieces work best. They are done once they puff up and are firm to the touch, but leave them on the heat long enough to brown nicely, even to char a bit. Do the same with the tentacles.You can serve grilled squid as is, with a knife and fork. But let the farmer’s market help decide. The other day, I found first-of-the-season Romano beans, hot chiles and cilantro, so the result was a spicy salad marrying beans and squid, perfect for sultry weather.Recipe: Spicy Grilled Squid and Green Bean SaladFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.