http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/21/us/politics/21intel.html
Spymaster Nominee Says He’ll Fight Turf Wars - The New York Times
Clapper  James R Jr,United States Politics and Government,Espionage,United States Defense and Military Forces,Intelligence Services
July 21, 2010
6982
WASHINGTON — Telling a Senate panel that he would not be a “hood ornament,” the Obama administration’s candidate to become national intelligence director pledged Tuesday that despite the job’s vague authority, he would try to bring an end to turf battles and bureaucratic bloat in America’s spy agencies.But the nominee, James R. Clapper Jr., also defended the extensive use of government contractors to perform intelligence work, comparing the growth of private companies working for spy agencies since the Sept. 11 attacks to the industrial buildup that took place during World War II.If confirmed, Mr. Clapper will be the fourth person in five years to hold the  post, a job that most intelligence experts believe lacks any real authority to wrestle with 16 disparate intelligence agencies and effectively combat waste and abuse.Many believe that addressing these problems head on would require  legislation, and no doubt a significant push from the White House. This is unlikely, given that Obama administration officials have shown little interest in strengthening the position. During the hearing, Mr. Clapper told lawmakers that he would try to make the current structure work and “push the envelope” of the intelligence post’s moral authority.Over two hours of questioning, the Senate Intelligence Committee asked Mr. Clapper almost no questions about Al Qaeda, Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan or other pressing national security threats.As with many jobs in Washington, the real authority of the intelligence job rises and falls depending on the director’s  relationship with the president. The past intelligence chief, Dennis C. Blair, had a frosty relationship with White House officials, and lamented that the Central Intelligence Agency was often successful in doing end runs around his office to advance its agenda with the president.The rapid expansion of the intelligence bureaucracy has been under particular scrutiny this week, with a series of articles in The Washington Post detailing the growth in spending on spy programs since the Sept. 11 attacks.The Post series was the source of a number of questions from senators about how Mr. Clapper would address bureaucratic redundancies in the intelligence world and wean agencies off their reliance on contractors.Mr. Clapper, while defending the work of contractors, said he would like to scale back their use, although he refused to give a target for such a reduction.He did acknowledge that the director’s  staff, which has grown to more than 1,500 since the position was created in 2005, was too unwieldy. He vowed that if confirmed by the Senate, he would cut the size of the intelligence director’s office.Despite occasionally pointed questions from members of the intelligence panel, Mr. Clapper is expected to be swiftly confirmed by the Senate.Mr. Clapper, a retired general, is now the Pentagon’s top intelligence official, and some lawmakers have raised concerns about his close ties to the Defense Department and whether they might further a “militarization” of the intelligence community. The Pentagon controls about  80 percent of the intelligence budget, managing billions of dollars worth of spy satellites and overseas listening posts.Mr. Clapper pledged that he would vigorously promote civilian control of intelligence agencies and said that his Pentagon background, including one tour as head of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, put him in an ideal position to understand the byzantine world of Pentagon intelligence activities.As for the C.I.A., Mr. Clapper said that he had recently had several discussions with the spy agency’s director, Leon E. Panetta, about how he can avoid the tensions that flared between Mr. Panetta and Mr. Blair.“He wants to make this arrangement work,” Mr. Clapper said.