https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/23/world/asia/shinzo-abe-japan-prime-minister-school-scandal.html
Fax-Wielding Witness Tries to Link Japan’s Prime Minister to Scandal - The New York Times
Abe  Shinzo,Politics and Government,Land Use Policies
March 23, 2017
3677
TOKYO — He said he had in his hand a fax.It was not quite Joseph McCarthy and his list, but in the most dramatic moment during several hours of testimony on Thursday in Tokyo, the leader of an ultraconservative education group that has become entangled in a scandal with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe produced a two-page fax that he said showed that aides to Mr. Abe’s wife, Akie, had talked to government officials on the group’s behalf.The scandal, which has dominated headlines for a month, centers on claims that the government granted improper political favors to Moritomo Gakuen, which operates a kindergarten in Osaka where children recite a 19th-century patriotic royal decree and are taught that some history textbooks in Japan and elsewhere in Asia wrongly characterize the country’s wartime atrocities.Japanese media breathlessly covered the testimony of Yasunori Kagoike, the administrator of Moritomo, waiting for a smoking gun that would link either Mr. or Mrs. Abe to a suspicious deal in which the school group bought public land at a steep discount to build a new school.If such links prove true, they could inflict political damage on Mr. Abe, who could soon become the longest serving prime minister since the end of World War II.Last month, he vowed in Parliament that he would resign as prime minister if he or his wife were found to have been involved in any wrongdoing related to the school, and Mrs. Abe stepped down as honorary principal of the new school last month as the furor over the scandal escalated.In the end, Mr. Kagoike failed to produce any damning revelations. Instead, the fax — a valid, and often essential, form of communication in Japan — from Saeko Tani, an aide to Mrs. Abe, acknowledged receipt of a request from Mr. Kagoike that the government extend a lease on the land where the group wanted to build a new school. Ms. Tani wrote that she had been in touch with officials at the Ministry of Finance and that they had told her that they could not grant the request.In his testimony, Mr. Kagoike noted that not long after this communication, the government agreed to sell the land to Moritomo Gakuen at a drastic discount below the assessed value of the property.“I am not party to the details of this negotiation,” said Mr. Kagoike, who said a lawyer for a construction company had negotiated a deal on the group’s behalf. “So I would ask that you please ask for clarification from the Ministry of Finance.”Mr. Kagoike said he was “angry” that Mr. and Mrs. Abe had pulled their support from the school. At one point, Mr. Kagoike wanted to name the school after Mr. Abe, but he said Mrs. Abe asked him not to. He also reiterated a claim — this time under oath — that he made last week, in which he said Mrs. Abe gave him an envelope of cash as a donation from the prime minister two years ago.Mr. Abe has emphatically denied it, and after the testimony on Thursday, Yoshihide Suga, Mr. Abe’s chief cabinet secretary, said that Mr. Kagoike’s claim was “completely wrong.”Renho Murata, leader of the main opposition Democratic Party, called for Mrs. Abe to testify before Parliament. On her Facebook page, Mrs. Abe wrote on Thursday that she did not give any donation to Mr. Kagoike, and that she was not involved with the fax written by her aide.“I remember that my secretary told me that she would reply to the inquiries he sent to her in a written document,” Mrs. Abe wrote. “I remember that was a reply declining his request.”Connecting the dots any further may be difficult. In response to a reporter’s question at a 100-minute news conference late Thursday afternoon, Mr. Kagoike said he did not believe Mr. Abe had “direct influence” on the discounted land deal.He hinted at “powers at work behind the scenes” and said that unidentified officials in the Ministry of Finance had helped facilitate the deal. “I believe that perhaps Prime Minister Abe or his wife were reading between the lines,” Mr. Kagoike said. “There was some sort of a mutual understanding between us.”Mr. Kagoike’s extreme right-wing views have become contentious as more details of his group’s existing kindergarten have emerged. It teaches elements of a patriotic prewar school curriculum and Mr. Kagoike has been accused of making derogatory statements about Chinese and Koreans.Asked about such statements during the news conference, Mr. Kagoike said he wanted the children to understand Japan’s position in territorial disputes with both China and South Korea.In the case of China, he said he wanted students to learn that when Chinese boats entered waters around a string of islands in the East China Sea administered by Japan and known here as the Senkaku and in China as the Diaoyu, it was analogous to “robbers entering somebody’s home.”Analysts said that the Japanese public is skeptical of Mr. Kagoike and that therefore the scandal was unlikely to have more legs. “I don’t think the majority of the public believes what he said completely,” said Koji Murata, a professor of international relations at Doshisha University in Kyoto.“Given the international situation surrounding Japan such as the North Korean provocations and the U.S.-Japan relationship,” he said, “I would guess the general public is getting more and more tired of this issue without clear evidence of a crime or scandal.”