https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/us/politics/trump-china-weapons-taiwan.html
U.S., Hardening Line on China, Approves $1 Billion Arms Sale to Taiwan - The New York Times
Taiwan,China,Arms Trade,Trump  Donald J,United States International Relations
June 29, 2017
1119
WASHINGTON — The State Department approved on Thursday selling more than $1 billion in arms to Taiwan in yet another sign that the Trump administration is embracing a far more confrontational approach with China.Heather Nauert, a State Department spokeswoman, underscored that the military sales have no effect on the United States’ “One China” policy, which President Trump suggested in December may be under review. Mr. Trump later affirmed to Chinese President Xi Jinping that he would honor the decades-old policy, under which the United States recognized a single Chinese government in Beijing and severed its diplomatic ties with Taiwan.The arms sale is the most tangible sign yet that Mr. Trump’s honeymoon with Mr. Xi is over. The American president had set aside tough moves on trade and regional issues in an informal quid pro quo for Mr. Xi’s commitment to further pressure North Korea.But Mr. Trump acknowledged last week that China had fallen short in its measures toward North Korea, and officials have said he would be less constrained in other parts of the relationship, including Taiwan.To that end, the administration also announced sanctions Thursday on a Chinese bank that has business dealings with North Korea. The announcements came hours before Mr. Trump was set to host a dinner for South Korea’s new president, Moon Jae-in, a progressive who is more open than his predecessor to diplomatic engagement with the North.That, combined with a potentially more turbulent relationship with China, could complicate Mr. Trump’s efforts to curb North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programs.Additionally, the Trump administration is expected in the coming days to determine that the American steel industry needs to be protected from cheap imports as a matter of national security. That is expected to lead Mr. Trump this summer to impose tariffs on steel imports, yet another action that is sure to infuriate the Chinese.At a news conference at the Chinese embassy in Washington during a Thursday evening party celebrating the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s handover to China, Cui Tiankai, China’s ambassador to the United States, condemned the arms sale and bank sanction.“And all these actions — sanctions against Chinese companies, especially arms sales to Taiwan — will certainly undermine the mutual confidence of the two sides and runs counter to the spirit of the Mar-a-Lago summit,” Mr. Cui said. He was referring to an April meeting between the two presidents, where they each talked tough on trade but described a warming kinship, at Mr. Trump’s estate in Palm Beach, Fla.The flurry of actions targeting China comes a week before Mr. Trump is expected to meet with Mr. Xi at a Group of 20 meeting in Germany. Eric G. Altbach, a senior vice president at the Albright Stonebridge Group, said it might signal that the Trump administration is trying to show China that it cannot be managed by Beijing on key issues.“So taking this series of actions is potentially an attempt to send a wake-up call in advance of their discussions at the G-20,” Mr. Altbach added.The sales, valued at $1.42 billion, include torpedoes, missiles and early-warning radar support, largely to modernize the island’s existing defense capabilities.A Trump administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity to describe the arms package said it was aimed at bolstering Taiwan’s confidence in its dialogue to improve relations with China.The arms sale announcement started a 30-day review period, during which Congress could vote to halt the sales, but it is unlikely to do so.