https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/20/opinion/trifling-with-the-arts-and-humanities.html
Trifling With the Arts and Humanities - The New York Times
National Endowment for the Arts,National Endowment for the Humanities,Federal Budget (US),United States Politics and Government,Humanities,Appointments and Executive Changes,Landesman  Rocco,Editorials,Culture (Arts)
Aug. 19, 2013
8718
More than eight months ago, the high-wattage Broadway producer Rocco Landesman announced his departure as chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts. Mr. Landesman, who took the job in 2009, will be hard to replace but not impossible. The White House has taken too long to nominate a successor. It also needs a new leader for the National Endowment for the Humanities, which has been missing a permanent chief since May.Both of these small-but-vital endowments have able acting leaders. But almost by definition, interim bosses do not have the influence permanent leaders do. A strong voice at the top — nominated by the president and approved by Congress — would be particularly helpful now that Congressional Republicans are threatening major budget cuts that neither agency can easily absorb.The House Appropriations Committee has proposed cutting each budget by half. Present financing levels are about $155 million each, a mite in the federal government’s overall $3.5 trillion budget. Even at these modest levels, the endowments are essential to art and enlightenment all across the country, and they help local economies in the bargain. Grants range from smaller awards, like $50,000 to the Nicolaysen Art Museum in Casper, Wyo., to bigger ones, like $3.5 million this year for the digital preservation of historic American newspapers dating from 1836 to 1922.Mr. Landesman has spent much of his time stressing art’s contribution to local economies — $26 in local economic activity, he said, for every $1 spent by the endowment. House Republicans have not been listening. Representative Hal Rogers of Kentucky has belittled endowment investments as “nice-to-have” programs.The White House’s job is to find persuasive leaders for both agencies to explain why culture is central to a civilized society, not merely “nice to have.”