http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/29/books/review/fleeing-north-korea.html
Fleeing North Korea - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Kim  Eunsun,Falletti  Sebastien,Park  Yeonmi,Vollers  Maryanne,Lee  Hyeonseo,John  David,Jang  Lucia ,McClelland  Susan,Kim  Joseph,Talty  Stephanie,A Thousand Miles to Freedom: My Escape from North Korea (Book),In Order to Live: A North Korean Girl's Journey to Freedom (Book),The Girl With Seven Masks: A North Korean Defectors Story (Book), Stars Between the Sun and Moon: One Womans Life in North Korea and Escape to Freedom (Book),Under the Same Sky: From Starvation in North Korea to Salvation in America  (Book),Thousand Miles to Freedom  A (Book),In Order to Live (Book),Girl With Seven Masks  The (Book),Stars Between the Sun and Moon (Book),Under the Same Sky (Book)
Nov. 25, 2015
3357
A THOUSAND MILES TO FREEDOMMy Escape From North KoreaBy Eunsun Kim with Sébastien FallettiTranslated by David Tian228 pp. St. Martin’s, $24.99.In North Korea, the framed portraits of Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il in each home are worshiped as sacred objects and dusted with a special cloth. When Eunsun Kim is 11, her mother, facing starvation, dismantles the frames to sell them, thus committing a crime punishable by death. For Eunsun, her mother and sister, wading through an icy river is the start of their nine-year ordeal, mostly in China, dominated by their sale to an abusive Chinese farmer.China does not recognize North Korean refugees. When Eunsun and her mother are caught, they are repatriated to a jail in their homeland. Through sheer luck, they slip back over the border, but then return to the farmer. After they finally abscond, years of hard labor secure the next leg of their journey: three terrifying hours stumbling through the Gobi Desert to a Mongolian detention center and eventual resettlement in South Korea. The power of this survival story is blunted by its simplistic prose, with its dearth of metaphors: chilling proof, if any were needed, of the success of the North Korean system in stifling the imagination.IN ORDER TO LIVEA North Korean Girl’s Journey to FreedomBy Yeonmi Park with Maryanne Vollers273 pp. Penguin Press, $27.95.There are no words for “love” in North Korea, according to Park, since the only love permitted is adulation of the Kim dynasty. Twenty-two-year-old Park — who has been nicknamed “the Paris Hilton of North Korea” — describes how her early life of privilege vanished when her father was jailed for smuggling. After fleeing to China, she watches her mother being raped and sold. At 13, she becomes the mistress of a violent Chinese human trafficker, effectively buying her mother’s freedom and her dying father’s exit from North Korea. In China, she traffics other North Korean women, earning their cooperation by telling them their buyers will be “gentle and rich.” Park even resells her own mother, ostensibly because she cannot afford to feed her, though just 10 pages later she recounts buying back her own freedom with jewelry she has hidden.Park’s memoir attempts to square various versions of her story she has told, though it still leaves many questions unanswered. Yet her profile is such that Pyongyang issued an 18-minute video to discredit her.THE GIRL WITH SEVEN NAMESA North Korean Defector’s StoryBy Hyeonseo Lee with David John304 pp. William Collins, $26.99.North Korea’s political caste system, songbun, has 51 gradations covering the three main categories of loyal, wavering and hostile. Lee’s mother had exceptional songbun, which smoothed her mother’s path as a smuggler and black market trader. As a child, Lee has a pet dog, wears snazzy foreign-made red shoes and enjoys overnight stays at the “hotel for foreigners.” She is 15 before she realizes others are going hungry.As a 17-year-old, she sneaks across the border, “thrilled” by the idea of a holiday with relatives in China. She stays on, working as an interpreter and living with her “flawless” South Korean boyfriend. She requests asylum by hopping on a plane to Seoul. But everything goes wrong when her mother and brother’s escape lands them in a Laotian jail.One tragedy of North Korea, Lee writes, is that “everyone wears a mask,” a necessity in a society with mandatory weekly criticism sessions, even for children. Lee’s own masks are her seven names, seven different identities. Even in exile, those masks are never really peeled away, leaving an emptiness at the heart of her story.STARS BETWEEN THE SUN AND MOONOne Woman’s Life in North Korea and Escape to FreedomBy Lucia Jang and Susan McClelland280 pp. Norton, $26.95.On the misery index, Jang’s book receives a solid 10/10. She charts her disastrous first marriage to an abusive, unfaithful, debt-ridden alcoholic, who — aided by her own mother — secretly sells their baby for 300 won and two bars of soap. She flees to China, where she herself is sold to “the village idiot.” She escapes, but is so crazed with hunger she trades sex for a single meal. She is twice caught and sent to North Korean prisons, once while pregnant, when she is informed the baby will be killed. Finally, she smuggles herself and her infant son through China and Mongolia to freedom in Canada.Jang evokes childhood in 1970s North Korea with memories of her “one and only toy,” a piece of string that she twisted into shapes until it fell apart. Her schooling consists of criticism sessions and acting as unpaid farm labor for four months every year. Yet Jang survives with her compassion unscathed. In jail, she shares her scarce rations with cellmates, asking in return for pledges to reunite outside North Korea. Such a show of humanity in an utterly inhuman environment lifts her tale of extraordinary suffering.UNDER THE SAME SKYFrom Starvation in North Korea to Salvation in AmericaBy Joseph Kim with Stephan Talty274 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $28.By 13, Kim is one of the kotjebi, “wandering swallows” or homeless street children, living off stolen pickings. After his father starves to death, he is abandoned by his mother, who sells his beloved sister in China. In a detention center, his street chops earn him a post as a guard, affording him the right to beat up new inmates and steal their possessions. Kim’s defection is almost instinctual; he walks along the train tracks and across an icy river to China, finding Christians to shelter him and arrange his passage to the United States.We learn the thief’s tradecraft — the tactics for filching peppers and corn, and what time of day to break into houses — as well as about the pain of hunger “scraping in your stomach.” Kim reflects on the corrosive impact of famine on morality, noting that the good died first, including regime loyalists like his father who refused to take bribes or steal from employers. That knowledge weighs heavily on those who survived: “We were angry, I think, because of what had happened to us, but also because of what we’d become.”