https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/07/nyregion/connecticut-to-require-all-11th-graders-to-take-the-sat.html
Connecticut to Require All 11th Graders to Take the SAT - The New York Times
Education (K-12),SAT (College Admission Test),Tests and Examinations,Education Department (US),Connecticut
Aug. 6, 2015
9363
Connecticut announced on Thursday that all 11th graders in the state’s public schools would soon be required to take the SAT college admissions tests, replacing an existing statewide exam amid widespread concern that the nation’s students are tested too much.With approval from the United States Department of Education, Connecticut said it would make the SAT a requirement, administered without cost to students, beginning in the 2015-16 school year.“We had reached the conclusion that there was, in fact, too much testing in 11th grade,” Gov. Dannel P. Malloy said in an interview. “We thought it was just a tremendous amount of pressure concentrated in a single year.”The federal government requires that states assess students in both reading and math once during high school. Because so many Connecticut public school students take the SAT anyway, replacing the existing high school test, given in 11th grade, with the SAT would leave young people with one exam fewer on their roster.State officials said that while scores had not yet been set on what would count as meeting or exceeding “achievement level,” a particular score on the SAT would not be required to graduate from high school or to rise to the 12th grade. Instead, the test will be used as one of several measures, including grades and attendance, to decide if a student has met the requirements necessary to move on.Dorie Nolt, a spokeswoman for the federal Education Department, said that several states, including Kentucky, South Carolina and Wisconsin, already use the ACT college admissions exam to fulfill their high school testing requirement.Education experts and Connecticut officials said that moving to a college-entrance exam might serve an additional purpose: nudging more students into applying to college.Robert Pondiscio, senior fellow and vice president for external affairs at the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, a conservative education policy organization, said the opportunity could be especially meaningful for low-income students, some of whom might not have taken the test in the past. “They might surprise themselves into making plans for college they might not otherwise have made,” he said.The past few years have been a time of great concern and anxiety around testing. The No Child Left Behind law ushered in an era of increased student assessments, which supporters say are necessary to track the true quality of the nation’s schools, and crucial to ensure that low-income children in particular are receiving a quality education.But many parents objected to the growing number of tests their children were required to take. And as the results of state tests were tethered to the ratings of teachers, unions joined the fight, as well. In some parts of the country, like New York, some parents have chosen to have their children opt out of the state tests altogether.Last year, Connecticut used a test from the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium as its high school exam for the first — and only — time statewide. (Many states use exams designed by the consortium, while many others use a test from the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers.)Dianna R. Wentzell, Connecticut’s commissioner of education, said the state decided to drop the Smarter Balanced Assessment test in favor of the SAT, and less testing, before it even received its students’ first official results.