http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/13/world/middleeast/giulio-regeni-egypt-killing.html
Death of a Student, Giulio Regeni, Highlights Perils for Egyptians, Too - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Egypt,Regeni  Giulio (d 2016),Italy,Torture,Abdel-Ghaffar  Magdi
Feb. 12, 2016
8833
CAIRO —  On the night he vanished, Giulio Regeni left his apartment and walked past four stores with surveillance cameras that might have provided vital information 10 days later, when his body turned up with welts, burns and fractures that were unmistakable signs of torture.One eyewitness said the footage would have shown Mr. Regeni, an Italian, being led away by two men believed to be Egyptian security agents. Three security officials said Mr. Regeni had indeed been taken into custody, bolstering Italian suspicions of an official hand in his death.But the Egyptian police have yet to request the footage, say the shopkeepers who own the cameras, a lapse that human rights advocates say is typical of police investigations here, indicating negligence or a possible cover-up.If Mr. Regeni had been an Egyptian, his case might now be all but forgotten. He would have been just one of hundreds of Egyptians who have disappeared into the custody of the authorities in the past year. But the fate of Mr. Regeni — who was pursuing a doctoral degree at Cambridge — has attracted international news media attention as well as a formal investigation by the Italian government into the mysterious circumstances and possibility of police abuse.The attention paid by foreign governments to the deaths of their citizens in several recent incidents in Egypt — the accidental massacre of Mexican tourists having a picnic in the desert in September and the downing of a Russian charter jet in October, in addition to Mr. Regeni’s death — has had the effect of spotlighting Cairo’s at times casual disregard for its own people.Each development in Mr. Regeni’s case has been breathlessly followed in the Italian news media, putting pressure on Rome to demand that the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, its close trading partner, conduct a transparent investigation. As a result, senior Egyptian officials have been forced to publicly address the killing. That includes the interior minister, Maj. Gen. Magdi Abdel-Ghaffar, who held a rare news conference earlier this week.The Egyptian authorities have not said whether they have any suspects or have made any arrests. General Abdel-Ghaffar said the authorities were anxious to solve the mystery but dismissed any suggestion that the police could have been involved in Mr. Regeni’s death.Mohamed Zarea, who heads the Egypt office of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, said the case bore the “fingerprints of the Egyptian security apparatus,” and might serve to focus international scrutiny on its frequent resort to abuse.“As we are speaking, there is someone being tortured or facing inhuman treatment in a police station,” Mr. Zarea said. “It is something that happens at every moment. There is not much attention about their situation. The Egyptian government doesn’t care about them. They care about foreigners because of international attention.”Egyptians have struggled for decades to shake their authoritarian rulers’ indifference to the everyday perils they face, to hold someone accountable for all the buildings that collapse, the ferries that sink, the failing hospitals or the mistreatment of Egyptian workers abroad. The government has been even more resistant to confronting its own security services, despite the fear and anger their practices frequently arouse.The issue of police torture was a central driver of the 2011 uprising that deposed President Hosni Mubarak. Even so, torture and a tactic known as “enforced disappearances” by the security services have become more frequent in the last two years, rights advocates say, as Mr. Sisi’s government has pursued a sweeping crackdown on political opponents. Several times in the last few months, the anger at the authorities has burst into public view, including protests after the deaths of detainees in Luxor and Ismailia.On Friday, thousands of doctors gathered in downtown Cairo to protest the assault of two doctors by policemen at a hospital in the Matariya neighborhood last month. It was one of the largest demonstrations in Egypt since the military-backed government banned unauthorized protests more than two years ago, and appeared to put pressure on Mr. Sisi finally to tackle the problem of police abuse.Adding to that pressure are new details that indicate that Mr. Regeni was in the custody of the authorities before he was killed.He disappeared on Jan. 25, the anniversary of the uprising against Mr. Mubarak, when security officers were out in force across Cairo to ensure that no protests were held to commemorate the day. Friends said Mr. Regeni had last been heard from as he was headed to a subway station in the Dokki neighborhood, on his way to meet friends in downtown Cairo.Ahmed Nagy, the prosecutor handling the case, said in an interview that the last signal from Mr. Regeni’s phone was picked up on the street where the subway station is. About the same time, a witness said, he disappeared.Several witnesses said that two plainclothes security men were searching young men on the street about 7 p.m., the time when Mr. Regeni was last heard from. One witness, who requested anonymity, said he had seen the two officers stop the Italian. One searched his bag, that witness said, while the other looked at his passport. Then the two officers led Mr. Regeni away. The witness said that one of the officers had been in the neighborhood on previous occasions, and had asked people about Mr. Regeni.Three Egyptian security officials who said they had inquired about the case said that Mr. Regeni had been taken into custody by the authorities because he had been impertinent with the officers. “He was very rude and acted like a tough guy,” one of the officials said.And all three, interviewed separately, said that Mr. Regeni, who had been researching informal labor movements in Egypt, had also drawn suspicion because of contacts on his phone that the officials said included people associated with the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood and the leftist April 6 Youth Movement. Mr. Sisi’s government regards both groups as enemies of the state.“They figured he was a spy,” one of the officials said. “After all, who comes to Egypt to study trade unions?”At various times since Mr. Regeni’s disappearance, Egyptian officials have suggested that he had been killed in a car accident, that he was the victim of common crime, or that perhaps some shadowy aspect of his personal life had contributed to his death. They have sternly discouraged theories that the security services played a role.Sameh Shoukry, Egypt’s foreign minister, told National Public Radio that in Cairo’s discussions with the Italian government “there is no such speculation or accusation levied” about the involvement of Egyptian security forces. “It is rather disconcerting that there should be this impression,” he said, according to a transcript of the interview.“We have a very large Egyptian population, expatriate population, in Italy, and they face on a daily basis criminal activity,” Mr. Shoukry said. “If I was to speculate that that criminal activity was somehow related to the Italian government, it would be very difficult to conduct international relations.”Despite the outsize attention to the case, there was little indication that the Egyptian authorities were exerting any special effort to solve it. The shopkeepers with the video cameras said any evidence was lost days after Mr. Regeni’s disappearance, because the footage is wiped out automatically at the end of the month.At his news conference this week, General Abdel-Ghaffar, the interior minister, did little to reassure a nervous international audience about the investigation into Mr. Regeni’s death.“We are treating his case,” he said, “as if he were an Egyptian.”