http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/04/world/asia/millions-in-najib-razak-accounts-didnt-come-from-state-fund-malaysian-antigraft-body-says.html
Millions in Premier’s Accounts Didn’t Come From State Fund, Malaysian Antigraft Body Says - The New York Times
Malaysia,Najib Razak,Corruption (Institutional),Campaign Finance,1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB)
Aug. 3, 2015
9832
HONG KONG —  Malaysia’s anticorruption body said Monday that nearly $700 million deposited into accounts controlled by Prime Minister Najib Razak did not come from a government-owned development fund now under investigation.Instead, the money came from “contributions of donors,” the Malaysian Anticorruption Commission said in a written statement, which did not offer specifics.Mr. Najib has been under scrutiny since news reports said last month that investigators had documented the flow of hundreds of millions of dollars into accounts under his control.Last week, he dismissed the attorney general and reshuffled the cabinet, removing a deputy who had publicly urged him to respond to questions over 1Malaysia Development Berhad, the development fund, which has $11 billion in debt.Mr. Najib has called the suggestions of corruption the work of political opponents trying to undermine him. He and the fund, also known as 1MDB, have denied wrongdoing.The task force looking into the fund includes the anticorruption commission, the attorney general, the inspector general of Malaysia’s police and the governor general of the central bank.The anticorruption commission said it would forward to the attorney general the results of its investigation into the money that had gone into the prime minister’s accounts.The political storm around Mr. Najib is likely to continue despite the announcement by anticorruption officials. In recent days, officials with his party, the United Malays National Organization, and the governing coalition have said that as party president, he is a trustee authorized to handle political donations. But the former prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, a onetime mentor turned critic of Mr. Najib, wrote on his blog on Monday that the hundreds of millions reported seemed far more than necessary for campaign expenses. Dr. Mahathir said that when he was president of the party, he never had election funds deposited into his personal accounts.Also on Monday, the Malaysian police interviewed Bahri Mohamad Zin, the anticorruption commission’s director of special operations, as part of an investigation into leaks of documents related to the 1MDB inquiry, according to Malaysian news reports.Mr. Bahri is the fourth official from the anticorruption body to be questioned in the leak investigation, The Malaysian Insider website and The Malay Mail Online reported. A former adviser and an official in the attorney general’s office working with the anticorruption commission were detained over the weekend as part of the leak inquiry, the outlets said.The leak investigation follows articles by The Wall Street Journal and Sarawak Report, a British website, that said investigators had documents that showed hundreds of millions of dollars had flowed into accounts controlled by the prime minister.