http://www.nytimes.com/2000/09/19/health/kidney-cancer-experiment-appears-promising.html
Kidney Cancer Experiment Appears Promising - The New York Times
TRANSPLANTS,CANCER,IMMUNE SYSTEM,KIDNEYS
Sept. 19, 2000
9419
To John Sirmans, the CT scan that doctors showed him last December looked like a pair of socks full of golf balls.But the socks were his lungs, and the golf balls were tumors. The cancer that had started in his kidney was advancing, despite three months of an experimental treatment at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Doctors feared that Mr. Sirmans, 51, the father of one child in high school and two in college, would not survive much longer.A month later, Dr. Richard Childs and Dr. Allen Chernoff brought Mr. Sirmans to a conference room at the hospital to show him a new set of scans, mounted on a light box next to the old ones.''They were almost giggling,'' Mr. Sirmans said. ''Dr. Childs kept saying, 'Look at this! Look at this!' He was like a kid in Disney World. The difference in the scans was something even a layman could pick up from across the room.''The tumors had shrunk by about 30 percent. Four months later, they were gone. Mr. Sirmans is back at home in Centerville, Ohio, near Dayton, working full-time as a technical writer.It is impossible to tell how long the remission will last. ''There is no such thing as cure,'' Mr. Sirmans said. ''It can come back.'' But, he added, he does not dwell on that possibility.In a report last week in The New England Journal of Medicine, Mr. Sirmans was Patient No. 19, one of the first 19 people to receive the experimental treatment, a transplant of cancer-fighting cells from the immune system of a brother or sister. All the patients had advanced kidney cancer that had spread to other organs and did not respond to conventional treatments. Few were expected to last more than a year.In eight, the treatment did not work, and they died of cancer. Two died of complications from the treatment.But nine, all treated more than a year ago, are still alive, including four in whom all signs of cancer have disappeared. One of those four was treated almost three years ago. In three of the five others still living, tumors shrank by more than half.Such marked improvements are rarely seen in advanced kidney cancer, which kills 12,000 Americans a year. The disease can be cured if it is detected early, by removing the kidney. But once tumor cells have begun to spread, half of patients die within a year, and fewer than 10 percent survive five years. The disease resists chemotherapy and radiation, but is sometimes sensitive to immunologic therapy like the drugs interleukin-2 and interferon, which stimulate the patient's own immune system to fight the malignant cells. Those drugs, though, help only 19 percent of patients.In an editorial in the same issue of the medical journal, Dr. Shimon Slavin, a cancer researcher at Hadassah University in Israel, said the experimental procedure opened new treatment possibilities not just for kidney cancer but also for other tumors that resisted conventional therapy.Dr. Robert J. Motzer, of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said the study was important because ''this is a disease that's crying out for novel treatment strategies.'' But he warned, ''We have to keep in mind that it's a small series of patients and their effort has to be duplicated by others.''Mr. Sirmans entered the study at the National Institutes of Health at the urging of his doctor in Ohio, after immunologic drugs stopped working. At the institutes, Dr. Childs and colleagues were trying to find out whether a transplant, or graft, of immune-system cells from patients' healthy siblings would be able to fight kidney cancer.Such cells, including the stem cells that can generate a whole new immune system and blood supply, can be harvested from a donor's bone marrow or collected from the bloodstream by special techniques. In this case, they were taken from the bloodstream.The goal was to give the patients a whole new immune system, one that would recognize the cancer cells as foreign and attack them. Dr. Childs and his colleagues thought this approach might work because of kidney cancer's vulnerability to immune therapy, and because transplanted cells are known to mount a strong attack against certain types of leukemia, a reaction called ''graft versus leukemia'' that sometimes has helped cure the disease.But using the graft itself to fight other types of cancer was a new idea. ''This was never done before in kidney cancer,'' Dr. Childs said. ''There was no track record, no animal model that could be developed that would tell us if it would work.''In advanced cases of other so-called solid tumors like breast and ovarian cancer -- as opposed to cancers of the blood and immune system like leukemia -- studies had not shown bone-marrow transplants to prolong patients' lives.But Dr. Childs said transplants for breast and ovarian cancer were not comparable to the procedure in his study. Patients with breast and ovarian cancer had their own bone marrow harvested, underwent high doses of chemotherapy and radiation, and were then given their cells back to replace those that were damaged by the high-dose treatments.But since high-dose radiation and chemotherapy generally do not work for kidney cancer, they were not used in the study, and the patients were given cells transplanted from siblings, not their own cells. The donor cells are dripped into the patient's vein like a transfusion, and the stem cells naturally find their way to the patient's bone marrow.The patients did receive some chemotherapy, to weaken their own immune systems and prevent them from rejecting the transplanted cells. But the dose was far lower than that used in other bone marrow transplants.The transplants had to come from siblings whose cell types matched the patients'; people without siblings, or whose siblings' cells did not match their own, could not enter the study. The odds that a sibling will match are 1 in 4. In Mr. Sirmans' case, one of his three sisters was a match.Rejection of the transplant by the patient was not the only concern. Even more dangerous would be an attack on the patient by the transplant, a potentially fatal reaction known as graft-versus-host disease. Dr. Childs warned patients that they would run a 30 percent risk of being killed by the treatment itself.The patients were given immune-suppressing drugs to prevent that attack. But the doctors had to walk a fine line: too little immunosuppression could result in graft-versus-host disease, while too much might keep the graft from attacking the cancer cells.Two patients in the study died of complications from graft-versus-host disease. Eight others had milder cases of it, resulting in skin rashes, diarrhea or both. Some had no signs of it, including a patient who has been cancer-free for almost three years. Mr. Sirmans still has a rash, which he likened to a sunburn.Shrinking of the tumors was often a delayed reaction that did not start until several months after the transplant, when the donor cells had had a chance to establish themselves and the doses of immune suppressing drugs were lowered, Dr. Childs said. In Mr. Sirmans's case, the tumors began shrinking only after doctors gave him a second transfusion of his sister's cells.Patients whose tumors disappeared were caught off guard, Dr. Childs said, adding, ''They had come to accept their mortality.''Explaining how the procedure worked, he said cytotoxic T cells, a type of white blood cell from the donors, probably killed the cancer cells, either by punching holes in them and dissolving them, or by sending a signal that made the cells kill themselves.Dr. Childs said the new treatment was promising and would be tested at many medical centers in kidney cancer, as well as in small numbers of patients with cancers of the breast, lung, colon, prostate, esophagus, stomach, bile duct, liver, bone and skin.''But it needs improvement,'' he said. ''There is risk of substantial toxicity, and it doesn't work on everybody. We're not going to stop until it works for everyone.''