https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/nyregion/james-burke-former-suffolk-county-police-chief-is-arrested.html
Ex-Police Chief of Suffolk County Is Accused of Beating Man and Trying to Cover It Up - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Burke  James (1964- ),Suffolk County (NY)
Dec. 9, 2015
8454
The former police chief of Suffolk County was arrested Wednesday on federal charges that he walked into an interrogation room three years ago, badly beat a man who was suspected of having stolen items from his police vehicle, then coerced fellow officers to cover up the act, prosecutors said.The former chief, James Burke, 51, who left the force recently as a federal investigation into the episode mounted, faces charges that he violated the man’s civil rights and later obstructed an investigation into the matter.“No one is above the law,” Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, said while outlining the allegations at a news conference at the federal courthouse in Central Islip, on Long Island.The charges, as well as details about the altercation, were filed in Federal District Court, where Mr. Burke was arraigned.Mr. Burke, who worked in the Suffolk County Police Department for nearly three decades and was appointed chief in January 2012, showed no emotion as he pleaded not guilty to all charges before Judge Leonard D. Wexler. Mr. Burke will be held at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn until a bail hearing that is set for Friday.The Associated Press reported that federal prosecutors sent a memo to Judge Wexler that said that during the encounter on Dec. 14, 2012, Mr. Burke threatened the suspect, Christopher Loeb, 29, by telling him that he would administer a “hotshot” to Mr. Loeb, a slang term for a fatal dose of heroin. The letter was later ordered sealed.The charges stem from an episode in which police officers searched the Smithtown home where Mr. Loeb lived with his mother.Mr. Loeb was suspected of having broken into several cars and stealing their contents; in the search, items were discovered that belonged to the police chief, whose car was among the vehicles that had been robbed. Among the items were a gun belt, several magazines of ammunition, a humidor and box of cigars, clothing and a bag of toiletries. Mr. Loeb ultimately pleaded guilty to the theft.At the news conference, Mr. Capers said that after the chief’s possessions were discovered, officers allowed Mr. Burke into the suspect’s home. He then drove to the Fourth Precinct station house, according to Mr. Capers, and walked into a room where Mr. Loeb was being interrogated. Mr. Loeb was handcuffed and chained to the floor. The chief then punched and kicked Mr. Loeb, striking his head and body, according to a news release from the Justice Department.Mr. Burke’s lawyer, Joseph Conway, did not respond to a phone message requesting comment.Mr. Capers said that once the federal civil rights investigation into the events began, Mr. Burke sought to quash the report, coercing detectives into agreement on a false story to cover up the assault. One of those detectives lied under oath and gave false testimony during a state pretrial hearing in Mr. Loeb’s prosecution in October 2013, the United States attorney’s office said. Prosecutors suggested that more arrests may be forthcoming, according to The A.P.The Suffolk County Police Department, with more than 2,700 sworn officers and more than 600 civilian members, provides law enforcement for much of eastern Long Island.In the statement from the Justice Department, Diego Rodriguez, the assistant director in charge of the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s New York field office, denounced Mr. Burke’s alleged behavior.“When caught at a crossroads between right and wrong,” he said, “Burke took a shortcut on the path to justice.”