https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/15/arts/design/colin-harrison-is-mad-about-maps-so-is-his-latest-character.html
Colin Harrison Is Mad About Maps. So Is His Latest Character. - The New York Times
Books and Literature,You Belong to Me (Book),Harrison  Colin,Art,Maps,Collectors and Collections
June 15, 2017
4354
It would be tempting to confuse the writer Colin Harrison with Paul Reeves, the protagonist in his new crime thriller, “You Belong to Me.”Like Reeves, Mr. Harrison is a map obsessive with a passion for New York City and a longing for things lost, or soon to be.“It’s hard to get maps of the city before the 1800s,” he said. “There are fewer of them. The technology changed in their manufacture. And they’ve all been collected or fallen apart.”But that’s where fact and fiction diverge.Unlike Reeves, whose imaginary Manhattan apartment boasts a large display gallery, Mr. Harrison’s collection lines four stories of his 1890s brownstone in Park Slope, Brooklyn.Upstairs, there’s a map from October 1776 illustrating the Battle of Long Island; another, from 1855, indicating yellow fever outbreaks in Brooklyn; and still another, from 1874, with the borough’s farms shaded in a pastel palette.Downstairs, vivid renderings of Manhattan serve as time capsules of the city’s perpetual ebb and flow, like an axonometric map from 1963 for which the German cartographer Hermann Bollmann translated 67,000 photographs into a minutely detailed bird’s-eye view of Midtown.In the novel, Reeves neatly stores his unhung maps in an architect’s cabinet. Mr. Harrison stores his maps — like Al Hirschfeld’s 1939 “Sightseer’s Map of New York” for The New York Times — in tubs on his dining room table or in haphazard piles in what he called a “very disreputable room.”Even the bathroom used mostly by his wife, the writer Kathryn Harrison, harbors an 1879 map of Blackwell’s Island (now Roosevelt Island), with its smallpox hospital and mental institution.Surely Mr. Harrison, who is also editor in chief of Scribner, carefully catalogs.“No! No!,” he said. “I am not the guy in the book. He is better than I am.”Was writing about a map collector inevitable?“I couldn’t have written the book without having first fallen victim to this form of insanity,” he said.These are edited excerpts from a recent conversation:How did you start your collection?Probably about 20 years ago I walked into a frame shop and there was a map of Manhattan, and I bought it. And that was the beginning of the end.Do you still have that first one?I have it downstairs. One of the things that happens is your standards keep going up, and things you once thought were fabulous you feel hostile toward.How many maps do you have?That is a question I can’t answer, and I don’t know if I would answer it if I could.This 1963 Bollmann map doesn’t look quite like the others.There are a lot of illustrated maps of Manhattan, which I love. It’s a whole other category. It’s not to scale. The streets are made wider so that you can render actual buildings.And this 1938 map has tiny people on it.In the 1920s and ’30s, there was a lot of, shall we say, ethnographic representation of populations. There are some black people dancing in Harlem, the Italian peddler, the ghetto [on the Lower East Side] with the Jewish old man, Greenwich Village with artists painting. And this was straight. This was not ironic or winking.Not all of your maps are pristine. I like a real working map. You can see that people used it. I used to feel kind of fussy about smudges and folds and tears, and now I just feel that it’s part of the beauty of it.In the book, Reeves covets a 1766 map of New York made by the British military officer Bernard Ratzer and considered one of the finest 18th-century depictions of the city. It is named for James Stassen, its wealthy owner. Do you own a Stassen-Ratzer map? I don’t, because a Ratzer costs at least $500,000. But I have several different facsimile detail versions. The Stassen part is totally made up. That’s me.What’s the most you’ve ever paid?It’s in the used-car price range. The aggregate is a secret that I’ve repressed knowing from myself.What’s the most insane thing you’ve done for a map?Once I hooked up with a guy on the New Jersey Turnpike. He was driving to Florida. We worked out a price. He wanted to sell it; I wanted to buy it. So I met him. He had a great big Escalade or something. Cash.Say you’re driving and you’re lost. GPS or map?I’ve got a pretty good sense of direction. I’d better, right?