https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/13/us/president-obama-once-a-guest-now-a-leader-in-world-talks.html
Obama, Once a Guest, Is Now a Leader in World Talks - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Global Warming,United Nations,United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,United States
Dec. 12, 2015
4752
WASHINGTON —  Six years ago, President Obama came away from a round of global climate talks bitter and frustrated, having been reduced to personally chasing other world leaders around a Copenhagen conference center and bursting uninvited into a meeting with them to salvage a pact that left many disappointed.On Saturday, Mr. Obama strode triumphantly into the Cabinet Room of the White House to declare victory in his quest for an ambitious climate agreement, after 195 nations reached an accord in a Paris suburb that commits them to reducing greenhouse gas emissions.“We met the moment,” Mr. Obama said. “Together, we’ve shown what’s possible when the world stands as one.”For Mr. Obama, the agreement represents a legacy-shaping success, destined to join his health care law in the annals of his most lasting achievements.The deal, reached after two weeks of intensive negotiating by world leaders and top diplomats, is a vindication of Mr. Obama’s decision to make tackling climate change a centerpiece of his second term. As the economy improved and Mr. Obama was able to focus on other priorities, he invested substantial time, energy and political capital on forging a pact that he has described as a moral imperative.It also reflects difficult lessons Mr. Obama learned about diplomacy and global leadership along the way. In Copenhagen, he was a first-term president meeting “the stark reality of just how complicated and fractured this issue was on the global stage,” a senior administration official said on Saturday.Mr. Obama’s experience there “underscored that if we were going to make real progress on this, we were going to have to be patient and develop a strategy” both at home and globally.The president, the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the issue candidly, “deliberately and ambitiously pushed the envelope on climate.” And on Saturday, Mr. Obama said the Paris agreement had been possible in large part because he had done so. This year, he issued regulations to slash carbon pollution from power plants, and last year he forged an emissions reduction agreement with President Xi Jinping of China that encouraged other nations to set their own climate goals.“We’ve transformed the United States into the global leader in fighting climate change,” Mr. Obama said on Saturday, referring to the “chaotic” Copenhagen talks. “We’ve set the first-ever nationwide standards to limit the amount of carbon pollution power plants can dump into the air our children breathe.”Still, like the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama’s climate agenda faces bitter opposition from Republicans, with all of the party’s presidential candidates pledging to roll back the agreement if elected.Republicans have tried to block the climate plan legislatively, and more than half of the states are challenging its legality in court.In a statement, Hillary Clinton, a Democratic presidential candidate, hailed the climate agreement and praised Mr. Obama for helping to deliver it. “We cannot afford to be slowed by the climate skeptics or deterred by the defeatists who doubt America’s ability to meet this challenge,” Mrs. Clinton said.But Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who is also seeking the Democratic nomination, said the pact “goes nowhere near far enough.”Mr. Obama, while calling the agreement “the best chance we’ve had to save the one planet that we’ve got,” conceded that the results were not perfect.“Even if all the initial targets set in Paris are met, we’ll only be part of the way there when it comes to reducing carbon from the atmosphere, so we cannot be complacent,” Mr. Obama said. “The problem is not solved because of this accord, but make no mistake: The Paris agreement establishes the enduring framework the world needs to solve the climate crisis.”