https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/opinion/sunday/saving-our-coastlines.html
Saving Our Coastlines - The New York Times
Global Warming,Coastal Areas,Floods
Sept. 10, 2016
6754
Rising sea levels caused by climate change are threatening coastal areas. What can we do?To the Editor: Re “Global Warming’s Mark: Coastal Inundation” (front page, Sept. 4):For all those myriad climate change deniers now confronting flooded streets and basements and salt-poisoned wells along America’s coastlines, the message is what it always was: Global warming doesn’t care whether you believe in it or not. It will continue and advance unless and until we confront it with the will, the science and the immense quantities of money required to turn it back before it destroys us.RON BONNSan DiegoAs a producer for “CBS Evening News With Walter Cronkite,” the writer created the series “Can the World Be Saved?,” about environmental issues.To the Editor: I was too scared to read your article and avoided it for a few days. Who wants to know about all the bad things occurring — especially one as divisive and complicated as climate change? I became hopeful when I read Jason Buelterman, mayor of tiny Tybee Island, Ga., state, “I’m a Republican, but I also realize, by any objective analysis, the sea level is rising.” Then I became disheartened when Ken Buck, a Republican member of Congress from Colorado, called a military proposal to prepare for sea-level rise a “radical climate change agenda.” We need to stop clinging to ideology and instead look at facts, such as the objective measures of sea-level rise. Then we need to open our hearts and go into the homes of real people, like Karen Speights of Norfolk, Va., and get a sense of her reality.Mr. Buck, as a member of Congress, you have a moral obligation to take care of the people you promised to serve. Take a few uninterrupted hours, with ideology aside, to examine the basics of climate change and the overwhelming data on climate change. Then look into the eyes of any children you love and tell them that you are using the powers you have to safeguard their future.SABRINA S. FUEllicott City, Md.The writer is a professor of science and environmental management at the University of Maryland University College.To the Editor: Your article clearly laid out the imminent perils of rising sea levels for the Atlantic Coast states. Flooding has become the norm in cities like Miami Beach and Norfolk and Alexandria, Va. Recounting the enormous efforts underway and the billions upon billions of dollars it will take to shore up infrastructure, elevate homes and raise sea walls, it becomes clear that such efforts to keep these areas habitable would be in vain. Since that is the case, then why throw away billions of dollars trying to fight the momentous forces of nature just to buy a little more time? With foresight and understanding about rising sea levels, use that money to gradually depopulate the coastal areas that will be affected and discourage new development there. If people want to live on the water — like the rich — they can do so at their own risk and on their own dime. They will be hard pressed to find insurance companies willing to cover their properties.Ordinary people who own homes and small businesses can be gradually bought out and relocated when disaster strikes and federal funds are dispensed, as New York is doing with some areas of Long Island that are being lost to erosion and suffered irreparable damage from Hurricane Sandy. There is time to do this in an intelligent and economical manner if the political will is there. It is foolish to waste precious resources on a losing game.JENISE R. DEPINTOAlbanyTo the Editor: Your article on rising sea levels prompted several questions that I think need answering or further explanation. What would be the cost for sea walls and other measures to mitigate the rise in sea levels and the cost of moving large populations away from coastal areas, versus the cost to reduce the use of greenhouse gases and switch to alternate fuel sources? Given the current output of greenhouse gases, how high are the seas expected to rise? What areas, globally, would end up underwater? How long would this likely take to occur? What would it cost to protect low-lying areas, both in the United States and globally? Should property owners in low-lying areas be compensated with public funds for damage to their properties or the need to abandon them as a result of the rise in sea levels? What claim for restitution, if any, would other countries have against the developed nations that produce most of those emissions today?JEFF KONDRATBrooklynTo the Editor: Now that many coastal towns are flooded by the sea-level rise that scientists have been warning about for many decades, some Republicans directly affected by the high waters are asking for federal help in the form of money for pumps, levees and road improvements needed to combat the floods. How ironic, after decades of denial of the problem by this political party. And still to this day Republicans refuse to help solve the problem by cutting back our fossil-fuel emissions with a whopping carbon tax. If you find yourself in a hole, stop digging.STEVE EITTREIMPalo Alto, Calif.To the Editor: As I read your article on the rising sea levels created by global warming, my own temperature started to boil. It has been obvious for at least a decade that this was going to happen. The cost of preventing climate change would have been a pittance compared with the costs we now face to deal with the effects of climate change. The punitive part of me says, “Everyone who supported the politicians who have persisted in their intentional ignorance shouldn’t get a dime of government assistance to deal with the natural consequences of their own political choices.” However, my more practical side says, “So now that you are up to your knees in water, you’d better vote out the idiots who let you get yourselves into this mess.” Why is it so hard for us as a society to abide by that adage “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure”?MARYAM MOHITHealdsburg, Calif.To the Editor: “I’m a Republican, but I also realize, by any objective analysis, the sea level is rising.” This quote, from the mayor of (sinking) Tybee Island, speaks to the greatest obstacle we face as a nation confronted with climate change, which is the stunning anti-rationality that has come to surround the whole issue. Note to politicians: There’s no such thing (thank goodness) as liberal science or conservative science, just good science and bad science. The fact that politicians and a large swath of the populace don’t understand this has put us in an unnecessarily precarious situation. There is no climate change “controversy” among those who know anything about the topic.MICHAEL B. GROSSONorthport, N.Y.