https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/27/us/politics/climate-change-denialists-in-charge.html
Climate Change Denialists in Charge - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Global Warming,Trump  Donald J,Pence  Mike,Bannon  Stephen K,Pruitt  Scott,Inhofe  James M,Smith  Lamar S,Perry  Rick,Kreutzer  David
March 27, 2017
1453
As President Trump prepares to unveil an executive order to dismantle President Barack Obama’s climate change policies, Washington’s policy-making posts are filling with officials who have a record of openly denying the established science of human-caused climate change.Climate denial starts at the top:Mr. Trump, the ultimate decider, has demonstrated a cavalier approach to the peer-reviewed atmospheric data that makes up the core of climate science. He has called Mr. Obama’s climate change regulations “stupid.” But in other forums, he has denied making some of those statements and shifted his position.What he has said:He said of climate change at a 2015 rally in South Carolina: “A lot of it’s a hoax. It’s a hoax.”But in an interview with The New York Times shortly after the election, he seemed to moderate: “I have an open mind to it.”Mr. Pence, the president’s influential No. 2, has appeared to question climate science, although his aim was less to question the existence of climate change as to stand up for the coal-fired power plants that provide his home state, Indiana, with most of its electricity.What he has said:In an interview with CNN in September, Mr. Pence, like his boss, modulated that view.Mr. Trump’s influential senior strategist is the former chief executive at Breitbart News, which regularly publishes articles with headlines like “Global Temperatures Plunge. Icy Silence From Climate Alarmists” and “Climate Change: The Greatest-Ever Conspiracy Against the Taxpayer.” Mr. Bannon is said to be pushing Mr. Trump to withdraw the United States from the 2015 Paris agreement, which committed nearly every country to take action on carbon dioxide pollution.What he has said:The administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency will lead the complex legal efforts to dismantle the Obama-era E.P.A. climate change regulations.What he has said:Mr. Kreutzer, a top E.P.A. aide to Mr. Pruitt, spent years at the conservative Heritage Foundation, where he was a vociferous critic of climate science. Mr. Kreutzer is pressing a hard-line stance against climate policies, such as legally challenging court-ordered regulation of carbon dioxide pollution.What he has said:On a panel in January about carbon dioxide emissions, fellow panelists suggested that increased carbon dioxide emissions could be beneficial to the planet. The crowd’s laughter prompted Mr. Kreutzer to snap, “You’re laughing because you’re ignorant.”The author of a 2012 book, “The Greatest Hoax: How the Global Warming Conspiracy Threatens Your Future,” and a senior member of the Senate committees on the environment and armed services, Senator Inhofe is a crucial voice in the debate over climate change. Mr. Trump and Mr. Pruitt have mined Mr. Inhofe’s former staff members to serve as energy and environment policy advisers.What he has said:Mr. Smith, chairman of the House science committee, has subpoenaed scientists and questioned their work on many topics, but particularly on human-caused climate change.What he has said:Mr. Perry, now the secretary of energy, drew attention during his tenure as the governor of Texas and as a presidential candidate in 2012 and 2016 for mocking climate science. But during his Senate confirmation hearing to head an agency that oversees much of the government-funded research into climate change, Mr. Perry reversed those views.What he has said:But at his confirmation hearing in January, Mr. Perry reversed that view: