https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/23/us/virginia-to-stop-recognizing-concealed-gun-permits-from-25-states.html
Virginia to Stop Recognizing Concealed Gun Permits From 25 States - The New York Times
Gun Control,Virginia,Herring  Mark R
Dec. 22, 2015
5952
WASHINGTON —  Virginia will no longer recognize concealed-handgun permits issued by 25 other states, its attorney general announced Tuesday, a stark change in a state known for its expansive gun rights.Attorney General Mark R. Herring, a Democrat and a strong proponent of gun restrictions, used his authority under state law to bar permit-holding residents of the 25 states, which span the country from Alaska to Florida, from carrying concealed weapons in Virginia. He is revoking Virginia’s so-called reciprocity agreements with those states.“We hear that we don’t need new gun laws, we just need to enforce the ones we have,” Mr. Herring said in a telephone interview, echoing the argument of the gun rights movement. “Well, I’m going to be enforcing the ones we have.”Mr. Herring made the decision, his office said in a statement, after “months of research and evaluation,” including an audit of 30 states whose concealed-handgun permits have been considered valid in Virginia. All but five of them, he said, grant permits to people who would be barred from carrying concealed weapons in Virginia. He called revoking the agreements a “common-sense step.”But gun rights advocates denounced the move, saying Mr. Herring had no evidence that suspending the reciprocity agreements would reduce crime. (In the interview, the attorney general said the state does not track how many out-of-state residents bring in concealed weapons.) Mr. Herring’s critics also said the new policy would make it harder for permit-holding Virginians to carry their weapons to other states.“It’s a sea change,” said Delegate Rob Bell, a Republican from Charlottesville who is running for attorney general. He accused Mr. Herring of trying “to accomplish a partisan goal and to make a political point.”The change came at the end of a horrific year of gun rampages, including mass shootings in Charleston, S.C.; Roseburg, Ore.; and San Bernardino, Calif. In Roanoke, Va., in August, a television journalist and a cameraman were killed while reporting on air. And the state bears the scars of the worst massacre by a single gunman in American history, the 2007 shooting at Virginia Tech.Here in Washington, the recent massacres have again put the debate over gun rights on the national agenda. President Obama and congressional Democrats are pushing — and Republicans are resisting — legislation that would bar people on terrorism watch lists from buying guns. In Connecticut, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, a Democrat, announced recently that he would sign an executive order to bar people on terrorism watch lists from buying firearms in the state.But in Virginia, home to the National Rifle Association’s headquarters, the Republican-controlled legislature opposes restrictions on gun ownership. Virginia is an “open-carry” state; anyone who is 18 or older and legally permitted to carry a firearm may carry it in public, except where prohibited by other laws.Mr. Herring said the events of this past year had filled him with a “renewed urgency to review our laws” to see what steps he could take without the legislature. Under state law, he has the authority to work with the state police to determine whether other states meet Virginia’s concealed-carry requirements. His predecessors, Democrat and Republican, do not appear to have exercised it.“It appears that this is a law that has been largely unenforced in a long time,” Mr. Herring said.Virginia imposes restrictions intended to prevent potentially dangerous people from obtaining concealed-carry permits. Permits cannot be issued, for instance, to people convicted of crimes like stalking, battery or sexual assault or to those who have had inpatient mental health treatment or have been judged not guilty of crimes by reason of insanity.Lori Haas, Virginia state director of the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, an advocacy group, said her organization began examining other states’ laws this year and found that many had standards less stringent than Virginia’s. She alerted Mr. Herring, who began his audit. Ms. Haas called Tuesday’s announcement “really good news.”The change will take effect Feb. 1. Mr. Herring said the state police were beginning to notify the 25 states whose agreements would be revoked. Virginia will continue to recognize concealed-handgun permits from Michigan, Oklahoma, Texas, Utah and West Virginia.