https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/arts/television/twin-peaks-season-3-episode-9-recap.html
‘Twin Peaks’ Season 3, Episode 9: Red, Beige and Blue - The New York Times
Television,Twin Peaks: The Return (TV Program),Twin Peaks (TV Program)
July 10, 2017
4549
In the original run of “Twin Peaks,” Maj. Garland Briggs was a rare voice of optimism, in a show that usually depicted a world suffering from irreversible entropy. The Major’s son, Bobby, was a high-school delinquent who sold drugs, slept with a married woman and spent a long stretch of the series masterminding an ill-considered insurance scam. Yet in the Season 2 premiere, in one of the series’s most emotional moments, Garland moved his son to tears by describing a vision he had of his boy leading a happy, upstanding adult life. And sure enough, in “Twin Peaks: The Return” that dream seems pretty much fulfilled, with Bobby now serving as a trusted deputy in his town’s police department.Of course, Major Briggs never saw any of this come to pass, because apparently for about 25 years he was stranded in another dimension, waiting to deliver a message he’d been guarding for decades: a set of coordinates, interrupted by the words “Cooper Cooper.” It was just Garland’s bad luck that when he finally received a visitor, it was a hapless paranormal dabbler (and, even worse, blogger) named William Hastings, whose trip with his secret lover, Ruth, to the place they called “the Zone” ended with Briggs’s headless body and Ruth’s disembodied head turning up in a shabby apartment in Buckhorn, S.D.Episode 9 of “Twin Peaks: The Return” is unexpectedly Briggs-centric, and is the most plot-heavy episode in a while. After the trippy flashbacks of Episode 8 (and a week off for the holiday), this was a return to “normal” ... inasmuch as that term ever applies to this show. The town of Twin Peaks played as big a role as it has all season, too, with Major Briggs’s linking the action in Washington to the multiple mysteries playing out a few states to the east.Garland’s presence is mainly felt in the Twin Peaks sheriff’s department’s continuing investigation into the disappearance of Agent Cooper, which leads them to the home of the widow Betty Briggs. After she says that her husband predicted that this day would come, she opens a secret compartment in the back of his favorite red chair and hands Sheriff Truman, Deputy Hawk and her son, Bobby, a small metal cylinder. (She also reminds Bobby that his dad never lost faith that he would become the man he is.) Back at the station, Deputy Briggs pings the container against the concrete a couple of times to reveal handwritten notes instructing the cops to be at a location in a couple of days near one of his dad’s old listening stations — 253 yards east of “Jack Rabbits Palace.”In South Dakota, F.B.I. Deputy Director Gordon Cole persuades his former employee Diane to join him on a trip to Buckhorn to look into a “Blue Rose” case. There, he and his associates examine Garland Briggs’s surprisingly young-looking corpse and interrogate William Hastings, who breaks down weeping as he tells Special Agent Preston about what he found when he and Ruth crossed over into the Zone. They saw “so many people” (including the Arm, the Woodsmen and all of their cronies, perhaps?); and they watched Major Briggs float up to the sky in a moment disrupted by some kind of mayhem, ending with decapitations left and right.What’s most interesting about the F.B.I.’s trip to Buckhorn is that they learn so much that’s relevant to their ultimate goal — finding Agent Cooper — and yet, in typical “Twin Peaks” fashion, they have no idea how to interpret what they’re hearing. They know Major Briggs’s stomach contained Dougie Jones’s engagement ring, for example; but since they don’t know who the “Dougie” or “Janey-E” engraved on the ring refer to, there’s no way yet for them to trace these clues back to Las Vegas.Similarly, in Vegas, three pear-shaped cops named Fusco (played by Larry Clarke, Eric Edelstein and David Koechner) have discovered that Dougie Jones sprang into existence around 1997, and that he’s been an anonymous insurance company employee for about 12 years. But they don’t know what to do with this info. They’re more interested in finding the man who tried to kill Dougie, “Ike the Spike” — which they ultimately do, tracking his prints to a cheap motel thanks to his entire palm’s having been left behind on the would-be murder weapon.The only one who really seems to have a handle on what’s happening with the different Coopers is his evil doppelgänger, Mr. C., who has recovered from being shot dead in Episode 8, and makes his way to “the farm” he previously discussed with Ray, the man who shot him. There he finds Gary “Hutch” Hutchens (played by Tim Roth), waiting for him alongside his lover and operative Chantal (Jennifer Jason Leigh). But because Mr. C.’s associate Duncan Todd failed in his assignment to have the good Cooper killed (thanks to Ike’s having underestimated his target), the bad Cooper is forced to ask Hutch to take over, to do a “doubleheader” in Vegas. (“Oh, let’s play two,” Hutch cackles, like a sadistic Ernie Banks.)What we have in this week’s episode, then, is a series of miscommunications and failed connections, with the specter of grievous physical harm hovering over every missed signal. And that’s not even taking into account the unusual number of disjointed, hard-to-parse scenes back in Twin Peaks: like when Lucy and Andy bicker over whether to buy a red chair or a beige chair online; or when Johnny Horne runs through the house and bloodies his head by running into a glass picture frame on the wall; or when Jerry Horne freaks out in the woods and becomes convinced that his foot is not his foot.The hour ends, as usual, with a musical performance at the roadhouse, but this is another one of those episodes that cuts away from the stage to show some locals pounding down beers and having an elliptical conversation. In this case it’s a couple of young women, one of whom has just lost her burger-slinging job for showing up to work high on drugs and now has a mysterious rash under her arm.So we’re right back to the version of Twin Peaks in which the town’s kids are doomed to decadence and decline. This is the life of rot that Bobby escaped. But he had the honorable Maj. Garland Briggs looking after him. And that man is long, long gone.Extra Doughnuts:• After the last episode’s veritable encyclopedia of astonishing images, Episode 9 was much plainer, visually. But there’s one nifty bit of Lynch-ness in the scene when Cooper is staring intently at an American flag at the police station, right before his attention’s pulled away by an attractive pair of legs in bright red shoes — and then to a humming electrical outlet, just like the one that spat him out in Las Vegas a few days before. Here’s what Cooper loves: duty, beauty and the dark.• Diane, herself, is a remarkable bit of visual design, with her bobbed white hair and her colorful asymmetrical outfit — looking like a ringmaster at an avant-garde circus. She’s also the source of some fresh intrigue this week, as she keeps anxiously checking her phone until she receives a message that reads, “AROUND THE DINNER TABLE, THE CONVERSATION IS LIVELY,” presumably from Mr. C., who sent the same message on his burner phone earlier in the episode.• Albert, as always, has the full-on funniest line in the episode, when he hears about Hastings’s wife getting murdered and his secretary exploding, quipping, “What happens in Season 2?”• Just when the oafish Twin Peaks deputy Chad Broxford seems as though he can’t get any worse, he eats two apparently malodorous microwaved dinners in the typically sacred space of the department’s main conference room, forcing Sheriff Truman to ask Bobby to open a window.• We have a repeat musical guest: the dream-pop trio Au Revoir Simone returns, after first appearing in Episode 4, the one that introduced the world to Wally Brando. Does it mean anything that they’ve reappeared in the most Twin Peaks-centered (and deadpan comical) hour since the fourth? That’s not a crazy thing to consider, given how densely self-referential this show can be.