https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/world/africa/united-nations-security-council-sudan-darfur.html
U.N. to Reduce Peacekeepers in Darfur Region of Sudan - The New York Times
War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,United States International Relations,Security Council (UN),Bashir  Omar Hassan Al-,Darfur (Sudan),Sudan
June 29, 2017
3932
UNITED NATIONS — The United Nations Security Council on Thursday approved a major reduction of peacekeepers in Darfur, the vast region of Sudan where violence continues against civilians, according to human rights groups, and millions remain displaced after years of fighting.More than a third of the nearly 19,000 troops and police officers deployed in Darfur will start to be withdrawn, according to a resolution unanimously adopted by the Security Council. The resolution is part of a larger effort, led by the Trump administration, to reduce the United Nations peacekeeping budget.The General Assembly is expected to vote on the new peacekeeping budget on Friday.Violence has subsided in parts of Darfur, according to the United Nations secretary general, though human rights groups warn of the risk of heightened abuses against civilians after peacekeepers withdraw, and humanitarian aid agencies say that without peacekeepers nearby it will be difficult to deliver assistance. Nearly three million people remain displaced from their homes.“While it’s hard to predict the immediate effect these cuts would have on civilian protection,” Omer Ismail of the Enough Project, a Washington-based advocacy group, said in an email, “we know the risk of conflict is high in many of the areas where bases are to be closed and military contingents are to be withdrawn.”Mr. Omer added that the withdrawal of peacekeepers “will make several key areas unsafe for humanitarian operations, likely leading to closures of programs upon which tens of thousands of conflict-affected people rely.”Peter Wilson, Britain’s deputy ambassador, told the Council that the situation remained “fragile” in Darfur, but had “evolved” sufficiently to justify the reduction of peacekeepers. Mr. Wilson said the Security Council would receive more frequent assessments of the situation in Darfur and would re-evaluate the conditions there in six months.The government of Sudan thanked the Security Council, asserting that Darfur was now secure and stable. The country’s president, Omar al-Bashir, has been indicted by the International Criminal Court on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity in connection with his government’s role in the conflict with Darfur rebels since 2003.But Mr. Bashir has refused to cooperate with the court and continues to travel widely. The United States has said it is considering lifting sanctions against Sudan, as Washington has come to increasingly rely on the government’s participation in counterterrorism operations.The United Nations mission in Darfur has come under criticism in the past for not doing enough to protect civilians from being raped or killed. The mission has routinely complained of a lack of cooperation from the government in Khartoum.“There is no reason to believe that government attacks on civilians and other abuses have ended since the same security forces remain in place,” Daniel Bekele of Human Rights Watch said recently when the peacekeeping reductions were proposed. “They have never been prosecuted for their crimes and can’t be relied on to protect civilians.”The American ambassador, Nikki R. Haley, said nothing specifically about Darfur on Thursday. But Ms. Haley has called for spending less on peacekeeping, inveighing against what she has called “fat” in United Nations operations. She had sought a $1 billion reduction in the $7.87 billion United Nations peacekeeping budget.The cuts that were finally hammered out this week, after intense negotiations with other big funders of the organization, were modest. Diplomats settled on a $7.3 billion budget, equal to what the European Union had proposed and slightly less than what African countries had sought. The United States pays for 28 percent of the peacekeeping budget, the largest share of any country, owing to the size of its economy and its permanent seat on the Security Council. China is the second-largest funder.The United States contributes only a small number of troops and police officers to United Nations missions.Late Wednesday, Ms. Haley celebrated the peacekeeping budget cuts on Twitter. “Just 5 months into our time here, we’ve cut over half a billion $$$ from the UN peacekeeping budget & we’re only getting started,” she posted, along with a photograph of her smiling.