https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/business/dealbook/kkr-henry-kravis-george-roberts-succession.html
K.K.R. Lays Out a Line of Succession, a Rare Move in Private Equity - The New York Times
KKR & Co LP,Kravis  Henry R,Roberts  George R,Private Equity,Bae   Joseph Y,Nuttall  Scott C,Appointments and Executive Changes
July 17, 2017
1362
Few can claim as crucial a role in creating the buyout industry as Henry R. Kravis and George R. Roberts. From a small partnership that began with just $120,000, the two created the colossus now known as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, the firm that bought RJR Nabisco and defined an era.Now, more than 40 years after setting up K.K.R., the two billionaire cousins have finally outlined the future of a firm where the K, the K and the R are all gone.In naming Joseph Y. Bae and Scott C. Nuttall as K.K.R.’s co-presidents and co-chief operating officers on Monday, Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts unveiled one of the clearest lines of succession in the private equity industry.It is a rare move in an industry where many of the iconic figures — Stephen A. Schwarzman of the Blackstone Group and David Rubenstein of the Carlyle Group among them — continue to drum up deals and raise billions of dollars from investors.The appointments will charge Mr. Nuttall, 44, and Mr. Bae, 45, with running K.K.R., a $137 billion firm, on a day-to-day basis.“Today’s announcement is about the future and ensuring we have the right team and leadership structure to serve our clients and partners for decades to come,” Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts said in a statement.While Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts are preparing for the day they step away from the business, it is not clear when that will be. Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts, both 73, will remain co-chairmen and co-chief executives.(Jerome Kohlberg Jr., their fellow founder, quit in 1987 amid disagreements over strategy and started his own investment firm. He died in 2015.)Blackstone has long had an heir apparent in its real estate chief, Jonathan D. Gray, a lifer at the investment giant. Yet Mr. Schwarzman has also shown little inclination to retire soon.Among the other private equity giants, TPG Capital added a former Goldman Sachs executive, Jon Winkelried, as a co-chief executive two years ago while the co-founder David Bonderman became chairman. And Warburg Pincus long ago named Joseph P. Landy and Charles R. Kaye as its chief executives, with them taking over from the co-founders Lionel I. Pincus and John Vogelstein.“Succession planning is something that a number of the public alternative asset managers will have to increasingly think about as each still has founders actively involved,” analysts at JMP Securities wrote in a research note on Monday.Preparing for a succession is not always easy, however. The Carlyle Group, a private equity titan, hired Adena T. Friedman from Nasdaq as its chief financial officer in 2011, setting off speculation that she would one day lead the company. But she left three years later to return to Nasdaq, where she became chief executive in November.The Carlyle Group hired Michael Cavanagh, a much-lauded executive at JPMorgan Chase, in 2014, but he left the firm for Comcast a year later.Today, Carlyle has a single president and chief operating officer, Glenn Youngkin, although it has younger executives like Kewsong Lee and Peter Clare who could be promoted.The anointment of potential successors to Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts is perhaps more notable than it would be for most. The men, who with Mr. Kohlberg founded K.K.R. 41 years ago with $120,000 of their own capital — equivalent to about $510,000 today — helped put private equity on the map.Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts led the firm’s pursuit of RJR Nabisco and earned the immortal sobriquet “barbarians at the gate.” Since then, the private equity industry has largely shed its reputation as being made up of uncouth raiders and become enormous, with some $820 billion in uninvested capital as of Dec. 31, according to Preqin.And it has made these firms’ founders billionaires several times over. Forbes estimates the net worths of Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts at $5.1 billion each.In recent years, the two have praised the firm’s growing bench, with Mr. Kravis once saying that any of 15 executives could lead the firm should he and his cousin retire.Among those individuals were Mr. Nuttall and Mr. Bae, both of whom joined the firm in 1996.Now they will oversee K.K.R., splitting the responsibilities. Mr. Bae, who joined the firm from Goldman Sachs, will take over the private equity business and the asset management operations that touch energy, infrastructure and real estate. Among his signature achievements was building the firm’s Asian operations.And Mr. Nuttall, who was previously at Blackstone, will handle K.K.R.’s debt investing, hedge funds and growing capital markets unit, as well as corporate development and initiatives for expanding the firm. He has already become a familiar face on Wall Street, having spoken often on the firm’s earnings calls with analysts and helped shepherd the firm onto the public stock markets.“They think and act globally, they embody K.K.R.’s core values, and they are two of our most accomplished business leaders, with proven track records of managing large teams, building new businesses and driving value for our fund investors and our public unit holders,” Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts said of Mr. Bae and Mr. Nuttall.The two co-presidents will also join the board.Mr. Bae and Mr. Nuttall will manage a firm that is more diverse than when it began, with the private equity industry continuing to evolve and grow.Although such firms remain tied in the popular imagination to leveraged buyouts like the RJR Nabisco takeover, the industry long ago extended into a much wider array of businesses. Much of that has been driven by a desire to expand the total number of assets the firms oversee, allowing them to collect a steady stream of management fees that Wall Street investors like.That is one reason that less than a third of Blackstone’s $366.6 billion in assets last year was held by its private equity portfolio while the firm has become the biggest private landlord in the United States. K.K.R. has pushed heavily into debt-trading businesses and capital markets underwriting.Among the four private equity titans that are publicly listed — K.K.R., Blackstone, Carlyle and Apollo Global Management — K.K.R.’s share price has performed the second best, climbing almost 50 percent in the last 12 months.As Mr. Bae and Mr. Nuttall rise, one of their colleagues will leave. Alex Navab, the head of the firm’s Americas private equity practice and one of its most senior deal makers, will depart, shortly after helping the firm raise $13.9 billion for its newest North American buyout fund.Mr. Navab is expected to eventually seek a job running a business.“Alex has been an outstanding investor and a remarkable leader of our flagship Americas private equity business over the last decade,” Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts said.Also leaving, at the end of the year, is Todd Fisher, the chief administrative officer. The firm said that his departure was unrelated to the changes at the top and that Mr. Fisher planned to leave the investment profession altogether.