https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/10/world/middleeast/video-shows-robert-levinson-ex-fbi-agent-missing-in-iran.html
Robert Levinson Video Adds to Mystery of His Disappearance - The New York Times
Levinson  Robert A,Iran,Kidnapping,Hostages,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Kish (Iran),Salahuddin  Dawud
Dec. 9, 2011
2843
The mystery surrounding the disappearance nearly five years ago of a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent in Iran was rekindled Friday with the release of a hostage videotape showing him alive as of a year ago.In the video, the former agent, Robert A. Levinson, is shown in a makeshift cell looking gaunt and wearing a threadbare shirt. Mr. Levinson, who worked as a private investigator after retiring from the F.B.I., disappeared in March 2007 while on Kish Island, a resort in the Persian Gulf.In the tape, which was received by Mr. Levinson’s family last November, he says that he has been held in captivity for three and a half years but does not identify his captors. The tape was the first sign he was still alive.“I need the help of the United States government to answer the requests of the group that has held me,” he said on the tape as faint music played on a soundtrack. “Please help me get home. Thirty-three years of service to the United States deserves something.”The footage of the former agent was included with a longer video that was released Friday on the family’s Web site in which Mr. Levinson’s wife, Christine, and one of the couple’s seven children appeal for his release. The decision by federal officials to publicize the tape a year after it was sent to the family by e-mail indicates that investigators have made little progress in their search for the former agent, said people briefed on the inquiry who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the situation.In their video, Mrs. Levinson and her son David make no mention of the Iranian government. They direct their requests to Mr. Levinson’s captors and urge them to contact his family again.“My mother has received your messages,” David Levinson said. “Please tell us your demands so we can work together to bring my father home safely.”Asked about the timing of the tape’s release, an F.B.I. spokeswoman, Jacqueline Maguire, said in a statement: “The video was not previously released due to ongoing investigative initiatives. The investigation to locate Mr. Levinson continues, as the U.S. government continues to work to find him and bring him home safely.”This year, Mr. Levinson’s family received another e-mail containing photographs of him wearing what looks like orange prison garb and with a full beard. The F.B.I. was able to trace the various e-mails back to Internet cafes in either Pakistan or Afghanistan but not back to the person or group that created them, said the people briefed on the inquiry.Mr. Levinson was 59 when he disappeared on Kish Island, where he had gone to meet with an American fugitive known as Dawud Salahuddin. Mr. Salahuddin has lived in Iran since 1980 when he fled there after assassinating a former aide to Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi outside his home near Washington. Mr. Levinson’s family and American officials have said that Mr. Levinson went to Iran to investigate cigarette smuggling for a private client.Iranian officials have denied knowing anything about the circumstances of Mr. Levinson’s disappearance or what happened to him afterward. During a 2010 trip to the United States, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran said that his government was willing to help American officials investigate Mr. Levinson’s case.Since then, at least two meetings about Mr. Levinson have taken place between American and Iranian officials, but they have not yielded any progress, according to the people familiar with the situation. While not discussing the tape, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton indirectly referred to it this year when she said that American officials had evidence that Mr. Levinson was alive.Last year, The New York Times reviewed the hostage tape showing Mr. Levinson, but at his family’s request withheld its publication.