https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/us/politics/ted-cruz-reminds-iowans-that-donald-trump-called-them-stupid.html
Ted Cruz Reminds Iowans That Donald Trump Called Them ‘Stupid’ - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Cruz  Ted,Presidential Election of 2016,Political Advertising,Advertising and Marketing,Iowa,New York City
Jan. 26, 2016
4193
Senator Ted Cruz is trying to antagonize Iowans against Donald J. Trump, with whom he is locked in an increasingly contentious fight, in this new ad, “New York Values.”Over ominous orchestral music, the ad opens with Mr. Trump speaking on “Meet the Press” in 1999. In a New Yawk accent that in hindsight seems over-the-top even for him, he tells Tim Russert, “I lived in New York City and Manhattan all my life, so my views are little different than if I lived in Iowa.”A narrator interrupts. “They are different. Like on abortion,” she says, mirroring a headline that overtakes the screen. Asked by Mr. Russert if he would ban a late-term procedure called partial-birth abortion by opponents of abortion rights, Mr. Trump says, “I am pro-choice in every respect.”The narrator interrupts again: “And what does Mr. Trump think about Iowa?” At which point Mr. Trump, arms outstretched on the stump, mouth agape, is shown asking rhetorically, “How stupid are the people of Iowa?”“Donald Trump. New York values, not ours,” the narrator and headline both conclude, before replaying the most Iowa-inflaming snippet from the Russert interview: “My views are a little bit different than if I lived in Iowa.”That Mr. Trump is not just a fraud but an elitist — an impostor posing as a conservative, out of touch with Iowans and, worse, belittling of them. Mr. Cruz’s derisive suggestion in a recent debate that Mr. Trump reeked of “New York values” blew back against him and handed Mr. Trump a chance to earn praise by speaking up for his city. Now, however, Mr. Cruz hopes that seeing Mr. Trump repeatedly insult Iowa will turn Iowans against Mr. Trump.In his 2000 book “The America We Deserve,” Mr. Trump wrote that, after the appearance with Mr. Russert, he consulted two doctors and immediately reversed his position on the late-term abortion procedure. In 2011, he described his conversion to being against abortion, citing a friend’s experience.The remark questioning Iowans’ intelligence came when Mr. Trump found himself losing ground in the state to Ben Carson, and when Mr. Carson was facing questions about his past. Mr. Carson had recounted, as a young man, trying to stab someone with a knife, but being stopped by the person’s belt. Mr. Trump, suggesting the story should not be believed, said: “How stupid are the people of Iowa? How stupid are the people of the country to believe this crap?”Iowa and South Carolina.Ads highlighting Mr. Trump’s previous espousal of liberal positions have had little effect. But highlighting his insults of Iowans could help Mr. Cruz damage Mr. Trump in the state before the caucuses on Monday.