https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/sports/tennis/bethanie-mattek-sands-knee-injury-wimbledon.html
Serious Knee Injury Ends Bethanie Mattek-Sands’s Wimbledon - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Mattek-Sands  Bethanie,Sports Injuries,Safarova  Lucie,Cirstea  Sorana
July 6, 2017
4432
WIMBLEDON, England — In a sport not accustomed to gruesome injuries, the screams of a fallen tennis player brought chills.Bethanie Mattek-Sands, 32, was approaching the net early in the third set of her second-round match Thursday against at Wimbledon when her right leg crumpled.As her opponent, Sorana Cirstea, walked toward the net to see what was wrong, Mattek-Sands began to shout: “Help me! Help me, please!”She lay on the court, grabbing her knee, and her wrenching cries pierced through stunned silence across Court 17 and nearby courts. Cirstea stepped over the net, where, she said, she saw that Mattek-Sands’s right knee was “in a very weird position.”“I’ve never seen anything like this in my life, such an injury,” Cirstea said. “So then I think I was a little bit shocked, as well.”Mattek-Sands’s husband, Justin Sands, Cirstea and Cirstea’s trainer gathered around her on the court.“She kept saying: ‘Sorana, help me! Sorana help me! Sorana, help me!’ I said, ‘I’m here, I’m here, I’m here,’” Cirstea said.She added: “I said, ‘I am here, you are strong, you can do this.’ I was trying, but of course I felt useless.”Medical attention for Mattek-Sands arrived bit by bit, in what seemed like too slow of a process for Cirstea, who estimated that it took at least 10 to 15 minutes for a stretcher to arrive. Mattek-Sands continued screaming in agony until she was wheeled off the court roughly 20 minutes later.“Of course you wonder what happen if it was a heart issue or something like this,” Cirstea said.The tournament defended its response in a statement, saying: “The first response to Court 17 was within 1 minute, by a qualified ambulance technician. The player was kept on court while pain relief was given. The player was then transferred directly into an ambulance and taken under emergency conditions to a hospital.”Lucie Safarova, Mattek-Sands’s doubles partner, also arrived to the scene, hours before her own singles match was set to begin, and wept by the courtside.Ranked 103rd in singles, Mattek-Sands is No. 1 in doubles. She won a gold medal in mixed doubles at the Rio Olympics with Jack Sock, and has won the last three Grand Slam events with Safarova.“It’s just terrible what happened, obviously I’m very sad for her,” Safarova said, speaking barely above a whisper after losing her singles match. “Doesn’t matter about whatever goals we had. It’s just about her being healthy; I know what she has been through with the injuries. Everything was going so well for her.”The tournament said only that Mattek-Sands had “an acute knee injury.” Safarova, who had been communicating with Justin Sands via text, said she hoped to visit her friend in the hospital as soon as possible.Although it was unclear what role the surface played in Mattek-Sands’s injury, many players criticized the court conditions on an unusually hot day.“I heard lots of complaining,” 12th-seeded Kristina Mladenovic said of the locker-room mood. “Honestly, my point of view is not criticize. I’m just very blessed and happy I’m not injured right now, because we saw worse today.”Mladenovic lost to Alison Riske, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4, on Court 18, which had to be inspected two games into the match.