https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/10/magazine/michael-botticelli-is-not-in-favor-of-legalization.html
Michael Botticelli Is Not in Favor of Legalization - The New York Times
Addiction (Psychology),Drug Abuse and Traffic,Alcohol Abuse,Botticelli  Michael P (1958- ),Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Naloxone (Drug),Heroin
April 6, 2016
5313
As the first drug czar who is himself in recovery from alcohol addiction, do you think your approach is different from those of your predecessors? Looking back over the history of the office, it has typically been led by generals and police officers. It was really geared toward supply reduction and interdiction. We want to focus on public-health strategies.Has your experience with addiction informed your opinion on legalization and decriminalization? I’ll take off my policy hat and talk about it as a person in recovery. Fundamentally, I know that my recovery is my responsibility, and I have been in recovery for 27 years. But walking down the street and smelling pot everywhere is really challenging to people in recovery. I think that there is a middle ground where you can move people away from the criminal-justice system without some of the challenges that might come along with legalization.But alcoholics can walk down the street and smell alcohol. Would you want to make alcohol illegal? No.Are you saying that there should just be more safe spaces for people who are in recovery where there aren’t drugs present? Well, think about what we’ve done with tobacco. We’ve changed the availability, we’ve really changed the culture, and our smoking rate is at its lowest level. Unfortunately, I still smoke.People talk a lot about stigma when it comes to addiction, but I was just in New Hampshire, and you’d be shocked at how many people freely offer stories about family members and co-workers addicted to opioids. I have been amazed by the parent movement that has sprung up around opioid addiction. They went to Town Hall meetings and raised their hands. They are incredibly passionate and tremendous advocates.Some people have pointed out that a reason this was effective is that it was middle-class white parents who had the resources to use the political apparatus to change the conversation. I don’t think that we can deny that that’s part of why this has gotten so much attention. You’re absolutely right: Many of these are well-connected and well-resourced parents. And now, because there’s so much attention on this issue, we have to make sure that we’re implementing policies that work for everybody.People call it “the heroin epidemic,” but do you think that’s accurate? Isn’t it really an opioid epidemic? I agree with you. People hear “heroin,” and they become very, very, very scared. This epidemic is really being driven by prescription medication. So when we talk about heroin, I am afraid sometimes that it takes the attention off prescription-drug misuse.The drug naloxone has been effective in preventing deaths from heroin over­doses, but some people think that it might be unwise for addicts and their acquaintances to keep around — that it enables addicts by providing a backstop. We don’t do that with any other disease. Right? We don’t say to someone who’s obese, “We’re not going to revive you when you have a heart attack, because you didn’t follow your diet.” I think that’s where stigma comes into play: We have this separate feeling for people with addiction than we do with people with any other condition.More and more communities affected by the crisis have been coming to­gether and agitating to reclassify drug overdoses as homicides, so they can charge dealers as murderers. What do you think of that trend? We’ve done a lot with “good Samaritan” laws to make people feel more comfortable calling 911 in the event of an overdose. We have to be careful that we not backslide on these advances by using overdoses as part of homicide investigations.