https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/27/realestate/the-surfer-at-home-strider-wasilewski-in-malibu.html
The Surfer at Home: Strider Wasilewski in Malibu - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Wasilewski  Strider (1972- ),Surfing,Interior Design and Furnishings,Malibu (Calif)
Dec. 25, 2015
9992
As a 14-year-old surfing prodigy, Strider Wasilewski used to hunt the crowded Southern California coast for quiet surf spots. One of his favorites was Little Dume Beach, near Point Dume in Malibu, a crescent of sand half-hidden in a cove at the bottom of steep bluffs.“It was an untouchable area,” gated off and accessible only to local residents, Mr. Wasilewski said. But he heard about a family that kept their gate open. “They lived right by the trail,” he said. “I used to run through their yard. They would yell at me.”Lily Harfouche, a real estate agent and occasional surfer who spent part of her childhood in Malibu, ran through the same yard with her teenage friends to get to the beach. “You go down there, and it’s you and a handful of people,” Ms. Harfouche said. “It’s so incredibly beautiful.”These days, Mr. Wasilewski, 42, and Ms. Harfouche, 36, are married (they met at a reggae concert on the Santa Monica Pier) and live with their three young sons on Point Dume, in a simple open-plan house they call “the barn.” But it took the couple several years and several moves to arrive at their childhood stomping grounds and their pared-down life.Their first place was farther down the coast in Venice, where years ago Mr. Wasilewski had bought two rundown bungalows on the same property. When he was off in Hawaii or elsewhere chasing big waves, Ms. Harfouche looked after the homes. The couple fixed them up and eventually sold them, discovering a shared interest in home renovation and real estate.They next moved to Malibu, where they repeated the buy-fix-sell process three more times. Mr. Wasilewski’s surfing buddies, many of them tradesmen, were drafted as the work crew. And Ms. Harfouche, who spent part of her childhood in small New York apartments (her parents were actors), began yearning for a big house.So with their profits, the couple bought a place on a one-acre lot on Point Dume, took it down to the studs and created a dream home on the hillside — which turned out to be too big. “I remember texting Strider from the bedroom upstairs and asking if he wanted to watch a movie,” Ms. Harfouche said. “I thought, ‘This is nuts.’ ”They often picnicked on a flat part of the property, and they began to envision a new house there. It would be small — around 1,300 square feet, plus a loft — and would reflect how they really lived as a family. The big house, which they still own, is now rented out.“By the time we got to the barn, it was: Is it functional? Is it necessary? Is it beautiful?” Ms. Harfouche said.The main living space is basically one large white room with 18-foot ceilings and tall windows. “The room isn’t gigantic in terms of square footage,” Mr. Wasilewski said, “so the air and the whiteness gave it an endless feeling.”That high-ceilinged living area is also the kitchen, with appliances tucked along one wall in the style of a studio apartment; the dining table doubles as an island and food-prep space. The loft in the back of the house contains bedrooms for the couple and their sons.In considering guests, Ms. Harfouche took a lesson from their big house, where the guest room had “a made bed, furniture, its own television, so luxe-y,” and yet their surfer friends always crashed on the downstairs couch. So here, a small library doubles as the guest room.The total budget was around $1.8 million, though that figure is a bit deceiving, because Malibu is a difficult, costly place to build. In reality, the house looks rustic and funky. The exterior was built using old barn boards, and the exposure to the ocean air has further weathered the wood and corroded the metal surfaces. “We just love that rusted, beat-down beach kind of energy,” said Mr. Wasilewski, who still surfs and spends much of the year traveling to surfing competitions in his role as commentator for the World Surf League. When he’s home, he said, he and his family are often at the ocean.“I’ve been a pro surfer my whole life,” he said. “I can’t run away from it.”Little Dume Beach is a short walk from the house, through a quiet neighborhood of homes set back from the street and down a trail lush with vegetation. But Mr. Wasilewski and Ms. Harfouche no longer have to sneak through someone’s yard to get there, as they did when they were teenagers. Now they have a key to the beach gate.