https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/nyregion/for-four-days-she-was-at-his-side-as-he-descended-into-madness.html
For Four Days, She Was at His Side as He Descended Into Madness - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Paranoia,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Bonds  Alexander (1982-2017),Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Bronx (NYC),Schizophrenia
July 17, 2017
3138
She told him it was all in his head. No one was out to get him. No one was at the door. Those lights were from passing cars — not coded language that he said he alone could understand. She tried to steer him to hospitals, into ambulances and toward help.On the Fourth of July night when it all ended, concern had turned to desperation. She called 911, tried to flag down police cars and ambulances, seeking intervention when reason failed. Finally, overwhelmed, she left Alexander Bonds, her boyfriend of six months, on a street corner in the Bronx.Perhaps less than an hour later, Mr. Bonds walked up to a mobile police command center stationed on East 183rd Street and fired a single shot through the passenger-side window, killing Officer Miosotis Familia as she sat inside.Mr. Bonds was killed moments later in a shootout with officers. There was little evidence of what had led him to open fire on a police officer; he left no manifesto, little public warning except on Facebook, where he expressed anger at prison guards and police officers. Police investigators immediately focused on the last few hours and days of Mr. Bonds’s life.Mr. Bonds’s girlfriend was with him for most of that time. It was, she said, a four-day descent into the depths of madness, and there was nothing she could do to stop it.“I didn’t know it could end violently,” she said. “I wish I could have done more.”The girlfriend, who spoke to The New York Times on the condition of anonymity out of fear of reprisal from the police or the community, said she was interviewed by police detectives, answering what she could. She wasn’t there for the shooting, she said, and didn’t know Mr. Bonds had a gun. But her account is the fullest and most harrowing to emerge of Mr. Bonds’s final days and hours.During their six months together, he had told her of his past struggles with schizophrenia. But she had not seen any symptoms. “I thought he was fine,” she said.They had spoken tentatively of marriage. She was helping him prepare for the G.E.D., a major undertaking as he was “somewhat illiterate” when they started studying together. She was proud of him. After a neighbor left two months ago — possibly on the run — others in the building took the possessions left behind. “Alex was disgusted by it,” she recalled. He told her, “People should not touch what’s not theirs.”He still talked, in her view, too much about prison and what he had experienced during his eight years behind bars for robbery. She wanted to help him move on.But on June 30, he received a phone call that, she said, seemed to trigger a psychotic episode. The person who had called him, a friend, passed along that “a rumor was going around that an old friend had a problem with him,” according to the girlfriend. Rather than dismissing it, Mr. Bonds “latched onto” the idea that someone was plotting against him, his girlfriend said.The next morning, she woke up to hear Mr. Bonds talking to himself. Agitated, he darted out of the apartment to see who was outside. He came back, but he kept rushing out again, convinced there was something out there to confront.The girlfriend said she had never before seen schizophrenia up close. She looked it up on Google.They headed to the clinic where Mr. Bonds’s psychiatrist worked. On the way, Mr. Bonds’s behavior grew more paranoid. A passing bicyclist unnerved him enough that he took off running. He talked about an unnamed enemy, even accusing his girlfriend of complicity.“He thought I had something to do with it, that his enemy had me date him in order to destroy him,” she said.They arrived at the clinic midmorning. The psychiatrist, they were told, could see Mr. Bonds at 3:30 p.m. That was too long to wait. So the clinic called an ambulance to take him to St. Barnabas Hospital. When police officers arrived, along with the ambulance’s crew, the girlfriend grew concerned that Mr. Bonds might grow more agitated and distressed. She explained to the officers, she recalled, that Mr. Bonds had been in prison and “avoiding police contact is the main thing in a parolee’s head.”The officers, the girlfriend recalled, treated Mr. Bonds respectfully and patiently.Inside the ambulance, Mr. Bonds seemed to show some understanding that he was paranoid and delusional. He exclaimed, “Oh, God, it’s all in my head,” and seemed in a rush to reach the hospital. There, Mr. Bonds was given some type of sedative, his girlfriend recalled.When Mr. Bonds awoke, he seemed stable. “He was relieved, he was happy, he was back to his normal self,” she recalled. They returned to his apartment, on Rev. James A Polite Avenue in the Morrisania section of the Bronx.For the rest of that day, and much of the following day, things seemed to be all right, she said. They spoke about his struggles with mental illness. She already knew some details about a past psychotic episode, involving voices in his head. “The voices were telling him to do pull-ups,” she said. “Or ram into people in the street.” He ended up in Bellevue Hospital.She also knew that he had not been taking his pills regularly — he complained they left him feeling dull. She insisted that he start taking his medication. Mr. Bonds fetched a large bag filled with pill bottles, all expired. She wondered if it might be more dangerous to take expired pills.The following night, he could not wind down. He talked and talked, with rising anxiety and frustration. The next morning, on July 3, she awoke to find Mr. Bonds fixated on the apartment next to his. No one lived there, but Mr. Bonds was not convinced.“He was talking about false walls,” she said. Someone was staying there, someone planning to hurt Mr. Bonds and rape his girlfriend. He said he could hear sounds coming from that apartment.She called the clinic. His next appointment was for July 10, a week away. Could they get in earlier? The next day, July 4, they went to a barbecue with friends, but Mr. Bonds was drifting away.He would wander off, distracted by the passing cars, insisting that they were following him. He was convinced he was in great danger and insisted that others not walk near him — “he felt like a target, and he didn’t want anyone to go down with him,” she said.As it got dark, Mr. Bonds told his girlfriend to leave. It was too dangerous for her. She refused. “I don’t love you. Get away from me,” he told her. But she would not leave.The next few hours are a jumble of cab rides, arguments in the street, 911 calls and rising helplessness.She began calling 911 around 9 or 10 p.m. to request an ambulance. Once or twice she hung up: Mr. Bonds would grab at the phone or accuse her of betrayal. At one point, as a police car approached, Mr. Bonds ran off to hide among parked cars.“You called the cops?” he asked his girlfriend in disbelief. He explained that if his enemy ever saw him with the cops, he would be in trouble. “I can’t be seen with no cop. If I do, it’s game over for me.”At one point, while the girlfriend spoke on the phone with a dispatcher, an ambulance approached. When Mr. Bonds grabbed for the phone, a struggle ensued and the ambulance drove right by.Finally, the 911 dispatcher directed her to stand at a certain corner. She waited there for 15 minutes. She tried flagging down police cruisers and ambulances. “I would wave, they wouldn’t stop.”Police officials said that Mr. Bonds’s girlfriend made three 911 calls in quick succession that night. She described Mr. Bonds as acting erratically, though not violently, and she made no mention of his being armed.The girlfriend said she never knew Mr. Bonds had a gun. “I would not have allowed that — I would have wrestled him for the gun,” she said.Mr. Bonds began to rant that he needed to find his enemy and talk to him, face to face, and try to appease him. At one point, Mr. Bonds began to bemoan the fact that he did not have enough money to offer — “to make it all go away.”She listened as he sought guidance from the lights and sounds around him, hoping he would soon grow weary and seek rest. He stared at the headlights of passing cars. “Do you want me to go there?” the girlfriend heard him ask. “One blink means ‘no,’ two blinks mean ‘yes,’ ” he said.They were in taxis, and then they were back on the street, but in an area unfamiliar to her. They walked for a time, until they came across two cabs.“Do you trust me?” he asked. He insisted that they go separately. From her cab, she said, she blew him a kiss, and headed home to wait for him.