http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/us/politics/hillary-clinton-gains-some-ground-among-young-voters-poll-finds.html
Hillary Clinton Gains Some Ground Among Young Voters, Poll Finds - The New York Times
Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Polls and Public Opinion,Youth,Presidential Election of 2016
Oct. 26, 2016
6622
Hillary Clinton has strengthened her position slightly among young voters, but she has struggled to take full advantage of Donald J. Trump’s rising unpopularity, a new poll shows.The poll, released on Wednesday by Harvard’s Institute of Politics, found that less than half of Americans ages 18 to 29 surveyed said they trusted Mrs. Clinton more than Mr. Trump to improve the economy, combat terrorism and reduce the impact of money in politics.Still, Mrs. Clinton led Mr. Trump by 28 percentage points among likely voters in that age group. In a four-way race, 49 percent supported her; 21 percent supported Mr. Trump; 14 percent supported Gary Johnson, the Libertarian nominee; and 5 percent supported Jill Stein, the Green Party candidate.The results show that Mrs. Clinton will have to convince many young people that they should trust her to grapple with some of the nation’s biggest issues.Mrs. Clinton has had problems attracting millennials throughout her campaign. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont outperformed her among young voters in the Democratic primary, and many of them are shunning the two major political parties in the general election.However, John Della Volpe, the director of polling at the Institute of Politics, said Mrs. Clinton had made some gains since the summer because many millennials watched the presidential debates and liked how she handled Mr. Trump. He also said that Mr. Johnson’s gaffes about Syria and world leaders had hurt his standing and that Mrs. Clinton had benefited from his troubles.“The combination of her performing better than expectations during the debates with Donald Trump, and Gary Johnson disappointing voters, has left her in a position where she has increased the number of people who view her favorably,” Mr. Della Volpe said. “But she still has progress to make if she’s going to unite the most progressive wing of the party, moderates and even Republicans.”Signs of that challenge can be seen in the number of young voters concerned that she may not be able to improve crucial parts of society. Just 47 percent of the young Americans Harvard surveyed said they trusted her more than Mr. Trump to improve the economy, and 46 percent said they trusted her more to combat the spread of terrorism. Only 42 percent trust her more than her opponent to reduce the impact of money in politics, as she continues to push back against the perception that she is too closely tied to Wall Street.Still, 56 percent of young people said they preferred her when it came to addressing inequality, while 51 percent said they trusted her more to unite the country. Half said they thought she could deal with immigration issues, which she has promised to focus on, better than Mr. Trump could.Mr. Trump is underperforming among young Republican likely voters by 17 percent, compared with Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee, who earned 91 percent of their support that year, according to exit polls. Only 16 percent of young people think Mr. Trump would address inequality more effectively than Mrs. Clinton, and 18 percent trust him more to unite the country. Eighty-five percent of young African-Americans and 72 percent of young Hispanics in the poll said that people of their racial backgrounds were “under attack” in America.The poll was conducted from Oct. 7 to 17 with 2,150 Americans ages 18 to 29. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points.Even with her struggles, Mrs. Clinton’s appeal among women could help her numbers with young voters on Election Day.“At this stage, it appears that she is reshaping the youth electorate: Specifically, more young women appear more likely to vote today than they did four years ago,” Mr. Della Volpe said. “That’s significant because she has the biggest advantage among young women.”