http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/17/world/middleeast/egypt.html
Blood and Chaos Prevail in Egypt, Testing Control - The New York Times
Egypt,Defense and Military Forces,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt)
Aug. 16, 2013
8715
CAIRO —  Egypt erupted into violent chaos on Friday, raising doubts about the new authorities’ capacity to maintain order, as Islamists and other opponents of last month’s military takeover fought security forces and their civilian allies in street battles across the capital and other cities.The country seemed to descend into anarchy. Terrified protesters caught in a cross-fire jumped or fell from an overpass in a panicked effort to escape. A gunfight erupted on the doorstep of a Four Seasons hotel. Men wielding guns and machetes — some backing the Islamists, others police supporters in civilian clothes, others simply criminals — roamed the streets of the capital and other cities, and it was often impossible to tell friend from foe.News reports put the civilian death toll for Friday at well over 100, which would bring the total since Wednesday to nearly 750. Health Ministry officials said Friday’s civilian toll was 27, but late Friday afternoon more than 30 uncounted corpses were seen at a field hospital in a mosque near the center of the fighting, in Cairo’s Ramses Square.Defying a 7 p.m. curfew, antagonists battled there into the night, lit by an unchecked fire that consumed a nearby office building. The military-appointed government issued a statement declaring that the military, the police and the people were “standing together in the face of the treacherous terrorist scheme against Egypt of the Brotherhood organization.” But the extent of the mayhem cast doubt on its ability to deliver on its central promise of restoring order and security.France and Germany called for an emergency meeting of European foreign ministers to respond to Egypt’s violence. “The toll of death and injury is shocking,” said Catherine Aston, the top diplomat for the European Union. “Responsibility for this tragedy weighs heavily on the interim government, as well as on the wider political leadership in the country.”Just two days earlier, the police had routed thousands of protesters from sit-ins in support of the ousted president, Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood, killing several hundred. The government suspended legal protections against arbitrary police action and authorized security forces to kill anyone who threatened a public facility.For many on Friday, however, shock at the scale of the bloodshed began to outweigh the threats. The violence started soon after noon prayers, as thousands of Islamists marched in a last defense against a return to the era of political exclusion, imprisonment and torture they endured under 60 years of military-backed dictatorship.For the first time since the president’s removal six weeks ago, some non-Islamists stood with the Morsi supporters, sometimes risking their own lives as well.“Where are we going with this?” one young man asked another watching at the edge of the Ramses Square battle. “Are we just going to fight one another endlessly?”His friend replied that he had protested against President Morsi, and that the police had protected him from threats. But now they were killing the Islamists, he said.“They’re Egyptian, too,” he said. “Why were we safe while they’re being killed by the police?”There was no sign that the chaos would end anytime soon. The Muslim Brotherhood, the main Islamist group behind Mr. Morsi, called for similar marches every day for the next week, and vowed to hold daily, nonviolent marches to Ramses Square for morning and evening prayers, declaring, in the words of Thomas Jefferson, that the bloodshed “irrigates the tree of liberty in Egypt.”As they have since the ouster of Mr. Morsi, state and private news media cheered on the battle against the Brotherhood. “Egypt is fighting terrorism,” a deep voice intoned periodically over Egyptian state radio throughout the day; a similar slogan in English and Arabic flashed on state television.ONtv, a private satellite network hostile to the Islamists, broadcast pictures of 60 detainees kneeling with bound hands in military custody. A headline on the screen described them as “militants.”A government official holding them said that 40 of them, including a few foreigners, had been captured by civilians near Ramses Square before being turned over to the military.Islamists in Turkey, Tunisia and Pakistan organized protests against the crackdown. But in Saudi Arabia, a fierce foe of the Brotherhood, King Abdullah delivered a televised statement pledging support for what he described as Egypt’s fight against “terrorism,” and he scolded the West for its criticism.“The kingdom stands with Egypt and against all those who try to interfere with its internal affairs,” he said, adding, “Those who are interfering in its internal affairs are lighting the fire of strife and supporting the terrorism they had claimed to be fighting against.”Outside Cairo, security officials said, the police broke up a pro-Morsi sit-in at the city of Qena, and the military killed protesters while breaking up another sit-in at the city of Suez. State news media reported that a crime wave had erupted in the security vacuum, with six banks robbed in Beni Suef and a museum looted in Minya.In Cairo, marches denouncing the military takeover began at mosques around the city after noon prayers, and within an hour the city was all but paralyzed. Mr. Morsi’s supporters and civilian vigilantes opposing them both blocked roads, bridges, tunnels and highways.Guns were visible in the hands of civilians on all sides, including a Morsi supporter filmed with a machine gun and peeking around a corner of the Four Seasons hotel in Giza as a gunfight broke out.In many places, heavily armed civilian supporters of the new government carried or fired guns while soldiers and police watched. In other cases, civilians hurling rocks or wielding sticks advanced against opponents under the cover of police gunfire.There also appeared to be provocateurs. At a pro-Morsi march, two masked men with machine guns seemed to pose as Islamists. First, they seemed to support the march, herding passers-by into its ranks. Then they aimed their guns at the terrified protesters, who fled in fear.“Who are these men with guns?” one woman among the Morsi supporters asked in terror. “Are they with us or with them?”Amr Darrag, 54, a senior leader of the Muslim Brotherhood who spent the last month negotiating with Western diplomats over the crisis, said he had been in a march with his wife and daughters when they were fired upon by gunmen atop a hotel, and cornered from three sides on an overpass by a combination of security forces, firing tear gas, and armed civilians.“We are dealing with vampires,” he said. “They intentionally killed us. My analysis is that they would like to force people to go to violence, because this is the only explanation.”Thousands had gathered in Ramses Square when the fighting there began. A small group of young people started throwing rocks at a nearby police station, and others quickly moved to try to stop them.Gunfire erupted from the police station soon after. Mohamed Abdel Salem, 19, said he happened to be walking by with a friend, Saed, 22, who was shot and killed by a police bullet. “Many died,” he said.A military helicopter hovered low overhead as the crowd chanted, “There are the mass killers, there they are.”By 3 a.m. Saturday, hundreds of protesters had taken refuge in a nearby mosque that for most of the day had served as a field hospital and morgue, refusing to leave for fear of arrests. Swarms of riot police officers and their supporters in civilian clothes began breaking down the doors, throwing rocks through the windows, and filling the mosque with tear gas. Among the Islamists killed in Ramses Square was Dr. Khaled el-Banna, 30, a grandson of the Muslim Brotherhood’s founder, Hassan el-Banna, who was gunned down near the same square in 1949.