https://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/22/magazine/22letters-t-DRJAMESWILLM_LETTERS.html
Dr. James Will Make It Better - The New York Times
Medicine and Health,Malpractice,Doctors,Health Insurance and Managed Care
Nov. 17, 2009
5058
To be sure, as David Leonhardt describes, Intermountain HealthCare’s model of using evidence-based medicine, led by Dr. Brent James, offers much to improve our current medical-care system and is in part an answer to our health care crisis. What must be kept in mind, however, is the limit of evidence-based medicine: what is good for a group, as a whole, is not equally good for each and every member of the group. This is why our medical-treatment system will never be able to achieve the same evidence-based safety and efficiency as our air-transportation flight-safety system; human beings vary, sometimes dramatically. Ultimately, medical care always comes down to the individual.CALVIN R. BROWN JR., M.D.Professor of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,ChicagoMalpractice reform is indispensable in the battle against rising medical costs. The reasons doctors often order tests that are not necessary is not related to an “intuitive” as opposed to an “empirical” approach to medical care but simply to avoid the charge of negligence. On the other hand, true malpractice reform would be aided by adoption of Dr. Brent James’s approach of tracking outcomes to determine the course of medical care. Doctors could then be protected from negligence claims by showing they used an empirically proven course of treatment.HERBERT OUIDARiver Edge, N.J.A silent and powerful third player in all medical decision-making is corrupted science — the bias that pervades medical research today through its dominance by the pharmaceutical and medical-device industries. This conflict is also rampant in the creation of clinical-practice guidelines, where industry often finances the academic researchers. Until academic medicine wrests control of medical education and research from corporate influence-peddling, doctors will continue to sort through confusing and conflicting clinical research, and many will ultimately base their treatment decisions on which pharmaceutical representative visited them that week.ELIZABETH ORAMNurse PractitionerSt. Vincent Catholic Medical CentersNew YorkEveryone ought to stand up and applaud Dr. Brent James for improving the quality of medical care by rigorously applying the principles of evidence-based medicine: patients, because he has improved the outcomes of treatment; doctors, because he is showing them how to deliver the best possible and most cost-effective care to their patients.Unfortunately, the ultimate decision makers — the administrators — are definitely not applauding. James’s logical and scientific approach to health care has reduced the number of needless and very expensive high-tech procedures, and that has inevitably slashed his hospital’s income.Under the perverse incentives of the United States health-insurance system, doctors and hospitals are rewarded for performing as many procedures as possible and punished for improving outcomes with cost-effective care. So when hospital administrators have to choose between better medical care or a higher income, guess which one they are going to pick?MICHAEL PHILLIPS, M.D.Menssana Research Inc.Fort Lee, N.J.