https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/10/us/politics/comey-trump-mcconnell-schumer.html
McConnell Defends Trump as Schumer Calls for Special Prosecutor - The New York Times
Comey  James B,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government
May 10, 2017
7730
WASHINGTON — Before President Trump was even sworn into office, congressional Republicans made a pledge: They would be a check on executive power, they said, often making the independence of the legislative branch a centerpiece of their own election campaigns last year.But on Wednesday, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, sought to give the beleaguered administration significant cover, strongly defending the firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, and resisting calls to challenge Mr. Trump and support a broader inquiry of Russian interference in the election.“Today we’ll no doubt hear calls for a new investigation,” Mr. McConnell said on the Senate floor as most Senate Democrats looked on, “which can only serve to impede the current work being done.”Democrats exerted as much pressure as they could on their Republican colleagues on Wednesday, moving to shut down Senate committees, using procedural moves available to the minority to block or delay hearings on Russia, cybersecurity, presidential nominees and several other matters.Democrats’ efforts to thwart Republicans quickly became clear. When Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, asked for unanimous consent to permit a scheduled meeting of the Special Committee on Aging, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, objected because, he said, “we have no path forward on the horrible and momentous events of last night.”Ms. Collins, clearly angry, said: “This makes no sense whatsoever. This is an example of the dysfunction of the Senate.” The committee operates in a bipartisan manner, she added, and the hearing, on the health and well-being of older Americans, had nothing to do with the F.B.I.Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the top Democrat on the Intelligence Committee, suggested that the Senate should refrain from confirming a new director of the F.B.I. until a special prosecutor is named. Democrats would need at least some Republicans to concur with this plan, and so far none have committed to do so.Mr. McConnell has consistently resisted calls for a special prosecutor, arguing that any investigation could be handled largely through the Intelligence Committee.Speaking after Mr. McConnell, Mr. Schumer frontally questioned Mr. Trump’s stated rationale for dismissing Mr. Comey and renewed a call for the Justice Department to appoint a special prosecutor. Without the blessing of Mr. McConnell — who has been largely invested in protecting Mr. Trump, his agenda and the Republican Senate majority — there is little chance that an independent inquiry will happen.In another stumble for a Congress that has strained to accomplish much during Mr. Trump’s chaotic early months, the majority failed to secure the votes on a measure related to an oil and gas industry rule that Republicans hoped to repeal. Vice President Mike Pence had been summoned to break a potential tie, in his capacity as president of the Senate, but Republicans were a vote short.Asked about Mr. Comey’s firing, Mr. Pence said the nation had “an opportunity for a new beginning with the F.B.I.”Mr. Pence did not directly respond to a question about whether Mr. Comey’s removal was related to the Russian investigation. “It was the right decision at the right time,” he said. He walked off without taking additional questions.Many Republicans appeared reluctant on Wednesday to take on Mr. Trump, hewing to the administration’s line that criticism of Mr. Comey’s tenure was a bipartisan affair. “President Trump acted decisively and within his authority,” Senator David Perdue, Republican of Georgia, said. “And I stand behind him.”They also insisted that it would not hamper any congressional investigation into the Russia matter.“Democrats and Republicans for different times and different reasons have had problems” with Mr. Comey, said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, adding that he hoped any new director would win over at least some Democrats, whose votes are not needed to confirm the nominee under rule changes employed by Democrats when they were in power.The firing “is not going to stop the Russia investigation,” Mr. Graham added, noting that if Mr. Trump believed that to be the case, “he made a big mistake because the investigation will go forward.”“The F.B.I. is not Comey,” he said.Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, noted that the next F.B.I. chief needed to be “a person of unquestioned integrity” and “continue investigating Russian involvement” in any American election.Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina and chairman of the Intelligence Committee, was among a handful of Senate Republicans who appeared to break ranks with the administration, at least to a degree, questioning the timing and rationale for Mr. Trump’s decision.Mr. Burr was a strong supporter of Mr. Trump during the presidential campaign and has at times struggled to project independence. Yet he has been far less conspicuously partisan than Representative Devin Nunes, Republican of California, who was forced to step away from the House investigation he was leading amid questions about his contacts and closeness with the Trump administration.“The timing of this and the reasoning for it doesn’t make sense to me,” Mr. Burr said on Wednesday, adding that the firing could complicate his panel’s investigation of Russian interference in last year’s presidential election. “This made our task a little more difficult, but it didn’t make it impossible,” he said, adding, “The investigation will run its course.”Other Republicans critical of Mr. Trump included Senators Ben Sasse of Nebraska and Jeff Flake of Arizona — two longstanding critics of Mr. Trump — and Senators Rob Portman of Ohio, James Lankford of Oklahoma and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska.Several vulnerable Republican House members from politically mixed districts expressed concern about Mr. Comey’s firing, including Representatives Martha E. McSally of Arizona, Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania and Barbara Comstock of Virginia.“Both Democrats and Republicans attacked the F.B.I. director at various times for various reasons and called for his ouster,” said Ms. Comstock, whose district in the Washington suburbs was carried by Hillary Clinton in November’s election. “However, I can’t defend or explain tonight’s actions or timing of the firing of F.B.I. director James Comey.”Yet most Republicans — with the notable exception of Senator John McCain of Arizona — declined to embrace the installation of an independent investigator or commission.Democrats signaled on Wednesday that they intended to keep the pressure on their Republican counterparts, seemingly assured that the public would be behind them.Mr. Schumer also demanded that his counterpart call a closed “and, if necessary, classified” briefing for all senators with the attorney general and deputy attorney general, ticking off questions he hoped to ask, including whether Mr. Trump had indeed been searching for reasons to fire Mr. Comey for weeks.“Was this really about something else?” Mr. Schumer asked. “No doubt we’ll have an opportunity to question Mr. Comey, now a private citizen, about what happened. But we need to hear from this administration about what happened and why and what is going to happen next.”He ended his remarks with a direct challenge to Mr. McConnell.“I remind him,” Mr. Schumer said, turning to the majority leader, “and my Republican friends that nothing less is at stake than the American people’s faith in our criminal justice system and the integrity of the executive branch of our government.”