http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/25/world/asia/536-killed-in-flooding-in-china.html
536 killed in flooding in China - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
June 25, 2005
4625
BEIJING — Flooding and landslides in areas throughout China have killed 536 people and forced 1.4 million to leave their homes over the past two weeks, making this one of the deadliest summer rainy seasons in a decade, the government said Friday. Government forecasters warned of more "torrential rains" in the densely populated south, especially around the Pearl River Delta northwest of Hong Kong - the heart of China's booming export industries. The damage was worst in southern China, where rains and mudslides have killed at least 97 people this week and left another 41 missing, the official Xinhua press agency reported. Nationwide, a total of 137 people were missing, while economic losses were estimated at 20.4 billion yuan, or $2.5 billion, the report said. The death toll was higher than that of most of the rainy seasons of the past decade, though still below that of 1998, when 4,150 people were killed in summer flooding in central and northeastern China, Xinhua said. This summer, the hardest-hit area is a five-province swath of the south, including Guangdong, China's most populous province with more than 100 million people and thousands of factories that feed export industries, news reports said. Roads and railways in Guangdong were cut off by rising floodwaters, including the main Beijing-Hong Kong rail line, Xinhua said. Flooding in parts of Guangxi, to the west of Guangdong on China's southern coast, was the worst in a century in the poor, mountainous region, according to state media. The authorities in Macao, the former Portuguese colony west of Hong Kong at the mouth of the Pearl River, issued a flood warning, saying the rain-swollen river could rise to as much as a meter, or three feet, above normal, Xinhua said. The impact of seasonal rains is magnified by environmental damage from decades of intensive farming and tree-cutting that have left denuded hillsides unable to trap rain. Millions of people live in vulnerable areas on reclaimed former flood plains. Newspaper photos showed soldiers and police officers rowing boatloads of residents down flooded streets. News reports said that floodwaters in some parts of Guangxi reached the third floor of buildings. About 760,000 people were evacuated from flood-prone areas in Guangxi, and 120,000 in Guangdong, state television said on its midday news. It did not give figures for evacuations elsewhere, but earlier reports said 320,000 people were relocated in Fujian. 