https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/23/world/europe/q-and-a-with-mikhail-b-khodorkovsky.html
Q. and A. With Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky - The New York Times
Khodorkovsky  Mikhail B,Berlin (Germany),Russia,Political Prisoners
Dec. 22, 2013
9799
Following are excerpts from an interview of Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky by an invited group of Russian-speaking journalists in Berlin on Sunday, as translated by The New York Times: Q: How did you decide to ask for clemency? Did you fear a third jail term?Mr. Khodorkovsky: The situation was both more complicated, and more simple.If you could follow my statements that I was publicizing through my lawyers, you could have noticed that unlike other commentators, I was always saying from 2008, when Medvedev said the clemency was possible in principle I immediately said it is not that it is unacceptable for me to write a request for clemency. It was all the same to me. Because the whole Yukos case was so much outside any legal boundaries… But there was one critical point: They told me, and repeated again and again every time: I have to admit my guilt. And this was absolutely unacceptable, and for very clear reasons. … It would immediately put all the former employees of Yukos under threat of legal action.Q: How did the release happen?A: I was put on a plane, so to say, in the best traditions of the 1970s, and they [security forces] waited until the door was shut. You must understand that despite what Mr. Peskov [Kremlin spokesman who has said that Mr. Khodorkovsky could return to Russia without threat] said, from the legal point of view, the prosecutors’ investigation from the first Yukos case, it’s $500 million, and according to Russian law, gives formal grounds for not letting me go abroad. The European Court of Human Rights proclaimed this investigation illegal — they were milder on the sentence itself — but according to Russian law it needs a decision of the Supreme Court, without that, this investigation stays.To take a risk to go to Russia and then, under formal grounds, not to be able to leave, I just cannot do it.Now the case is in the Supreme Court. If the investigation will be lifted, I will consider it as a sign sufficient to come, or be visiting Russia. While that is not the case, I don’t think so. Where I am going to live, I don’t know yet, and my wife, who didn’t know (about his impending release), she just flew back to Moscow. Now she is going to come and then we will discuss.Q: Did any of your colleagues in big business ever express the desire to support you or to be mediators?Unofficially I got a lot of signals. But officially only Mr. [Mikhail] Prokhorov did express his good wishes, and support. And knowing all the strings attached, I am still grateful to him for doing that . Otherwise, no one. Because it was too risky to do it.Q: Are you going to be involved in politics?A: I am not going to be involved in politics as a fight for power. But if we are talking about the fight for liberation of political prisoners, not just the Yukos ones … how can I behave otherwise? I don’t think that even our power would expect me not to do it. Not to do or say anything.But in the larger sense I have a position which I don’t think was the reason for my arrest, but nevertheless I declared it back in 2002-3. I think the Russian problem is not just the president as a person, the problem is that our citizens in the large majority don’t understand that their fate, they have to be responsible for it themselves. They are so happy to delegate it to, say, Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and then they will entrust it to somebody else, and I think that for such a big country as Russia this is the path to a dead end. Which, in a particular fashion, is where we are now.You have to explain, “Hey, guys, if you want to live in a democratic country, you have to change the system.” I always took the stand that Russia has to be not only really democratic, but a parliamentary system, or — for the start — a parliamentary-presidential situation.And the problem is not just that the present government doesn’t like this, the current society doesn’t like it. And you have to persuade it.Q: On your treatment in jail, and your lawyer, Yuri Schmidt, who died in January.He came to me just two months before his untimely death. As a lawyer he got hold of documents that were stamped “special control.” Which meant two cameras over my bed, camera over the table where I ate, all these 10 years I was moving in prison with “double control.” Common regime, people said, but, for instance, in the last camp, there were cameras over my bed, over my workplace, over my table in the canteen — this is a small example of what it means, “common conditions.”All meetings [with lawyers] happened in the presence of cameras hanging right above and between me and my lawyers was a phone which I considered to be a form of audio control.Under these conditions, the proposal of Genscher was relayed to me, whose initiative [the request for clemency] was. [He said] “If you are satisfied with this version, then please write about it to President Putin.” I looked at it, the admission of guilt was not there, it needed only the reference to objective life circumstances [mother’s illness], no political demand, but, I mentioned the way I did before that I was not going to fight for the shares of Yukos and I am not going to participate in the fight for power. And politics is the fight for power. I wrote these documents.If your question was how much the power counts on me in persuading others not to fight for Yukos shares, and participation in suppressing of the fight of a multitude of shareholders of the company, I don’t think that they really imagine that I am going to have any influence on that. At least nobody posed that question to me.Q: Your arrest was a turning point in Russian history. Is your return?A: I cannot fully agree with you. I think my arrest was a symbol of a turning point in Russian history. And the turning point in Russian history was already predetermined. Whether my release is a symbol of a turning point in the reverse direction, no, I don’t think it is a symbol of the fact that Russian power and President Putin in particular, they are seriously occupied with the image of Russia as a democratic state. Whether it means the possibility of more deep reform, this as we can judge from the speech of (Russian deputy state) prosecutor Zvyagintsev. This is a subject of a furious fistfight, a really wild fight. That is my estimation. Maybe I’m wrong. I don’t have enough information.Q: Is this image correction connected with Sochi?A: Naturally it is one of the factors. But it is also G-8 [which Russia chairs next year]. I think it is also a general feeling — I have this feeling and I think the power has it too — the absence of an attractive image of the country. It really interferes with our country solving the burning questions on the international stage. With money alone, no matter how much, many questions cannot be solved. And then people want, on top of that, weird things.” [laughter]Q: How did you change as a person, and what did other prisoners think? What helped you keep in such good shape?A: You know, I was trying to look at my situation as a challenge. “O.K., enemy forces got me. So, the situation is grave. But it also offers some opportunities.” And to be honest, this optimistic life view is characteristic for me. It is my inner state of being. And I was not torturing myself with — yeah, there were some days more depressing — but basically I was not carrying them around inside me.And what concerns the ability to keep the physical form: Today, in this particular sense, Russian prison system is not the gulag. In this particular sense. I mean, they might humiliate people, they can put you under pressure, but if there is no particular command to do so, then hunger, cold that you know from the tales of former inmates — in this form, it does not exist. There are excesses — rotten food, or extremely cold barracks, they exist. But these are excesses. The rest depends solely on you. When I crossed the threshold of prison, I understood, this is for a long time. And then immediately quit smoking. If they are going to bury me, let them do it themselves, without my participation.Q: When you say you will be socially active, what does it mean? In Russia this is often considered political action. Will it be as before, financing certain parties or groups? Any limits?A: I won’t sin against the truth if I say I have no idea about my financial situation right now. I met only one of my former partners so far. Not because we stopped being friends, but because we stopped doing business together. I think I will deal with the situation.But it would be extremely disappointing for me if people will mistakenly — not the journalists, but the Russian opposition — if they would consider me as an opposition sponsor the way Yukos was. I don’t have such opportunities and more so — if I had them, but I want to stress that I do not — I understand better than our opposition, though I don’t exclude that there are people who understand it better than me, I understand better than them how dangerous it could be for them.Seven years for laundering money, it’s just what lies on the surface. So-called 174th article of the Criminal Code. I would be extremely disappointed if they would expect from me what is not going to happen and as a result they would miss other opportunities.Q: Was your arrest a result of personal conflict with Putin?A: I can only assume the following: There was this very unpleasant conversation, Feb. 19, 2003 … there is no point in retelling it. After that, people close to V. V. told me the situation is so-so. Two weeks later, the first Yukos case was launched. That’s the chain of events. What else was there? A lot of suggestions but even more specially fabricated myths. … I know for sure that some of them were issued by our deeply respected presidential administration. Driven by whatever reasons they have. … [He went on to indicate that these unidentified aides spread false stories for “naïve people."]As the head of a major company, I naturally would never make a speech that would jeopardize the investment of the shareholders. And it goes without saying that my speech was not only discussed with the presidential administration but also … I could see that it will be pretty sharp — before the conference I asked if the presidential administration really wants me to make the speech during the part where the mass media was present? And they confirmed to me that, yes, that would be normal, even the right thing to say. And of course the reaction was for me unexpected.But what I couldn’t let myself do and what some other person could — I couldn’t reverse my words, I would not lie. And I couldn’t change my point of view the way some politicians do simply because it turned out to be too hot — I physically cannot do it. Maybe it’s wrong, even more so, I think being unable to be flexible blocks the path into politics regardless of my desire or the lack of it. ... That is simply the way I am ... probably some other person could work it out better.Q: What have you lost in the last 10 years?A: We won’t have enough time to answer that question. The heaviest loss is 10 years of communication with my family. There was only four years out of 10 when I had the opportunity once every three months to really meet my relatives for three days. It’s more than spending a winter on the Antarctic. ... That was the most painful. The rest is a long list of some bitter losses and some I could cope with. Yes, that’s how I comforted myself: Everything is bad, but this is a challenge and an opportunity to change. That helped!Q: So, politics are out. Yukos is out. But you were always interested in new technologies. Are you going to invest? What’s in? Are you going to stay a businessman?A: I was always interested in heavy industries. It was a challenge: Can I do this? Can I succeed in that? Can I do YUKOS? I could, which some of your colleagues might challenge. ... If I’d need money to survive, I would be involved in business. But at present, even without knowing the real size of my capital, for sure I have enough money to make a living. I’m not buying soccer teams! I don’t want to waste my time — of which there is always not enough — on the things I already accomplished.”To return to normal family life? As I said, for four years I could communicate with the family. There’s no barriers. The main problems of most of my co-inmates was that 90 percent, after prison, they had nowhere to go. My situation is completely different, and this is such a rare luck for people in prisons that it’s actually more uncomfortable to speak about than, for example, to say that you have a spare pack of cigarettes in your pocket. Q: Does the opposition in Russia have any future, and who is the main person there?A: I don’t agree with the very paradigm of the juxtaposition of Putin versus an opposition leader. And the most important person in the opposition, I don’t agree with this paradigm. If you have a most important person in the opposition, as a result you will get another Putin. Maybe not us but our children. Vladimir Vladimirovich is a healthy man. So it could go on for a long time.I think the opposition will be real when the society will acquire a need for self-governance, to take its fate in its own hands. And there will not be the very main person to whom we entrust our future. But there will be different structures, parties, deputies and so on — those people whom we as citizens and voters will appoint. Or control. They will represent our interests, and when they will stop representing our interests, we will remove them. But not one person.At present, the perspective of opposition is not very strong, particularly because this request in the society is articulated pretty weakly, although much more strongly than it was 10 years ago.Q: Your path from oligarch to the now former prisoner — what were the stages? The moments when you realized that life could be different?A: My inner subjective feeling was that changes began earlier, during the crisis of 1998. It was a very severe psychological blow to me. I always keep my promises, and when I stumbled on a situation that I couldn’t meet my obligations, it was a human disaster. I had to talk to people a lot, with work teams, persuading them — you have to wait it out — and how they responded to that, to my requests, personally, for me, turned out to have an essential effect on me. And gradually I was moving away from the fact that the most important thing is industry.The most important thing turns out to be people. And the final realization of this fact came to me in prison, after I lived through the very difficult period of the collapse of the company. That was practically in real time, and shown on television, and online, in prison. At some point I realized: If you save people, and we managed to save the majority, then the industrial scrap doesn’t matter. And the further from me the scrap went, in time, the bigger segment, the second component occupied me [meaning people]. That is my subjective view. Maybe in reality it was all different.Q: What is Russia’s economic situation?A: What I really wish, when the situation in Russia emerges, is that many Europeans on the dramatically different level will start to invest in our country. Not just the money, there is enough money in the world now. But invest their desire to work. European youth has this potential, and in Russia it is indispensable. There is a shortage of it now. This is my point of view, and I would really like that the potential of European youth — in the business community — and Russia’s potential as a place where this effort can be applied, in contrast to a much more well-organized Europe, that at some point they will merge. In space and in time. Whether you can say this time arrived, or is close, I am not ready to answer.Q: The prospects for opposition, you mentioned, are weak. But how long can this system survive? If Putin stands in 2017, what are the consequences?A: I wanted to say that from an organizational point of view, the situation of the opposition is pretty weak. From the point of view of public opinion, it is also not too strong yet. But it’s much stronger than it was say five years ago, or 10 years ago. The trend is obvious. The trend is clear, the level is not sufficient.Talking about where the continuation of the rule of the current group can lead — headed by Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, I personally think that now we are in the point ... that can severely change the answer to that question.As I said in the beginning, in the 36 hours that passed since my liberation, I couldn’t acquire sufficient information to answer more concretely. I could see on my own example that obviously there are people who think that the Russian reputation must be corrected in the direction of democratic values. And the president is inclined toward that. Judging from his action. But there are others who, judging from their action, such as the speech of Mr. Zvyagintsev, and the efforts known to us, who think, “Let’s tighten it again — a half turn of the screw, and again, and it doesn’t matter what other people think about us.” ... The situation is ripe, and Mr. Putin will have to make a decision. What decision he will reach, I cannot predict. And even my evaluation might be wrong.Q: What are the biggest changes in you in 10 years? What are the biggest changes you see in Russia?A: The biggest change in me is that I got 10 years older.And what concerns Russia: It is perfectly obvious, to my mind. From 2003 the amount of people who want to define themselves, and their fate, grew radically. There are still few of them, but today it’s not a margin of error. The way it was before. This is probably the most important change.Q: So you were talking about the main person in the opposition. Many people think that the main guy is you, that you are the new messiah, the new Mandela, the new Sakharov, that you will hurl yourself on the ground to save Russia and come and occupy the Kremlin. How are you going to talk to these people? To explain to them that for the time being that you are not going to do this?A: I think that at no single moment those people who really are interested in my fate and my life, in what I wrote, they never got any foundation for these kind of conclusions. My position in my interviews and my article was consistent. And there were many, many interviews and articles. What people want from me — those who in reality never read this material and don’t care about my fate — because I am not going to be elected anywhere. And because of that I can say, “I don’t care about your lives either.” They don’t care about me, and I don’t care about them. Unlike the politicians, I can say it directly. [laughter]What I can do, and what concerns the people to whom I feel responsible, those who stay in prison, the political prisoners, I will do.Talking about Mandela, and I already wrote about it — the main lesson that I have drawn and I would wish that our opposition would draw the same lesson: Don’t push your fellow citizens — be they opponents, or in power, or in the opposition — into a corner. No matter what, you have to live in the same country.Tolerance, full stop. This is what Mandela contributed, in my opinion. That’s what I say, that’s what I write, and that is what many criticize me for. And, thank God, so be it.