https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/17/upshot/to-fund-health-plan-gop-considers-limiting-popular-tax-break.html
To Fund Health Plan, G.O.P. Considers Limiting Popular Tax Break - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Tax Credits  Deductions and Exemptions,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party
Feb. 17, 2017
9346
In order to fund health insurance for Americans who don’t get coverage through work, congressional Republicans are considering changing the system for those who do.This week, health care committees in the House and Senate circulated an outline of an Affordable Care Act repeal and replacement plan. That outline explained how money would be spent on the program — on Medicaid, tax benefits for holders of health savings accounts, and tax credits for individuals buying their own insurance. What it did not say was how government would pay for the plan. Moreover, it called for eliminating taxes imposed by the A.C.A., including taxes on medical devices, drugs and health insurance plans.But congressional Republicans do have an idea about where they could find some money to pay for their health program: by limiting the size of the tax break employers and workers receive on their health plans. Several lawmakers who attended a House Republican caucus meeting Thursday said such a plan was under discussion.Currently, a dollar your employer spends on your wages is subject to income and payroll taxes, while any dollar spent on your health insurance is tax free. That system, which dates to the 1940s, is loathed by economists across the political spectrum, but it has become a staple of our tax and compensation system. The employer health insurance tax exclusion, as it’s known, is the single largest expenditure in our tax system, costing $216 billion in lost tax revenue last year, according to the Tax Policy Center. That’s almost three times the size of the mortgage interest deduction.For workers and employers, it feels like a great deal: Depending on how much you pay in taxes, the savings on the cost of expensive health benefits can be substantial. And most Americans under 65 benefit from tax savings associated with this policy.But the economists dislike it anyway, for two main reasons: 1) They argue that it distorts the market for health insurance by creating incentives to spend more money on benefits than salaries. Those richer plans, they argue, lead workers to use too much health care and to remain insensitive to the cost of services, driving up health costs. 2) Liberal economists believe the tax exclusion is regressive, benefiting richer workers more than poorer ones, who would pay comparatively lower tax rates on ordinary income.Kevin Brady, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, has had his eye on the tax exclusion for some time, and his committee held a hearing on the policy last year. Avik Roy, then a senior fellow at the conservative Manhattan Institute, described the exclusion in his testimony as “the central flaw in our health care system.”Experts on the left also dislike the exclusion. That’s why a tax on high-cost health plans, nicknamed the Cadillac tax, was part of the original Affordable Care Act law.Since then, labor and employer groups have mobilized against the Cadillac tax. It turns out that people who aren’t economists don’t like the idea of having their health benefits taxed. An appropriations bill passed in 2015 prevented it from going into effect as scheduled. (And the groups have already begun fighting the rumored exclusion cap, as Sarah Kliff at Vox reported Thursday.)“It’s turned out to be very hard to say to people: ‘Your health costs are too high. To address this, we think you should pay more for health insurance,’ ” David Cutler, a health economist at Harvard who dislikes the deduction and advised the Obama administration on health policy, wrote in an email. “Not sure why, but it’s not totally effective.”A major element of the new Republican plan would tend to redistribute resources from the poor to the rich, by providing a flat tax credit by age for all Americans not covered through work. If Republicans proceed with this payment mechanism of capping the tax exclusion, it would push somewhat the other direction, giving greater benefits to middle-class people than to their wealthy bosses.Workers might end up with less generous health plans, but they’d be paying proportionately less in overall taxes. And, the theory goes, if wages and health benefits are taxed at the same rate, employers might be more inclined to give their workers a raise instead of another health benefit.But none of the possible benefits of the policy change are likely to make it popular. The Affordable Care Act generally provides benefits for a small fraction of the American population, as would a Republican replacement plan. The number that benefit from the employer system is much, much larger.