https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/09/nyregion/an-officers-death-in-one-square-mile-of-danger.html
An Officer’s Death in ‘One Square Mile of Danger’ - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Department (NYC),Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Bronx (NYC)
July 9, 2017
9732
In a Bronx police precinct that officers used to call “one square mile of danger,” there is a particular block where guns, crack cocaine and hot tempers still seem to pool.It was there, in March, that a man believed to have ties to a Bloods gang shot two taxi passengers and a deli customer in the middle of the afternoon and fled, the authorities said.And it was there that detectives seized seven illegal guns over the next two months, most of them from teenagers.“That’s the hot block, the hottest block,” said Eddie, sitting outside the barbershop where he works, as he pointed down East 183rd Street between Morris and Creston Avenues, a stretch of discount markets and beauty supply shops a mile and a half west of the Bronx Zoo. Eddie, who did not give his last name out of concern for his safety, continued: “That’s the oven over there.”Officer Miosotis Familia never let the hazards change how she treated people, residents said. They were used to officers being too quick to assume, to detectives not having time to give a shooting investigation the resources many thought it deserved.But for the eight hours of her shift in an RV-style command post there in the 46th Precinct, Officer Familia effectively moved in. She ate Salvatore’s pizza as the locals did, spoke Spanish as they did and smiled at neighbors as they did. Residents and shopkeepers said the block had become a kind of family, albeit one bonded in part by an invisible landscape of memorable crimes, and she had earned the respect of a steady visitor.All that changed on July 5 — the unspoken truce between the command post officers and the block, the recent cooling-off of crime, the young parents deciding it had become safe enough to settle down. A man with a history of mental illness and an apparent plan to shoot a cop walked past the command post once before circling back and firing his .38-caliber Ruger through the passenger-side window, killing Officer Familia.Officer Familia lived in the Bronx, a couple of miles from where she was killed, and on Monday, a viewing is to be held at World Changers Church on the Grand Concourse, with her funeral to follow Tuesday morning.In the days after the fatal shooting, shops around the scene crawled with detectives, and the command post was towed away, replaced by a new one ringed with metal barriers. On Thursday, a police officer, tears in her eyes, noticed memorial flowers growing parched and placed them in a bucket of water before she resumed her post.“Once you got yourself acclimated, you were part of this — I don’t know,” said Rose Cruz, a retired officer who used to work the overnight shift on the same stretch of East 183rd, pausing to find the right words. “We were like family,” she said, “and we’re still family.”Hemmed in by the Grand Concourse and Jerome Avenue, two thoroughfares bustling with restaurants and an elevated subway, this slice of East 183rd is a vein of commerce and sidewalk conversations that also seemed to attract drug sales. Crime waxed and waned over the years, and longtime residents of this block in the Fordham Heights neighborhood made routines to skirt the violence: in and out for work and errands, but no late-night grocery runs or letting children play in the park.A lifelong resident, Gladys Rosario, said she recently downloaded Citizen, a cellphone application that sends crime alerts, to figure out when it was safe to go out and what streets were blocked off. The police recorded at least 147 felony crimes in the four square blocks around East 183rd and Morris in the last year and a half, including 55 assaults.This spring, a spate of gang-related shootings broke a quiet spell as rival groups from across the Grand Concourse battled, said a law enforcement official who, like other current and former officials interviewed for this story, spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss crime conditions. A Young Gunnaz gang subset is known to have a presence around where Officer Familia was shot; across the Grand Concourse, an opposing gang operates out of public housing projects.Few acts of violence were more brazen than a triple shooting at 3:45 p.m. on March 16, a Thursday, at East 183rd and Creston. Gunshots into a taxi and then a deli left one victim partly paralyzed, a second with muscle and nerve damage and a third with bruising to the heart, court documents say.Investigators found video of the suspect, Clifford McClinton, 25, hiding a silver firearm and changing his clothes after he fled, and they believe he is connected with a Bloods-affiliated gang set known to sell crack cocaine in the area, said Patrice O’Shaughnessy, a spokeswoman for the Bronx district attorney’s office, which secured an indictment against him on five counts of attempted murder. Mr. McClinton’s lawyer, Kevin McLoone, declined to comment.The shootings persuaded the 46th Precinct commander, Inspector Philip P. Rivera, to place the RV-style truck on East 183rd as a visible deterrent, said Vanessa Gibson, a city councilwoman who represents a neighboring district. Officer Familia was among those deployed there. Residents said the truck quelled violence and allowed them to become friendly with the officers.“They communicate with everybody,” said Michael Perry, 26, who has lived nearby since he was about 4. “They were really cool, down to earth.”He and other residents worried officers would come down hard on them after their colleague’s killing and the camaraderie would evaporate.After the March shooting, detectives uncovered an arsenal of illegal weapons, Ms. O’Shaughnessy said. On March 18, just around the block on Creston, narcotics officers arrested a 15-year-old with two loaded pistols — a .40 caliber and a 9 millimeter — and a 17-year-old with a loaded .45-caliber pistol.Two months later, at a building 200 feet away, Bronx gang detectives arrested four people, among them a 16-year-old with a loaded .45 caliber, another person with a 9 millimeter and a third who tried to dump a .380-caliber pistol. They executed a search warrant and found a loaded .38-caliber revolver in an apartment. The Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, secured indictments against six people on gun charges, and investigators believe they all have ties to Mr. McClinton.Violence has decreased in the area; the 46th Precinct had 14 murders last year, the second-most in the city along with three other precincts, though far fewer than the 82 murders it had in 1990. But Angel Villoda, a father of seven who has lived in the neighborhood since 1986, said that the streets were still flush with guns and that the violence had grown more wanton. He was eating on Thursday at Salvatore’s, where Officer Familia was known to grab a slice of pizza.“Man, ’86, those were the days: break dancing, community centers, block parties, schoolyard functions,” he said. “There wasn’t so much tension in the air. Then, you could dance your way out of a problem.” He continued, “but then the gang colors started coming out and gun violence became a bigger deal.”Like others interviewed in the neighborhood, Mr. Villoda said the city had failed to invest in schools, health services, sports programs and jobs, setting children adrift. Thoughts of moving now preoccupied Mr. Villoda, as they did Irene Lugo, a single mother of two boys, who pointed last week to buildings that had become landmarks for episodes of violence: shootings, stabbings, fights.“I so need to get out of here,” a neighbor told Ms. Lugo.“We all do,” Ms. Lugo replied as she passed by.Some residents recounted calling the police about drug sales and officers quickly responding. Others said they needed to hound the police before officers would investigate.Strained relations between the community and the police, residents said, have as much to do with instances of overaggressive treatment as with people not wanting to be seen talking to officers. Officer Familia’s killing drew intense sympathy from the neighborhood, but some residents harbor deep animus toward the police and a few people vented in the hours afterward that the department did not come out in force when one of their neighbors was killed.A number of residents said they wished the city would deploy more officers there, so detectives could investigate everyday shootings with the attention they gave an officer cut down. As in many Bronx precincts, detectives in the 46th in recent years handled substantially larger caseloads of violent crime than their Manhattan counterparts.“There are shootouts here often, but you never see police like this,” Angel Osornao, 32, said.For police officers, patrolling the 46th means often skipping lunch to handle calls and working in a community struggling with poverty and addiction. Former officers recalled a steady stream of radio calls for violent crimes. A good portion of them ended in arrests.“It was a tough precinct to work,” a retired captain said. But the risks created ironclad loyalty. “They backed each other up all the time,” he said of his colleagues.In early 2015, as the Police Department cut back on low-level enforcement after the killings of two officers in Brooklyn, plainclothes officers on a 46th Precinct anti-crime unit were nearing the end of their shift when they heard a report of a robbery at a deli nearby. Without pausing to put back on bulletproof vests, they went searching for the suspects; two officers — Andrew Dossi and Aliro Pellerano — were wounded.About two decades earlier, the precinct’s second-in-command, Capt. Steven Plavnick, was wounded in the back outside the station house in a contract shooting that prosecutors said was revenge for the acquittal of another 46th Precinct officer, Francis X. Livoti, on state charges in the choking death of Anthony Baez. A detective ran onto the wide-open street to take the captain to the hospital.Afterward, 46th Precinct officers went right back to work, as they did last week.“You can’t say, ‘I’m traumatized — I have to go home,’” said Ms. Cruz, who worked in the precinct from 1986 to 1998, six of those years on midnight shifts, before retiring from the department in 2012. “You had to be strong — for yourself, for your partners and for the other cops working with you, and for the community.”