https://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/20/world/africa/rachid-al-ghannouchi-imagines-democratic-future-for-tunisia.html
Rachid al-Ghannouchi Imagines Democratic Future for Tunisia - The New York Times
Ghannouchi  Rachid al-,Tunisia,Elections,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Muslims and Islam,Politics and Government
Oct. 19, 2011
8703
ISTANBUL — For more than three decades, Rachid al-Ghannouchi has preached that pluralism, democracy and Islam are harmonious. As his country, Tunisia, heads toward the first elections after the Arab revolts on Sunday, Mr. Ghannouchi, a renowned Islamic thinker, faces a reckoning between his principles and intentions.Mr. Ghannouchi boldly predicted Wednesday that his Renaissance Party would win a majority in the elections, contested by more than 80 parties, to choose an assembly charged with drafting a constitution for a country that was once one of the Arab world’s most repressive. That would be one of the most startling achievements for an Islamist party in the Arab world since 1992, when the military in Algeria deprived a religious party there of an almost certain electoral victory, igniting a civil war.Many secularists are bracing for the prospect with foreboding, worried that Islamists will seek more regressive laws on marriage, divorce and inheritance, and encourage — or mirror — the Arab world’s growing cultural conservatism. Mr. Ghannouchi’s many critics draw on fears that democracy will serve as a tool for Islamists to deliver another brand of intolerance.“We will not be lenient with those who try to manipulate Tunisians,” said Najib Chebbi, the chairman of the largest secular faction, the Progressive Democratic Party.But Mr. Ghannouchi, long a seminal figure in the Arab and Muslim world, believes that the Arab revolts have allowed the region to imagine a different future. At 70, he walks slower these days and pauses before he answers, aware, it seems, of what this moment represents in the old conflict between political Islam and secular authoritarianism.“The situation today is different,” he said recently.As if struck by the idea, he repeated the phrase three times.Tunisia “is going to be a democratic society, a model in the Arab world,” he said, after a recent conference in Istanbul, where some of Turkey’s conservative leaders look to him as an inspiration and an ally. “The direction of Tunisia’s future is that it will be open to the entire world.”The elections Sunday represent the end of an arc for Mr. Ghannouchi, whose beard has long since turned gray. He began as a follower of Gamal Abdel Nasser, the former Egyptian president and a hero to a generation in the Middle East, and he has an intimate feel for the rest of the Arab world not always shared by his fellow Tunisians. He studied in Egypt and Syria before returning to Tunisia. In 1981, the year Anwar el-Sadat was killed in Egypt, he founded the Islamic Tendency Movement, which denounced violence and endorsed pluralism and democracy.“Rulers benefit from violence more than their opponents do,” he said.The lesson is an old one in the Arab world: secular authoritarian leaders have long derided Islamists as a violent threat, whatever their orientation. They are sometimes proved right; Egypt faced a simmering Islamist insurgency for years after Mr. Sadat was killed. More often, though, states wield far more repression.Soon after founding his group, Mr. Ghannouchi was imprisoned, then released after three years. He was jailed again before leaving for exile for 22 years. He returned to Tunisia on Jan. 30, after the ouster of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.These days, Mr. Ghannouchi acknowledges that Tunisia is not as secular as the capital, Tunis, and the coast might suggest. His language overlaps with that of Christian conservatives in its emphasis on family and community. But he has sought to reassure Tunisians that his party’s success will not harm tourism — with a ban on alcohol, for instance — or lead to the enforcement of the most visible symbol of piety, the veil. He speaks of rights for workers and women, and suggests that his socioeconomic model would look Scandinavian.Perhaps most important, he and other parties seem to have learned the lesson of their own experience in elections in Tunisia in 1989. Though they were thought to have done well, the vote was rigged. They looked also to Algeria, and the 1992 coup.Mr. Ghannouchi said that even if the party won a majority in the elections, a coalition was essential not only to draft the constitution but also to run Tunisia during the transition. The negotiations have already begun, he added, with more than one party.“We think that in the interim period — five years for example — Ennahda cannot face challenges alone,” he said, referring to his party’s Arabic name, which is sometimes rendered Al Nahda. “That is why the most important slogan that we can raise at this moment is consensus and not strife.”Some secular groups seem amenable to a coalition, though the largest of them is balking. Its leaders have suggested that secular forces could come together in a majority if Ennahda wins only a plurality — a possibility Mr. Ghannouchi termed “a circumvention of democracy.”“Tunisians will not be fooled by those who use religion to influence people,” said Maya Jribi, secretary general of the Progressive Democratic Party. “Our only competition is Ennahda.”Deep suspicions linger in Tunisia. Some in Ennahda suspect that an old guard that remains from the fallen president’s days may try to rig the vote. Secular figures still distrust Mr. Ghannouchi’s intentions and worry about the prospect of a bigger voice by radical groups, like Hizb al-Tahrir. In an online debate with Mr. Ghannouchi, Naila Silini, a professor at the University of Sousse, warned that Islamists had yet to be “domesticated.”“What will democracy be like if it coexists with the application of Islamic law?” she asked. How, she added, could dissenting voices contest “the application of religious law, which is a law they want and that they have, wrongfully, attributed to God?”Many of those secular figures point to acts of intolerance; last week, the police used tear gas to disperse thousands protesting an animated film they deemed blasphemous. The house of the owner of the television station that broadcast the film, “Persepolis,” was firebombed.Mr. Ghannouchi and his colleagues blame the most puritanical elements for the unrest, and, indeed, Ennahda has sought to distance itself from them, some of whom call not for democracy but for the restoration of a caliphate. But in a news conference on Wednesday, he was less restrained in his criticism of secular forces, attacking them for “fear mongering” about the threat of a hard-line Islamist takeover if Ennahda wins power.“They are spreading fear against Ennahda as if Ennahda is an alien body,” he said. “How can a party so popular be presented as something that is alien and terrifying?”In the end, Mr. Ghannouchi counseled patience.He said he admired the success of Turkey’s Justice and Development Party, a group with roots in political Islam that disavows the term. Conservative is the preferred word. He sees the moment as bigger than Tunisia, too, as economic woes rack Europe and the United States, riots flare in London and protests gather in New York, Rome and elsewhere. Old models are crumbling, he said, and he and other Islamists believe they offer an alternative embedded in morality and a sense of community. “Capitalism is now facing a crisis,” he said.Mr. Ghannouchi is not running in the elections, and he has promised not to run for president or serve in the cabinet. Revolutionary politics, he said, should be left to those with “dark hair.” But that conviction does not diminish the prospect of casting his vote.“It will be the first time in my life,” he said, “when I am at the end of my life.”