https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/dining/abcv-review-vegetables-restaurant-jean-georges-vongerichten.html
Vegetables With Benefits at ABCV - The New York Times
Restaurants,ABCV (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Vongerichten  Jean-Georges,Flatiron District (Manhattan  NY)
July 3, 2017
9544
Warnings about the risks of eating raw shellfish and eggs are now fairly routine on menus. Somewhat less common are disclaimers like the one that appears next to an asterisk on the drinks menu of Jean-Georges Vongerichten’s latest restaurant, ABCV:“These statements have not been evaluated by the FDA. These products are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease. If you are pregnant, nursing, have a medical condition or take medications, please consult with a healthcare professional before use.”This note refers to a group of juice blends with ingredients from ayurvedic and other medical traditions, and what the Food and Drug Administration has not signed off on are not so much statements as nebulous targets that the juices may or may not hit. The first one I drank was tangerine and black currant juice dosed with rhodiola, St. John’s wort and albizia, which some believe fight anxiety and depression. ABCV calls this beverage Joy.Those who follow Mr. Vongerichten know the chef to be a protean shape-shifter. Over the years, he has championed Asian fusion, luxe American comfort food and border-dissolving pan-Latinism, among other things, all while holding down the fort of modern haute cuisine at Jean-Georges. Still, it is a bit surprising to see him pop up as a pitchman for drinks that require cutting and pasting verbiage from section 101.93 of the Code of Federal Regulations.The V in ABCV performs triple duty, standing for vegetables, vibrations and Vongerichten. It does not officially signify vegan, although many things on the menu are. Sustainable farming is favored. Ingredients whose genes have been monkeyed with are avoided. The aromas of cooking animal flesh do not pollute the atmosphere of the dining room, which is loftlike and white with a few brightly colored chairs, like the lounge in “2001: A Space Odyssey.” ABCV sits on East 19th Street, inside ABC Carpet & Home and side by side with ABC Kitchen and ABC Cocina. Mr. Vongerichten owns and operates all three with Paulette Cole, the store’s proprietor.Sustainability was a theme in the first two ABC restaurants, but ABCV extends the idea into a boutique wellness exercise. It is the sort of restaurant where the menu has a preface. ABCV, it explains, “is here to serve, inform and inspire a cultural shift towards plant-based intelligence.” The food is not simply vegetarian. It is “high vibration,” and has the goal of nurturing “our personal and planetary ecosystems.”An insert within the menu, illustrated with pretty watercolor drawings, goes into detail on the health benefits of various plants you may encounter.I found the menu’s prose mildly indigestible, but the food it describes is light, colorful, fresh and easy to like. Some of it is memorable, and none of it makes you feel as if you have asked your stomach to do things it wasn’t meant to do. These are the two sides of ABCV: a missionary message combined with cooking that has a large measure of creativity and surprise. I guess that qualifies as “high vibration.”Some of the most engaging courses at ABCV are dips. The gold medal in this event goes to the green hummus made with fresh chickpeas and Thai basil and served with substantial puffs of whole-grain pita. Good hummus has many fine qualities, but it is rarely exciting. This is. Running a close second is the labneh fortified with shallots, which give it some of the charm of an old-fashioned cocktail-party onion dip. It is great on purple potato chips or cucumbers (“a warrior against hypertension and heart disease”).Mr. Vongerichten and his chef de cuisine, Neal Harden, focus their salads in ways that turn them into precise statements. There’s nothing random about the pairing of bitter radicchio with ripe strawberries, a few of which are crushed so they get smeared around the purple leaves and join forces with the saffron vinaigrette.Warm appetizers are built with a similar care. Grilled caps of donko shiitakes the size of muffin tops are spread with a green goddess dressing with a tingling charge of yuzukosho. The mushrooms (whose B vitamins help “manage physical and emotional stress”) come with caramelized fennel, a more apt partner than you might guess.Roasted carrots (“eat with oil or a fat to absorb the full benefit of her beta-carotene”) are spritzed with lime and piled over an excellent and spicy butter, ground from toasted nuts and seeds.All of this is many miles away in flavor and charisma from the dour school of vegetable cookery that has been dished out recently by young, Nordic-influenced chefs I think of as the Brotherhood of the Charred Sunchoke. These chefs avoid the spices, citrus and chiles of warmer climates, presumably in tribute to their North Star, the Copenhagen restaurant Noma.Mr. Vongerichten and Mr. Harden aren’t playing in that sandbox. They’ve got their own toys. When a squirt of lime juice can help, squirt they will.One or two dishes struck this omnivore as not quite complete. A plate of crisp, salty, horseradish-spiked sauerkraut made from savoy cabbage was a little monotonous on its own. I’ll bet it’s fantastic on a hot dog.I also wanted more heft from the parts of the menu headed “noodles and rice” and “legumes and grains.” In the wild rice with spring vegetables and fermented carrots, rice was an ensemble player, not the lead.And when my server recommended the spinach spaghetti by means of a story about cooking pasta at his mother’s side, I was hoping for more than a sparrow’s nest of green noodles under a mulch of kale and broccoli (“a cruciferous that prevents premature aging”). The flavors were very good, livened up with preserved lemons, but I had to manage my stomach’s expectations.Desserts are unpredictable. You could get a grainy, thick, cakelike pudding trying to pass for chocolate mousse. Or you could have an exemplary pavlova outfitted with strawberries and rhubarb.And yet, I always got up from the table feeling pretty good. True, the health claims are not made in a style that appeals to everyone. ABCV goes in a little too much for the Goop style of transactional nutrition: If you eat X, then Y will (or won’t) happen.But since I tend to treat nutritional advice the way the owner of a new Lamborghini treats speed-limit signs, I sent ABCV’s menu to Jeffrey B. Blumberg, who researches antioxidants at Tufts University. For the most part, he approved. The specific claims looked largely accurate to him, and the more general ones struck him as vague enough to be harmless.“I’m not giving it a scientific endorsement for precision,” Dr. Blumberg said. “But this kind of information, in a very subtle way, gives you the idea that each of these plant foods gives you different things. And if you put enough of them on your plate, you’ll be eating according to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which very few people follow.”Did I eat more vegetables than usual at ABCV? Yes. Will it stop me from aging? Time will tell. Did my Joy bring me joy? Maybe not, but it didn’t make matters worse, either.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.