https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/world/middleeast/italy-warns-egypt-giulio-regeni-death.html
Italian Official Warns Egypt Over Inquiry Into Student’s Death - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Regeni  Giulio (d 2016),Gentiloni  Paolo,Italy,Egypt
April 5, 2016
8836
CAIRO —  The foreign minister of Italy said Tuesday that his government would take “immediate and proportional” measures against Egypt if it failed to help uncover the truth behind the death of an Italian graduate student in Cairo two months ago.“We will stop only when we will find the truth, the real one,” Foreign Minister Paolo Gentiloni told Parliament, adding that he would not accept any “fabrication.”The threat by Mr. Gentiloni came the day before a team of Egyptian investigators was scheduled to land in Rome for meetings on the case of the student, Giulio Regeni, 28, a doctoral candidate, whose brutalized body was discovered on a roadside in February in Cairo.A slow-moving investigation into the killing, hampered by troubled cooperation between the Italian and Egyptian police, has prompted Italian accusations of an Egyptian cover-up.Five Egyptian investigators and prosecutors were scheduled to meet with their Italian counterparts on Thursday in Rome. The Italians are demanding data from Mr. Regeni’s cellphone and footage from surveillance cameras in the Cairo neighborhood where he disappeared on Jan. 25.Mr. Regeni’s body was found nine days later bearing signs of torture, including cigarette burns, broken bones and head wounds that were consistent with forms of abuse associated with the Egyptian security forces.Egyptian officials claimed a breakthrough last month in the investigation of the death of Mr. Regeni after police officers shot dead five men they said were part of a gang that kidnapped foreigners.Officers later said they found Mr. Regeni’s passport and student card at an apartment linked to the slain suspects.The explanation elicited scorn and disbelief in Italy, where members of Mr. Regeni’s family and the Italian government suspected that the Egyptian government, already under fire for its poor human rights record, was seeking to divert attention from the possibility that Mr. Regeni had been killed by members of Egypt’s security forces. Last week Mr. Regeni’s mother, Paola, said that her son’s body had been so disfigured that she could only recognize him by the tip of his nose. “I won’t tell you what they had done to him,” Mrs. Regeni said. “I saw all the evil of the world in that.”Mrs. Regeni threatened to release graphic photographs of her son’s body if his killers were not found.Although the Egyptian news media and some officials have for weeks floated lurid theories about how Mr. Regeni died, many Egyptians are becoming increasingly vocal about their alarm over the case.The mother of Khaled Said, a young Egyptian whose death at the hands of two police officers in 2010 was seen as a motivating factor in public protests that led to the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak in early 2011, released an emotional video addressing Mrs. Regeni. “I feel for you and feel your pain,” said the mother, Laila Marzouk. “I will continue the journey of your son.”On Sunday, the editor in chief of Al Ahram, Egypt’s top state newspaper, published an unusually sharp denunciation of the government’s handling of Mr. Regeni’s case. The officials’ lack of understanding of “the value of truth, to say nothing of the priority given to human rights in European societies, places the Egyptian state in an embarrassing and extremely grave predicament,” said the editor, Mohammed Abdel-Hadi Allam, in a front-page article.Others raised questions about the theory that Mr. Regeni had been killed by a gang of kidnappers.Relatives of the five men killed by the police, apparently in a shootout at a checkpoint in a Cairo suburb, said they believed that they had in fact been executed. Moamen Tawfeeq said the body of his 21-year-old nephew, which he had identified in a morgue, had just one bullet wound to the head. “He was killed in cold blood,” Mr. Tawfeeq said.A police spokesman, Abu Bakr Abdel Karim, could not be reached for comment on the case.Egypt’s president, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, has repeatedly dismissed suggestions that the allegations of police brutality represent a broader trend. But in recent months, his government has imposed a harsh crackdown on journalists, human rights activists and aid groups that document torture, disappearances and other rights abuses.On Tuesday, officials moved to close down the Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture, the most prominent Egyptian organization tracking patterns of police abuse.The authorities had been threatening to close the organization for months, ostensibly for a health violation, in what was widely seen as part of a broader assault on independent associations that monitor government abuse.But health officials sent to close the building left after employees refused to leave, said Aida Seif al-Dawla, one of the group’s founders.“I don’t know what will happen next,” Ms. Seif al-Dawla said. “I am expecting anything.”