https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/opinion/senator-mccains-health-and-americas.html
Senator McCain’s Health, and America’s - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),McConnell  Mitch,McCain  John,Health Insurance and Managed Care,United States Politics and Government,Law and Legislation
July 17, 2017
471
To the Editor:Re “As Doubts Grow, Top Republicans Vow Health Vote” (front page, July 17):Senator John McCain is recovering from what must have been very costly surgery involving the best doctors in one of the top American medical facilities, the Mayo Clinic Hospital in Phoenix, and he is presumably not facing financial hardship because of it.Meanwhile, the Republicans in the Senate are waiting for him to come back and vote for a bill that, according to Senator Susan Collins, a true stateswoman, “would affect some of the most vulnerable people in our society, including disabled children, poor seniors.” She added: “It would affect our rural hospitals and our nursing homes. And they would have a very difficult time even staying in existence.”In other words, the legislation would bring severe financial hardship and untimely death to more Americans.I pray that the quiet of convalescence will give Senator McCain a chance to reflect that his position in government is meant to serve the common  good and a more compassionate agenda than his party’s leaders are proposing.KAREN LEAHY, MOUNT VERNON, N.Y.To the Editor:Re “McCain Out, Senate Puts Off Health Care Votes” (front page, July 16):If a Democratic senator had needed surgery, do you think that Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, would have postponed voting on the health care bill?Not a chance.WILLIAM O’FALLON BRENTWOOD, TENN.To the Editor:Re “Republican Health Bill Stirs Fear of a Return to ‘Junk Insurance’ ” (news article, July 16):The Affordable Care Act above all else established a national standard for health care that eliminated junk insurance. In many ways it was an evolutionary medical triumph. Its features are incredibly popular. Repealing and replacing it with junk policies and sham insurance amounts to a national disgrace.There are three malevolent forces pushing for this change. We have Donald Trump, a president who simply wants a “win” regardless of how much human damage it will cause.We have Tom Price, a former congressman and physician whom Mr. Trump appointed as secretary of health and human services to destroy the health care law. Secretary Price in no way represents the mainstream of American medicine, whose members want to preserve and improve the law.And we have Senator Mitch McConnell, a politician who despite the rhetoric knows that he is destroying meaningful health care for millions of Americans.Guaranteed health care is a human right. Where is the humanity? Where is the human decency? Where is the care? We who are doctors are enraged at the sham that is now being proposed.HOWARD A. CORWIN CENTER LOVELL, ME.The writer is a retired clinical professor in psychiatry at the Tufts University School of Medicine.To the Editor:Re “Even Worse: New Senate Health Care Bill” (editorial, July 14):It’s a simple message to constituents: Get sick, and you are on your own. How mean can mean get? Congress has, by stealth, figured out the way.Members of Congress, who are fortunate to have well-paying official positions plus major health care subsidies paid for by taxpayers, seem ferocious in their push to deny basic and vital medical assistance to people who are have-nots!What kind of human beings are so without empathy for the “other”? To serve the American people, as Congress claims to do, requires a strong moral code. Do the right thing!JOAN MELTZER, STAMFORD, CONN.To the Editor:In the health care debate, the distinction between healthy people and sick people should be erased, as we all move from the first category to the second at some point, often suddenly.Routinely in my dermatology practice, a patient with a new ailment exclaims, with seeming incredulity, “But, Doctor, I never had this before!” My response: “You don’t have anything, until you have it.”Likewise, with insurance, you don’t need it until you need it.WENDY LIVINGSTON MOUNTAIN LAKES, N.J.