https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/23/world/asia/beijing-smog-alerts.html
Beijing to Raise Threshold on Red Alerts for Smog - The New York Times
Beijing (China),Air Pollution,China,Xinhua
Feb. 22, 2016
4794
BEIJING — The first red alert over air pollution in the Chinese capital almost brought this city to a standstill in December, with schools shut, construction halted and driving restricted. Now, in a swift policy shift, Beijing plans to issue a red alert based on higher thresholds, despite government pledges to better address the toxic air.A red alert, the highest level of a four-tier warning system, will be issued if the daily average air quality index is forecast to exceed 500 for one day, 300 for two days or 200 for four days, Xinhua, the state news agency, reported on Sunday, quoting Beijing’s environmental agency. The new standards will take effect before the end of March, it said.The air quality index, used in many countries, is an aggregate measure of various pollutants in the air. Currently, any reading above 200 for more than three days in Beijing will prompt a red alert, which activates numerous contingency plans that can disrupt jobs and businesses.Beijing’s air quality is among the worst in the world, and much of the smog comes from industrial pollution and the burning of coal.The red alert issued in December came as a surprise to many because air pollution in the city had routinely been worse. A number of times during the winter over the past three years, the air quality index exceeded 500, a level deemed hazardous to human health. Those “off-the-charts” episodes did not activate red alerts, even though the state news media instructed people to reduce their outdoor activities.The new standards will also be applied to neighboring provinces that have suffered from severe air pollution, Xinhua reported.Ma Jun, a prominent environmental researcher in Beijing, said the change highlighted officials’ worries about the social disruption a red alert could cause. With the new standards, he said, officials must reassess some of the contingency measures that come with the warning.“There will be multiple times of red alerts in a year if we continue using the current standards, which will bring about a high social and economic cost,” Mr. Ma said, alluding to the contingency measures. They include the closing of factories and schools and strict limits on the use of cars.Among the issues at stake is children’s health, he said, arguing for the need to re-evaluate the emergency measures after the imposition of the new standards. The Xinhua report said the response measures would remain the same, but each city affected would be able to decide if primary and middle schools should be temporarily closed.Mr. Ma argued that schools should continue to be closed even if Beijing declared a lower warning.Next week, the Chinese Communist Party will convene its Parliament, where air pollution is expected to be a major topic.The Chinese news media reported over the weekend that Beijing was considering a plan to build five ventilation corridors to improve urban air circulation. The corridors, each at least 1,500 feet wide, would run through the city, passing through parks, inner-city lakes and public spaces. Also being planned, the reports said, are an unspecified number of narrower corridors. It is not clear how much the project would cost or when it would be finished.“The main role of ventilation corridors is to reduce the blockage of wind by the city to facilitate a heat exchange between the city and its peripheries and the spread of pollutants,” Wang Fei, vice director of the Beijing Municipal Commission of Urban Planning, was quoted by Xinhua as saying.“Thus, the urban heat island effect and pollution can be reduced,” Mr. Wang said, using a term for warmth in urban areas caused by human activity.The announcement followed the publishing last week of an opinion piece on the website of the government-controlled China Science Daily, officially called Science Times in English. It said the root cause of the smog in Beijing was declining wind power, which it said was the result of an increased planting of trees where none had been before, lower atmospheric pressure and desertification in Inner Mongolia, a province north of Beijing.“We couldn’t help asking, did we plant the trees in the wrong place?” the article said. It also attacked the widely held view that smog comes from automobile exhaust, coal burning and industrial emissions, labeling such beliefs “ridiculous.”Liu Shuhua, a professor of atmospheric sciences at Peking University, expressed doubts about the ventilation corridors.“The weak vertical atmospheric circulation means ventilation corridors will have a very limited role to play,” he said. “They will only improve ground ventilation.”More studies need to be undertaken to back up Beijing’s plan to build ventilation corridors, and many details are still lacking, said Edward Ng, a professor at the School of Architecture of the Chinese University of Hong Kong who helped design ventilation corridors in Hong Kong.“Beijing has very low ground wind,” he said, meaning that the corridors would not be effective to disperse smog. He said that reducing industrial emissions remained crucial to tackling the issue.But, he said, many Chinese cities are hoping to join Beijing in the development of such tools. He said he would be in Xi’an, the capital of the northwestern province of Shaanxi, this week to discuss a plan to build ventilation corridors with officials there.