https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/16/nyregion/melissa-mark-viverito-council-speaker.html
Melissa Mark-Viverito Focuses on Her Passions in Final State of the City Address - The New York Times
State of the City Message (NYC),City Councils,City Council (NYC),Mark-Viverito  Melissa,New York City
Feb. 16, 2017
7690
Melissa Mark-Viverito on Thursday delivered her last State of the City address as the speaker of the New York City Council, peppering the speech with policy, Spanish and invocations of immigrant contributions — and lacing it with allusions to, but no direct mention of, President Trump.The 58-minute speech was delivered in the towering King Theater in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, and included topics central to Ms. Mark-Viverito’s three years as speaker: criminal justice reform, immigration, gender equity and diversity in city programs. She repeated her desire, first articulated in her speech last year, to close the jail complex on Rikers Island.In perhaps the most consequential moment, she announced that the Council would work with four of the city’s five district attorneys — Staten Island being the lone holdout — to do away with outstanding warrants for low-level summonses that were more than 10 years old. Hundreds of thousands of such warrants exist, with the potential to result in the arrest of New Yorkers who have had no contact with the police for years, or even decades.“The punishment must fit the crime,” Ms. Mark-Viverito said, recalling her efforts to create a new system for handling low-level offenses like drinking in public and public urination.The administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio threw its support behind the effort “to vacate nonviolent summons warrants that are older than 10 years,” said Austin Finan, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio.Ms. Mark-Viverito, a Democrat, also said the City Council would pass legislation over the next year to block federal immigration agents from entering “private areas on city property and offices where New Yorkers receive social services” without a warrant or a court order. Federal agents are already barred in most cases from entering schools, according to federal rules, and nonpublic areas of city buildings are also off-limits, city officials said.Nevertheless, the speaker’s proposal was greeted with applause from an audience of elected leaders, community activists and city residents, many of whom have been on edge over Mr. Trump’s promise to increase deportations. As Ms. Mark-Viverito spoke, Mr. Trump held a freewheeling, combative news conference, and a comparison of the two events emerged in the social media accounts of many in the city’s political class.“The speaker’s message today of justice and inclusion and respect for all stands in marked contrast with the messages of bigotry and hate from Washington,” said Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. “Makes me proud to be a New Yorker.”Ms. Mark-Viverito’s presentation began shortly after noon with a moment of levity: a tongue-and-cheek video of her trying her hand at rap, comedy and theater as if her future might include those endeavors.With less than a year left in the Council, her next step has been the subject of speculation because she cannot seek another term. She has been considering a run for office in Puerto Rico, where she was born, and a campaign for mayor of New York City, though aides have cautioned she would not challenge Mr. de Blasio, who helped secure her place as speaker in 2014.The race to succeed her — which has already attracted intense interest in the 51-member body — also emerged in the proceedings on Thursday.“A fun fact about the New York City Council, every single one of us is running for speaker of the City Council,” Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer of Queens, who counts himself among those vying for the job, said in remarks at the start.Ms. Mark-Viverito’s three years as speaker have been notable, said those in the Council, for progressive legislation and for changes in rules that have given members more freedom to introduce bills and that have reformed the system of so-called member items to increase fairness. “From carwash owners to freelancers, this Council has advanced the rights of workers,” said Councilman Brad Lander of Brooklyn.Though her address included only brief mention of the mayor — noting his backing of new legal services to help tenants in housing court — many in the audience found themselves comparing it with the State of the City message delivered by Mr. de Blasio.The mayor, a Democrat who gave his speech on Monday night from notes but without a text or teleprompter, focused on jobs and the affordability of the city; critical issues like homelessness and schools were, by design, not addressed. The word immigration did not come up in his speech.The locations of the speeches were the subject of behind-the-scenes wrangling in the de Blasio administration: The mayor’s staff had selected the Kings Theater, which has returned to its glory after decades of disrepair and disuse, as the venue for his speech, only to find out in January that the speaker’s office had reserved it, according to two people with direct knowledge of the conversations.The theater has particular resonance as a symbol of a resurgent Brooklyn and of the city’s investment in minority neighborhoods.Eventually the mayor decided to hold his address in the Apollo Theater instead, according to the people, who requested anonymity to discuss the private conversations.“We looked at a lot of locations,” said Eric F. Phillips, the mayor’s press secretary.