http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/02/nyregion/new-york-passes-state-budget-hours-after-midnight-deadline.html
New York State Budget Is Passed Just After Deadline - The New York Times
New York State,Cuomo  Andrew M,Budgets and Budgeting,State Legislatures
April 1, 2015
7482
ALBANY — For Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, on-time budgets are a serious point of pride, a symbol that he has restored order in the capital. This year, he sacrificed many of his top proposals to clear the way for the punctual approval of the budget.But as midnight struck and the state’s new fiscal year began on Wednesday, there was only one problem: Lawmakers were not quite finished.Some of Mr. Cuomo’s opponents reveled in the moment. State Assemblyman Steven F. McLaughlin, a Republican from the Albany region, jabbed him on Twitter.After missing the midnight deadline, the State Assembly finished passing budget bills shortly before 3 a.m. No fiscal calamity ensued in the meantime. But the slight tardiness robbed Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, of a beloved talking point.In past years, Mr. Cuomo has handed out souvenirs to commemorate his streak of on-time budgets. Any similar celebration this year would probably come with an asterisk.“Tonight, both houses of the Legislature have successfully passed the 2015-16 budget spending plan to allow for the continued operation of government,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement issued shortly after midnight.Mr. Cuomo and legislative leaders announced an agreement on the roughly $150 billion budget on Sunday night, which seemed to put them on track to complete the spending plan by the deadline. But negotiations on some portions of the budget, particularly a contentious package of education proposals, still needed to be resolved.The Republican-controlled Senate finished passing budget bills with about an hour to spare on Tuesday night. But debate over the spending plan stretched for hours in the Assembly, which is controlled by Democrats, pushing it past midnight.Some lawmakers considered another deadline. “The bars don’t close till 4, so we still have time,” Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., a Manhattan Democrat, joked around 2:30 a.m., after a colleague mentioned the late hour.Compared with New York’s long history of late budgets, the performance this year was admirable. The last late budget, in 2010, did not miss the mark by a few hours: It was 125 days late.The minor lateness of the budget never appeared to pose any threat to the functioning of state government. In fact, some lawmakers argued that the budget should not be considered late because critical spending bills were approved before the midnight deadline.“All of the operations of government were done before midnight,” said Carl E. Heastie, a Bronx Democrat, who negotiated his first budget as Assembly speaker. “It’s on time.”One legislator with unusual expertise took the same view.The lawmaker, Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, negotiated many budgets as speaker, a position he relinquished after his arrest in January on federal corruption charges.“If we walked out of here today — right now — there would be no shutdown in government,” Mr. Silver said around midnight. “Every agency will operate.”Mr. Silver, in his new seat in the back row of the Assembly chamber, reflected on budgets over the years.“Some are smoother, some are less smooth,” he said. “We all hit bumps in the road at some point.”