https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/19/upshot/how-much-did-health-insurance-rates-go-up-its-complicated.html
How Much Did Health Insurance Rates Go Up? It’s Complicated - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),United States
Nov. 18, 2014
9285
Americans could find the new insurance rates for the Affordable Care Act in online marketplaces last week. Prices of many plans went up. But just how much depends on how you measured them.Shortly after the numbers were released, think tanks, consultants and reporters all crunched the data to produce varying estimates of what’s happening to insurance premiums in the new marketplaces. (The Upshot, of course, had its own take on the numbers.)The bottom line is that it’s not easy to say simply whether premiums are going up, or by how much. The health law set up marketplaces that allow for state regulation of insurance and regional variation in prices. It also offers a wide variety of insurance plans. That’s the consequence of the structure the Affordable Care Act envisioned: lots of plans competing on price and features in local markets.But it makes it hard to walk away with any single measure of what’s happening to rates.“There are many ways of looking at this depending on what you care about,” said Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation, which offered one take on the rates last week. “Are you looking at this from the perspective of a consumer looking to renew coverage? Are you looking at this from the point of view of a new person looking at their options? Are you looking at this from the perspective of federal budget?”Here’s our guide to the most popular ways of looking at the question so far, and the advantages and disadvantages of each.State averages. The consulting firm PWC has been publishing average rate increases for each state for several months, as prices have been reported to insurance regulators. Reporters at The Washington Post also published their versions of state numbers, though they limited their average to prices for a particular category of plan. The Post analysis of rates in federally run marketplaces found that prices are increasing in 25 states and declining in nine.The state numbers have the advantage of simplifying a really complicated picture, and it’s similar to the way that people talk about insurance rate changes in the more familiar employer market. But while employer plan averages focus on the plans that employers actually chose, marketplace averages include a lot of plans that very few customers bought or will buy. In 2014, nearly all shoppers chose among just four plans in every market — the two cheapest plans in two categories. Average rates include much costlier offerings that got almost no market share in 2014, and probably include plans that no one will buy in 2015, either.Lowest-cost “silvers.” This was the most popular plan in the 2014 marketplaces, and it seems reasonable to think that new shoppers in 2015 will also gravitate toward these plans. Silver plans are required to cover 70 percent of the average patient’s medical bills, and lower-income people who buy them can get additional help with deductibles and co-payments. Insurers who were competing for business were clearly shooting to be the lowest-cost plan in this category. A New York Times analysis looked at these plans at the county level. For people entering the market for the first time, knowing what’s happening with the low-cost silvers is probably the most important thing, since it’s the plan they are most likely to buy, especially if they qualify for federal subsidies. The Times analysis didn’t offer any summary statistics, but noted that prices were increasing by more than 10 percent in a fifth of United States counties.But we know that the lowest-cost silvers don’t capture the entire market. Many people who bought 2014’s cheapest silver plan may just renew it in 2015, and most of those plans are no longest the cheapest in their area.Benchmarks. The health law gave a special status to a particular plan in each market: the second-cheapest plan in the “silver” category. That plan is used to calculate the tax credits that help middle-income Americans pay their premiums, so it has a lot of significance for the federal budget. It was also a pretty popular choice in 2014, though not the most popular. The Kaiser Family Foundation, among other groups, focused on these plans at the county level, because they tell you a lot about what the plans will cost the federal government. The Kaiser analysis found an average rate increase of only 2 percent for the benchmark, lower than many analysts had predicted.Shop vs. Renew. The Upshot analysis, aided by data from the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform, looked at two numbers for each geographic area known as a ratings area. We compared the 2014 and 2015 lowest-cost silver plans. But we also looked at what happened to the specific plans that were the cheapest silvers in 2015. Our goal was to show the very large differences consumers would experience if they switched plans to get the lowest price, vs. simply renewing the plans they had the year before. We relied on ratings areas, because insurance plans used them to report their rates to insurance regulators, making it possible to quickly match plans from 2014 with their counterparts in 2015. Our typical increase for a customer who renews a plan was 9.7 percent, while someone willing to switch would see an average increase of 3.4 percent.A shortcoming of our approach is that not everyone who lives in a ratings area can buy the cheapest plan offered there. In some states, products are offered in smaller geographic areas, down to the county or even the ZIP code.There are lots of new and cheap plans this year, and we don’t know how many customers will switch or how many new customers will enter the market, so weighted averages based on 2014 enrollment will overstate increases. Straight averages of county or ratings area changes fail to capture the differences in population. But measurements of who signs up for insurance in a given place isn’t quite proportional to overall population, either. These considerations explain why we’re seeing a range of average increases.The Upshot analysis included a straight average of ratings areas with data. We called this a “typical” increase. Kaiser provided a straight average of county rates. The consulting firm Avalere Health provided the average change by state for the four most popular plans in each market: cheapest silvers, benchmarks, and the cheapest and second-cheapest “bronze” plans.The truth is that we won’t really know how much prices went up for people in the marketplaces until we learn how many people entered the market and what plans they picked.