http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/20/dining/reviews/hungry-city-skal-in-chinatown.html
Hungry City: Skal in Chinatown - The New York Times
Restaurants,Chinatown (Manhattan  NY),Skal (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Skal (NYC)
Nov. 14, 2013
9555
At Skal, three little smelt lie in a chipped bowl, crispy tails flipped upward. You expect crunch and maybe a whiff of the sea, nothing more. But what you get is subtler and stranger: a texture like sopped bread and a burst of brine, both from within (the smelt are stuffed with capers) and without (a splash of apple cider vinegar after the smelt are dusted with rye flour and fried).This is a lot of work for a small fish. It suggests a certain stoicism in the kitchen, which, more than the ubiquity of pickling and the presence of juniper, buttermilk and seaweed on the menu, testifies to Skal’s Nordic spirit.Early reports on the restaurant, which opened in August on a spartan corner of far eastern Chinatown, described it as Icelandic. The name, pronounced scowl, is an Icelandic drinking toast; one of the owners, Olibjorn Stephensen, is from Reykjavik; and the décor approximates a cottage overlooking the steely North Atlantic, with hand-me-down china on the wall, tables painted glacier blue and shelves of Icelandic children’s books like “A Puffin Called Fido.”But there are no regional specialties here, no puffin jerky or dung-smoked lamb or hakarl, made from a species of shark whose flesh has such a high urea content that to be rendered edible it must be buried and left to rot underground. Instead, the cooking tilts toward Noma, in Copenhagen. The 26-year-old chef, Ben Spiegel, a Canadian, apprenticed there for five months and cooked in the Noma style at the Willows Inn on Lummi Island in Washington.His dishes are less abstract and more frankly appealing than those at fellow-traveling Aska in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Duck wings are meaty and smoky, almost pub food despite a drapery of seaweed and an underlay of pulverized mussels and squid ink, which sounds like something a puffin might eat but registers as a kind of goth mayonnaise.In places, the menu reads like a bistro’s: croquettes, tartare, steak. But those croquettes are made from cod salted in-house and swollen with lamb fat and lamb gribenes. The tartare is a sublime chaos of jagged cuts, some chewy, some tender, bound together by minced clams whose creaminess substitutes for egg yolk. As for the steak, it is respectable but ordinary, eclipsed by the accompanying “tonnato,” in which salted herring, imported from Iceland, plays the part of tuna, with more brio.Likewise, Berkshire pork shoulder is secondary to roasted tendrils of spigarello and poached wheat berries, monkfish to cabbage blackened at the edges and a cauliflower purée that achieves the loft of mashed potatoes. Lamb — aged in-house and slow-roasted in a crockpot filled with hay — seems just an excuse to serve the sunchokes that cook alongside it until they lose structure.Mr. Spiegel speaks of his ingredients fondly (“That’s my favorite cabbage”) and reminisces about their origins as if flipping through a family album. Perhaps this intimacy explains the depth of flavor he coaxes from vegetables. The best dish I ate at Skal was De Cicco broccoli, charred on one side and almost raw on the other, so that a single bite encompasses bitterness and a grassy clarity. It gets a little help from the animal kingdom, with an emulsion of duck eggs, fermented green garlic and fermented fish sauce and a crumble of panko and anchovies fried in chicken fat.There are wobbles in the kitchen. A boudin blanc, velvety with cream and Armagnac, is meant as a homage to the Icelandic hot dog, but it comes across as straight-up French. Oysters, served atop inverted clam and whelk shells embedded in ice, are doused with fermented cucumbers (basically, pickle juice), which is all you taste. One evening, heirloom carrots, glazed with honey heated to the brink of burning, were too sticky-sweet; walleye pike, basted with verbena, was delicate to the point of absence.But then came a small, fragile dessert of beetroot, Concord grapes, sorrel granita and skyr (a soft, tangy, yogurt-like cheese). The list of ingredients, greeted by my dining companions as preposterous, did not prepare us for its baffling, beguiling just-shy-of-sweetness, nor for its hairpin turns of snap and resistance, dissolve and cling.My table fell silent. Suddenly we were all believers.