http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/04/upshot/how-economists-can-be-just-as-irrational-as-the-rest-of-us.html
How Economists Can Be Just as Irrational as the Rest of Us - The New York Times
National Bureau of Economic Research,Economics (Theory and Philosophy),Research
Sept. 4, 2015
9274
Retailers know that the items they place at eye level of store shelves will sell faster than those that are down low. The top headline on a news website will usually be clicked more often than the ones down lower. So maybe it shouldn’t be surprising that the same logic applies to economics research, with long-lasting implications for what ideas are propagated.Economists, they’re just like us.That was a conclusion of a National Bureau of Economic Research working paper earlier this year that studied downloads of other National Bureau of Economic Research working papers. The group, a Cambridge, Mass. nonprofit devoted to, well, economic research, sends out an email every Monday morning with summaries of its latest working papers to 23,000 subscribers.No editorial judgment goes into the sequence in which the working papers appear. It is random, based on the order in which the paper was submitted and in which the N.B.E.R. approval process was completed. In other words, there is no inherent reason to think that the first paper listed is more groundbreaking, important or interesting than the third or 17th.But a lot more people read the first one listed. Showing up first in the email generated a 33 percent increase in the number of people who clicked on the working paper and a 29 percent increase in the number who downloaded it.Perhaps even more amazing, it wasn’t just that more people pulled up the paper that appeared first. Those papers also received 27 percent more citations in later research, though that result was based on a relatively small time period. Having the luck to appear first in the email meant that a given working paper had greater influence in subsequent economic research.Since Daniel Feenberg, Ina Ganguli, Patrick Gaule and Jonathan Gruber identified this phenomenon in May (in a paper that unluckily appeared in the 21st spot out of 25 in the list that week), bureau officials have looked for ways to eliminate the unfair advantage. They went with the most obvious one, announced Wednesday: Henceforth, recipients of the weekly email will receive a varying, randomly assigned sequences of papers. They may still click on the first one listed at a higher rate, but different subscribers will see a different paper listed first, so no paper should receive a systematic advantage.It may seem of interest only to the small universe of economists publishing N.B.E.R. working papers, but the episode does offer a broader lesson.“I think it does remind us that the way in which we present information and choices is important,” said James Poterba, the president of the N.B.E.R. That has implications for things like choices in a retirement account or a health insurance package offered by a company. People don’t necessarily make decisions based on specific cost-benefit analysis but can be pointed in one direction by something as simple as the sequence of choices in a list.“The choice architecture is an important and understudied dimension of economic choices,” Mr. Poterba said. Why adopt the new practice of randomizing the emails? “Once you recognize there might be a bias,” he said, “it’s almost a natural default to pursue.”