https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/sports/tennis/in-a-cozy-setting-at-wimbledon-the-womens-game-suffers-an-indignity.html
In a Cozy Setting at Wimbledon, the Women’s Game Suffers an Indignity - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Women and Girls,Kerber  Angelique,Muguruza  Garbine
July 10, 2017
4406
WIMBLEDON, England — The No. 2 Court at Wimbledon is a fine little stadium: well proportioned and intimate, with a capacity of 4,000.On Monday, it was also the site of a slight to women’s tennis.Top-seeded Angelique Kerber, a 2016 Wimbledon finalist, and No. 14 seed Garbiñe Muguruza, a 2015 Wimbledon finalist, shrugged it off, took the court for their fourth-round encounter and played one of the best matches of the tournament.Muguruza came back to prevail, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, and then celebrated in the sunshine, but she should have been playing and celebrating in a much grander setting on No. 1 Court or Centre Court.The scheduling committee had decided otherwise, which seemed both the wrong move and, more important, the wrong message from Wimbledon, which should know better by now.It is undeniably one of the great sports events on the planet — one that has come a long way in its attitude toward outsiders in the 27 years since my first visit.Once a place where the reflexive response was too often “no,” Wimbledon has evolved, its administrators adopting a more open and consensual approach to constructive criticism.They even finally agreed — under duress — to equal prize money for men and women at the 2007 championships and continue to give women big windows of visibility, particularly for singles matches during the second week, with stand-alone days for the quarterfinals and semifinals.But Wimbledon’s approach to the bustling tennis day appropriately known as Manic Monday continues to undermine some of that progress.Equal pay should be coupled with equal treatment, and the decision to stage two men’s singles matches and one women’s singles match each on Centre Court and No. 1 Court no longer adds up. Kerber and Muguruza both expressed surprise, but no rage, at their court assignment on Monday, with Kerber saying she planned to share her reaction with Wimbledon organizers. Other women’s tennis icons used stronger words.“We have equal prize money, so why do we not have equal representation on Centre Court and Court 1?” asked Chris Evert, the former women’s No. 1, in an interview with BBC Radio. “Instead of four men’s matches and two women’s matches, I would like to see, and I think all women would like to see, three men’s matches and three women’s matches to go along with the equal prize money.”It also would have been better to give Jelena Ostapenko, the new star from Latvia, a major court assignment in the first week after her win at the French Open.Instead, she played on Court 18 in Round 1, Court 12 in Round 2, Court 2 in Round 3 and Court 12 again on Monday, where she defeated Elina Svitolina, 6-3, 7-6 (6), to earn a quarterfinal date with Venus Williams.“Crazy to not showcase a young, new Slam champion more in the earlier rounds,” said Roger Rasheed, a leading coach just elected to the ATP board of directors. “It’s a missed opportunity.”There are no contractual obligations that require Wimbledon to maintain this status quo. It is a matter of choice, and according to Richard Lewis, Wimbledon’s chief executive, the decision to stay the imperfect course on Monday was a particularly difficult one this time.“Lots of good matches today, so we were spoiled for choice,” Lewis told me in an interview at the All England Club. “It’s a lovely problem to have, but it was a problem.”By Monday’s end, the club had another problem, this one partly of its own making. The fourth-round duel scheduled for No. 1 Court between Novak Djokovic and Adrian Mannarino — one of the men’s matches that bumped Kerber and Muguruza down the priority list — was pushed back a day after Gilles Müller needed 4 hours 48 minutes to upset Rafael Nadal, 6-3, 6-4, 3-6, 4-6, 15-13.When that epic match ended, darkness was approaching, but Centre Court, with its roof and lights, was empty and apparently available. The club has moved matches in the past from No. 1 to Centre Court, including a third-round match between Gilles Simon and Gaël Monfils in 2015. But this time, Wimbledon officials cited security concerns as a reason to postpone, rather than move, the Djokovic-Mannarino match.“As late as 8:30 p.m., 30,000 people still remained on the grounds,” the club said in a statement. “Therefore, moving the match would have created a significant safety issue.”Security, of course, should always be the primary concern. Opening the gates to Centre Court with that many fans still on the grounds, nearly all in the north end, could have created a rush for available seats. But it is hard to believe Wimbledon did not have better, smarter options somewhere along the way on Monday.Perhaps it could have moved Djokovic and Mannarino after clearing the grounds of all but No. 1 Court ticket holders. Perhaps it should have moved Djokovic and Mannarino to Centre Court right away, when its crowd was still in place after Roger Federer’s 6-4, 6-2, 6-4 romp over Grigor Dimitrov — the last scheduled match on Centre Court.Whatever the details, the outcome was that players on both the women’s and men’s side were treated inequitably on Monday. Either Djokovic or Mannarino will now face Tomas Berdych in the quarterfinals with one less day of rest — a rotten scenario.It is also one that could have been avoided if Wimbledon had scheduled Djokovic and Mannarino — the least compelling of the matches involving the Big Four men — on No. 2 Court, where it belonged in the first place.Call it poetic justice, even if Lewis, a reasonable man, is entitled to disagree.In his view, Wimbledon’s reputation for lingering sexism is unwarranted. The club points to 2016, when, after many years of imbalance, there was an even split of women’s and men’s singles matches on Centre and No. 1 courts.This year has proved trickier, in part, he said, because the Big Four men — Andy Murray, Djokovic, Federer and Nadal — remain major players and all are former Wimbledon champions.“We looked very hard for today at whether Novak or Rafa could go to No. 2 Court, and in the end, we just couldn’t justify it,” Lewis said. “We know the demand for those players when they are playing. We know the demand for tickets, for hospitality, for debentures. There are so many metrics, and it’s not just slightly that way. It’s very strong, and that’s not a criticism of women’s tennis. It’s a reflection of the state we’re in with the golden era of men’s tennis.”But Lewis believes change could be coming, and 2019, when the roof on No. 1 Court is scheduled to be completed, could provide the impetus.With two courts with roofs and lights, start times could be advanced to accommodate four singles matches — two men’s singles and two women’s singles — instead of the current three, with the assurance that all matches could be completed.“I think 2019 is an opportunity for us to look again at this particular day,” Lewis said of Manic Monday.A new look would be welcome.