http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/28/washington/28hillary.html
Senator Clinton and Liberals Split Over Flag Desecration - The New York Times
Flags  Emblems and Insignia,Freedom of Speech and Expression,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Democratic Party,Constitutional Amendments,Politics and Government
June 28, 2006
7862
WASHINGTON, June 27 — Perhaps even more than her stance on the war in Iraq, it is Senator  Hillary Rodham Clinton's position on flag desecration that has drawn the scorn of the liberal Democratic base.When Mrs. Clinton took a stand on the matter last year — co-sponsoring legislation that would have criminalized the desecration of the American flag even as she opposed a constitutional amendment that sought to achieve the same end — she was pilloried from the left. Editorial boards criticized her for political maneuvering, the political commentator Arianna Huffington attacked her for "stars, stripes and triangulation" and even some of her supporters quietly wondered why she had gone out on a limb on such a controversial issue.On Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton played a leading role in the flag-burning debate once again, co-sponsoring a measure similar to her previous one as an alternative to the constitutional amendment that was about to come up for a vote in the Senate."Fortunately, we have an opportunity to protect our flag in a bipartisan and constitutional way," Mrs. Clinton said in her floor speech.The measure, brought to the floor by Senator Richard J.  Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, failed, 64 to 36, minutes before the proposed amendment fell short of the 67 votes it needed.With more than half of Democrats supporting the measure, the outcome suggested that Mrs. Clinton's approach had plenty of adherents within her party, and that while she might have tried the patience of her core liberal supporters, she remained within the Democratic fold as she prepared for a possible presidential race.The divergent views of her position reflect a broader rift in the Democratic Party over whether the key to electoral success rests in winning over centrists or by drawing clear distinctions with Republicans by staking out unapologetically liberal positions."What's politically pragmatic isn't always what's pleasing to the left," said Steve McMahon, a Democratic consultant. "But pragmatism is what wins elections for Democrats."Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, gave Mrs. Clinton credit for trying to give Democrats a viable alternative to amending the Constitution to ban flag desecration."This is an effort to try to take into account the people on the left by narrowing" the proposal, Mr. Frank said. "I still disagree with it. But it's clearly a move away from the constitutional amendment, rather than toward it."Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a former presidential nominee, voted for the measure, which closely resembled past efforts  to pre-empt an amendment to the Constitution. Democrats who voted for the measure in effect bought themselves the right to claim that they had voted against flag desecration, potentially inoculating themselves against possible charges of lacking patriotism in a general election campaign. The broader measure to amend the Constitution failed by a single vote, 66 to 34.Ms. Huffington was not mollified."It seems in line with her stance on so many issues — trying to strike right in the middle and triangulate, by not supporting the amendment because that would upset the base too much and at the same time supporting a legislative proposal that will appeal to the center," she said of Mrs. Clinton. "It's a truly tragic way of leading."