https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/16/world/americas/sean-penn-says-el-chapos-capture-overshadowed-his-article.html
Sean Penn Says His El Chapo Article ‘Has Failed’ - The New York Times
Drug Cartels,Prison Escapes,Fugitives,Rolling Stone,Guzman Loera  Joaquin,Penn  Sean,Rose  Charlie,60 Minutes (TV Program),Mexico
Jan. 15, 2016
2556
The actor Sean Penn said he has “a terrible regret” that the capture of the Mexican drug lord known as El Chapo has distracted from his article in Rolling Stone, which he had hoped would start a national conversation about the war on drugs.“My article has failed,” Mr. Penn told the CBS host Charlie Rose in an interview to be broadcast Sunday on “60 Minutes.” An excerpt was released Friday.The article and Mr. Penn’s secret meeting with the fugitive head of the Sinaloa drug cartel, Joaquín Guzmán Loera, were widely viewed as a surreal development, stoked debate about journalistic ethics and raised questions about how Mr. Penn had been able to track down a high-profile fugitive who had eluded the authorities for six months after escaping from prison. Mr. Penn said he met secretly with Mr. Guzmán in October for the article, which the magazine published online on Jan. 9, a day after the drug lord was recaptured in a gun battle. Now, in his first extensive comments since the article was published, Mr. Penn told Mr. Rose in the interview taped on Thursday that he regretted how it all played out.“I have a regret that the entire discussion about this article ignores its purpose,” Mr. Penn said, “which was to try to contribute to this discussion about the policy in the war on drugs.”He continued: “Let’s go to the big picture of what we all want. We all want this drug problem to stop,” and later added: “And how much time have they spent in the last week since this article come out, talking about that? One percent? I think that’d be generous.”“You’re saying there’s not much dialogue about — ” Mr. Rose began.“My article failed,” Mr. Penn said.“As a result of El Chapo,” Mr. Rose said.“Let me be clear. My article has failed,” Mr. Penn said.In a stunning escape last July, Mr. Guzmán stepped into the shower in a prison cell and slipped away in full view of a video camera. Guards later discovered a small hole in the shower floor. But on Jan. 8, he was captured again after a gun battle in his home state, Sinaloa.Mr. Guzman’s arrest ended one of the most extensive manhunts undertaken by the Mexican government, involving every law enforcement agency in the country and help from the United States.Since then, Mexican officials have said Mr. Guzmán’s meeting with Mr. Penn was being monitored. Mexico’s attorney general said the authorities had been able to track down Mr. Guzmán because he met with actors and producers, a reference to Mr. Penn’s visit.Mr. Penn denied that his meeting with Mr. Guzmán had contributed to his subsequent capture. He said he believed the Mexican government said it had tracked his visit in part because they wanted to blame him and to encourage the cartel to put him in their cross hairs.“There is this myth about the visit that we made, my colleagues and I, with El Chapo, that it was — as the Attorney General of Mexico is quoted — ‘essential’ to his capture,” Mr. Penn said. “We had met with him many weeks earlier, on October 2nd, in a place nowhere near where he was captured.”“So, as far as you know, you had nothing to do, and your visit had nothing to do, with his recapture?” Mr. Rose asked.“Here’s the things that we know: We know that the Mexican government — they were clearly very humiliated by the notion that someone found him before they did,” Mr. Penn said. “Well, nobody found him before they did. We didn’t — we’re not smarter than the D.E.A. or the Mexican intelligence. We had a contact upon which we were able to facilitate an invitation.”“Are you fearful for your life?” Mr. Rose asked.“No,” Mr. Penn said.In a brief email exchange with The Associated Press this week, Mr. Penn said of his meeting with Mr. Guzman: “I’ve got nothing to hide.”Mr. Penn told Mr. Rose: “This is somebody who — upon whose interview could I begin a conversation about the policy of the war on drugs. That was my simple idea.”He added: “  ‘We’re going to put all our focus — forget about blame — we’re going to put all our focus, all our energy, all our billions of dollars on the ‘bad guy,’ and what happens? You get another death the next day the same way.”Mr. Penn also responded to criticism from some in the news media who questioned whether it was appropriate for Rolling Stone to allow Mr. Guzman to approve what would be published in the magazine.“When you get the story that every journalist in the world wanted, there’s a lot of green-eyed monsters who are going to come give you a kiss,” Mr. Penn said, CBS reported.“Those are jealous journalists you’re suggesting,” Mr. Rose said.Yes, Mr. Penn replied, adding, “Of course, I know that there are people who don’t like me out of the gate.”