https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/17/world/asia/taiwan-china-singer-chou-tzu-yu.html
Singer’s Apology for Waving Taiwan Flag Stirs Backlash of Its Own - The New York Times
Taiwan,China,Music,Flags  Emblems and Insignia,Chou Tzu-yu
Jan. 16, 2016
3569
BEIJING — A teenage singer made headlines in China and on her home island of Taiwan this weekend, but not for the winsome K-pop music that she hoped would attract fans. Instead, a glum, shaken apology after a controversy over a flag landed the singer, Chou Tzu-yu, in the maw of tensions between China and Taiwan, just as the island voted to elect an independence-leaning president on Saturday.The uproar over Ms. Chou’s apology was so intense that the president-elect, Tsai Ing-wen of the Democratic Progressive Party, addressed the controversy in her first news conference after declaring victory.“Over the past couple of days some news has shaken society,” Ms. Tsai said in a televised news conference. “A performer who was developing in South Korea, a 16-year-old girl, was set upon for holding the national flag. This has angered Taiwanese people.”Many Chinese bristle at the idea that Taiwan is not part of their country, and when images spread recently of Ms. Chou waving the flag of Taiwan while appearing on a South Korean television show, she became the target of nationalist Chinese ire. Chinese Internet users have demanded that she and her band, Twice, be banned from performing in China, although the images were two months old.Ms. Chou responded with an abject videotaped apology issued by her South Korean management company, JYP Entertainment.“Hello everyone, there’s something I want to tell you all,” Ms. Chou says in the video, dressed in a black turtleneck sweater and standing against a gray wall. She then bows down and continues, saying she owes a belated apology.“There is only one China,” Ms. Chou says, reading from a piece of paper and echoing Beijing’s verbal formula for denying the possibility that Taiwan could ever achieve independence.“The two sides of the strait are one, and I have always felt proud to be Chinese,” Ms. Chou continues in the video. “I feel extremely apologetic to my company and to Internet friends on both sides of the strait for the hurt that I have caused, and I also feel very guilty. I have decided that I will halt all of my current activities in China, and will go through some serious reflection. Again, I apologize to everyone. Sorry.”The video probably had only a marginal impact on the outcome of Saturday’s vote, as people angered by the incident were most likely to vote for Ms. Tsai anyway, said Jonathan Sullivan, an associate professor at the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies at the University of Nottingham.But the losing party in the elections, the Kuomintang, also known as the KMT, may use the video as an explanation for its defeat. “It’s a fig leaf, but the KMT is going to be desperate for something to save face,” Mr. Sullivan said.Ms. Chou, who was born in southern Taiwan, a center of pro-independence sentiment on the island, is the latest celebrity caught in tensions over the island’s future. On the show, she was shown briefly fluttering the flags of South Korea and of the Republic of China, the name that Kuomintang forces continued using after they fled the mainland in 1949 and made their home on Taiwan.Since then, the two sides have been politically estranged, even as economic and cultural contacts have grown. Taiwanese pop music and television — garish, cheerful and cloying — has long been popular in China, as has the South Korean K-pop music that Ms. Chou and Twice sing. The band also includes three Japanese performers and five South Koreans.Some Taiwanese performers have been accused of supporting independence for the island even as they rake in royalties and performance payments from mainland audiences. In 2000, Chang Hui-mei, a Taiwanese pop singer popular in China, sang at the presidential inauguration of Chen Shui-bian, a pro-independence politician loathed by the mainland authorities. As a result, Ms. Chang was effectively banned from performing in China.Ms. Chou’s act of traditional self-criticism, updated for an online audience, drew mixed reactions in China. On the Internet, some accused her of insincerity. But The Global Times, a popular mainland tabloid that has made nationalist indignation its selling point, proclaimed victory in a commentary widely circulated by Chinese websites.“This was a complete victory by mainland Internet users over Taiwanese independence,” said the commentary. “The patriotic-mindedness of mainland Internet users is by no means some ‘passing fancy.’ ”Ms. Chou’s manager, Park Jin Young, also issued an apology, “for the hurt caused to Chinese,” The China Youth Daily reported. “I have again experienced in a profound way that to cooperate with a country, you should respect its sovereignty, culture, history and the feelings of its people.”But on Taiwan, many people said the Chinese authorities had hurt only themselves by allowing the flood of indignation against Ms. Chou.“People in Taiwan are very angry about this,” said Hsiao Yi-ci, 29, a painter. “This sort of oppression from China really upsets people,” she said. “If you are abroad and can’t show your flag, can’t represent your country, that makes Taiwanese people very afraid.”“The Chou Tzu-yu incident makes Taiwan people realize they are not the same as Chinese people,” said Liu Che-lin, 34, a musician.But the Chinese government was unmoved by the criticisms from Taiwan, even though they may have driven some voters to back candidates distrustful of Beijing. On Saturday, an unnamed media officer for the Chinese government’s office for Taiwanese affairs suggested that the uproar was the work of troublemakers in Taiwan, the official news agency, Xinhua, reported.“Compatriots on both sides of the strait must be highly vigilant against some political forces on Taiwan exploiting a handful of incidents in exchanges between the two sides to provoke the feelings of the public on both sides,” the media officer said.