https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/world/canada/as-canada-turns-150-a-return-to-expo-67-and-a-time-of-reinvention.html
Canada Is Turning 150. Oh, to Be 100 Again. - The New York Times
Canada,Montreal (Quebec),Expo 67,vis-photo
June 29, 2017
382
MONTREAL — It didn’t seem very Canadian.For Expo 67, this usually modest and frugal country spent vast amounts of money to create islands within the St. Lawrence River and build an array of huge buildings, all to show off Canada to the world.But even if uncharacteristic, the fair was a coming out for a new Canada. And in 1967, it defined the country’s celebration of its 100th birthday (or, more accurately, the centennial of its current political structure) in a way that no single event will mark the 150th on Saturday.Much like today, 1967 was a time when Canada was reimagining itself. Its now iconic maple leaf flag was only two years old, and a committee was recommending that “O Canada” succeed “God Save the Queen” as the official anthem.The Liberal government was distancing itself from the administration in the United States over the war in Vietnam while providing refuge for Americans to avoid the draft. Its charismatic justice minister, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, introduced sweeping social changes to the country’s laws, including the legalization of homosexuality. “There’s no place for the state in the bedrooms of the nation,” Mr. Trudeau declared.In popular lore, the summer of 1967 has become the summer of love. For me as an 11-year-old in the sixth grade at Glenwood Public School in Windsor, Ontario, it was the summer of Expo.I was not the only Canadian kid counting down the days before my family headed to Montreal. At a time when Canada’s population was 20 million, more than 50 million people visited the fair in six months. It seemed as if the entire country had joined the world and made its way to Expo.Most of the political context was lost on me. But I saw clearly Expo’s promise as an optimistic peek into the future.The importance of Expo was highlighted by the fact that we took the train, in first class, rather than endure a long drive. Just leaving the train in Montreal’s Central Station let me peek into the tomorrow I was seeking. There was a new subway with rubber-tired trains like ones that Paris had, shiny high-rises and just-opened expressways.Our choices of which pavilions to visit were based more on the length of the lines out their doors than my careful advance study of the 350-page official guide. Attendance at Expo broke all forecasts and overwhelmed logistics.Like many families, we were taken by a 360-degree movie about Canada sponsored by a consortium of telephone companies but made by the distinctly American Disney studios. Its building was among the few designed with moving crowds in mind. Labyrinth, a National Film Board of Canada movie theater with projections on giant, multiple screens, formed the basis for Imax.Daunting lines took the British pavilion, with its fragmented, op-art Union Jack tower, off the list. Our only trip into the United States pavilion, a soaring geodesic dome designed by Buckminster Fuller and filled with space gear, was on a tiny monorail that snaked through the building.I did get my space capsule fix, nevertheless, thanks to the Soviet Union, which had a pavilion with the added bonus of enameled pins depicting cosmonaut heroes.Ultimately what mattered most then, and in my memory, was the excitement of just being there, a place that suddenly had made Canada the focus of the world, it seemed.World fairs may well be outdated in the 21st century, and this year’s 150th anniversary celebrations offer nothing like the thrill of Expo 67. Not many 11-year-olds are likely to be all that excited about the red leather couch that is touring the country, one of the government’s “signature projects” for the anniversary.Recently I went back to the Expo grounds, now a city park named for Jean Drapeau, the mayor during Expo. Half a century has both imposed and taken away. The largely treeless artificial islands are now thickly wooded in many areas.Only seven pavilions remain. The French pavilion, another one that my family skipped, has been combined with Quebec’s and has become a casino. Some, like Jamaica’s, have been repaired to play host to wedding receptions or to act as offices. In the Tunisian pavilion, desks sit next to Moorish columns.For many pavilions, the end came when a Formula One racetrack was built on the site. It is host to what is now Montreal’s largest annual tourist draw.Long gone is the inverted pyramid that was the signature of the Canadian pavilion, along with much of the surrounding building. Some of the pavilion’s remains are abandoned and crumbling. Other sections act as garage and park offices.But a two-level reception room in the pavilion remains much as it was 50 years ago — with striking carvings on its walls depicting indigenous life in the Arctic by the Inuit artists Kumukluk Saggiak and Elijah Pudlat.Despite this artwork, the country’s indigenous population was very much off to the side at Expo. Still operating in 1967 were the infamous residential schools for indigenous people, which an official commission recently declared to be a form of cultural genocide.So it seems somehow appropriate that as Canada again reinvents itself — taking on a more active role in world politics and trying to reconcile injustices against its indigenous population — the work of two indigenous artists has become the most evocative relic of one of the country’s great shining moments.