http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/05/world/middleeast/former-syria-ambassaor-ford-criticizes-us.html
Victory in Syrian Election Is Show of Assad’s Control - The New York Times
Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),State Department,Ford  Robert S,Syria,Assad  Bashar al-
June 4, 2014
9209
BEIRUT, Lebanon —  President Bashar al-Assad of Syria on Wednesday celebrated his overwhelming victory in a deeply disputed election, asserting his confidence and defiance in the Syrian conflict as supporters savored his success in thwarting the United States.Syrian officials announced that Mr. Assad had been re-elected with 88.7 percent of the vote and reported turnout of 73.4 percent of eligible voters. Those numbers could be questioned on many levels, but that did not matter much, as the election was primarily a display of Mr. Assad’s continued control of important Syrian cities, the loyalty of his core supporters and the failures of his opposition and its backers.For United States officials, it was a less triumphant day. Mr. Assad’s supporters celebrated with gunfire in Damascus and even in neighboring Lebanon, where Secretary of State John Kerry paid a visit on Wednesday. But the Americans were confronted with a sense that their policy on Syria and in the region was adrift.The night before, Robert S. Ford, the career diplomat and Arabic speaker who was until recently the nominal ambassador to Syria and the main executor of American policy there, declared on “PBS NewsHour” that he quit his post in February because the policy had failed and he “could no longer defend” it in public. He said that with the United States unwilling to seriously aid potential allies in the Syrian opposition, Russia and Iran had been “driving” the war’s dynamics by hugely increasing their support for Mr. Assad.In Beirut, where Mr. Kerry made a surprise lightning visit, a Lebanese reporter asked if, given the timing a day after the Syrian election, he had rushed to the region “because of the miscalculation” by United States officials in declaring that Mr. Assad’s days were “numbered.” American officials began calling for Mr. Assad’s ouster and predicting his exit two years ago, raising the opposition’s hopes for substantive aid that has not materialized.Mr. Kerry tried to leave the news conference after announcing a new American infusion of $290 million for United Nations agencies responding to the regional Syrian refugee crisis and answering preselected questions, but he returned to the podium to respond. Calling the election “a great big zero,” he added that the raging Syrian war and the refugee flows overwhelming Lebanon and other neighbors were destabilizing the region.In his remarks, he deployed a new tone regarding the role of Mr. Assad’s allies. While he blamed them for prolonging the “grotesque” war, he added, “I call on them — Iran, Russia, and I call on Hezbollah, based right here in Lebanon — to engage in the legitimate effort to bring this war to an end.”Mr. Kerry was most likely not signaling a major shift in American policy toward Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group and political party that the United States lists as a terrorist organization. Still, Randa Slim, an analyst at the Middle East Institute, said it was notable that Mr. Kerry directly addressed the group as a stakeholder that could play a part in resolving the conflict.Some analysts viewed it as a step toward recognition that a settlement could not be reached without all parties to the conflict. Previously, the United States had prevented Iran from taking part in talks.Reporters had no chance to ask whether Mr. Kerry agreed with Mr. Ford that United States policy had failed and that the United States had missed a chance to arm nonextremist insurgents despite the recommendations of the State Department. A department spokeswoman, Marie Harf, has said that Mr. Ford was free to express his opinion as a private citizen and acknowledged that no one in the administration was satisfied with what was happening in Syria.Mr. Ford was United States ambassador to Syria when the country’s uprising began in 2011. He gained controversial prominence in Syria by addressing protesters in the central city of Hama early in the uprising against the rule of Mr. Assad. The United States government pulled him out, citing credible security threats against him, and he became the point person trying to coordinate American dealings with both the armed and unarmed opposition.“We’ve consistently been behind the curve,” Mr. Ford said on Tuesday.“We need — and we have long needed — to help moderates in the Syrian opposition with both weapons and other nonlethal assistance,” Mr. Ford added.At the United Nations on Wednesday, the top official overseeing the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons confirmed that Mr. Assad’s government would miss the June 30 deadline set by the Security Council for the arsenal’s destruction.The official, Sigrid Kaag, told reporters the final shipment, 7.2 percent of the total, was ready to be exported for destruction abroad but was trapped in an area contested by insurgents.