https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/01/business/wilbur-ross-with-succession-question-faces-challenge-in-raising-new-fund.html
Wilbur Ross, With Succession Question, Faces Challenge in Raising New Fund - The New York Times
Private Equity,Ross  Wilbur L Jr,Banking and Financial Institutions,Murdoch  Rupert,Buffett  Warren E,Ross  W L  & Co
Feb. 29, 2012
2147
Over the last decade on Wall Street, Wilbur L. Ross Jr. has been called many names, including a vulture, a turnaround king and Mr. Distress.One description thrown around these days, though, quickly gets under his skin: old.“Each weekend I play at least one and maybe two sets of tennis a day,” Mr. Ross, 74, said in a telephone interview when asked how he responds to questions about his age. “My doubles team was in the finals recently at my tennis club in Palm Beach and lost a tiebreaker after a three-hour match.“I must confess, by the end of the three hours, I was relieved it was over,” he added, chuckling.For all the battles the rich and powerful of Wall Street wage, there is one opponent even they cannot beat, and that is Father Time.Mr. Ross oversees an empire at his private equity firm, W. L. Ross & Company, that controls $8 billion in assets. He has made billions of dollars through the years by buying unloved companies in unwanted industries, like steel, coal and, more recently, banks and financial institutions, and fixing them to sell for profits.But over the last year, Mr. Ross has struggled to raise a new fund.Many private equity firms that have hit the road to try to raise new funds are facing lukewarm receptions and tighter purse strings from investors. While some of the reluctance is a result of wobbly performances by some funds, the black eye that private equity has gotten this year in the brutal Republican primaries also appears to be giving large investors pause.In the case of Mr. Ross’s new fund, investors and others say the looming question has been who is going to eventually fill his very big shoes in overseeing funds that typically last about a decade.“It was his vision, his skill, and if you’ve got a fund that’s very dependent on that man playing that role and he’s 74 years old, they’re looking and wondering what it’s going to be like when he’s 84 years old,” said Colin C. Blaydon, the director of the Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth. “He may look great now, but that clock is ticking.”Mr. Ross is hardly the only aging business titan who has been slow to consider the succession question.Just last week, Warren E. Buffett, 81, said in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders that a successor had been selected, but he declined to say who it was. In August, Rupert Murdoch, 80, said Chase Carey, News Corporation’s president, chief operating officer and deputy chairman, was his most likely successor, rather than his son James.Mr. Ross began to provide some indication of the firm’s future when he sent investors a letter on Wednesday announcing that the firm was moving two of his longtime lieutenants into bigger leadership roles.Stephen J. Toy, 39, who was W. L. Ross’s point man on its auto-related acquisitions in recent years, will be taking over as chairman of the firm’s investment committee, and David H. Storper, 46, who oversees the firm’s analysts and traders, will be in charge of proposing strategic initiatives for the firm.Mr. Ross was quick to note in an interview that he did not plan to leave the firm soon, saying he had just signed a contract to remain chief executive and chairman of W. L. Ross until 2015. The contract can be extended yearly after that.The private equity industry, now in its third decade, is filled with a generation of larger-than-life personalities who have achieved enormous financial success and now must decide whether they want their companies to outlast them.For a very select few of the mega-buyout firms, the answer has been to diversify the firm’s products and go public.Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company will exist well after the retirement of Henry R. Kravis, 68, one of its founders. And the Blackstone Group will remain when Stephen A. Schwarzman, 65, decides to step aside. The Carlyle Group, which has filed plans to go public, will also give David Rubenstein, 63, a co-founder, an eventual graceful exit.Mr. Ross, who sold his management company to the investment firm Invesco in 2006, set out more than a year ago with plans to raise a $4 billion fund — the same size as his last fund — to invest in companies in financial distress or bankruptcy.But the fund’s target was lowered about six months ago to $2 billion, and late last year, W. L. Ross said in filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had raised only about $450 million.The California Public Employees’ Retirement System, or Calpers, which has invested in nearly all of Mr. Ross’s funds and which put $400 million in his last fund, said it had not committed any money to his new fund.Press officers for North Carolina’s and Connecticut’s state funds, which put $200 million and $100 million, respectively, into his last fund, also said in e-mails that they had not invested in the new fund. None of the state pension funds would elaborate as to why they had not invested in Mr. Ross’s new fund.The Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund cut its investment in Mr. Ross’s new fund in half, to $100 million, from what it put into the last fund, saying in public documents that the reduction reflected the state’s need to manage its “overall private equity allocation.”Mr. Ross, citing regulations that prevent him from speaking about fund-raising efforts, declined to speak about his new fund.Speaking broadly about the fund-raising environment, however, he said that some investors — particularly state pension funds whose movements are closely scrutinized — seemed to be dragging their feet about making decisions on private equity investments.He attributed that to a combination of the volatility in stock and bond markets, making it difficult to maintain targets for asset classes, and the glaring spotlight private equity found itself under this year because of Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign.“This whole Republican political campaign has complicated life for private equity,” Mr. Ross said. “The Obama administration has not been particularly favorable to private equity, and now you’ve got all this scrutiny of Romney, Bain, distressed and turnaround investors and questions of whether people are paid too much, and that has not created the world’s best environment for fund-raising.” Someone with knowledge of the firm’s fund-raising efforts said, however, that executives believed they would still be able to reach their $2 billion target by June.Mr. Ross denied that the catalyst for his firm’s new executive duties was difficulties in fund-raising. Instead, he categorized the moves as part of an evolving succession plan that began in 2009.He added that W. L. Ross had put in place more stringent provisions that, if he or other key figures left the firm, would stop it from acquiring new companies unless it got approval from its investors.Some say they don’t think Mr. Ross will be leaving anytime soon. Dwight Keating, the chief investment officer of the Claude Worthington Benedum Foundation, which oversees $350 million, said he was investing in the new fund.“Are we concerned about his age? I would have to say no,” Mr. Keating said. “He’s more vigorous than people a heck of a lot younger. I’ve known Wilbur for over 10 years, and he’s a very unique guy, and he sees value where other people don’t see anything.”