http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/06/sports/olympics/murray-topples-federer-for-olympic-gold-to-delight-of-home-crowd.html
Andy Murray Beats Federer for Olympic Tennis Gold - The New York Times
Federer  Roger,Tennis,Olympic Games (2012),Great Britain,Switzerland,Murray  Andy (1987- )
Aug. 5, 2012
4480
WIMBLEDON, England — Andy Murray has yet to win Wimbledon, but he has now won a big one at Wimbledon.Riding the wave of British Olympic success this weekend and his own formidable counterpunching talents, Murray was unstoppable against Roger Federer in the gold medal match in men’s singles on Sunday. He shrugged off two break points in the opening game and gathered strength and precision from there to win, 6-2, 6-1, 6-4.The victory came on the same patch of grass (and dirt) where Federer has won a record seven men’s Wimbledon singles titles, and at the same court where Federer reduced Murray to tears last month when he rallied to defeat him in four sets in the Wimbledon final.Murray has struggled to recover from disappointments like that in the past, but he bounced back quickly this time, sweeping through six matches in the Olympic tournament with the loss of only one set and reeling off nine straight games against Federer in one particularly lopsided stretch Sunday and finishing with two consecutive aces.Murray, a 25-year-old with a deadpan sense of humor and a gravelly voice, has not won a Grand Slam singles title, losing all four of his major finals. But winning the Olympic gold medal in his own country surely qualifies as a major victory.He certainly greeted it with major emotion: leaping high, covering his eyes with his hands and eventually climbing into the stands to embrace his support team, including his mother, Judy, a British Fed Cup captain who taught him the basics of the game in Dunblane, Scotland.“I’ve won an Olympic gold medal; I haven’t won a Grand Slam,” Murray said. “I know how this feels, and it feels great. I’ve lost some tough matches in some tough finals, and that’s hurt me a lot. I think tennis in the Olympics is getting better each time it’s played because all the top players are playing now. For me, it’s the biggest win of my life.”Murray has long been relegated to fourth in the pecking order in this golden age of men’s tennis, behind Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic. Murray will still be ranked fourth on Monday, but he certainly knows how to beat all three of those ahead of him, including Federer.Murray leads their head-to-head series, 9-8, but until Sunday he had never defeated Federer in a best-of-five-set match.Murray’s performance early in last month’s Wimbledon final augured well. Returning and moving beautifully, he dominated the early baseline exchanges. But he lost command late in the second set as Federer lifted and then began to soar in earnest once the roof over Centre Court had been closed because of rain.There would be no extra gear for Federer on Sunday. Murray fought off all nine break points he faced and consistently forced the issue with his forehand.After some early showers, sunshine returned to southwest London in time for the Olympic final. The roof, which had been closed for the women’s doubles final won by Venus and Serena Williams, was open for the men’s final, which certainly helped Murray’s state of mind.It may also have helped Murray, an intelligent and combustible player, that the Olympic tournament reshuffled the deck and the psychological obstacles. Despite the familiar setting, this was not a Grand Slam final, and in an Olympic context, the focus was less on the individual and more on the British flag and team.“When Wimbledon is going on, the country stops, but when the Olympics are going on, tennis is just part of it,” said Paul Annacone, Federer’s co-coach. “So it’s a different level of expectation, a different level of pressure in my opinion.”Murray has been an Olympics spectator as well as an Olympian here, channel surfing between matches and at home in nearby Surrey. He marveled at the British runner Mo Farah’s victory in the 10,000 meters, one of six British gold medals Saturday.“The way Mo Farah won, I mean, I do 400-meter repetitions in my training, and when I’m completely fresh, I can run it in 57 seconds, and his last lap after 9,600 meters was 53 seconds,” Murray said. “It’s just unbelievable fitness, and it gave me a boost.”Murray said he took particular inspiration from the gold medal won in double sculls by Katherine Grainger, a Scottish rower who had settled for silver in three previous Olympic appearances.“To keep coming back is something that not many can do,” Murray told British reporters. “I think she will tell you that she’s a lot happier right now than someone who won gold at their first attempt. Obviously, you want it to happen as soon as possible, but in sport, when it’s taken a long time to get that first breakthrough, it’s more special.”Sunday, then, must have been special indeed for Murray and bittersweet for Federer, who finally won an Olympic singles medal in his fourth Olympics but had to settle for silver.“I think this is as good as I could do during these championships; Andy was much better than I was today in many aspects of the game,” Federer said. “For me, it’s been a great month. I won Wimbledon, became world No. 1 again, and I got silver. Don’t feel too bad for me.”Murray came close to winning a second gold medal later Sunday but was defeated, with Laura Robson, in the mixed doubles final, 2-6, 6-3, and then 10-8 in the deciding super-tiebreak by Victoria Azarenka and Max Mirnyi of Belarus.Lisa Raymond and Mike Bryan of the United States took the bronze. Juan Martín del Potro upset Djokovic to take the bronze in men’s singles after his emotional loss to Federer on Friday in a semifinal that stretched to 19-17 in the final set.Federer shed tears of joy and relief after that match, and in retrospect, that was his Olympic peak emotionally and physically.On Sunday, Federer’s best chance came in the third game of the second set, when he had six break points on Murray’s serve and failed to convert any of them.“Ultimately, Andy just did a great job of putting a chokehold on the match early,” Annacone said.The surprise was that, despite all the disappointments past, Murray did not stop squeezing, and it will be intriguing to see what that means in big matches to come, at the United States Open and beyond.“I spoke to Ivan Lendl after the Wimbledon final, and he said to me, ‘You’ll never play under more pressure than you did in the Wimbledon final,’ ” Murray said, referring to his new coach this season. “I’m able to deal with the situations better now, and I did. I felt much more comfortable on the court.”