http://www.nytimes.com/1999/01/26/science/britain-details-the-start-of-its-mad-cow-outbreak.html
Britain Details the Start of Its 'Mad Cow' Outbreak - The New York Times
GREAT BRITAIN,LIVESTOCK,CREUTZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE,MEAT,MAD COW DISEASE (BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY),FOOD CONTAMINATION AND POISONING
Jan. 26, 1999
3099
Despite years of increasing worry and worldwide headlines, the British Government has only now gathered the information it needs to figure out how ''mad cow disease'' spread through the nation's dairy herds and apparently cost 35 people their lives.Late last year, a public inquiry by the Government concluded the yearlong fact-finding phase of a nationwide investigation into the handling of mad cow disease, more properly known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or B.S.E.On the same day, an advisory committee of the United States Food and Drug Administration recommended that the agency consider banning blood donations from people who have visited Britain since 1980, just in case the disease could be spread through blood donations.Both the recommendation and the British inquiry have the same aim: prevention. ''The primary object of this inquiry is not to attribute blame for what occurred,'' Lord Justice Nicholas Phillips said as his inquiry began, ''but to identify what went wrong and why, and to see what lessons can be learnt.''Colin Blakemore, a professor of physiology at Oxford, called for the investigation in 1997, when he assumed the presidency of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. The year before, Professor Blakemore said: ''We must reform the way in which scientific advice is given to and interpreted by Government ministers. Time and time again, inappropriate assurances to do with human health were made by people with no qualification to make them.''The British panel will sort through the information it has gathered and issue conclusions and recommendations in June. In the process, it is producing a medical detective story of unusual proportions. Testimony by scientists, veterinarians and doctors who dealt with the disease has painted a detailed picture of what happened in the field and in the laboratory as the outbreak took its course.The Phillips inquiry has established that the epidemic began 14 years ago. On Dec. 22, 1984, a veterinarian named David Bee was called to a farm in West Sussex, in southern England, where a dairy cow known simply as No. 133 was displaying what he described as ''a variety of unusual clinical manifestations.'' By  Feb. 11, 1985, No. 133 was dead, and more cows on the farm were showing symptoms, including aggression, panic and lack of coordination.Dr. Bee ruled out several possible causes: lead and mercury poisoning, fungal contamination of the feed container, kidney parasites. After six more cows on the farm died, the farm owners agreed to allow another sick animal, No. 142, to be killed so that an autopsy could be performed by the Government. The report came in on Sept. 19, 1985. The cow's brain was riddled with spongelike holes, a  pathologist at the Government's Central Veterinary Laboratory in Weybridge, Surrey, said. Cow 142 had a ''spongiform encephalopathy.''But it took pathologists more than a year to realize the spongy-brain disorder was a disease in itself, and not the result of something else, such as poisoning. By November 1986, the condition had a name: bovine spongiform encephalopathy, one of a school of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, including scrapie, a disorder of sheep, and kuru, a human disease linked to cannibalism.By March 1988, the source of bovine spongiform encephalopathy had been tracked by a Central Veterinary Laboratory epidemiologist to what Dr. Daniel Carleton Gajdusek, the kuru researcher and Nobel laureate, now calls ''high-tech cannibalism'' -- the use of performance-enhancing dairy feeds whose protein came from meat and bone meal from slaughtered sheep and cows. (The practice of including these ingredients in animal feed is no longer allowed in the United States.)The British Government quickly announced the formation of a scientific consultative committee to be led by a professor of zoology at the University of Oxford, Sir Richard Southwood. This group recommended that ruminant protein be banned from cattle feed, and a crucial issue being examined by the inquiry is the efficiency with which that ban was put into effect.By autumn of 1988, people were beginning to wonder if the condition could spread to people who ate meat from sick animals. As Professor Southwood recalled for the inquiry, ''From work on scrapie we considered that the central nervous system and, to a lesser extent, the lymphatic system were the tissues that would harbor the agent.'' As a result, a total ban on the use of certain bovine offals, including brain, thymus and spleen, was announced in June 1989.British pet food manufacturers had removed these substances from their dog and cat food a year earlier, but in May 1990, a house cat came down with a B.S.E.-like disease, followed by a several zoo animals.This ominous ''species jump'' prompted another Government action. The Southwood committee had predicted that, should bovine spongiform encephalopathy erupt in humans, it would ''closely resemble Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,'' a fatal neurodegenerative disease that usually strikes the elderly and, like kuru, scrapie and B.S.E., is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy.Shortly after the first cat died, a unit was set up at Western General Hospital in Edinburgh to monitor humans for signs of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.Four years later in summer 1994, in Wiltshire, the disease first appeared in a human, when the parents of a Royal Air Force cadet, Stephen Churchill, noticed that he had slipped behind in school. Soon he had succumbed to hallucinations. By March 1995, he was undergoing comprehensive tests at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in London. There, his mother for the first time saw a possible diagnosis in a note on his chart: ''C.J.D.?''Stephen Churchill died on May 23, 1995, and by fall more young people were found to be stricken with the same illness. Could the disease be spreading from cows to people? The British Government maintained that  beef products were safe. But some scientists began to contradict this position publicly.In December 1995, Sir Bernard Tomlinson, a neuropathologist from Gateshead in northeast England, announced on BBC Radio 4 that he would not eat beef organs, including calf's liver. The Health Secretary at the time, Stephen Dorrell, responded on BBC, saying, ''We have removed from the human food chain the organs that could conceivably be linked to that,'' and ''There is no conceivable risk from what is now in the food chain.''Nevertheless, only four months later, on March 20, 1996, Mr. Dorrell read a fateful statement before the House of Commons that 10 young people had died, and ''the most likely explanation'' was ''exposure to B.S.E.'' That day the world learned the name of a new disease, disease: new variant C.J.D., or human B.S.E.The European Union banned the sale of British beef for three years, until November 1998. In the meantime, according to Britain's Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, more than 4,347,380 cattle were destroyed, most merely because they were deemed old enough to conceivably harbor the disease agent. The Ministry of Agriculture has estimated that the total cost will reach $7.13 billion by 2002.To date the human death toll stands at 35, with 34 cases in the United Kingdom, and one in France. Scientists who tested tissue samples at the Neuropathogenesis Unit in Edinburgh and Imperial College School of Medicine at St. Mary's Hospital in London said B.S.E. and human B.S.E. are caused by the same disease agent, possibly a novel form of protein called prions. Whether humans were infected by bovine products, or from an independent source entirely, remains unknown.News last year that two of the British victims had been blood donors has led to the establishment of a $77.5 million program to strip donated blood of the white blood cells that might carry the B.S.E. agent. Meanwhile, Britain is importing most of its blood for plasma, mainly from the United States.Some scientists regard the small number of cases among humans as a reason for optimism. But estimates of how many cases may follow vary wildly from tens, to hundreds, to hundreds of thousands.More than 173,000 cows from all over Britain have been confirmed to be infected. Hundreds of thousands more might have entered the food supply undetected.Though the inquiry has yet to draw conclusions, its work has brought some comfort to the families of people affected by the disease. ''What we want is the truth,'' said Stephen Churchill's mother, Dot Churchill. ''We believe that's what we'll be told by the inquiry.''