http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/30/washington/30usattorney.html
Prosecutor Is Named in Dismissal of Attorneys - The New York Times
United States Attorneys,Gonzales  Alberto R,Mukasey  Michael B,Special Prosecutors (Independent Counsel),Dannehy  Nora,United States Politics and Government
Sept. 29, 2008
5492
WASHINGTON — Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey on Monday appointed a federal prosecutor to continue an investigation into the dismissals of nine federal prosecutors in 2006 as an internal Justice Department inquiry concluded that political pressure drove the action against at least three of them.The internal investigators said that the White House’s refusal to cooperate in the high-profile investigation produced significant “gaps” in the understanding of who was to blame  and that they did not have enough evidence to justify recommending criminal charges in the affair. Now the task of determining if anyone should be prosecuted will fall to Nora Dannehy, the federal prosecutor in Connecticut.The 356-page report, prepared by the department’s inspector general and its Office of Professional Responsibility, provides the fullest account to date of a scandal that dogged the Bush administration for months last year over accusations that it had politicized the federal justice system by ousting prosecutors seen as disloyal.It provided particular detail in the dismissal of David C. Iglesias, a former New Mexico prosecutor who was let go at the prodding of Republican leaders in Washington and New Mexico who were dissatisfied with his work in investigating accusations against Democrats. Despite the denials of the Bush administration, the political pressure was “the real reason” for Mr. Iglesias’s dismissal, the report said.The investigators acknowledged, however, that they could not answer some critical questions because the White House refused to turn over internal documents and to allow interviews with some crucial figures.Investigators interviewed about 90 people in the last year and a half, but three senior administration officials who played a part in crucial phases of the dismissals — Karl Rove, the former political adviser to President Bush; Harriet E. Miers, a former White House counsel; and Monica M. Goodling, a former Justice Department liaison to the White House — refused to be interviewed.But at the same time, the inquiry rejected accusations that the dismissals of two other prosecutors, in Phoenix and San Diego, were designed to thwart political investigations involving Republicans.The controversy over the dismissals of nine federal prosecutors led to the resignation of Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales last September, and the  report saves some of its harshest criticism for him. It concludes that Mr. Gonzales was “remarkably unengaged” in an unprecedented process to fire a large number of prosecutors at once, and it says that he, along with his deputy at the time, Paul J. McNulty, “abdicated their responsibility” to ensure the integrity of the process and left it mainly to Mr. Gonzales’s chief of staff, D. Kyle Sampson.The report also faulted Mr. Gonzales’s misstatements to Congress and the news media about the true reasons for the dismissals and his “extraordinary lack of recollection about the entire removal process.”In ordering a new investigation, Mr. Mukasey echoed the language of the investigators and acknowledged that the process for firing the prosecutors was “haphazard, arbitrary and unprofessional.” The dismissed prosecutors, he added, “did not deserve the treatment they received.”The actions and misstatements by Mr. Gonzales are expected to be a central focus of the new investigation by Ms. Dannehy, who is expected to report the status of her examination within 60 days. But on Monday, Mr. Gonzales and his lawyer appeared unconcerned about that prospect.The investigation “is clearly over as to him,” said Mr. Gonzales’s lawyer, George J. Terwilliger III. “The inspector general after 18 months of investigation has basically concluded that the facts and circumstances regarding Judge Gonzales’s activity do not include any unlawful conduct.”Mr. Terwilliger said he found it odd that Mr. Mukasey was ordering an investigation nonetheless.In a statement, Mr. Gonzales said, “My family and I are glad to have the investigation of my conduct in this matter behind us, and we look forward to moving on to new challenges.”Mr. Gonzales, who was criticized in a  report last month for his mishandling of classified information, has been giving paid speeches at a cost of more than $30,000 each and has done some work as a private arbitrator, Mr. Terwilliger said, but he has struggled to find another job at a private law firm since his resignation.Despite difficulties in receiving cooperation from the White House, the investigation did uncover some administration e-mail messages and other evidence not previously made public in the course of extensive Congressional investigations last year.In the case of Mr. Iglesias, for instance, the new evidence demonstrated in even starker terms the intense political pressure from Republicans to have him fired despite the strong evaluations he had received as a United States attorney in New Mexico.Mr. Iglesias had tangled with his state’s leading Republican officials, including Senator Pete V. Domenici and Representative Heather A. Wilson, over what they asserted was his slow response to accusations of voter fraud and political corruption against Democrats in New Mexico. That pressure, the report concluded, led directly to Mr. Iglesias’s removal.For many months before the dismissal of Mr. Iglesias, officials in the White House complained privately that voter fraud by Democrats might have cost Mr. Bush the state in the 2004 presidential election, the investigation said.In one previously undisclosed e-mail message obtained by investigators, Allen Weh, chairman of the state Republican Party, sent an e-mail message to four officials in the White House, including Mr. Rove, and to a staff member for Mr. Domenici on Aug. 9, 2005, complaining about Mr. Iglesias and urging that he be fired. Mr. Iglesias had “failed miserably in his duty to prosecute voter fraud,” Mr. Weh said in the message. “To be perfectly candid, he was ‘missing in action’ during the last election, just as he was in the 2002 election cycle.”The administration tried to hide the political reasons behind Mr. Iglesias’s dismissal through public misstatements and “disingenuous after-the-fact rationalizations,” the report found, including the idea that Mr. Iglesias, a captain in the Navy reserves required to serve 36 days a year, was an “absentee landlord.”Mr. Iglesias said in an interview after the report’s release: “I feel very much vindicated. This tells me there was enough evidence uncovered by the inspector general’s investigation to take this to the next level, which is a special prosecutor.”He said he hoped that the prosecutor, Ms. Dannehy, would have the subpoena power and other authority to compel the White House to turn over records that it refused to give to the inspector general, and he said a new administration in January could make it easier for her to obtain critical records.The investigation also found that political pressures played a part in at least two other dismissals, despite the denials of the White House.In Missouri, Todd P. Graves was removed as the United States prosecutor after complaints from the staff of Senator Christopher S. Bond, a Republican, about Mr. Graves’s refusal to intervene in a dispute between Mr. Bond’s staff and Mr. Graves’s brother. And in Arkansas, H. E. Cummins III, the United States attorney, was let go in order to make room for a protégé of Mr. Rove, J. Timothy Griffin.The exact reasons for the dismissals of four other United States attorneys were less clear, although all involved policy disputes with officials in Washington over issues like immigration enforcement, gun prosecution, obscenity cases and the death penalty.Notably, the investigation rejected charges that the firings of two prosecutors in that group — Paul K. Charlton in Phoenix and Carol C. Lam in San Diego — were an effort to thwart public corruption investigations in their districts involving powerful Republican lawmakers.In the case of the final two fired prosecutors — Margaret M. Chiara in western Michigan and Kevin V. Ryan in San Francisco — the investigation concluded that the Justice Department had “reasonable concerns” about their performances. It rejected the assertion from Ms. Chiara that she was let go because of what she called an unfounded rumor she was having a sexual relationship with a female lawyer in her office.