http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/09/world/europe/italy-recalls-envoy-to-egypt-over-inquiry-into-students-death.html
Italy Recalls Envoy to Egypt Over Inquiry Into Student’s Death - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Italy,Regeni  Giulio (d 2016),Massari  Maurizio,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Gentiloni  Paolo,Egypt
April 8, 2016
2763
CAIRO — Tensions between Italy and Egypt over the torture and death of an Italian graduate student in Cairo this year touched a new high on Friday, when Italy announced that it was withdrawing its ambassador to Egypt for urgent consultations to protest what it called a lack of cooperation in the joint investigation between the two nations.Italy’s foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, announced the move at the end of two days of talks in Rome between Egyptian and Italian investigators over the death of Giulio Regeni, 28, whose brutalized body was discovered beside a highway on the edge of Cairo on Feb. 3. In particular, Italian officials wanted cellphone data and surveillance footage that could help determine the precise circumstances of Mr. Regeni’s disappearance on Jan. 25.But that assistance did not materialize in recent days, Italian officials said, stoking concerns that Egypt wanted to stymie the murder investigation because of widespread suspicions that its own security forces were responsible.In a statement, Mr. Gentiloni said he was recalling Ambassador Maurizio Massari for an “urgent evaluation” of efforts to resolve what he termed a “barbaric murder.” The gesture falls short of a full withdrawal of the ambassador and will not entail closing Italy’s Embassy in Cairo.The case has become a focus of Western concerns about mounting human rights abuses in Egypt, where accounts of torture, abduction and extrajudicial executions have soared in the past year as President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has cracked down on critics including human rights activists, journalists and writers.In Cairo, the Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ahmed Abu Zeid, said the government had not been formally informed of the Italian decision and would await the return of the Egyptian investigators from Rome before taking further steps.Mr. Regeni’s killing has dominated the news media in Italy for weeks, and public anger there has been driven by accounts of the injuries he suffered before his death. His body was found with cigarette burns, broken bones and signs that he had been beaten on the feet — all typical signs of police abuse in Egypt.Sharp questions arose over Egyptian attempts to link Mr. Regeni’s death to five men who the police said were members of a criminal gang that had been kidnapping foreigners. The men were shot dead at a police checkpost on March 24.An emotional news media appearance last month by Paola Regeni, the student’s mother, increased pressure on the Italian government to take a tough stance. She threatened to publish a photograph of her son’s battered body unless the Egyptian investigation made substantial progress.Italy wants other European countries to pressure Egypt on the Regeni investigation. But a united European front on the case may be complicated by competing economic and strategic interests. The president of France, François Hollande, is scheduled to visit Cairo on April 18 for a four-day visit during which the two countries are expected to sign a $1.1 billion weapons deal.