https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/27/world/middleeast/iran-ayatollah-ali-khamenei-mahmoud-ahmadinejad.html
Iran’s Supreme Leader Advises Ahmadinejad Not to Run for President - The New York Times
Khamenei  Ali,Iran,Ahmadinejad  Mahmoud,Rouhani  Hassan,Elections
Sept. 26, 2016
5136
TEHRAN — Iran’s most powerful figure ruled out on Monday a return to politics by former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, known in the West for his denial of the Holocaust and for bombastic threats against Israel.The decision by Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, reported by the semiofficial Fars news agency, means that the country’s hard-line faction lacks a serious candidate to challenge the incumbent president, Hassan Rouhani, during elections in May.Mr. Rouhani, a cleric and a relative moderate, is widely expected to run for a second term and, after the supreme leader’s statement, to win it handily, his supporters say.“He will be re-elected for sure,” Mojgan Faraji, a prominent female journalist who supports overhauls, said of Mr. Rouhani.The president, who was elected on a platform of improving relations with the West and escaping crippling economic sanctions, has been seen as vulnerable to a challenge from Iran’s hard-liners, for failing to deliver on his promises. Many sanctions remain in place even after the signing last year of a nuclear deal, primarily because of what the United States says is Iran’s support for terrorism and human rights violations.Tehran denies those accusations, but no European or American bank will finance business with Iran as long as the sanctions remain in effect, unless the United States Treasury specifically certifies the deal, as it did for recent contracts with Airbus and Boeing.Mr. Ahmadinejad’s two presidential terms, from 2005 to 2013, were defined by confrontation with global powers, especially the United States. He is widely admired by the rural poor but is despised by the middle class majority. Corruption grew substantially during his tenure, and it continues to be a major problem today.Experts say most of the profits from record-high oil prices during Mr. Ahmadinejad’s years were pumped around the state apparatus or were invested in ambitious housing projects that now stand empty in desert plains, without proper utilities or transportation infrastructure.He has been credited, however, with cutting a bloated state subsidy system.Ayatollah Khamenei made the statement about Mr. Ahmadinejad during a lecture for seminary students at his office. He was responding to rumors, circulating in Tehran for weeks, that he had barred Mr. Ahmadinejad from participating in the coming election.“Someone, a man, came to me,” he said, presumably of Mr. Ahmadinejad, in the typically elliptical style of Shiite clerics. “I told him not to take part in that certain issue, both for his own and the country’s good.”“I did not tell him not to participate,” the supreme leader continued. “I said, ‘I do not find it advisable that you participate.’ ”Technically, under the Constitution, Ayatollah Khamenei can only advise possible candidates, he cannot legally bar them or judge their suitability. The vetting process is officially done by the 12-member Guardian Council. In practice, though, Ayatollah Khamenei’s statement amounts to an edict, and it is almost certainly hopeless for Mr. Ahmadinejad to try to mount a campaign against the supreme leader’s wishes.Nevertheless, a website close to Mr. Ahmadinejad, Dolat-e Bahar, left open the possibility that he could run again. “While some point out that Master has made an order,” the website said, “he actually said that it is not expedient.”The chances of his candidacy seem slim. “With these statements, the discussion of Ahmadinejad participating is finished,” a conservative lawmaker, Mohsen Kouhkan, told the website Asr-e Iran.