https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/26/us/politics/poll-shows-disapproval-of-threat-of-government-shutdown.html
Poll Shows Disapproval of Threat of   Government Shutdown - The New York Times
Polls and Public Opinion,National Debt (US),Federal Budget (US),Obama  Barack,House of Representatives,Republican Party,Democratic Party,Tea Party Movement
Sept. 25, 2013
1869
Eight in 10 Americans find it unacceptable for either President Obama or members of Congress to threaten to shut down the government during budget negotiations in order to achieve their goals, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll. Fewer than 1 in 5 think the stalemate between Mr. Obama and the Republicans in Congress is acceptable.Republicans, Democrats, independents and Tea Party supporters alike object to the threat of a shutdown, the poll says.“What they’re doing has so many repercussions, and I just don’t think that they should hold the budget over everyone’s head the way they are,” Barbra Torres, a retired health care administrator living in Cape Coral, Fla., said in a follow-up interview.“It makes me so angry that these folks can’t come up with anything to compromise on or agree with,” said Ms. Torres, who described herself as an independent. “We elected them to office to pass laws and get things done.”Americans see Republicans as somewhat more inflexible in the debate: just 1 in 4 say that Republicans in Congress are working with Mr. Obama. In the poll, Republicans themselves are divided as to whether their party is making efforts to work with the president. Nearly half of them say that Congressional Republicans are not working with Mr. Obama, and about 4 in 10 say they are.But nearly 9 in 10 Democrats and three-quarters of independents say that Republicans in Congress are not making any attempt to find common ground with the president.Mr. Obama is seen by half of Americans as trying to get things done with the Republicans. But that is down from 6 in 10 who said the same thing in January 2012 and three-quarters who said he would work with Republicans in 2010 and 2011.Americans split along party lines about whether the president is reaching out to his political opponents. Just 1 in 5 Republicans say that. But nearly 8 in 10 Democrats say he is taking a bipartisan approach.And what do independents think? They are split: 50 percent say he is not trying to work with Republicans, but 4 in 10 say he is.Harry Bailey, an independent from Gresham, Ore., a retiree and military veteran, said he was pessimistic about the possibility of a solution. “They’re both equally at fault,” he said. “It’s always both sides; it’s never just one side. When you are responsible for 350 million lives, you have to be able to listen to other ideas and be willing to accept them. You can’t be close-minded or you are no longer helping the people you’re supposed to be helping.”The national poll was conducted by landline and cellphone from Sept. 19 to 23 among 1,014 adults. It has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. More results from this poll will be released on nytimes.com after 6:30 p.m. on Wednesday.