https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/nyregion/how-to-fix-mounting-subway-problems.html
How to Fix Mounting Miseries on the Subway? Political Bickering Isn’t the Answer - The New York Times
Subways,Railroad Accidents and Safety,Metropolitan Transportation Authority,New York City,Harlem (Manhattan  NY)
June 27, 2017
7669
For sheer threat to life and limb, few calamities in New York City can match a subway derailment. The events in a Harlem tunnel on Tuesday morning showed why.“You had metal peeled back like on a can,” said Paul Navarro, a transit worker who helped to repair the damage caused by the derailment of an A train just north of 125th Street. “Signal towers down. Chunks of concrete gouged off.”Each subway car that runs on the A line weighs roughly 90,000 pounds empty, and there are eight of them in a train. With passengers in a half-full train, that comes to perhaps 800,000 pounds of steel and aluminum, flesh and blood, all of it moving.At any speed above zero, the physics of derailment are unforgiving: Five people died in a high-speed one that took place around midnight near Union Square in the summer of 1991.The lethal possibilities are why a derailment crisis in the 1970s and 1980s led to the creation of a state safety board in 1984 with the power to investigate public transit accidents in New York and report on the causes — much like the National Transportation Safety Board, which we often hear about after airplane crashes. (The national board also investigates serious accidents on rails and roads.)The state board identified causes like broken tracks, motors that dropped out of trains, concrete crumbling into the roadbed and misaligned switches. With that kind of public accountability, along with more aggressive management and more money, the number of derailments soon dropped. But they have not vanished: In January, there were two derailments a day apart on the No. 7 line near Citi Field in Queens.Still, derailments are rare these days, and the injuries in Tuesday’s accident were not life-threatening. While it is sure to cause trouble for hundreds of thousands of people whose commute touches the 125th Street station, trains leaving the tracks certainly are not the source of the mounting miseries in the transit system.The principle established by the safety board investigations, of looking back at what went wrong on a specific occasion, is a good starting point.A transit expert with many years of experience in the New York system, who asked not to be identified because his current position does not allow him to comment publicly, said that improving overall commutes requires a comprehensive approach. That is, figuring out not just what went wrong on Tuesday but what goes wrong regularly.“You need to identify the root causes of problems,” he said. “What are the repeat offenders?”In the late 1980s and into the 1990s, as service was improving, transit officials combined engineering and mechanical investigations to unearth persistent problems — say, the same electrical flaw or a part that wore out before its expected life span. Cars would be scheduled for maintenance before those weak points failed.This process is not nearly as thrilling as the spitball fights between Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, but its history of success shows that it stands a chance of getting people moving to work and home faster.Public snarling between those two politicians has not yet succeeded.And we need to get direct answers to what happened on Tuesday. At least some of the cellphone video from the damaged train shows that the transit workers acted quickly and smoothly to get people off.Service on the A train, where many of the cars are four decades old, has been on a long decline. “In recent weeks and months, it has been pretty abominable,” David Schmidt of Washington Heights said. He commutes to work from the 190th Street station to Canal Street.“It should be 50 minutes door to door,” Mr. Schmidt said. “It’s not unusual for it to take an hour and a half.”Mr. Schmidt said that on Monday morning, around the same time of Tuesday’s derailment, he was on an unusually pokey A train with his children. “I think it was just before 125th Street, and we were going really slow when it came to a screeching halt, and the announcement came on that we were being held because of a police investigation,” Mr. Schmidt said.Eventually, the train crawled into the station. Mr. Schmidt saw no sign of the police. The train, he said, was taken out of service as delays piled up behind it.Another frustrating and bewildering morning, without the high drama of a derailment. Why doesn’t the Metropolitan Transportation Authority post a clear, concise explanation online every time that happens?