https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/us/maine-paul-lepage-workers-prisoners.html
Maine’s Governor Wants Inmates to Fill Jobs, Not Prison Beds - The New York Times
Amnesties  Commutations and Pardons,Labor and Jobs,LePage  Paul R,Maine,Prisons and Prisoners
June 1, 2017
3691
Paul R. LePage, the brash and deeply conservative governor of Maine, has never been seen as an advocate of loosening punishments for criminals. He once joked that drug dealers should be publicly executed. He has seemed, at times, to support racial profiling in the pursuit of drug traffickers. And he has suggested that suspected domestic abusers wear ankle monitors, even if they have not been charged with crimes.But last week, Mr. LePage conditionally commuted the state prison sentences of 17 male inmates, and is soon expected to commute the sentences of some female inmates as well. At the same time, his administration is reviewing whether he is legally allowed to commute the sentences of county inmates.During radio interviews this week, Mr. LePage suggested his push for commutations was not a sudden shift in his views on the criminal justice system. Instead, he said, he is trying to solve the aging state’s mounting labor problem. The released offenders will be required to find jobs or job training.“The tourist industry is struggling, can’t find enough workers,” Mr. LePage, a Republican who has been in office for six years, said on Tuesday on the radio station WVOM. “We are looking at every corner of the state to try to put people back to work. That’s what the commutation program’s all about.”The commutations have flipped the political script in Maine. Mr. LePage is drawing cautious praise from advocates of civil liberties and supporters of shorter prison sentences for some crimes — groups that more often vehemently disagree with the governor. He is drawing anger from some of his fellow Republicans, who see the commutations as part of a political fight over a prison that Mr. LePage wants to close.Most in Maine agree on the challenging contours of the labor market: The statewide unemployment rate is 3 percent, and innkeepers and restaurateurs have struggled to find workers for the summer tourist season. A drop in the number of available H-2B visas here, for seasonal nonagricultural workers, has not helped.“This is the lowest unemployment rate the state has had probably ever,” said Julie Rabinowitz, the director of policy, operations and communication for the state’s Department of Labor.Maine has the oldest population in the nation, largely because of a drop in the birthrate during the 1990s that has not been offset by migration into the state. That has left Maine with a paucity of workers. That shortage is compounded when the state adds around 38,000 seasonal jobs during the summer. Adding 17 inmates to the work force hardly seems a significant number, but Ms. Rabinowitz said it fits into a larger effort by state labor officials to work with prisons to expand the work force.“We need every Mainer,” Ms. Rabinowitz said. “We don’t care where they are.”Joseph Fitzpatrick, the commissioner of the state’s Department of Corrections, said the governor had commuted only prisoners convicted of nonviolent offenses, and avoided commuting the sentences of sex offenders, drug traffickers and people who had been convicted of domestic abuse.He said the state’s Labor Department would work to help those with commuted sentences find a job. Some of them, he said, had committed crimes to support addictions. Among those whose sentences were commuted, William Dawson, 63, had been imprisoned for stealing nearly $500,000 from the elderly, according to the Portland Press Herald. Many of the 16 others had been convicted of theft or burglary.The commutations come amid growing support in Democratic- and Republican-led states for sentencing reform. Gov. Nathan Deal of Georgia, a Republican, drew praise last year from President Barack Obama for overhauling sentencing. Rick Perry, the Republican former governor of Texas and current energy secretary, supported numerous bills aimed at lowering the prison population.But Marc Mauer, the executive director of the Sentencing Project, a Washington-based group that advocates reduced incarceration, said that with some exceptions — such as Mike Huckabee, who pardoned or commuted more than 1,000 people during his 10 years as the governor of Arkansas — commutations by governors are not substantially common.“He wouldn’t have been the first governor I would expect to see this from, given his past statements and positions about tough crime policies,” Mr. Mauer said.In Maine, the sudden commutations have drawn criticism from Democrats and Republicans alike.“While Democrats would be supportive of commutations for Mainers serving longer sentences than they should, there must be a transparent process for granting them,” said Charlotte Warren, a Democratic state representative who is the chairwoman of a committee on criminal justice and public safety.In recent months, Mr. LePage has been at odds with the Legislature over his efforts to close a state prison in an economically struggling part of Maine’s Downeast region. Some critics said the commutations were aimed at freeing up prison beds and clearing the way for the closing.Mr. LePage has said the commutations are not related to his efforts to close the prison, which he has said is “not fit to live in.”But State Representative Will Tuell, a Republican who represents the town of Machiasport, which hosts the prison, was skeptical. “I think he’s absolutely soft on crime myself,” Mr. Tuell said of the governor. “This is being done so as to play with the numbers at Downeast Correctional Facility.”The American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, which often pointedly criticizes Mr. LePage, offered rare praise.“It felt like a step in the right direction,” said Meagan Sway, a fellow with the organization. “We have lots of suggestions if the governor would like to continue this great move to save money and release people who do not need to be imprisoned.”