https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/sports/soccer/united-states-mexico-players.html
‘It Is America. But I Want to Play in Mexico.’ - The New York Times
Soccer,Mexican-Americans,Guadalajara (Soccer Team),Dallas (Soccer Team),World Cup (Soccer),United States Men's National Soccer Team,Mexico
Nov. 10, 2016
8320
EL PASO — Night fell, and the thick, heavy air was cut by a sharp, chilling breeze, the sort of West Texas wind that made it feel as if the whole city had a fever. Was it hot out, or cold? The children on the field at Pico Norte Park — little more than a bumpy, narrow strip of grass lined for soccer — wore uniforms and quickly broke a sweat; the parents ringing the sideline wore jeans and long sleeves as they watched and cheered and occasionally shivered.Daniel Pepi stood under a tree. Pepi was born in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, just minutes from here across the border. He moved to this side of the border with his family when he was a boy and now has a wife and children of his own. From under the tree, he watched his middle child, Diego, sprint through drills with purpose. Diego, 8, flicked the ball with his feet. He thwapped it with confidence.“Will he end up in Dallas, too?” someone said. Pepi shrugged. “Maybe,” he said. He smiled. “I hope so.”Dallas is where Pepi’s older son lives. Ricardo, 13, is a soccer star. Slick and fierce and merciless in front of the goal, Ricardo was picked out during an area scouting day this year and offered an opportunity: Leave home, move to Dallas, live with a family there and join the youth academy of F.C. Dallas, the city’s Major League Soccer team.Ideally, for both the Pepi family and the club, Ricardo will play several years in the academy, training in the mornings, going to school afterward and meeting with his team again in the afternoons five or six days a week. Then he will sign a professional contract with F.C. Dallas.“For a lot of us standing here,” Pepi said, gesturing to the sideline, “that would be the perfect world.”Not everyone in the borderland feels the same. Out on the field at Pico Norte, one of the coaches leading Diego and his teammates through practice was Jonathan Camarena. Like Daniel Pepi, Camarena, 23, was born in Juárez. But instead of staying in the youth system in the United States, he opted to play in Mexico as a teenager before returning for college.He still feels a pull toward home, though. That is why, this winter, he will leave the boys he coaches in El Paso and head back to Mexico, to a third-division club, and try again.His decision, like the ones faced by the Pepi family, is not an uncommon circumstance. In sports like tennis and basketball and baseball, young athletes often have to make early decisions about their careers that can carry serious long-term consequences, or bring rich rewards. But for soccer players, and particularly those along the United States-Mexico border, those same choices come freighted with other burdens, among them family and citizenship and nationalism and identity, that will follow them into adulthood.But first they must choose a side.“I want to be a player in Mexico,” Camarena said. “That’s what I’ve always wanted.”He looked around the field. “This is amazing, absolutely,” he said. “It is America. But I want to play in Mexico.”The relationship between Mexico and the United States is a tricky one, and the ugliness many Mexicans and Mexican-Americans saw in the recent campaign for president of the United States brought to the surface even greater emotion about issues already fraught with feeling.Mentioning the election, or even just the name of Donald J. Trump, now the president-elect, around here last month inspired no shortage of passion.“Just because I love America doesn’t mean I love all Americans,” one Mexican-American mother watching her son play here said, rolling her eyes.Soccer has its own place within the larger Mexico-United States dynamic, playing out most visibly in matches like Friday night’s World Cup qualifier in Columbus, Ohio. The most high-profile stages for the rivalry involve not only those head-to-head meetings, but also the increasingly frequent tugs of war over players eligible to represent both countries, like defender Edgar Castillo and goalkeeper William Yarbrough, who chose to play for the United States national team, or, more recently, the teenage midfielder Alex Zendejas.Zendejas, 18, was a rising star in the United States youth national team system until this summer, when he signed a contract with a top Mexican club. The deal came with one very important condition: Zendejas had to agree to reject any future call-ups from U.S. Soccer.But while individual situations like those garner most of the attention, the push-pull nature of Mexico against the United States in soccer runs far deeper. And Texas — where about a quarter of the roughly 34 million Mexican-Americans in the United States live — is one of the flash points.In border areas like this one, or the San Diego/Tijuana region on the West Coast, decisions about where to play soccer reflect intrafamilial dynamics, cultural differences and an ever-changing perception about the United States’ place in the global soccer landscape.Sometimes, the calculus is simple. Cristian Zamora, who plays for the new professional indoor soccer team in El Paso, was invited to join the Guadalajara club Chivas’s youth academy when he was 16. His father, who is from El Paso, did not want him to move; his mother, who is Mexican, pushed him to go.“To her, it was too big, too important,” Zamora said. “My dad didn’t see it that way. But my mom couldn’t see it any other way.”Zamora went, but for many the path is murkier. As Zamora noted, on each side of the border there is a perpetual glut of young players looking to be the next great prospect, and the never-ending cycle of player development means that opinions vary widely.Some say it costs parents more money to develop their children as players in the United States because of the fees, for uniforms, leagues and referees, while Mexican clubs rarely ask for similar money upfront. Others say it actually costs more to get a talented player noticed in Mexico because there is still a prevalent culture of quid pro quo, in which coaches accept, or even solicit, money from players or their families in exchange for help in moving the player up the soccer ladder.In places like El Paso, these sorts of dichotomies are constant. About 2.5 million people live in this region, and thousands cross the border every day for work or school, or to shop or see a doctor. “Home” may be on one side of the border, but family members often live on the other. Signs in stores are in English and Spanish. Conversations float between the two, and many Mexican-Americans speak with a crossover vocabulary.Mexicans often refer to more extreme instances of this kind of Spanish as “pocho,” or inauthentic, and also use the term as a derogatory way to describe Americanized Mexicans who speak better English than Spanish. David Dorado Romo, an author and historian from El Paso, said the phrase “ni aquí ni allá” — neither here nor there — is a popular sentiment for residents of the border area, and it can inform every decision, including those about soccer.“A lot of us feel that the border is an entirely different country — that we’re not accepted completely by Mexicanos, and in the U.S. it’s like an occupied country for us,” Romo said. “We feel like we’re from both sides. And that’s why a lot of people refuse to choose sides definitively when it comes to just about anything.”The duality is perpetual. Lalo Salgado, who was born in Mexico, lives in El Paso and commutes to work in Juárez. Salgado’s son, Omar, was a talented soccer player from a young age. Scouts from clubs on each side of the border identified his talent early on, and at 14 he left El Paso for Guadalajara, the home of Chivas, one of Mexico’s biggest clubs.Lalo Salgado was torn, excited for his son to have an opportunity with Chivas — a dream for any Mexican father — but also concerned about sending his boy so far away. Every day, Omar would call Lalo at 8 a.m. as he approached a particularly busy street that he had to cross to get to the training field.“Dad, I’m crossing the street,” he would say into the phone. Then there would be silence. Then: “O.K., I crossed. Talk to you later.” At 5 p.m., the same call would mark the moment Omar reversed the trip.“Then, a few hours later at night, he would call crying,” Salgado recalled. “He was a boy away from home. And for Americanized boys, it is hard to go into those situations.”Omar’s reaction was not atypical. In general, the conditions at Mexican youth academies are challenging. Competition is merciless — one coach here recalled a 13-year-old who was sent home after only three days because he had sprained an ankle — and the living situation in a team’s Casa Club, or clubhouse, is rarely luxurious, with players sometimes living a dozen to a room.There is also a sentiment, still espoused by many talent evaluators at clubs around the world, that Mexico is a better training ground for a player.“We all look at Mexico as a trampoline — if you can play here, you can play anywhere,” said Joel Burrola, who grew up in Juárez and plays professionally there. “I don’t know if people think the same about the U.S.A.”Fernando Clavijo, not surprisingly, disagrees. Clavijo is the technical director for F.C. Dallas, which is generally regarded as the most progressive team in M.L.S. when it comes to cultivating a relationship with Mexican-American youth players.According to Clavijo, nearly half of the roughly 225 players in F.C. Dallas’s academy — which includes teams from under 10 to under 18 — are Mexican-American, and many come from the club’s nine feeder affiliates in places like El Paso and Laredo, and even Monterrey, across the Mexican border. A steady stream of homegrown players has allowed F.C. Dallas to maintain its place as one of the league’s most successful teams — it had the best record in M.L.S. this season — without having to pay bloated salaries to imported players.Very often, Clavijo has to visit with families of players who have been recruited by teams from each side of the border and face a decision. Clavijo said his sales pitch was simple: We offer a better way of life.Players at F.C. Dallas’s academy who are from out of town live with families who act as surrogates, helping with scheduling needs and offering support with school and anything else. Players train in the morning and attend school together. Assistance with college preparation and recruiting is provided. So are meals and transportation.“We offer an American education, a stronger family structure, a more stable environment,” Clavijo said. “At the younger age, we don’t know if they’re going to make it. We don’t know if they’re going to be pros. We don’t know any of that.”He added: “I tell them: ‘You’re one injury away from never playing again. Where would you rather be if that happens?’ ”And yet the competition Clavijo and F.C. Dallas are up against is fierce. Several Mexican clubs, including Club America and Tigres, have their own United States affiliates. Pumas, based near Mexico City, lists 11 stateside affiliate clubs on its website: one in Utah, another in Arizona and nine in Texas.Other clubs, as well as the Mexican national team, regularly attend scouting combines put on by a variety of organizations, the best known of which is Alianza, a company that scheduled a dozen showcases throughout the United States this year and aggressively markets them in Hispanic communities.M.L.S. clubs also attend the combines, but the vast majority of players receive — and accept — offers from Mexican clubs. Among the many players discovered by Alianza is Edwin Lara, 17, a defender with Mexican parents who grew up in Berkeley, Calif., and is frequently ranked as one of the top youth prospects in the world. After leaving his American club, Lara now plays for the youth teams of both Pachuca and the Mexican national team.One player personnel executive in M.L.S., who spoke on condition of anonymity because he did not want to be seen disparaging other clubs (including his own), said the majority of teams in M.L.S. “aren’t anywhere near where they should be” in terms of actively battling Mexican clubs in the recruitment of Mexican-American players.Some of that stems from a smattering of older rules — including one that is now being more strictly enforced by FIFA to combat the trafficking in young players — as well as newer regulations, like one in Mexico that will force all players, including dual nationals, to register with the Mexican federation by age 19 or be declared a “foreign” player for roster purposes. But much of the problem is about resources.Forward Paul Arriola — who grew up near San Diego, and is one-quarter Mexican — left the Los Angeles Galaxy’s academy in 2013 to join Club Tijuana because he felt there were not enough playing opportunities for him with the Galaxy’s reserve team. In Mexico, by comparison, the reserve teams play a full league schedule.Arriola, 21, lives in San Diego but commutes each day to Tijuana, where he is on the roster with the first team and has made 12 appearances this season. (He keeps one foot firmly in the American camp by representing the United States internationally.)“When I left, U.S. fans kept saying to me that they were mad and asking, ‘Why can’t we keep American kids inside the American system?’” Arriola said in an interview. Referring to Galaxy Coach Bruce Arena, he continued: “Bruce didn’t think I was ready at the time, and it hurt me, but it made my decision much easier, too. There just weren’t enough games, so I had to go.”Things are changing, however. Arriola said that the opportunities for younger M.L.S. players had grown considerably. And salaries in the league, while still lower, are improving.“Now, I have a lot more kids in Mexico asking me about the situations with clubs here,” he said. “They’re more interested. They’re more curious. And if I was in the same situation again, I’m not sure the decision would be as clear-cut.”Although Daniel Pepi is certain about the path he wants for his children, Erasmo Chavez is less sure. Chavez lives in El Paso and has two sons. One of them, Owenn, 19, played at youth academies in Juárez and Celaya, Mexico, before returning to the United States this year to attend college. The other, 15-year-old Yahir, plays for F.C. Dallas’s El Paso affiliate and is considering his options.Like many Mexican-American parents, Chavez said he would ultimately leave the decision about where to play to his sons, but he conceded that he felt conflicted. His indecision, romantic as it might be, was not about nationalism. Rather, it was about a simple reality — which country would give Yahir the best chance to play at the highest level?Juan Arroyo, who is the president of International, another youth academy in El Paso, said the concerns he hears from parents about soccer in the United States almost always boil down to the same question: Will my child learn quickly enough here?“If I’m being honest, youth soccer before 12 is a joke in the United States,” said Arroyo, who criticized programs for requiring children of that age to play nine against nine and prohibiting them from heading the ball.“That’s not the standard for the rest of the world,” he said. “At 10, in Mexico, they play 11 on 11. They head the ball. They don’t get participation trophies.“The player who comes here from there, you can see the difference. He’s more aware to certain details than the American player. He is technical. He’ll talk throughout the game. He’ll foul when he needs to. At 13, he knows all of that. And, over there, at 14, he’s basically playing semipro.”Yet as top American academies continue to expand to younger ages — most, like Dallas, have recently added high-level under-12 teams — the number of families who want that is changing, and the choice is getting harder.That was what Chavez was thinking about as he watched Yahir run and cut and weave. He does not know if his son will stay in El Paso or go to Dallas, or to Juárez or somewhere else altogether.“The advantage, I suppose, is that both countries are in my heart,” Chavez said. Then he turned back to the field to watch the players, who shouted to one another in Spanish beneath the breeze of another Texas night.