https://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/30/science/30ancestor.html
DNA Offers Clues to Greenland’s First Inhabitants - The New York Times
Eskimos,DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid),Archaeology and Anthropology,Greenland,Science and Technology
May 30, 2008
5425
A swatch of hair, so thick and tangled it could have belonged to man or bear, has provided answers about a mysterious culture and its origins half a world away.The culture is that of the first people to have occupied Greenland some 4,500 years ago. Known to archaeologists as the first Paleo-Eskimo culture, it gave way to a second Paleo-Eskimo culture some 2,500 years ago and then 700 years ago to the Thule culture of the present-day Inuit peoples. Some archaeologists suggested that each culture might have descended from its predecessor, but proof required obtaining DNA from the earlier cultures and comparing it with that of the Inuit.Eske Willerslev, an expert on ancient DNA at the University of Copenhagen, recently spent two months in the frozen wastes of northern Greenland. Dr. Willerslev wore a full body suit while digging so as not to contaminate samples with his own DNA. But human remains from the early culture are hard to find, and archaeologists have speculated that the dead were laid on the sea ice.Despite working in freezing weather for two months, Dr. Willerslev could find no human DNA from the period.It was only on expressing his frustration to a friend that he learned of the swatch of hair in a museum collection, excavated by the friend’s archaeologist father from a Paleo-Eskimo site on Disko Bay in western Greenland. The hair had been kept cold and yielded plentiful DNA. It turned out to be human, not from bears, and contained a baleen comb, from which whale DNA was extracted.The human DNA differed from that of the Thule people and of American Indians. Its closest match was to people who live in the Commander Islands, the two westernmost islands of the Aleutian chain that arcs from southern Alaska to the Kamchatka Peninsula in Russia, Dr. Willerslev and colleagues reported in an article published online Thursday by the journal Science.Because the Commander Islands are at the Siberian end of the Aleutian chain, the new finding indicates a heretofore unknown migration from Siberia to the New World, Dr. Willerslev said. Earlier migrations brought the ancestors of American Indians and of the Neo-Eskimos who developed the Thule culture. Michael Crawford, an expert on circumpolar populations at the University of Kansas, said that it was not yet known if there had been a single migration or many, but that “this finding may turn things around.” But Dr. Crawford noted that the hair had provided DNA just on the maternal side and from a single individual, making it hard to generalize about populations.The Thule culture, which originated in Alaska, developed the technology for hunting bowhead whales. This enabled it to expand across the northern coast of Canada, eventually reaching Greenland. Dr. Crawford said the Aleutian people probably took the same route but depended on fish and seals.Early peoples had no maps and were not traveling to known destinations; rather, as their population expanded, they followed the natural resources on which they depended. This strategy evidently led the Aleutians some 5,000 years ago to embark on a circumpolar journey that took them all the way to Greenland.The three Eskimo cultures in Greenland now seem to have been generated by at least two separate arrivals. Archaeologists do not know if each culture perished from natural causes or was obliterated by its successor.