https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/politics/sensing-tea-party-weakness-mainline-republicans-flex-their-muscle.html
Thad Cochran’s Re-Election Bid Marks Final Test of Tea Party Strength - The New York Times
Tea Party Movement,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party,Cochran  Thad,McDaniel  Chris (1972- ),Mississippi,Elections  State Legislature,Presidential Election of 2016,Senate,House of Representatives,Primaries and Caucuses,McDaniel  Chris,United States,Elections  Senate
May 31, 2014
4238
NEW ORLEANS —  Tea Party thunder fills the Hilton Riverside ballroom with denunciations of President Obama and criticism of congressional Republicans for not being tough enough on him. The atmosphere has the energetic but hostile tone that helped propel conservatives to success in 2010.Yet outside of this hermetic setting, where the Republican Leadership Conference was meeting this weekend, the political reality was sharply different: Incumbents are fending off Tea Party challengers in primary after primary, and the establishment is reasserting itself as the party’s center of gravity.The ultimate test of its strength will come on Tuesday in Mississippi, where Senator Thad Cochran, a 76-year-old master of pork-barrel spending who is seeking a seventh term, will face a challenge from State Senator Chris McDaniel, who has attracted support from Sarah Palin, Rick Santorum and an array of conservative groups.After the Mississippi results are in, Tea Party-aligned forces will have little opportunity to upend mainline Republicans, or even throw them much of a scare.That 2014 has been the year that the establishment struck back — preparing and financing its candidates with a new determination and focus — is evident in its success.That may prove to have been the easy part. Republicans on both sides of the internal divide are now looking at the impact the primary season will have on politics and governance as the party seeks to build on its House majority and take control of the Senate this year and win back the White House in 2016.Emboldened by their success, establishment Republicans are using tough language about the party’s more conservative groups. They are suggesting that the federal government shutdown last fall — led by hard-liners like Senator Ted Cruz of Texas — and this year’s primary results have staggered the organizations claiming the Tea Party mantle.“This is a bunch of out-of-state political gunslingers who have crowned themselves as the leaders of Tea Party Republicanism and are raising money in the name of a more conservative party and spending it all attacking Republicans,” former Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi said in an interview at the meeting here.“If in 2016 we don’t have these people raising millions of Republican dollars and using it to attack Republicans, then we’ll be stronger against the Democrats for president and for keeping the House and for hopefully keeping the Senate,” said Mr. Barbour, who was one of the few speakers at the meeting to urge party unity.The most significant effect of the party turnabout could take place well before 2016, though. If Republicans now in office conclude that Tea Party pressure is no longer a political threat, they may be more willing to face down the right on issues like an overhaul of immigration laws.“If the threats are toothless, then the scorecards are meaningless,” said Mr. Barbour, referring to the closely watched voter guides issued by many conservative groups.Scott Reed, a political strategist for the newly aggressive U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said that such ratings now amount to “hollow threats” and that the success of the party’s mainstream wing would give Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio some room to maneuver in the House.“If Speaker Boehner increases his margins, he’ll have a more manageable caucus, and governing will be back front and center,” Mr. Reed said.Yet even as many Republicans predict a new season of more pragmatic conservatism, elements of the right are warning party leaders in Washington that they should not misread the election results so far.“If we do win the majority, they better use it responsibly and they better use it aggressively,” said Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, who is considering a presidential bid. “If they get complacent, if they just end up being a cheap version of the Democratic Party, there’s going to be a fierce backlash.”Matt Bevin, who challenged Senator Mitch McConnell in the Kentucky primary and was thrashed by 25 percentage points, said the primaries had sent an important message to party leaders: “You will be challenged within your ranks.”Mr. Bevin predicted that congressional Republicans would be less likely to tack to the middle now. But the fact that Republicans from both wings are now speaking in the future tense underscores the degree to which the intraparty struggle appears to have been settled for the moment.Perhaps the most telling sign that both blocs of the Republican Party are looking toward the general election came last week when the Club for Growth, the best financed of the conservative groups, began broadcasting commercials for Republican Senate candidates in Alaska and Arkansas that took aim at the Democratic incumbents there.“We think those races are necessary for Republicans to take the Senate majority,” said Chris Chocola, the Club for Growth’s president. He added that his group’s “bigger concern” was how Republicans would govern if they controlled the Senate.Even the Senate Conservatives Fund, which led the charge against Mr. McConnell and has been among the most aggressive of the outside groups, seems to be looking to the horizon.“Primaries are good because they give voters choices and they hold politicians accountable, but once the primaries are over, it’s important for Republicans to come together to defeat the Democrats,” said Matt Hoskins, executive director of the group, adding that it had started to “to build a farm team of conservatives for higher office in the future.”Establishment Republicans are mocking conservative groups that are trumpeting their lower-profile House primary victories, like last week’s runoff defeat of 91-year-old Representative Ralph M. Hall of Texas.“That’s pathetic,” said Mr. Reed, of the Chamber of Commerce. “They’re bragging that they beat old Ralph Hall.”Mainline Republicans are not only talking tougher, they are also moving behind the scenes to confront hard-liners after the November elections. Some of Mr. Boehner’s lieutenants, for example, are considering rule changes to more easily punish fellow Republicans who do not vote for him as speaker in the next Congress, according to a House Republican official who requested anonymity to speak on internal matters. The same group has also discussed issuing a statement from a large number of House Republicans who pledge to support only Mr. Boehner for speaker. The discussion about such tactics was first reported by Politico.Such muscle-flexing has worried the conservative bloc, whose members are looking to the Mississippi Senate race as a way to salvage the primary season. Ms. Palin held a rally there for Mr. McDaniel on Friday and Mr. Santorum was to do the same on Saturday.And immediately after Mr. Barbour’s attack on political purity at the conference, David Bossie, the leader of the conservative group Citizens United, took the stage here in New Orleans and won cheers for predicting that “a McDaniel victory will rock the establishment to its very core.”At least one Republican senator facing a re-election campaign in 2016 — and the possibility of a primary — does not seem threatened. After speaking here on Thursday night, the first-term senator, Ron Johnson, from Wisconsin, strolled into a room of reporters and matter-of-factly said the conservative groups did not necessarily represent rank-and-file Tea Party activists and that the attacks on party leaders were intended to help the groups raise money and stay afloat.“Let’s face it, from a standpoint of fund-raising, nothing is more successful than attacking the Republican establishment — it works,” Mr. Johnson said.It was a remarkable assessment, particularly given that the 2010 election of Mr. Johnson, a conservative with no experience in elected office, was seen as being propelled in part by Tea Party energy.“You can be very doctrinaire. You can demand purity,” he said. “But in the end, if you actually want to advance your principles, if you actually want to advance policies that can be enacted, you have to win elections.”