http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/us/-canada-immigration.html
Want to Move to Canada? Europe? Somewhere? Trump’s Impact Will Follow You - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Canada,Citizenship and Naturalization,Europe
Nov. 9, 2016
2530
It has become a reflexive pledge, often half-joking, after an election: Worried about the next president? Move to another country.After the news of Donald J. Trump’s victory in the presidential election was confirmed early Wednesday, many Americans apparently considered doing just that.One likely destination was north. Late at night, Canada’s citizenship and immigration website crashed as it was flooded with interest.Remi Lariviere, a spokesman for the Canadian immigration agency, confirmed Wednesday morning that the cause was “a significant increase in the volume of traffic.”By then, the site was taking about half a minute to load but was accessible shortly before 8 a.m. Eastern. “Move to Canada” remained among the top trending search topics on Google.There is no way, of course, to be sure how serious these queries are. And experts point out that anyone seeking refuge in another country would be hard-pressed to escape the global effects of a new American administration or outlook on the world.Stephen J. Farnsworth, a co-author of the 2013 book “The Global President: International Media and the U.S. Government” and a professor of political science at the University of Mary Washington, said that escaping to Canada would not shield you from the influence of a President Trump.“America’s global reach being what it is, the impacts that America has in the world will also follow you wherever you go,” he said. “Decisions that the U.S. makes with respect to NATO policy, for example, would be part of your experience if you move to say, a NATO country.”(Canada is one of the founding members of NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.)Of course, many of those exploring their options would be fleeing not just the new president and his policies, but also the America that voted for him. And Canada was not the only country people appeared interested in checking out.Immigration officials in New Zealand said that its website dealing with residency and student visas had received over 1,500 registrations from American citizens in November, according to Reuters, more than 50 percent the usual amount.Many people who already have or are close to achieving dual citizenship in other countries and the United States said they were considering staying in, or leaving for, their alternate homelands.And some of those without citizenship considered returning to one of the many nations — including Israel, China and Ireland — that offers “right of return,” an easy path to citizenship for those with some form of heritage related to that country.(For Jews, moving to Israel is known as making Aliyah.)Julian Edward Toles, 27, an essayist living with his girlfriend in Barcelona, said that while he had already started to look into the benefits of Spanish citizenship, which he could obtain were he and his girlfriend to marry, he was now thinking “much more seriously” about getting residency rights.“Trump and his promises to uphold ‘law and order’ frankly scare me,” Mr. Toles, who is black, said in a Facebook message. “I fear for my personal safety as the worst of what we’ve seen from his campaign becomes a daily reality.”Oscar Barajas, a 36-year-old with Mexican citizenship living in Chicago, said that while he was about to get his American citizenship, he “was not so happy to join after Trump’s election.”“I don’t plan to leave because Trump won, but I can say I at least would be fortunate to go back to my country if he makes the U.S. a place where I wouldn’t like to start a family,” he said. "I know so many people who are noncitizen and are scared about this situation.”Others advised that those upset about the election stay and ensure that their rights are upheld.Asked about what he would tell a Muslim mother of three who was worried about her future in the United States, Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, the nation’s largest Muslim civil rights group, said, “I don’t think leaving the country is what anyone would recommend.”“We’re Americans like all other Americans,” he said. “We’re here, we’re not going anywhere, and we’re going to defend our rights and the rights of all Americans regardless of who’s in the highest office in the land.”He did say, though, that he had been getting emails of friendly concern from Muslims in Canada.They’re “saying, ‘what’s going on down there?’ ” he said, chuckling at the emails. “ ‘It’s chillier up here but it’s nice.’ ”Alexandra Andreeva, 27, a dual citizen of Bulgaria and the United States, said that her “first instinct after learning the results of the election” was to return to the European Union. But she said her strong identity as an American made her feel responsible to the United States, where she moved from Bulgaria when she was 6 years old.“Because I was born under communism, which is the opposite of liberal democracy, I would say that I feel even more compelled to stay here and to continue the fight,” she said.Mr. Farnsworth said, “Every four years, people talk about leaving the U.S., but it’s really striking how few do.”It is not necessarily easy to become a Canadian citizen, despite the country’s reputation for niceness. The country is in search of university students and highly skilled workers; for those who do not fit into those neat categories, it would be far more difficult to find a place in the country.“I’m often amazed by people who describe themselves as patriotic being so willing to move away if they don’t like the outcome of a presidential election,” Mr. Farnsworth said. “The consolation for losers every four years is the recognition that there is no permanent majority and no permanent minority in American politics.”If you don’t like the political outcome, it’ll probably change in two years or four, he added. “And then a whole ’nother set of people can talk about moving to Canada.”