https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/25/us/texas-border-wall-reaction.html
Rejecting the Wall ‘Is Too Emotional,’ and Other Voices From the Border - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,McAllen (Tex),Mexico,Trump  Donald J,Homeland Security Department,Border Patrol (US),United States Politics and Government
Jan. 25, 2017
149
McALLEN, Tex. — In this South Texas city in the Rio Grande Valley, the border is a barrier. A river. A fence. A symbol.The fence itself lines the Rio Grande roughly nine miles from downtown McAllen, a city of wind-battered palm trees where Mexican culture has long shaped life.On Wednesday, President Trump signed an executive order to build a wall along the border. That reignited debate around McAllen, not only about the nature of the border but about the nature of walls themselves. One opponent of the idea pointed to the bumper sticker on his Chevrolet Suburban. It read “No Border Wall.” He’s had it there for years. What is old is new again.Here are some voices on the issue.Name: Amancio ChapaAge: 70Voted For: Hillary ClintonBack story: Lives outside McAllen, about 10 miles from the border“I know it’s been referred to as something like the Berlin Wall,” Mr. Chapa said. “Something like that, this artificial barrier, it symbolizes a division. It symbolizes an overreaction to the issue of immigration. It stigmatizes Mexico and singles out Mexico as this big problem for the United States.”_____Name: Efren GarzaAge: 70Voted For: TrumpBack story: Lives about three miles from the border, near Mission, Tex.“We are under attack from the rest of the world,” Mr. Garza said. “We do have an open border. Mexico doesn’t give a damn about who is coming through their country to us. It’s an open-door policy. They want to be good neighbors? Everybody’s coming through Mexico, and Mexico is doing nothing to help.”_____Name: Victoria GuerraVoted For: Did not vote for presidentBack story: Is a lawyer in McAllen, where she was born and raised“When 9/11 happened, none of those terrorists came through Mexico, and yet we created this border war,” Ms. Guerra said. “I just don’t think it justifies a wall. We’re a next-door neighbor to Mexico, and many of us come from Mexican heritage. Instead of bridging the communities, we’re dividing them.”_____Name: Sergio SanchezAge: 47Voted For: TrumpBack story: Is the chairman of the Hidalgo County Republican Party, which is based in McAllen“I support the wall in segments and where the wall is practical, based on what Border Patrol and folks at Homeland Security deem is necessary,” Mr. Sanchez said. “To automatically reject the idea of a wall is too emotional and knee-jerk. Most of those folks need to take a step back. He’s not being uber-sensitive. But I do not see anything sinister or racist in his approach.”