http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/31/us/missouri-flooding-st-louis-mississippi.html
Record Floods Affect Millions in the Midwest - The New York Times
Floods,Missouri,Illinois,Midwestern States (US),Rivers,Weather,Deaths (Fatalities),Mississippi River
Dec. 30, 2015
4939
FENTON, Mo. —  Amid the worst flood this town has ever seen, Tammy Morgan took a break Wednesday from shoveling sand into the yellow bags she hoped would save her business and pointed to a line of treetops rising from the water. There, she said, a few hundred feet away, past streets and clapboard houses now submerged, is where the Meramec River should be — not lapping at the grass a few feet away.“It’s pretty far away,” she said. “It’s a lot to get up here, you know?”Some of the highest flood stages ever recorded hit the Mississippi River basin, part of a band of severe flooding stretching from northern Texas to the Ohio River Valley, affecting millions of people. Neighborhoods have been evacuated, towns inundated, roads and water treatment plants closed.In Illinois and Missouri, where the governors declared states of emergency across wide swaths of the states, officials had blamed 20 deaths on the floods.And the trouble here continues: Rivers are not expected to peak until Thursday, at the earliest, and the flood crest will be making its way down the Mississippi well into next week. While the Mississippi was expected to remain a few feet short of its record height at St. Louis, downstream at places like Cape Girardeau and New Madrid, Mo., and at Memphis, it could approach or equal records set in the floods of 2011 and 1993, the Army Corps of Engineers and the National Weather Service reported.“We’re not over it yet,” Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri warned after touring some of the flooded areas.For people in this region, rising waters mean more road closures, and many people are already stranded. Ms. Morgan and her husband, Jodi, who live in Eureka, another town battling floods, feared they would be unable to make it home.“Fenton will become an island, I’m afraid, here shortly,” said Michael D. Polizzi, its mayor.The hardest-hit region is eastern Missouri, particularly here, in the small towns along the Meramec southwest of St. Louis, where the river winds its way toward the Mississippi. The usual declarations from victims that they had never seen anything like it somehow fell short, as the Meramec and its tributaries shattered previous flood records Wednesday. In places, the Meramec rose 27 feet above flood stage — as much as three feet higher than had ever been recorded.“It’s of such proportions that it’s very difficult to use the correct words to tell you how bad it is,” said Mr. Polizzi, who has lived here for 20 years.Ms. Morgan said that of all the entrepreneurial risks she envisioned when she took over Sisters Tea House, the thought that the placid river down the hill would rise up and swallow the heart of this town of 4,000 people, was not one of them.Fenton officials made plans to deposit rocks as temporary roads into stranded subdivisions, while in parts of the town’s business district, it was hard to tell that roads ever existed. A transmission shop, a brick bungalow housing a commercial glass company, and a bar sat side by side. Each was submerged about halfway under what had essentially become a vast lake. Just up the road, people stood on a bridge spanning the river and gawked at the flotsam that raced downstream, including a roof.The rivers here surged over their levees, evacuation orders were issued for thousands of people in several towns, and the state Department of Transportation closed a 24-mile stretch of Interstate 44, the major artery through the area, most of it under water. Emergency workers, National Guardsmen and volunteers built sandbag barriers and patrolled streets in motorboats, rescuing people and pets from rooftops, while a house that had been swept from its foundation drifted down the Meramec.The entire town of West Alton, population 500, north of St. Louis, was evacuated, after the Mississippi topped a levee there.The deluge struck at a time of year that usually brings snow, not rain. The region’s worst floods usually hit in spring and summer, but an unusually wet and warm fall had saturated the ground.Then, from Saturday through Monday, a powerful line of slow-moving and unseasonably warm storms spawned a string of tornadoes near Dallas and dropped heavy rain across an arc hundreds of miles long.A few places in southern and eastern Missouri, including the town of Union, a short drive upstream from here, recorded more than a foot of rain in two days.Rivers went from well-controlled to severely flooded in a matter of hours, as forecasters repeatedly raised their predictions of how many feet deep rivers would become, leaving residents unsure what to believe.“A day and a half ago, it was 39.8,” said Alan Schiller, 49, who lives here. “Yesterday, it was 42, until last night. They raised it another foot last night.”Connie Govero, the office manager for the Olde Towne Fenton Pet Hospital, pointed out a back window of the business, toward a wooded bluff a couple of football fields away. A creek sits at the bottom of the bluff, and she said that the water was contained to the area immediately around the creek when she got to work Tuesday morning.By the time she left at about 8 p.m. Tuesday, Ms. Govero said, the water was trickling into the hospital’s parking lot. And by Wednesday morning, the lower level was flooded.“The water came up a whole lot faster than normal,” she said.Since the 2011 flood, the Corps of Engineers has worked to strengthen the levee system in places that were hard-hit, like Cairo, Ill., with projects like installing underground barriers to keep water from seeping through porous soil under the levees.“We haven’t seen any levee failures,” and that should remain true, said Rene Poche, a spokesman for the corps. But with the Mississippi spilling over levees in some places, and seeping under them in others, he cautioned, “there will be flooding.”