https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/01/us/politics/obama-pledges-to-defend-democrats-on-trans-pacific-partnership-trade-deal.html
Obama Pledges to Defend Democrats on Trade Deal - The New York Times
Trans-Pacific Partnership,International Trade and World Market,Obama  Barack,Democratic Party,Sanders  Bernard,Elections  House of Representatives,Elections  Senate
April 30, 2015
6484
WASHINGTON —  President Obama on Thursday made a personal plea to a group of congressional Democrats to support a far-reaching Pacific trade deal even in the face of political peril, promising them during a two-hour meeting at the White House that he would defend and campaign for lawmakers who risked their jobs to back him.Mr. Obama’s pledge to about 30 members of his own party in the Cabinet Room of the White House reflected his intensifying push to win support for a pivotal element of his legislative agenda that is facing determined opposition from both Democrats and Republicans.But it also spotlighted the scale of the political obstacles standing in the way of one of his cherished goals. Mr. Obama’s administration has been working for months to lay the groundwork to win “fast track” authority that would give the president the power to submit trade agreements to Congress and have them considered on an expedited basis, without amendments and subject only to a yes-or-no vote. The authority is widely regarded as essential to completing the ambitious trade deal, called the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would lower trade barriers between the United States, Japan and 10 other nations.Resistance to the deal is hardening among Democrats who, stung by past experience with agreements like Nafta, harbor deep-seated worries about the consequences of new accords for American workers. Those concerns are likely to draw greater attention with the entry into the 2016 presidential race of Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, a vocal opponent of trade deals. And skepticism has yet to wear down in the ranks of the historically pro-trade Republican Party, where some lawmakers are loath to grant the president any additional power, and others are loyal to a Tea Party base that routinely criticizes what it calls the evils of crony capitalism.“There will be strong Republican support for trade promotion authority,” the House speaker, John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, said on Thursday. But, he added, “the president needs to step up his game in terms of garnering more support amongst Democrats.”At the White House on Thursday, it did not take long for Mr. Obama to be confronted with the deep anxiety in his own party about supporting a sweeping trade agreement, or legislation that would give him the power to cement one. Representative Gerald E. Connolly, Democrat of Virginia, said that another lawmaker asked the president directly about the political risk he would be assuming if he voted yes.“The gist was, ‘I need to know whether the White House is going to have my back or not,’ ” said Mr. Connolly, who would not identify the questioner. “We’re walking a plank here, if we support this, with our own base. Where’s the safety net, so we don’t fall into the deep dark ocean?”That elicited the promise from Mr. Obama that he would campaign for any lawmakers who found themselves facing a primary opponent — or the threat of one — because of a vote in support of free trade.The exchange highlighted a challenging reality for the president that is complicating his efforts to sell both the trade deal and the trade promotion bill. The Democratic base, powered in large part by organized labor, is intensely opposed to free trade agreements, and many lawmakers in the party fear a backlash by voters if they support the deals.That is also true of presidential candidates. Hillary Rodham Clinton has offered only qualified statements on the trade deal.And in Congress, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, whose strong support by the party’s liberal core gives her outsize influence with her colleagues, has made a cause of criticizing the pact.Acknowledging the challenges, Mr. Obama has intensified his efforts to rally members of his party to back him on trade and has begun to push back forcefully against critics.He has dropped mentions of trade into speeches, news conferences and interviews seemingly at every opportunity in recent days, and he announced on Thursday that he would take his sales pitch on the road, appearing at the headquarters of Nike next week.He spent an hour on the telephone several weeks ago making a point-by-point rebuttal to a 12-point critique from Representative Sander M. Levin of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee.But Mr. Obama’s efforts have yet to erode the skepticism, which is rapidly calcifying into full-blown opposition. Republicans let it be known this week that they did not believe they had enough votes to carry the measure alone, increasing the pressure on the president to provide votes from the Democratic side.“We don’t want to give up our leverage,” Mr. Levin said in an interview. “The more the president and everybody in the administration gets involved, the more concern there is about what’s in the package before it’s fast-tracked.”After a slow start, Mr. Obama, who is usually loath to get involved in the sometimes messy business of legislative haggling and horse-trading, has shown himself uncharacteristically willing to engage with Democrats on the agreement, sitting down with them at the White House and cajoling them on the phone.“This is an issue with a long history — there’s nothing new about how difficult this is,” said Bill Galston, a Brookings Institution scholar who served as domestic policy chief in Bill Clinton’s White House. “The president has concluded that in order to make the sale, he’s going to have to do what he’s often reluctant to do, that is, roll up his sleeves and deal with senators and representatives one-on-one and one-on-few.”Mr. Connolly praised the engagement, but he said he told Mr. Obama that it was time to shift to a much more active “war room approach,” where he is focused on rounding up the votes of Democrats needed to push through the trade promotion measure.“My concern was, he’s got to focus intensely on the politics of this thing,” Mr. Connolly said, describing himself as “favorably disposed” both to the trade promotion bill and the Pacific trade pact. “The education and question-and-answer period is over. We’re now at the corral-the-votes stage, and we’ve got to recognize there’s a very finite number.”