https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/19/us/dna-analysis-exposes-an-inexact-forensic-science.html
DNA Analysis Exposes Flaws in an Inexact Forensic Science - The New York Times
Innocence Project,Forensic Science,DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid),Federal Bureau of Investigation
May 18, 2014
8365
By now — despite the apparent infallibility of detectives from Sherlock Holmes to Lieutenant Columbo, despite the clinical genius of wizards from Dr. Quincy to Gil Grissom — it should surprise no one that forensic science is not the model of exactitude that popular culture might have us believe. The scientific rigor of entrenched forensic disciplines has been challenged for years. Still, we live in a “C.S.I.” world, and television viewers could be forgiven for assuming that laboratory techniques used to catch bad guys are unassailable. In real life, though, the soundness of criminal analysis is being regularly tested, both in America’s labs and in its courtrooms.This week’s offering from Retro Report, a series of video documentaries that re-examine major stories from the past, zeros in on microscopic hair analysis, a staple of forensics for generations. It was long accepted as a virtually unerring technique to prove that this suspect — without a doubt, Your Honor — was the criminal. Wasn’t a hair found at the scene?But with the advent of DNA analysis in the late 1980s, apparent matches of hair samples ultimately proved to be not quite as flawless as people had been led to believe. Instances of wrongful imprisonment make that clear. Retro Report focuses on one such case, that of Kirk Odom, a Washington man who was found guilty of rape in 1981 and spent two decades behind bars. The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s vaunted crime lab had asserted that hairs taken from his head were microscopically like — meaning virtually indistinguishable from — one found on the victim’s nightgown. In time, however, DNA testing established that Mr. Odom was not the rapist, as he had asserted all along. Unfortunately for him, that official conclusion came late. By then, he had completed his prison sentence, a man done in by discredited forensic testimony.Other lab techniques have had their reliability in the courtroom called into question. A 2009 report by a committee of the National Academy of Sciences found “serious problems” with an assortment of methods routinely relied on by prosecutors and the police. They included fingerprinting, blood typing, weapons identification, shoe print comparisons, handwriting, bite marks and — yes — hair testing. DNA was the game changer. The 2009 report said that, with the exception of nuclear DNA analysis, “no forensic method has been rigorously shown to have the capacity to consistently, and with a high degree of certainty, demonstrate a connection between evidence and a specific individual or source.”This is not to say that these techniques are no good at all. Indeed, the F.B.I. still affirms its faith in microscopic hair analysis, particularly as a first look. But it now tries to follow that procedure with a deeper and more certain investigation that uses DNA sampling, and it has done so for 18 years. Nonetheless, many forensic methods no longer come wrapped in the shield of invincibility they once widely enjoyed (especially among those prone to take TV shows literally). Fingerprints get blurred, bullets get smashed, blood specimens get tainted, hairs get mischaracterized.And then there is human frailty. In 1997, the F.B.I.'s inspector general reported that the bureau’s crime lab was — not to put too fine a point on it — all too often sloppy. Technicians were found to have exaggerated the reliability of their findings beyond the bounds of science, typically slanting their conclusions in the prosecution’s favor. A forensics expert who used to work in the federal lab, Max M. Houck, told Retro Report that there was “absolutely a disconnect between what I could say as a scientist and what the prosecutors, or the defense attorneys, wanted me to say.” One lab employee, Michael P. Malone, was accused in the late 1990s of providing false testimony. (Mr. Malone left the bureau, but said he has since resumed working for it as a contractor, doing background investigations.)The Innocence Project, a nonprofit group based in New York that uses DNA testing to help clear people wrongly convicted of crimes, has played a notable role in casting doubt on how forensic science is applied. Nationwide over the past 25 years, the project says, 316 people sent to prison have been exonerated through DNA analysis; 18 of them served time on death row. Hair comparisons performed by crime labs were factors in nearly one-fourth of those cases.Even the F.B.I., while asserting the validity of hair analysis, has effectively acknowledged past problems.In 2012, in an understanding reached with the Innocence Project and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, the F.B.I. agreed to a more cautious approach to stay squarely within the confines of known science. No absolutes. The bureau would now say, for example, only that a specific person could be included in, or could be excluded from, a “pool of people of unknown size” who might be the source of a specific hair sample. There would also be no statements of statistical probability. In addition, the F.B.I. says it is examining more than 2,500 old cases that lacked DNA evidence, to determine if hair analysis, of itself, played a role in guilty verdicts. It is unclear how far along this review is.Oh, just one more thing, as Lieutenant Columbo would say.While it is undoubtedly lamentable, even outrageous, that innocent men and women have been put behind bars, it would probably be a mistake to assume that the prisons are filled with thousands upon thousands of inmates who are doing the time without having done the crime. No one pretends that all those imprisoned people are angels. The Innocence Project acknowledges that.“About half the cases that go to DNA testing,” said Paul Cates, a spokesman for the project, “end up confirming guilt.”