https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/29/style/when-the-gospel-of-minimalism-collides-with-daily-life.html
When the Gospel of Minimalism Collides With Daily Life - The New York Times
Minimalism,Orderliness and Clutter,Psychology and Psychologists,Interior Design and Furnishings
April 29, 2017
5415
Minimalism as a lifestyle creed is pretty simple: The less you own, the happier you’ll be. Pare down and declutter, the thinking goes, and your mind will have room to exhale. Minimalists say that it’s about spending more energy on living, less energy on having. With more than six million Instagram posts tagged #minimalism, and four million more tagged #minimalist, it’s a trend that won’t die.And understandably so. The impulse to step off the consumer treadmill can be quite tempting.In theory, minimalists have more time and money to amass something that researchers have found to provide far more satisfaction than material items: memories. Experiential purchases, psychologists assure us, offer deeper emotional sustenance than any new gadget or piece of furniture. Studies suggest that even the perfect Danish modern chair fades into the background after daily exposure. Yet our brains never quite get over the thrill of, say, hiking Bryce Canyon, which yields more psychological bang for the buck.But those who have tried the minimalist way have found that it’s not always as satisfying as design websites and tiny-house blogs insist. For some people, purging did not bring Shangri-La. Like most things, living minimally is more complicated than it may seem. In fact, some people found that their compact homes and minimalist manifestoes came with different challenges, and that the trade-offs were not always worth it. Sometimes, they realized, a little more stuff actually brought them immense comfort.For Karen Bertelsen, a former television host in Canada and now a lifestyle blogger, minimalism was calming — until it became boring. Her desire to pare down began in 2009, when she suddenly felt that her two-bedroom brick cottage in Ontario looked stuffed to the gills with antiques and lace. “One day,” she said, “it just started to feel oppressive.”She recalls how, inspired by the virtuously clean-looking homes she saw pictured in Dwell magazine, she thought: “This is it. I am a minimalist. This is how it’s going to be, everything calm from now on.” And within two weeks, she had gotten rid of almost everything she owned and painted the whole place Decorator’s White, a life reboot. She went full-on Dwell, even building a chicken coop, the de rigueur symbol of suburban simplicity, in the backyard. A year after what she calls “the incident,” she wrote her first post on her blog, The Art of Doing Stuff, about the day she realized that she just “hated every inch of her house” — and how she came to view white as “the Botox of paint colors”: She and her home “look younger and fresher for it.”But fairly quickly, Ms. Bertelsen fell off the wagon, sneaking items here and there — a pair of flea market midcentury lamps, an Empire chandelier — back to her 1,200-square-foot home. Even more, her venture into minimalism made her realize how much she enjoyed viewing the physical manifestations of memories, reliving moments through concrete reminders. “I want to see the drumsticks from the last Ramones show I went to in 1994, or the rock I picked up climbing a mountain in Vancouver,” she said. “I want to see the titles of all the books I’ve read.”“Minimalism sure does suck you in,” she said. “Life looks easier. It seems like your skin will be dewier and your hair shinier — a happier, healthier version of yourself.” Today, Ms. Bertelsen believes that she’s struck the perfect balance, living in a well-edited space with expressive touches, like the stand, built by a friend, in her dining room that displays one of her riding saddles, a memento from a sport she loved as a child and young adult. But she also kept her backyard chickens from her Dwell phase and maintains that she’ll always be a little bit of a minimalist type inside, too.According to the sociologist Joel Stillerman, author of “The Sociology of Consumption,” among certain educated, upper-middle-class segments of the United States and other Western societies, there is a connection between minimalist design and a quest for well-being. But minimalism is also meant to project taste, refinement and aesthetic knowledge. “These people,” he said, “are making the statement that ‘I can afford to have less. I appreciate books and travel and good meals.’”Mr. Stillerman calls these post-materialist values; in other words, simplicity as a form of cultural capital. This concept is evident in a current exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, “Sara Berman’s Closet”: an actual closet, meticulously organized and filled with white garments, recreated by the artists Maira and Alex Kalman, Ms. Berman’s daughter and grandson. The installation, according to the museum, represents Ms. Berman’s life from 1982 to 2004, when she lived in a sparsely but precisely decorated Greenwich Village studio after divorcing her husband of 38 years. The closet epitomizes the idea of the city sophisticate that draws so many people to minimally designed spaces.Still, critics chide minimalists for a kind of faux self-discipline. After all, if you can afford to toss your stuff, you can probably reacquire it should you change your mind and, say, come to find that your home carbonation system is indispensable. And living minimally isn’t an entirely new thing. Tiny houses are in vogue, but not mobile homes, which have been around a while. As Dak Kopec, an environmental psychologist at the Boston Architectural College explained, it’s “more prestigious to say you live in a tiny home than a recreational vehicle or camper.”But there are also potential health problems associated with tiny living spaces. Most notable, some studies have linked crowding-related stress to increased rates of domestic violence and substance abuse; experts worry in particular about the growing trend of micro-apartments in urban centers. To combat New York’s housing shortage, for example, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s administration held a competition to design the city’s first affordable residential tower of micro-units — single apartments of 260 to 360 square feet — which opened in 2016. While everyone’s tolerance level for small spaces is different — there’s no agreed-upon formula for square-footage-to-person ratio, Dr. Kopec said — each of us can handle only so much crowding in our intimate quarters before it takes a toll. At least in a tiny house or an R.V., as opposed to a micro-apartment, people can retreat outdoors for privacy.Finding the appropriate psychological balance between indoor and outdoor space is also more art than science, and it may take a bit of design trial and error to get it right. Some of us create enough internal stimulation that we crave a minimal home, explained Dr. Edward Hallowell, a psychiatrist who specializes in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. He describes how we all modulate our outside environment and our private spaces: Someone who lives on a farm, for example, may want to pump up a home’s visual volume, whereas a person living in Manhattan may find that a tchotchke-free home with a white palette helps to create a feeling of equilibrium.Kerri Fivecoat-Campbell is candid about the pros and cons of tiny homes and a minimalist ethos. Her book, “Living Large in Our Little House,” details life with her husband and their six dogs in a 480-square-foot cabin in the Ozark Mountains in Arkansas. “When we first moved here full time, I tried to write in our 10-by-10 bedroom, but it was like working from an airplane seat,” she said. Then it hit her: People go to offices. Her husband worked outside their home. Why couldn’t she build a free-standing structure on their property for her books and desk? “I realized it’s not cheating on tiny houses or minimalism if I build a little 320-foot detached writing studio,” she said. “You have to make this lifestyle work for you.”Like Ms. Bertelsen, she found that her need to preserve childhood memories proved more powerful than she could have predicted. “The only time I’ve ever really wanted more space and felt sadness over it,” she said, “is when I couldn’t fit my mom’s wedding china in our house after she died.” The china cabinet was far too large, and there was no way to store its contents in their home. The desire to hold on to certain objects as a tangible connection to a lost loved one is another reason she’s thankful for her separate office space; there, she displays many of her mother’s books.Over time, minimalists may also find that they lack the time and energy needed to constantly prune their homes and exist as sparingly as possible. After Hattie Garlick lost her job in late 2012, she and her husband, Tom, declared a spending freeze on all “kiddie consumerism” for the year 2013, vowing to buy nothing — no toys, clothing, activities or child-targeted foods — for their toddler and, later, for the baby girl they learned they were expecting. Ms. Garlick started a blog to chronicle her minimalist journey, showing how she found used baby gear and swapped items with friends. The internet named her the Minimalist Mom and the experience inspired her second book, “Born to Be Wild,” which offers instructions for free outdoor activities that engage a child’s imagination. Now, four years after her Minimalist Mom sojourn, she works three days a week as a freelance writer, with no pressing need to pinch pennies. But most important, she said, she feels “less addicted to spending,” so she’s less panicked about a leaner month or the prospect of any future instability.These days, she warned, their two-story London house is far from minimalist. “Lego bricks strewn across the floor, poster paints cluttering the breakfast table, children’s drawings covering the fridge,” she said. In hindsight, she said, some of the trade-offs she made as the Minimalist Mom, like spending days looking for free toilet-training underpants for her toddler, “may not have been the best investment of my time.”Ms. Garlick cautions those flirting with such a lifestyle change, “Chasing any ideal, whether it’s minimalism or anything else, isn’t the way forward.”“Family life,” she added, “and actually any life probably, is at its best when it’s a bit scruffy and messy.” Being the Minimalist Mom entailed some daily mental gymnastics, she said, and required her to say no to her son about buying certain things, purely “in pursuit of a principle.” Today, she said, she feels more relaxed and happier, without the added worry of so much minimalism.