http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/06/world/the-saturday-profile-boris-in-wonderland-2-wonderlands-actually.html
THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Boris in Wonderland (2 Wonderlands, Actually) - The New York Times
GREAT BRITAIN,JOHNSON  BORIS,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,MAGAZINES
April 6, 2002
9907
PERHAPS it is his shambling, shaggy-dog manner, or his quaint, Bertie Wooster-ish diction. Maybe it is the way his bright hair juts forward as if it were about to slide off. Or maybe the reason it is so difficult to take Boris Johnson completely seriously is that he seems disinclined to do so himself.''Beneath the carefully constructed veneer of a blithering buffoon,'' he said recently by way of self-analysis, ''there lurks a blithering buffoon.''But how blithering can Mr. Johnson be, really, given that he holds two very adult jobs? He is the editor in chief of The Spectator, the 174-year-old conservative weekly magazine that is required reading for London's chattering classes, and for the past six months he has spent his spare time as a Tory member of Parliament. Or maybe it's vice versa.How does he get it all done (in addition to writing a weekly political column for The Daily Telegraph and raising four children with his wife, a lawyer)?''I play both ends against the middle and do virtually nothing,'' he said. He chortled. ''I work very hard, actually.'' Take his column. ''Because I have no time to do it, I do it in no time. You just whack it out.''Mr. Johnson, who at 37 has the stentorian voice of an elderly 19th-century flâneur, subscribes to the English tradition of pretending that your work simply flows invisibly from you, with no actual effort. In an increasingly meritocratic England, it is an old-school affectation that does not fool anyone.''There is a type in Britain who masquerades as a bumbling oaf,'' said Conrad Black, the Canadian newspaper magnate, who owns The Spectator. ''But Boris is not a bumbling oaf beneath the facade. He is a person of great political skill and high intelligence.''Some time ago, Mr. Johnson pledged to resign as editor if he ran for office. ''I reminded him of his promise,'' Mr. Black said. ''He gave his usual sackcloth-and-ashes, hand-wringing response. He said his enthusiasm for political service had got the better of him and that he was motivated solely by his desire to rescue the country from the evils it had fallen into.''Asked about this, Mr. Johnson said, ''The blessed sponge of amnesia has wiped the chalkboard of history.'' In Britain, holding political office and editing a political magazine at the same time is not widely viewed as a conflict of interest, at least when it comes to the Conservative Party and The Spectator.ALEXANDER BORIS DE PFEFFEL JOHNSON is well prepared for his current juggling act. Born to a mother who was a Bohemian, left-wing artist and a father who worked as a Conservative member of the European Parliament, his background is much more mixed than the average Tory's. His great-grandfather, the last interior minister of the imperial Turkish government, was lynched by Ataturk's partisans in 1922; his grandfather was a Turkish asylum-seeker.What he inherited was an insatiable drive to make his way in the world. ''I'm not posh; I'm an arriviste,'' he likes to say.Fresh out of Oxford, where he studied classics and served as president of the Oxford University Union debating society, Mr. Johnson worked at The Times and then was hired to write editorials for The Daily Telegraph. He spent five years as the Brussels correspondent, where he gained a deep distrust of the bureaucracy and helped hone his political position as a Eurosceptic Tory.Circulation at The Spectator has risen by about 10 percent, to just under 62,000 copies, since Mr. Johnson took over two years ago. The magazine specializes in irreverent opinion pieces, insiderish political intrigue and idiosyncratic columns. It has livened up considerably under Mr. Johnson, but generally advances the mainstream Tory agenda.Although Mr. Johnson is not the first Spectator editor to serve in Parliament, he may be stretched too thin. His writers complain that he is difficult to reach, and his editors complain that he is often missing. Colleagues in Parliament, where he represents Henley, northwest of London, grumble that he is rarely there, either. His nimble wit, they say, often gets away from him.One afternoon in the Spectator's offices, Mr. Johnson was by turns distant and engaged, charming and scattered, dazzlingly well-spoken and so silly he might have been a sixth grader at Eton (which, in fact, he once was). At times one expected him and members of his staff, meeting for lunch, to pick up their rolls and fling them at one another.The discussion began with Mr. Johnson's account of his morning in Parliament, where he spoke about a program for the disabled.''It's a jolly interesting subject, although my oration was heard by about five people,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''I banged on a bit -- I was really very P.C. -- and it was good as far as it went, but it wouldn't butter any parsnips.''There ensued a debate on the origin of the phrase ''buttering the parsnips,'' an expression used for anything that does not amount to much. It moved on to a discussion of the film ''Iris,'' about Iris Murdoch (Mr. Johnson: ''I didn't know she was such a goer''), and then to a critique of her oeuvre.''Her books are pretty hard-going for someone like me,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''Donnez-moi un break -- I read her book 'Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals.' '' But he confessed that by his bedside is a book of Greek lyric poetry.At one point, Mr. Johnson told his staff that ''I might trickle back to the Commons,'' but then he repaired to his office, where he lighted a half-smoked cigar and talked about what is wrong with Parliament.''I certainly think, after more than six months as an M.P., that one of the reasons politics is so despised at the moment is the procedures of the Commons,'' he said. ''We have to stop wasting time, stop filling time with speeches. Say what we want. Say what we mean. God! The reason the chamber is empty half the time is because people know there's nobody there who's going to say anything worth listening to.''AS he got up to go, his secretary thrust a sheaf of papers at him and, flinging on his coat, he signed them, talking all the while, a triumph of multitasking.Mr. Johnson knows that he remains in Parliament by the grace of the voters, and at The Spectator by grace of Conrad Black. ''I think our lives hang by a thread in our profession,'' he said of his editorship. ''We are always as good as our last article or our last issue. And I live or die by his opinion.''Just so.''So far it's been good,'' Mr. Black said. ''But assuming he can knuckle down and get the respect of his colleagues in Parliament, I assume they'll ask him to do more, and then we'll have to see. He's a delightful man, but I'm not running a welfare agency for humorous characters.''