https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/t-magazine/design/david-alhadeff-future-perfect-home.html
New York’s Foremost Champion of American Design - The New York Times
Future Perfect,Brooklyn (NYC),Interior Design and Furnishings,Furniture,New York City,Alhadeff  David
Nov. 29, 2016
9981
If it is possible for one person’s career to embody the trajectory of this country’s cutting-edge design, you could argue for David Alhadeff.Growing up in a Seattle suburb in the 1980s, he was the kind of kid who hungrily flipped through architecture books and designed shoe-box houses for his Smurfs. After college, his proto-Gen-X resume included wandering through Southeast Asia and starting an e-commerce site. He landed in New York City in 2000, and three years later, at 29, he had scraped together the cash to open the gallery-cum-design store the Future Perfect. Set in the hipster heart of Williamsburg, it made a name for such local artisans as Lindsey Adelman, Jason Miller and the duo called Fort Standard. That group, with Alhadeff’s fierce encouragement, began to produce increasingly sophisticated work. As the rest of the design world remained obsessed with midcentury masters, he argued for the new wave, gleefully attacking the notion that only Milan and the Netherlands could produce groundbreaking work, and that, as he puts it, “American design was crap.”The self-described outsider was soon the fulcrum of a witty, rustic brand of industrial-tinged modernism now known worldwide simply as “Brooklyn.”His loft in a former warehouse near his store was a perfect reflection of his taste and time: One midnight, he recruited friends to paint his bedroom walls Baker-Miller pink, a shade used to calm aggressive prison inmates. There, amid exposed wiring and heating ducts, his playful nerd side (Donkey Kong Jr. arcade game) flourished amid works from his artisans (Miller’s I Was Here table, plaster trees by David Wiseman) and iconic pieces by trendsetters of international design (a Moooi sofa and a Timorous Beasties carpet adorned with giant iguanas). “It was real and it was good, you know? It was me,” he says.But just as Brooklyn grew up, Alhadeff did, too. In 2009, feeling that retail spaces like American Apparel stores had conquered Williamsburg and the Future Perfect no longer fit into the neighborhood, he moved the store to Great Jones Street in NoHo (he added an outpost in the Pacific Heights neighborhood of San Francisco in 2013). No longer simply a modish place to find high design by local makers, the Future Perfect now has a hushed, theatrical gravitas. Though Brooklyn still represents (among his newer brands is Workstead, started by a couple of former Rhode Island School of Design grads), the front of the space is reserved for elaborate revolving installations and focuses on major pieces by artisans that Alhadeff searches the world for, including Piet Hein Eek, who uses reclaimed lumber in his Netherlands studio; Christopher Stuart, a former welder from Indianapolis; and Rooms, a female duo working in Tbilisi, Georgia. His website is an encyclopedia of the avant-garde.Alhadeff is both fanboy and mentor. While he’s still the self-effacing motormouth who rides his bike everywhere, it can take him years to cultivate relationships with those whose work he shows and to be confident that the work will intrigue his core buyers, the architects and decorators whose rarefied clients long for the shock of the new. “We brainstorm, push and pull each other, talk constantly,” he says. “I’m sure I drive people a little crazy.”Lately, Alhadeff has embraced a more decorative, embellished style that combines elemental shapes with painterly textures, such as straight-edged, low-back sofas from the Milan-based Dimore Studio, upholstered in hand-embroidered fabrics with a baroque appeal.With his increasingly expansive vision came a change in residence as well, in June, to Manhattan. Instead of opting for one of the many amenity-rich new developments, Alhadeff and his partner, Jason Duzansky, who is the art director at the studio of the photographer Steven Meisel, gut-renovated a 1,300-square foot co-op on the Lower East Side. The architecturally undistinguished complex was built in the 1950s, financed partly by the International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union, as a middle-class cooperative, and although it’s now spruced up, like much of Lower Manhattan, the buildings are still home to plenty of original tenants, now elderly, whose design ethos is more bric-a-brac than Bauhaus. “As always,” says Alhadeff, “it’s about the mix.”Gone are the pink walls of Williamsburg, replaced by various shades of green, some silvery, some mossy and deep. There are vintage pieces he bought at auction, including Pierre Cardin suede sling chairs at the dining table and a Chinese Deco rug, but many of the objects in his home track the Future Perfect’s evolution, and thus both the birth of Brooklyn style and the history of how America came to be taken seriously in 21st-century high design. He still has the I Was There table and Matt Gagnon’s 2005 acrylic lamp made from hardboard. Above a sofa hangs the limited-edition Meissen baboon mask that once held a place of honor near the giant exposed fuse box in his Williamsburg living room. In the entryway, an iconic Cherry Bomb chandelier by Lindsey Adelman (still among his closest friends) illuminates a black-stained timber Rooms console from a recent collection. It is placed against a stretch of vividly impressionistic wall covering from Dimore.Alhadeff may have left Brooklyn as it outgrew its bohemian ethos, but you can never quite squeeze the borough out of the boy, it seems. In addition to finding a Manhattan apartment as close to Brooklyn as you can get without actually living there — right on the East River, with 180-degree views from the wraparound terrace — he can’t quite let go of the Williamsburg loft. There it sits, largely unoccupied, a bubblegum-hued monument to a bygone era. “I just like to know it’s there,” he says. “It’s cheap, remember, like Brooklyn was. And so much happened there. Just thinking of all that makes me happy.”