https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/03/theater/twisting-touching-and-teasing-in-queen-of-the-night.html
Twisting, Touching and Teasing in ‘Queen of the Night’ - The New York Times
Theater,Weiner  Randy,Queen of the Night (Play)
Feb. 2, 2014
5355
Do not forget to pack the Purell if you’re even mildly germ-phobic and planning to attend “Queen of the Night,” the latest invasive theater piece — sorry, I mean immersive theater piece — to open in New York. Should you be among the many attendees treated to close encounters with the comely young cast members, expect to have some skin-on-skin contact, albeit of a strictly PG-13 kind.Your hand may be fondled and examined as if it were some kind of mysterious bauble, then perhaps placed on a naked hip. A kiss may be planted on a fingertip. And at many points, you may find yourself being suddenly stroked as you wander the rooms of the lavishly restored Billy Rose’s Diamond Horseshoe nightclub in the basement of the Paramount Hotel.While loading up on the hand sanitizer, you should probably also remember to leave behind any intimacy issues. This may not be quite so easy for many New Yorkers. As someone who has long prided himself on possessing a veritable pu pu platter of neurosis, I could more easily leave my apartment without my skeleton. Still, having braved a long night of enforced frolicking with scantily clad performers of both genders, I can report that I emerged unscathed and unscarred.A tip for social anxiety sufferers: The cocktails will probably help.“Queen of the Night,” directed by the talented set designer Christine Jones (“American Idiot,” the Metropolitan Opera’s “Rigoletto”), blends several strands of currently fashionable theatrical DNA. Among its presenters is Randy Weiner, who is among the producers of “Sleep No More,” the wildly popular riff on “Macbeth” that requires you to don a beaky mask and wander several floors of a building in Chelsea in search of dark doings. As at “Natasha, Pierre and the Great Comet of 1812” (at least when it first opened in the meatpacking district), a full meal is included in the ticket price: kale salad and potatoes, and one of three theatrical main dishes: chunky beef ribs presented on a huge wooden platter, a roast suckling pig plopped down on the table still on the spit, or lobster. (A vegetarian option, mushroom risotto, is also available.)While you’re tucking into that unfortunate piglet, you are treated to an elaborate floor show featuring the kind of circus acts that have long since exploded from the big top and spilled onto the stage: gymnasts hurtling through a small hoop suspended from the ceiling, a man juggling (magnificently) a red umbrella and other acrobatic feats performed by men and women hanging above the dining room like so many human chandeliers.The overall effect of “Queen of the Night” feels a bit like being frog-marched into the middle of a Super Bowl halftime show — maybe the sexy one from last year, featuring Beyoncé flashing her lissome flesh with such oddly appealing aggression — and asked to do a few of your own moves.Although there is a sprig of drama involved — characters modeled on the principals in Mozart’s “Magic Flute” have central roles in the floor show — the foursquare aim of this meticulously produced spectacle is to satiate appetites other than traditionally dramatic ones. Just how sated you will be depends on chance, to a degree. As with “Sleep No More,” every individual’s experience will be different. You might drink, dine and watch the performance, most of which takes place on a raised platform in the middle of the ballroom-size dining room, without being accosted by any of the “butlers,” as the wranglers who spirit customers away for private encounters are called.Or you could be lassoed (literally) almost the moment you descend the marble staircase leading to the festivities, as my companion was, and led off into a private chamber for some intimate talk about intimate matters. (“Have you ever been in love?”)Or you could find yourself, as I did, shoeless and sitting in a fur- and mirror-lined boudoir with a pert young woman making goo-goo eyes at you as she strokes your face with a feather.Or you could be hijacked during the dinner service and swept off to a small chamber and invited to engage in a game of striptease, as the handsome hedge fund guy sitting next to me was. (I expect the young, toned and beaming-with-extroversion are selected for this option.)If you’re in the mood for these kinds of things, I’m not sure I can give any advice about how to convey your inclination. Maybe just look for a young man sporting raccoon eyes (the eyeliner budget alone must stretch to the thousands a month) and a come-hither look, and throw yourself in his path. These assistants can also be identified by their black-and-white ensembles, created by the fashion designer Thom Browne, who provided all the costumes. Of course, as with real mating games, maybe it’s better to look like you’re not looking. Try clutching your drink tightly and staring in anguished anxiety at the floor, and see what happens.In fact, staring at the floor, and the walls, and the light fixtures, is among the most reliably pleasurable diversions at “Queen of the Night,” and one that does not require curatorial assistance. The design is a collaborative effort among the interior designer Meg Sharpe, the “set and scent” designer Douglas Little and the creative director Giovanna Battaglia. (I recall a little incense, but nothing too wild in the olfactory department.) It features a riot of different styles, with an emphasis on opulence twisting toward the decadent.A stuffed leopard, posed as if on the prowl and draped in jewels, stands sentinel in one of the antechambers, looking as if he’d just crawled down from an Erté print. One room I was led through, in which a female cast member was bathing as nonchalantly as you can bathe while strangers stroll by, featured walls and a chandelier molded from white wax. Another wall in one of the antechambers features an elaborate inlaid design created from metallic blue beetle shells and butterfly feathers. The handles on the doors to most of the rooms are outstretched hands, a clever symbol of the show’s theme of connection and seduction. (Take care to establish the gender of the hand on the bathroom door you choose, or you could find yourself treating some patron to an unwanted moment of interpersonal engagement.)You may also notice that some attendees have little hand-shaped amulets hanging from ribbons around their necks. These would be the guests who opted for the higher tiers of pricing. General admission tickets begin at $135 and include a cocktail and full dinner with unassigned seating, but there are levels of increased coddling that can push that price north of $500. (For that sum, you get to select your own premium wine and have special canapés in the kitchen.)I was assured, however, that the butlers have no instructions to give extra attention to patrons who have paid more. Everyone has an equal chance at being treated to a little knife throwing, a magic trick, a back rub or even a ritualized milk bath. Given the show’s general air of fin-de-Bloomberg-era lavishness, it was good to know that at least when it came to the elaborately stage-managed intimacies, all were on the same footing. At “Queen of the Night,” decadence and democracy are shaking hands.