https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/fashion/open-thread-style-newsletter-colette-closing-wimbledon.html
Open Thread: This Week in Style News - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Tennis,Givenchy
July 14, 2017
3287
Each week, the Open Thread newsletter will offer a look from across The New York Times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share, with Vanessa Friedman as your personal shopper. The latest newsletter appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.Happy Bastille Day! POTUS and FLOTUS are on their way back from France, where Mrs. Trump has, it seems, been more sartorially diplomatic than usual, not only dressing in a wardrobe that seems to be dictated by the colors of the French flag (which are also the colors of the American flag), but in clothes from ur-French brand Dior, as well as her favorite Franco-American designer, Hervé Pierre.But that isn’t the only notable news of the week.Yesterday was the last day of New York Men’s fashion week, which means the show circus is officially on hiatus until September — to probably everyone’s great relief. After all, that leaves us free to concentrate on other exciting fashion displays like the above-mentioned petit tour and … Wimbledon!I know, of all the grand slams Wimbledon seems like the least exciting dress-wise, thanks to its all-white requirement. The Australian Open, by contrast, is where sports brands debut their looks of the year, and the French Open tends towards elegance (this year, one look could be best described as “florcore” — the floral equivalent of normcore); and the U.S. Open involves the most extreme statement-making.But look to the stands, dear reader. Look to the stands. Whether because of the fact that for debenture seat holders who want to enter the restaurants and bars “smart casual” is encouraged and torn jeans and “dirty sneakers” are actually forbidden or because Ralph Lauren is a sponsor with an official box, or because Anna Wintour makes a de rigueur post-couture stop, guests at Wimbledon tend to dress for the occasion.Anyone searching for clues on what to wear to a summer garden party could do worse than to model themselves on the Duchess of Cambridge in white-and-black polka dot Dolce & Gabbana, David Beckham in khakis, a blue blazer and blue banker stripes, or Andy Murray’s wife Kim Sears in pretty much anything from TopShop to Beulah London.Or, for other news, get a sneak peek at the new Givenchy from Clare Waight Keller; mourn the closing of Paris concept store Colette; take a trip to Rosita Missoni’s extraordinary garden (complete with her secret risotto recipe) — and have a good weekend.Every week on Open Thread, Vanessa will answer a reader’s fashion-related question, which you can send to her anytime via email or Twitter. Questions are edited and condensed.Q: Thanks to my red-headed mother and blond father, I am pale as a newt and prone to freckling and sunburn. I like to walk home after work, but my summer sunscreen bill will bankrupt me if I don’t cover my arms and legs. I’ve looked at a few “SPF clothing” websites, but the clothes are either too sporty or too loose and flowing, à la ’70s rock goddess. Any suggestions to keep me looking chic and staying shielded? I am 5’11” with a medium build. — Suzanne, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaA: Though there is a general belief that when it comes to hot weather, the less clothing, the better, I have learned as I have gotten older that there is a reason people in desert climes actually cover up. Long skirts, culottes and sleeves in very light fabrics cut to veil the body but not constrict it are by far the coolest way to dress. Think pieces like palazzo pants, pajama suiting and dresses with empire waists in cotton or lightweight silks. There’s an element of the Talitha-Getty-in-Marrakesh to this kind of dressing, I admit, but most of it now comes with a tailored edge that keeps it from looking too boho for an urban, or office, setting.Anita Leclerc, our fashion editor and Browsing guru, says, “For my money, an oversize shirt and wide pants is nicely breezy, and protective, for summer. I confess to loving my giant (if scary expensive) blue-and-white stripe Balenciaga shirt, but who’s to say that a big Brooks Brothers shirt in a similar blue- or red-and-white stripe wouldn’t look just as cool (and might well be on sale now)? I also gravitate to pants with a paper-bag waist because the higher waist tends to balance the wide legs.” But if all else fails, The Wirecutter, our sister site that focuses on product reviews, offers a guide to the best sunscreens for the least amount of money. — VANESSA FRIEDMAN