http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/19/us/nine-victims-of-charleston-church-shooting-remembered.html
Recalling Nine Spiritual Mentors, Gunned Down During Night of Devotion - The New York Times
Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Charleston (SC),Blacks,Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church (Charleston  SC),Hate Crimes,Pinckney  Clementa C (1973-2015),Coleman-Singleton  Sharonda (1969-2015),Hurd  Cynthia (1960-2015),Jackson  Susie (1928-2015),Lance  Ethel Lee (1940-2015),Middleton-Doctor  DePayne (1965-2015),Sanders  Tywanza (d 2015),Simmons  Daniel Lee Sr (1939-2015),Thompson  Myra (1955-2015)
June 18, 2015
5674
When Tywanza Sanders, the poet and peacemaker of the family, saw the man draw his gun during Bible study and point it as his elderly aunt, Susie Jackson, he shielded her and tried to talk the gunman into laying down his weapon, a relative said Thursday.“That was who he was,” said Kristen Washington, a relative who recounted what she heard from witnesses to the shooting.Instead, the gunman killed Mr. Sanders, and then gunned down his aunt and seven other churchgoers who had driven to the church on a Wednesday night for one reason: to discuss Scripture, and how to make Jesus’ actions come alive in their own lives and communities.The nine victims — three men and six women, who ranged in age from 26 to 87 — were leaders, motivators, counselors and the people everyone could turn to for a heap of prayer, friends and relatives said. Led by the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, 41, the pastor of Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church who was also a state senator, the group included a girls’ track coach, a recent college graduate, a librarian, a university admissions coordinator and others devoted to churches in the area.Mr. Sanders, 26, had graduated from Allen University last year and worked full-time as a barber to pay his bills. He was proud of his degree in business administration from Allen, a historically black college, but he wanted more. He told Torrence Shaw, a friend, that he wanted to go to graduate school to pursue music production. Mr. Sanders had been researching scholarships.But it was his personality, even more than his ambition, that left an impression on his friends and family.“For him being so young, he was wise,” Mr. Shaw said. “He was always caring and would give the shirt off his back to anybody. He was the first person I would always call to get his wisdom and advice.”The two met in high school and Mr. Sanders helped Mr. Shaw cope with the death of his father. But he reminded him that, with Mr. Shaw’s older brother away at school, he had to step up and be the “man of the family.”Ms. Washington, his cousin, said there was not a lot that would get Mr. Sanders down. He wrote poetry and attended open mic nights. He loved rap. And he could not get enough of the water.Mr. Shaw’s brother Tyrone said Mr. Sanders was focused on getting his life in order and being positive.Sharonda Coleman-Singleton, 45, who was on the church’s ministerial staff, held two roles at Goose Creek High School. She was a speech therapist, and coached the girls’ track and field team, the kind of school booster who could never be missed at games because of all the shouting and cheering.“She was teaching them track: How to throw the discus, how to do shot, triple jump, those types of things,” said Jimmy Huskey, the school principal, at a news conference. “But she taught these young ladies how to be better young ladies. This is something that can never be replaced.”Ms. Coleman-Singleton was never the type to preach aggressively. She demonstrated her faith, not with words, but with her behavior.“She didn’t go out there and say it or anything else,” Mr. Huskey said. “It was by her actions. It was what she did for people.”Ms. Coleman-Singleton had three children, including a son, Chris Singleton, an outfielder for Charleston Southern University.Cynthia Hurd, 54, lived amid books. A librarian for 31 years for the Charleston County library system, Ms. Hurd once said in an interview with a local newspaper that she loved finding answers, like a detective. But it was working with people that she loved most about her job, she told the paper. She named Maya Angelou as her favorite author.The Charleston City Council announced Thursday that it would rename the St. Andrews library branch in her honor.“It is unimaginable that she would walk into a church and not return,” Ms. Hurd’s brother, Malcolm Graham, a former state senator, said in a statement. “But that’s who she was — a woman of faith.”DePayne Middleton-Doctor, 49, a minister who loved to sing, had retired from county government as head of the Community Development Block Grant Program in 2005. Last year, she joined her former school, Southern Wesleyan University, as the admissions coordinator. Ms. Middleton-Doctor had gotten a master’s degree in management from there.“DePayne truly believed in the mission of S.W.U. to help students achieve their potential by connecting faith with learning,” said the university’s president, Tom Voss.The Charleston City Council chairman, Elliott Summey, said as a county worker Ms. Middleton-Doctor, who had four daughters in junior high through college, tended to the needs of underprivileged communities. “In a very big way, she was doing very human, kindly things,” he said.Like others attending the Bible study, Ethel Lee Lance, 70, was dedicated to Emanuel. She was a sexton at the church and had worked there for three decades, her grandson told The Post and Courier of Charleston, S.C.Ms. Jackson, 87, Mr. Sanders’s aunt, was a longtime Emanuel churchgoer in a spiritually rooted family that considered churchgoing as nonnegotiable.Myra Thompson, 59, had traveled over from Holy Trinity Reformed Episcopal Church, the church where her husband, the Rev. Anthony Thompson, serves as vicar, to join the study group.The Rev. Daniel Lee Simmons Sr., 74, had made a similar journey. He was a retired pastor from another church but would regularly stop by Emanuel, according to his daughter-in-law, Arcelia Simmons of Newport News, Va. Mr. Simmons was the only victim to die at the hospital.“Many people are struggling with this right now, and we think it’s a time to start the healing process,” Mr. Huskey, the principal, said.“We’re in a society today that is broken, pretty much,” he added. “And there will be a time when those times will be made right.”