http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/30/business/worldbusiness/former-chief-of-treasury-will-oversee-bank-of-italy.html
Former Chief of Treasury Will Oversee Bank of Italy - The New York Times
ITALY,BANKS AND BANKING
Dec. 30, 2005
6855
Italy named Mario Draghi, a vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International, to lead the country's central bank yesterday, moving quickly to restore faith in one of its top institutions after a scandal that led to the resignation of his predecessor.Mr. Draghi, who has a long academic background and was a respected chief of Italy's Treasury, is expected to bring calm and gravitas to a post that has been the center of controversy this year.His predecessor, Antonio Fazio, has been accused of impeding two takeovers of Italian banks by foreign institutions; prosecutors contend he also improperly accepted gifts, including expensive watches, rare books and gold necklaces with a total value of $60,000."The new governor will know how to rebuild the dignity of this institution that has been severely tested during the dramatic events that have battered the Italian financial system," Romano Prodi, leader of Italy's opposition political party, said.The selection of Mr. Draghi will "assure the country the prestige and the role that it deserves on the international stage," Mr. Prodi said.Mr. Draghi, 58, is a vocal advocate of tearing down remaining national barriers to competition in the European Union's single market. His move to one of Europe's most influential financial posts is likely to lead to more liberal policies toward foreign acquisitions.At the same time, he will be an important voice on the board of the European Central Bank as it considers further moves to raise interest rates despite signs of a slow recovery in the European economy. Analysts said Mr. Draghi would probably not try to dissuade the bank from raising rates.Mr. Fazio resigned last week from his lifetime appointment as governor of the Bank of Italy, Italy's chief banking regulator, after 12 years in office. He was accused of actively blocking bids by two foreign banks, and is the subject of two criminal inquiries in connection with those bids.As chief of the central bank, Mr. Draghi is expected to make it easier for foreign banks to buy Italian banks, which could increase competition, lower bank fees and benefit consumers and businesses."The institution and Italy have really suffered a lot, and it will be a very hard job," said Luigi Buttiglione, an economist who was an official of the Bank of Italy when Mr. Draghi served as an adviser there for a year in 1990. "I am not sure anyone can succeed in regaining confidence, but Draghi can play some good cards."Mr. Draghi earned a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has worked at the World Bank and was a professor at the University of Florence during most of the 1980's. But he made his reputation as a top manager when he served as director general of the Italian Treasury for a decade beginning in 1991 -- demonstrating a knack for political impartiality as he served under 10 governments.At the Italian Treasury, he was responsible for the enormous task of privatizing billions of euros of government stakes in Italian companies. The job was critical to getting Italy's finances in shape so it would qualify to give up the lira and adopt the euro in 1999.Since 2002, Mr. Draghi has been in the private sector, based in London for Goldman Sachs. He was charged with drumming up business with major European corporations, and with governments across the globe.A spokesman for Goldman said Mr. Draghi was not available for comment.As governor, Mr. Draghi faces two immediate problems: what to do with the bank's governing board, which stood steadfastly by Mr. Fazio as he was engulfed by scandal, and how to streamline a bureaucracy that has resisted trimming despite new technology and a transfer of many of the bank's functions to the European Central Bank in Frankfurt.Mr. Draghi's appointment was approved by Italy's president, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the final step in assuming the post, and comes a day after an overhaul of the central bank was signed into law in a move to limit the powers of its governor.The term is a once-renewable six years, rather than a lifetime appointment, and the nomination will come from the government, rather than from the bank's board.