https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/24/world/americas/crisis-in-brazil-widens-with-report-of-firms-payments-to-politicians.html
Crisis in Brazil Widens With Report of Firm’s Payments to Politicians - The New York Times
Brazil,Odebrecht SA,Bribery and Kickbacks,Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Rousseff  Dilma,Odebrecht  Marcelo,Corruption (Institutional)
March 23, 2016
8167
RIO DE JANEIRO —  In the latest twist to Brazil’s colossal corruption scandals, the country’s already beleaguered political establishment found itself under siege on Wednesday over revelations of payments made to figures across the ideological spectrum by the construction giant Odebrecht.The payments by Odebrecht, a company at the heart of graft scandals enmeshing the government of President Dilma Rousseff and some of her most prominent opponents, reflect the volatility of Brazil’s political crisis.The revelations came after a ruling on Tuesday by a justice of Brazil’s Supreme Federal Tribunal that shifted jurisdiction to the high court of an investigation of former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.A crusading federal judge, Sergio Moro, had been in charge of the case against Mr. da Silva, the most powerful figure in the governing Workers’ Party and, until recently, a popular and revered figure here. Prosecutors were seeking the former president’s arrest, but with the latest move at the high court, Mr. da Silva is expected to enjoy broad legal protections that would shield him from being arrested.While Mr. da Silva is also under scrutiny over his ties to Odebrecht, documents from federal prosecutors overseeing the investigation into a huge graft scheme at the national oil company, Petrobras, showed that more than 200 politicians from 18 parties had received money from Odebrecht.It was not clear if the payments were illegal, with analysts pointing out that the amounts differed from already declared campaign contributions, and various politicians on the list asserting that they had done nothing wrong. The list, which was first reported by the Brazilian journalist Fernando Rodrigues, demonstrates the close ties between Brazil’s politicians and the nation’s construction conglomerates.Names on the list include Aécio Neves, an opposition leader and senator who ran against Ms. Rousseff in 2014 and has pushed for her impeachment. Mr. Neves said on Wednesday that the money he had received from Odebrecht was in the form of legal campaign donations.“A lot of serenity is needed to separate the wheat from the chaff,” Mr. Neves told reporters.According to Mr. Rodrigues’s report, the federal police seized the list from the homes of an Odebrecht executive, Benedicto Barbosa, in the beachside neighborhoods of Copacabana and Leblon in Rio de Janeiro as part of the Petrobras investigation that Judge Moro has been leading.Numerous Odebrecht executives have been arrested as part of the investigation, including the company’s former chief executive, Marcelo Odebrecht, who this month was convicted of corruption and money laundering and sentenced to more than 19 years prison.The sentence was seen as motivation for Mr. Odebrecht and others to sign plea agreements and cooperate with the judiciary. But confusion emerged on Wednesday over a potential plea deal, with Odebrecht saying in a statement that its executives would cooperate and prosecutors insisting that no such deal had been reached.Either way, political leaders are bracing for more revelations to emerge that could further tarnish a broad spectrum of Brazil’s political class. Among the 594 members in Brazil’s Congress, 271 face serious charges. But they also have the protective legal armor that Mr. da Silva is trying to obtain for himself.Justice Teori Zavascki of the Supreme Federal Tribunal ruled on Tuesday night that the investigation of Mr. da Silva must be sent to the high court, effectively barring the possibility that Judge Moro could seek his arrest.Judge Moro recently drew criticism for his handling of the case, particularly after releasing tapes of intercepted telephone conversations between Mr. da Silva and Ms. Rousseff that had been collected as part of the investigation.The criticism came not only from Mr. da Silva, Ms. Rousseff and their supporters, but also from independent legal experts.“I don’t see any problem on the decision to tap the former president,” said Oscar Vilhena Vieira, a constitutional law professor at the university Fundação Getulio Vargas in São Paulo. But he said that he saw “a problem in opening this information to the public when it involves the president, because the president is not under his jurisdiction.”Justice Zavascki’s ruling reflected this sentiment. He wrote that the high court should have jurisdiction over the intercepts because they involve the country’s sitting president.Still, his ruling can be appealed and is expected to go before the full court. He also did not overturn a separate ruling last week by another justice on the court barring Mr. da Silva from becoming a minister to Ms. Rousseff.Yet Dr. Vilhena expects the full court to uphold this latest decision and also to ultimately allow Mr. da Silva to become a minister. The Constitution gives the president broad discretion to choose ministers, as long as they do not have criminal records and have not been indicted.