http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/02/us/politics/paul-ryan-budget.html
Ryan’s Budget Would Cut $5 Trillion in Spending Over a Decade - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),Ryan  Paul D Jr,Republican Party,House Committee on the Budget,Medicaid,Food Stamps,United States Economy,United States Politics and Government
April 1, 2014
5775
WASHINGTON — The unveiling Tuesday of Representative Paul D. Ryan’s newest Republican budget may have redrawn the battle lines for the 2014 election, detailing what his party could do with complete control of Congress and allowing Democrats to broaden the political terrain beyond health care and the narrower issues of the minimum wage and unemployment benefits.Mr. Ryan, the House Budget Committee chairman and a possible White House contender in 2016, laid out a budget plan that cuts $5 trillion in spending over the next decade. He said it would bring federal spending and taxes into balance by 2024, through steep cuts to Medicaid and food stamps, and the total repeal of the Affordable Care Act just as millions are reaping the benefits of the law.Defense spending would increase. Domestic programs would be reduced to the lowest levels since modern government accounting. And Medicare would be converted into a “premium support” system, where people 65 and older could buy private insurance with federal subsidies instead of government-paid health care.“We need to be a proposition party, not just an opposition party,” said Mr. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin. “We believe we owe it to the country to offer an alternative to the status quo. It’s just that simple.”Even with those tough political choices, the budget would balance in 2024 only because Mr. Ryan is assuming his cuts would prompt a burst of economic growth to raise tax revenues above what independent economists forecast. He also does not adjust the government’s revenue ledger to reflect the cost of repealing the health care law’s tax increases and Medicare cuts, which could total $2 trillion.“This is what elections are about,” said Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the Budget Committee. “Budgets are the clearest roadmaps for discovering what people’s priorities are.”The Ryan budget will be formally drafted on Wednesday in the Budget Committee and brought to a House vote on Friday — if Republican leaders can muster the 217 votes to pass it over the concerns of moderates who say it goes too far and conservatives who say it does not go far enough. Because Senate Democrats do not intend to even draft a budget this year, the Ryan plan will serve more as a political manifesto than a legislative roadmap for the 113th Congress.“It is not fair, and it is not acceptable to simply sit by and accept the status quo, as Democrats have chosen to do, time and time again,” said Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia, the majority leader.Regardless of its fate, the budget will be pushed to the forefront of the coming campaigns, both parties say, not only in House races but also in critical Senate contests. In some of those contests, like Senate races in Arkansas, Louisiana, Montana and West Virginia — where Republicans seek to take seats held by Democrats — Mr. Ryan’s budget will force them to choose whether to support the plan.“Bill Cassidy has repeatedly voted to slash seniors’ retirement benefits and turn Medicare into a voucher program that forces hundreds of thousands of Louisiana seniors to pay thousands more for their health care each year, and now he must own the new reckless G.O.P. budget proposal that does exactly that,” said Andrew Zucker, communications director for the Campaign for Louisiana, a Democratic group criticizing Mr. Cassidy, a House Republican running to unseat Senator Mary L. Landrieu.Representative Steve Israel of New York, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said that in the coming weeks, the committee would be buying online advertising in competitive House districts, making automated phone calls and creating a new website, “Scandalous,” to tell of district-specific cuts.“We are going to make this budget the centerpiece of the next seven months,” he said.Republican leaders had considered not doing a budget this year, since spending cuts for the current fiscal year and the next were set in December with passage of a bipartisan plan. But House conservatives demanded a document they could take to their strongly Republican districts.The new budget violates some tenets that both parties have tried to observe since the budget fights of 2011 and 2012. Those fights preserved a practice of cutting defense and nondefense programs almost equally while sparing the poorest Americans from the worst of the belt-tightening.Mr. Ryan’s plan does not strike that balance.In his plan, military spending through 2024 would actually rise by $483 billion over the spending caps established in the 2011 Budget Control Act “consistent with America’s military goals and strategies,” while nondefense spending at Congress’s annual discretion would be cut by $791 billion below those strict limits.In all, Mr. Ryan said, spending would be cut by $5.1 trillion over the next decade. More than $2 trillion of that would come from repealing Mr. Obama’s health care initiative, the Affordable Care Act, a political move that has become much more difficult with the closing of the first enrollment period. More than 10 million Americans have gotten health insurance through the law, either through private policies purchased on insurance exchanges, through expanded Medicaid or private policies purchased through brokers but subsidized by the law.As with past budget proposals, Mr. Ryan seeks to eliminate the Affordable Care Act’s Medicaid expansion, a $792 billion retrenchment, then turn the health care program for the poor into block grants to the states — saving an additional $732 billion over the decade. He would turn food stamps into a block grant program and cap spending, starting in 2020, cutting that program by $125 billion in five years. The budget relies on imposing new work requirements on food stamp and welfare recipients.Such an approach “empowers recipients to get off the aid rolls and back on the payrolls,” Mr. Ryan wrote.But the toughest cuts would come from domestic programs that have already been reduced steadily since 2011, when Republicans took control of the House. Mr. Ryan’s 2024 domestic spending figure would be lower in nominal dollars than such spending was in 2005. Adjusted for inflation, it would be a 29 percent cut from today’s levels, and 28 percent below the average level of spending in former President George W. Bush’s administration.Nor did Mr. Ryan shy away from hot-button issues. Education funding would be cut by $145 billion over 10 years. Pell grants for college students would lose $90 billion. University students would start being charged interest on their loans while still in school, reaping $40 billion.Federal subsidies for the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities, as well as the Corporation for Public Broadcasting “can no longer be justified,” Mr. Ryan said.