https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/education/helping-students-avoid-the-trap-of-college-costs.html
Helping Students Avoid the ‘Trap’ of College Costs - The New York Times
Student Loans,Tuition,Scholarships and Fellowships,Consumer Protection,Raimondo  Gina M,Bair  Sheila C,Rhode Island,Washington College
June 7, 2017
6185
Student loan debt is the second-fastest growing type of debt in the United States, behind only home mortgages. After more than doubling in a decade, it now exceeds $1.2 trillion, with the average borrower owing about $30,000, according to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. More than a quarter of student loan borrowers are delinquent or in default.Among the handful of proposals and programs trying to ease the debt load of college students, two have the potential to be models for other programs nationwide.Gov. Gina Raimondo of Rhode Island unveiled a plan in January to subsidize the state’s public colleges, and the legislature is set to vote on it before the summer recess.The plan, called Rhode Island Promise, aims to provide two years of tuition-free college for high school graduates in the state. Unlike some other proposals, the aid would not be based on family income. Each graduate could choose free tuition either for two years at the Community College of Rhode Island or for the final two years at one of the state’s public four-year colleges.“It’s extremely difficult today to get a high-paying job — or a decent job — without a degree beyond high school, yet college is unaffordable for most people,” Ms. Raimondo said in an interview. “It’s really a trap.”After starting college, many students find that they cannot afford it, and then they drop out to work instead, she told an audience of educators last week at the Higher Ed Leaders Forum hosted by The New York Times. “Now they have double the problems — debt and no degree,” she said.Ms. Raimondo, who has attracted 17 companies to Rhode Island in her first two and a half years in office, said the No. 1 thing business owners have told her they need is a skilled work force. “To the extent that Rhode Island can distinguish itself as a place that has a deep talent supply,” she said, “then we will be a place of choice for companies.”Ms. Raimondo did not include a financial means test in her program proposal, she said, because she didn’t want to disqualify students from families that appeared to be upper middle class but did not earn enough to put two or three children through college.Prospects for passage of her plan are unclear. A poll released in April showed 60 percent of citizens in favor of it. The legislature is controlled by fellow Democrats, but the House speaker, Nicholas Mattiello, has called the plan “fiscally irresponsible.” The governor has said she’s open to compromise.“The reality is that someone who has a college degree compared to someone who doesn’t makes a million dollars more in the course of their lifetime,” Ms. Raimondo said. “And they will pay taxes on it. That is good for the economy and good for society.”Sheila Bair, who will step down as president of Washington College in Chestertown, Md., this month and who led the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation from 2006 to 2011, started several cost-cutting initiatives at the school. One, called Dam the Debt, uses donor money to reduce the student loan debt of graduating seniors. It is the first initiative of its kind in higher education.Ms. Bair also introduced a program to freeze tuition for four years for incoming freshmen; another that provides scholarships to match contributions from 529 college savings plans or other educational savings accounts up to $2,500 a year; and an initiative called George’s Brigade, which provides full scholarships to 20 high-achieving, low-income, first-generation college students who would otherwise not be able to afford a private liberal-arts education. Students can apply in groups with friends and be considered for admission together. This, Ms. Bair said, addresses both their financial and social support needs.But what she really wants to see, she said at the education forum, is the scrapping of student debt entirely, and a move toward income sharing. It makes little sense to ask 17- and 18-year-olds to determine how much they can responsibly borrow, she said, when they have no idea what their grades will be, what kind of job they may eventually have or even whether they will graduate.A core principle of consumer lending, she said, is making sure you lend to someone capable of repayment.In a national income-sharing program, the government would provide a specific amount of financial assistance, and in return, the student would agree to pay a small percentage of earned income to the government over a certain number of years. There would also be a cap on the total amount that could be paid back.At Washington College, Ms. Bair has proposed something slightly different: a donor-funded income-sharing program. Students choosing to participate would receive a certain amount of money toward a portion of their debt and would then pay a percentage of their income earned after graduation back to the fund. That percentage would start low, rise incrementally with the student’s income and be capped.Last year, Purdue University became the first major university to offer an income-sharing agreement to its students with the Back a Boiler initiative.“Income sharing is radically different than debt,” Ms. Bair said in an interview. “Debt is inflexible. If you can’t pay it back, you’re stuck with it the rest of your life.”