https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/29/opinion/a-landmark-gay-marriagecase-at-the-supreme-court.html
A Landmark Gay Marriage Case at the Supreme Court - The New York Times
Editorials,Supreme Court (US),Kagan  Elena,Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships
April 28, 2015
5615
The lawyers defending state bans on same-sex marriage before the Supreme Court Tuesday morning tried their best to put a friendly face on their arguments. But if anyone doubted the depth of the discrimination that gays and lesbians continue to face across America, an outburst partway through the arguments provided a bracing reminder.At the close of the first half-hour, a man in the back of the gallery began shouting that same-sex marriage violates the teachings of the Bible, and that its supporters will burn in hell. After he was dragged out kicking and screaming, Justice Antonin Scalia quipped, “It was rather refreshing, actually.”The heckler’s tirade, which cut through some of the courtroom tension, made one thing clear: Opponents of marriage equality are not going down without a fight. And that is a major reason the court needs to resolve, finally, the question it has been dodging for more than four decades: Is there a constitutional right to same-sex marriage?In 1972, the justices summarily dismissed a petition asking them to grant that right, finding that the case did not present “a substantial federal question.”Since then, the legal landscape has changed greatly. In 1972, no state permitted same-sex marriages. Today, 36 do, as does the District of Columbia. But 13 states ban it (its status in Alabama is unclear). Couples from four of those states — Kentucky, Tennessee, Ohio and Michigan — are asking the court to rule that the bans violate constitutional guarantees of due process and equal protection.For two-and-a-half hours — more than twice as long as a typical oral argument — the justices weighed two questions: Does the Constitution require states to license marriages between people of the same sex, and, if not, must states at least recognize lawful same-sex marriages performed in other states?The conservative justices, not normally eager to acknowledge legal traditions outside America, cited everyone from the ancient Greeks to the hunter-gatherers of the Kalahari in making the argument that marriage has been universally understood to be between a man and a woman.“This definition has been with us for millennia,” said Justice Anthony Kennedy. “It’s very difficult for the court to say, oh, well, we — we know better.” Justice Kennedy has written three of the court’s major gay-rights rulings, and his vote will very likely determine the outcome here. But his questions on Tuesday gave fewer clues than many had hoped as to where he would come down this time.In 2013, when the court voted 5 to 4 to strike down the heart of the federal Defense of Marriage Act, Justice Kennedy emphasized the equality and dignity of same-sex couples, but also the importance of respecting states’ rights. With this in mind, the lawyers defending the bans insisted that each state should be allowed to make its own decision about same-sex marriage. John Bursch, a special assistant attorney general in Michigan arguing on behalf of his state’s ban, asked the justices to give way to the “democratic process,” which he said “forces neighbors to sit down and civilly discuss an issue and try to persuade each other through reason, love and logic.”To this naïve and oversimplified view of how state-sponsored discrimination actually works, Justice Elena Kagan had an apt rejoinder:“Mr. Bursch, we don’t live in a pure democracy,” she said. “We live in a constitutional democracy. And the Constitution imposes limits on what people can do, and this is one of those cases.”