https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/us/politics/ethics-office-urges-inquiry-of-petri-wisconsin-republican.html
Ethics Office Urges Inquiry of Petri, Wisconsin Republican - The New York Times
Wisconsin,Petri  Tom,United States,Office of Congressional Ethics,Ethics and Official Misconduct,House of Representatives,Oshkosh Corporation,Manitowoc Company Inc,Congress
Sept. 30, 2014
5986
WASHINGTON — Representative Tom Petri, Republican of Wisconsin, may have violated House conflict of interest rules when he repeatedly intervened on behalf of a Defense Department contractor in which he owned more than $250,000 in stock, the Office of Congressional Ethics has concluded.A 584-page investigation into the matter, completed in June but confidential until Tuesday, urged the House Ethics Committee, which has sole jurisdiction to punish House members, to look into the matter more thoroughly.Mr. Petri has strongly defended his actions, saying that the Oshkosh Corporation, the company he intervened for, is one of his state’s largest employers. He also said that his office had consulted with the House Ethics Committee on several occasions before it sent letters to the Defense Department and other members of Congress in late 2009 related to Oshkosh and a $3 billion truck contract it had won, but feared it might lose as competing bidders were protesting the decision.“In every instance, Representative Petri has made a good-faith effort to comply fully with both the letter and the spirit of the rules,” said a statement by Mr. Petri’s lawyer, Robert K. Kelner of Covington & Burling.The Office of Congressional Ethics, which serves as a grand jury of sorts conducting preliminary investigations, said that Mr. Petri’s office had in fact sought permission in 2009 to write a letter to the Defense Department related to the contract dispute, but that Mr. Petri had agreed not to mention Oshkosh by name. But in the letter he signed, Oshkosh was named.Mr. Petri also contacted the Environmental Protection Agency in August 2013 on behalf of Manitowoc, another Wisconsin company, asking the agency to grant it a “hardship exemption” that would allow it to continue to use diesel-engine cranes it manufactures, based on a concern that switching to more environmentally friendly engines would cost the company jobs.Mr. Petri’s staff acknowledged that he did not notify the E.P.A. of his shares in Manitowoc or seek Ethics Committee advice on his intervention before it took place, the report says. Mr. Petri, as of December 2013, owned $250,000 to $500,000 in stock in the company, meaning his action in this case may have been an ethics violation as well.House rules do not prohibit lawmakers from voting on an issue that might have an effect on a company they own stock in, such a prohibition being seen as impractical. But lawmakers are supposed to take extra caution when intervening with a federal agency or introducing legislation that has a direct effect on a company they are heavily invested in, particularly if they could profit as a result.A similar question came up in the 2012 case involving former Representative Shelley Berkley, Democrat of Nevada. The Ethics Committee concluded then, when it admonished her, that “it is improper to provide official assistance to entities in which the member has a significant financial interest.” That case involved her intervening with the federal authorities related to a medical practice her husband co-owned.The House Ethics Committee has not decided to move ahead with a formal investigation into Mr. Petri, it announced Tuesday, and instead said in a statement that it was going to study the matter more, which means it could be dropped without further action.