https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/fashion/new-york-shopping-events-orla-kiely-enfold-moussy.html
Go International Without Leaving Town - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Shopping and Retail,New York City,Manhattan (NYC),Keep a Child Alive,Warby Parker,Kiely  Orla,Enfold (Fashion Label),Moussy (Fashion Label),Skriver  Josephine (1993- )
Oct. 26, 2016
7695
On Thursday, go international without making the trek to J.F.K. Orla Kiely, the Irish queen of prints, will open a New York store filled with flora-inspired numbers, like a leaf-embellished silk georgette dress ($327) and a mini cross-body bag with punched stem detailing ($374). At 372 Bleecker Street.And two Japanese labels land in Manhattan. Enfold, a ready-to-wear line based on clean silhouettes and precise tailoring, like a hoodie coat ($355) and relaxed trousers ($409), will be joined by the culty denim line Moussy, which makes artfully patched jeans ($331). At 411 Bleecker Street and 474 Broome Street.That same day, the Arrivals, a direct-to-consumer outerwear company based in New York, will open a holiday pop-up shop filled with cozy bits like a virgin wool-cashmere city coat ($395). At 39½ Crosby Street.The Hayward designer Marin Hopper will be at Bergdorf Goodman from 3 to 4:30 p.m. to present her luxe handbag designs, including a Venetian brocade shopper ($1,800) that takes inspiration from Golden Age Hollywood.And from 5:30 to 8 p.m., the Italian outerwear label Peuterey will host a shopping event at Bloomingdale’s on 59th Street. The stylist Mary Alice Stephenson will be on hand if you’re torn between, say, a taffeta parka ($1,250) and a puffer jacket with a fox fur collar ($1,195).On Wednesday, Warby Parker will open in Grand Central. Metro-North commuters will find smart updates on classics like round-lens glasses in intensely hued acetate ($145). At 25 Grand Central Terminal.The model Josephine Skriver has teamed up with the eyewear label Illesteva to make her favorite style, the Palm Beach, a rounded cat-eye in an exclusive creamy marble color ($240). The proceeds will support Keep a Child Alive, which provides treatment and care to children with AIDS in Africa and India. At 814 Lexington Avenue.The ready-to-wear label Sachin & Babi has teamed up with W Hotels on a capsule collection in celebration of the opening of W Goa. It includes an off-the-shoulder ruffle tunic with pompom tassels resembling the marigold flowers ubiquitous at weddings in the region ($660). At whotelsthestore.com.The jewelry designer Anna Sheffield has created a series of celestially inspired earrings and ear jackets that allow the wearer to mix and match diamonds, precious gemstones and pearls within various yellow and rose gold settings (starting at $750). At 47 Orchard Street.