https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/03/opinion/vladimir-putin-comes-half-clean-on-olympic-doping.html
Vladimir Putin Comes Half Clean on Olympic Doping - The New York Times
Doping (Sports),World Anti-Doping Agency,Olympic Games,Putin  Vladimir V,Russia,Olympic Games (2014),Olympic Games (2016),International Olympic Committee
March 3, 2017
9013
Russia’s abominable record of doping its athletes in international competitions finally forced President Vladimir Putin to concede some shortcomings this week — but not his government’s basic culpability in the cheating.With global sports increasingly banning Russian athletes from competition, Mr. Putin admitted that his nation’s anti-doping system has failed, “and this is our fault, and is something we need to admit and address directly.” But he continued to deny investigators’ finding that Moscow’s supposed monitoring system masked a government scheme in which an estimated 1,000 athletes had been involved in doping over the years in 30 different sports.This was the finding last year of an extraordinary investigation by the World Anti-Doping Agency that left more than 100 Russian athletes  barred from the Summer Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. Since the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, where Russian authorities were in charge of drug testing, the International Olympic Committee has begun disciplinary proceedings against 28 Russian competitors whose urine samples were found to have been switched by government security agents.“For years, international sports competitions have unknowingly been hijacked by the Russians,” Richard McLaren, the head of the doping investigation, said, adding that the full extent of the doping may never be known. The retesting of urine samples from past Games is continuing, raising the pressure on Russia to convince officials that it will institute credible antidoping measures. If it doesn’t, Russia could be banned from the Winter Games next year in South Korea.On Wednesday, Mr. Putin continued to cling to the fiction that the government played no role in the doping scheme. But in December top Russian sports executives told Rebecca Ruiz of The Times that multiple officials in the state sports ministry were involved in a long-running “institutional conspiracy” to use drugs to win medals.The heart of the issue is whether the principle of full and fair competition at the Olympics can have any meaning at all if Russia does not end its system of doping.Anti-doping authorities from 17 nations, including Canada, Australia and the United States, have called for stronger enforcement that is more independent of national and global authorities who juggle conflicting roles in both promoting and policing their sports. This would certainly bolster the credibility of the Games and the morale of athletes who compete cleanly.In the meantime, confusion and suspicion reign. Record books are being rewritten as some Russian “victories” are redacted, but others are not. Mr. Putin has the power to repair Russia’s standing on this matter by going beyond half-admissions. He needs to end the disgraceful undermining of the Olympic Games and prove to the world that he has done so.