https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/23/world/middleeast/iraqis-rally-around-many-flags-as-a-national-identity-falters.html
In Struggle for National Identity, Iraqis Rally Around Many Flags - The New York Times
Iraq,Muslims and Islam,Sunni Muslims,Shiite Muslims,Abadi  Haider al-,Bell  Gertrude,Marr  Phebe
Dec. 22, 2014
8573
BAGHDAD —  At checkpoints across Baghdad, soldiers have defied a recent order from the prime minister to remove Shiite religious flags and replace them with Iraqi ones. At schools in the northern city of Kirkuk, students have raised Kurdish flags. And in the southern port city of Basra angry citizens have designed their own flag, anchored by the image of a single drop of oil.Then, of course, there are the black flags of the Islamic State, the extremist group in control of about a third of the country.Perhaps not since modern Iraq was created nearly a century ago by the fusion of three Ottoman provinces — Basra, Baghdad and Mosul — have more people challenged the idea of Iraq as a unified state.Even as the new government is scrambling to defeat the militants of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, it faces an underlying challenge that may be tougher: promoting a new sense of national identity that, even if it cannot transcend the differences between Sunni and Shiite, Arab and Kurd, at least basically holds them together as countrymen.Some officials have called for reinstating mandatory military service, in the belief it would bring communities together. Others have suggested promoting mixed marriages between Sunnis and Shiites by offering cash incentives. Still others say that promoting Iraq’s pre-Islamic past, as the cradle of civilization, could offer something from which Iraqis could build a degree of national unity.State television is in propaganda overdrive, with dramas portraying battlefield victories punctuated by the raising of the Iraqi flag — a celluloid counterpoint to the true story on the ground, where the flags of various militias indicate the erosion of the state’s reach.“The identity issue — getting an identity that all Iraqis can agree on so the state stays together — is serious,” said Phebe Marr, a prominent historian of modern Iraq. “This is a struggle for a new vision of Iraq.”By every measure, it is a struggle in collision with the realities of life here, as communities become more isolated from one another.Ehab al-Maliki, a famous Iraqi poet, has placed his talents in the service of the national project, appearing on state television, sometimes in a military uniform and holding a gun, to recite patriotic poems.His goal, he said, is to use his poems “to promote national unity and the convergence of views, and to call for peaceful coexistence and nonviolence between communities.”For this, he has received numerous death threats.One, in a text message, read: “You are a Shiite dog, a bastard, and we swear to God we will cut your belly out and give it to the dogs. You don’t deserve life and we will hunt you down.”In a recent decree, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi ordered the armed forces not to fly Shiite religious and militia flags. The banners have long aggrieved Iraq’s Sunni minority, who used to rule Iraq before the American invasion. Mr. Abadi was praised for this step by the United Nations’ Iraq representative in a speech in New York as a first step of “a broader initiative to restore confidence among Iraq’s communities.”The problem, though, is that the Shiite flags are not coming down, and are not likely to.At the V.I.P. checkpoint to the Green Zone, the government enclave in Baghdad, a soldier explained recently that when the flag order was handed down, people chose their faith over their commander in chief. There were no Iraqi flags at the checkpoint, only the black-and-green flags of Imam Hussein, the revered Shiite martyr.“The secondary identities — cultural, religious, our ethnicity — have prevailed,” said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, Iraq’s former national security adviser. “We all went to our little corners. Over the last decade, we have been looking for a new identity.”A struggle for a national identity has persisted since the country’s modern founding after World War I, and has challenged all of Iraq’s authorities, from monarchs to dictators to occupiers.Under the Ottomans, the primary identity was simply being a Muslim. After the British took charge, and for decades afterward, the ideology of Arab nationalism — “a hankering for a larger state,” in Ms. Marr’s words — united many of Iraq’s leaders.Later, Saddam Hussein and his Baath Party ruled with an iron grip that allowed no other creed than obedience. And for a time, in the 1970s and ’80s, an increasing middle class that benefited from the state — not to mention the Iran-Iraq war — gave rise to some sentiments of national identity and patriotism, Ms. Marr said.When the Americans invaded, for Iraqi society, “it was like a cover coming off a pressure cooker,” Mr. Rubaie said.Ms. Marr first visited Iraq in 1957 to conduct research for her graduate thesis. She has visited and studied the country ever since, and in 1982 published the first edition of her highly regarded book, “The Modern History of Iraq,” which chronicles the country’s tumultuous past century, including a half-dozen coups, the monarchy’s ouster and many wars. None of those events, she said, threatened the integrity of the state as thoroughly as the current crisis does.“It never occurred to me when I wrote this that it would be a question if Iraq stays together,” said Ms. Marr, who is working on a new edition.Few expect the country to formally break apart soon. But many are suddenly talking about the possibility — long a subject of Western think tanks but more and more a topic of discussion in the cafes and living rooms of ordinary Iraqis, and in the salons and offices of the powerful.“We don’t feel like we have a country that will defend us and protect us and love us,” said Arkan Hussain, a 28-year-old Sunni man who lives near Tikrit, where the Islamic State is largely in control. “Each and every one of us has forgotten his country, and started thinking about his tribe and sect.”Similarly, Wafa Muhammad, a Shiite woman in southern Iraq, said, “as for the national identity, no one is crying for Iraq. Everyone is crying for his sect or faith, and you rarely find anyone who cries for Iraq.”After the British took control of Mesopotamia and tried to shape it into a modern nation-state called Iraq, Gertrude Bell, the diplomat credited with drawing the country’s borders, visited a prominent Baghdad farmer and local leader to ask his advice on how to knit together Iraq’s many ethnicities and faiths. To prepare for the visit of Miss Bell — as she was known to Iraqis — the farmer stopped feeding his roosters. When she came, he put the hungry roosters in a cage, and the result was a bloody mess.The farmer then turned to Miss Bell, as the story is related today by one of his descendants, Muthanna al-Lami, and said: “We had 400 years of the Ottomans, and we have suffered under them. Please help the Iraqis and don’t let them fight like these roosters.”More than a decade later, the king that she helped install in power, Faisal I, wrote: “With my heart filled with sadness, I have to say that it is my belief that there is no Iraqi people inside Iraq. There are only diverse groups with no national sentiments. They are filled with superstitious and false religious traditions with no common grounds between them.”The same could largely be said today. If anything, many Iraqis say, unity is something for the far-off future.“Reconciliation cannot take place right now,” said Amar Ahmed, 42, of Tikrit. “But after decades from now, maybe the next generations can forget what has happened with all this bloodshed.”