https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/27/us/supreme-court-abortion-clinic-protests.html
Court Rejects Zone to Buffer Abortion Clinic - The New York Times
Abortion,Massachusetts,Supreme Court (US),Freedom of Speech and Expression,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,McCullen  Eleanor,McCullen v. Coakley,First Amendment (US Constitution)
June 26, 2014
1811
WASHINGTON —  The Supreme Court on Thursday unanimously  struck down a Massachusetts law that barred protests, counseling and other speech near abortion clinics.“A painted line on the sidewalk is easy to enforce, but the prime objective of the First Amendment is not efficiency,” Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. wrote in a majority opinion that was joined by the court’s four-member liberal wing.The law, enacted in 2007, created 35-foot buffer zones around entrances to abortion clinics. State officials said the law was a response to a history of harassment and violence at abortion clinics in Massachusetts, including a shooting rampage at two facilities in 1994.The Massachusetts law was challenged on First Amendment grounds by opponents of abortion who said they sought to have quiet conversations with women entering clinics to tell them about alternatives. “Petitioners are not protesters,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote.The court was unanimous about the bottom line but divided on the reasoning, with Chief Justice Roberts writing a narrow opinion. The law blocked too much speech, he said, “sweeping in innocent individuals.”But Chief Justice Roberts said the state’s concerns could be addressed in other ways, including through laws concerning harassment, intimidation and obstruction. Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan joined the majority opinion.In a conference call sponsored by Planned Parenthood Federation of America and Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts, officials pledged to protect patients and workers.“Our patients will be safe,” said Martha M. Walz, the chief executive of Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts and a former state legislator.“One tool has now been taken away,” said Ms. Walz, who was a lead sponsor of An Act Relative to Public Safety, the law struck down by the court. “We will now use the other tools at our disposal,” including laws prohibiting entrances of clinics from being blocked and injunctions against protesters who go too far.“By striking down the buffer zone today, the Supreme Court has taken away an essential measure to protect public safety and health care access in our state,” she said. “The opinion raises the question of whether the buffer zone at the Supreme Court is in fact constitutional.”Ms. Walz said that when she was doing research for the legislation in 2007, wearing a guide’s bib and standing at the center’s door, she was confronted by a large protester, “up in my face screaming at me.” She recalled, “It was, to say the least, frightening.”Justice Antonin Scalia said the majority’s approach was too tentative and had created an “entirely separate, abridged edition of the First Amendment applicable to speech against abortion.” The law, he said, is “unconstitutional root and branch.”“Protecting people from speech they do not want to hear is not a function that the First Amendment allows the government to undertake in the public streets and sidewalks,” Justice Scalia added. Justices Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas joined the concurrence.“Many women have abortions because they feel they have no other option or because they are pressured by a boyfriend or parent,” said Eleanor McCullen, a plaintiff in the case, McCullen v. Coakley, No. 12-1168. “Today’s ruling means I can offer loving help to a woman who wants it, and neither of us will go to jail for the discussion.”Mark L. Rienzi, lead counsel for Mrs. McCullen and an associate professor of constitutional law at the Catholic University of America in Washington, was exultant about the decision. “It’s a great day,” he said in a telephone interview. “It’s a unanimous opinion, and it’s a strong opinion saying: ‘If there’s bad behavior, the state should prosecute the bad behavior. They can’t put peaceful grandmothers like Eleanor McCullen in prison.’ ”Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. filed a separate concurrence saying that the law “blatantly discriminates based on viewpoint,” a grave First Amendment sin.Chief Justice Roberts took a more benign view of the law, even as he struck it down. He rejected the challengers’ assertion that the law was aimed at speech based on its content. It is true, he said, that the law is limited to reproductive health care facilities.But state lawmakers acted “in response to a problem that was, in its experience, limited to abortion clinics,” the chief justice wrote.Justice Scalia said that was naïve. “It blinks reality to say, as the majority does, that a blanket prohibition on the use of streets and sidewalks where speech on only one politically controversial topic is likely to occur — and where that speech can most effectively be communicated — is not content based,” he wrote.Chief Justice Roberts also said that several exemptions in the law — for people going into or coming out of the building, people using the sidewalk to get somewhere else, law enforcement officials and the like, and clinic employees — were permissible and not aimed at allowing people of one viewpoint to have greater speech rights. “There is nothing inherently suspect about providing some kind of exemption to allow individuals who work at the clinics to enter or remain within the buffer zones,” he wrote.Justice Alito disagreed. “Critics of the clinic are silenced,” he wrote, “while the clinic may authorize its employees to express speech in support of the clinic and its work.”The majority opinion was notable for leaving open the door to other efforts to protect abortion clinics, which is probably why the court’s liberal members were willing to join it.Massachusetts “has available to it a variety of approaches that appear capable of serving its interests, without excluding individuals from areas historically open for speech and debate,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote.The effect of the law across the country is still unclear, said Roger Evans, senior counsel for law and policy for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. There is no other state with fixed buffer zones around abortion clinics, the chief justice said, citing briefs in the case, though a handful of localities have them. Planned Parenthood believes the number is closer to 10 ordinances and one other state law, New Hampshire’s, which has not gone into effect.In 2000, the Supreme Court upheld a similar Colorado law in Hill v. Colorado. That “floating bubble” law established 100-foot buffer zones outside all health care facilities, not just abortion clinics. Inside those larger zones, the law banned approaching others within eight feet for protest, education or counseling without their consent. Only Justices Scalia, Kennedy and Thomas wrote that they would have overruled the Hill decision.Massachusetts experimented with a law similar to the one in Colorado but found it inadequate.In testimony before a legislative committee in 2007, Capt. William B. Evans, then a police commander and now Boston’s police commissioner, said the floating-bubble approach made his officers’ job impossible. “I like to make the reference of a basketball referee down there, where we’re watching feet, we’re watching hands,” he said.The 2007 law at issue in the case did away with floating bubbles and the need to determine who approached whom and whether the listener consented.