http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/22/us/politics/22aftermath.html
Washington Cleans Up After Big Party - The New York Times
Washington (DC),Inaugurations
Jan. 21, 2009
6263
WASHINGTON — As Tuesday’s historic inauguration drew to a close and crowds cleared the Mall, an army of city and federal sanitation workers began putting downtown back together.Over 300 workers with brooms marched alongside vacuum trucks that looked like Zambonis, all plowing through more than 100 tons of paper, plastic water bottles, newspapers, food wrappers and hundreds of tiny American flags left behind.Giant septic trucks suctioned the contents of portable toilets  and lifted thousands of them onto flatbeds to be cleaned and returned to storage.Overnight, city workers began returning dozens of traffic lights that had been removed from the medians along the parade route on Pennsylvania Avenue. Each metal pole had to be bolted down, rewired and timed before the Wednesday morning rush hour.The scaffolding for Jumbotrons and speaker towers was also being dismantled.“The odd part of it is how quickly it all disappears,” said Dan Tangherlini, the  city administrator.Over all, the inauguration went smoothly, city officials said, with a spokesman for the Police Department reporting no arrests throughout the day.Cellphones failed to work for many people. But city officials, saying they had learned from the problems encountered during the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, equipped first responders with radios and back-up cellphones with alternate carriers.Emergency hot lines received more than 1,000  calls throughout the day, many related to hypothermia. Some people were injured when they became trapped between security barriers and gridlocked crowdsBy daybreak Wednesday, few remnants remained of the previous day’s celebrations, save the trash scattered on the Mall and lingering Jersey barriers and red-white-and-blue banners along the parade route.‘The city has a lot of practice at cleaning up after these sorts of events,” Mr. Tangherlini said.He said it would take at least a month to disassemble the two reviewing stands at the White House where President Obama and members of the news media had watched the parade. One stand is four stories tall, with a balcony.Hosting the inauguration cost the city $47 million, according to city officials who have already received $15 million from Congress and promises for the rest later.Early estimates of the crowd ranged as high as two million, while the National Park Service and Mayor Adrian M. Fenty put the figure at 1.8 million. City officials said the number could be higher if the people standing on the Mall, along the parade route and farther into the surrounding neighborhoods were counted.Satellite images of the swearing-in ceremony suggested, however, that the actual size of the throng might have been smaller, according to experts who reviewed the images. Nonetheless, most agreed it was probably the largest crowd ever at an inauguration.The National Park Service has not given official estimates of crowds in more than a decade, complying with a Congressional order to stop doing so after a controversy over how many people attended the Million Man March in 1995. Estimates then varied from 400,000 to more than a million.But David Barna, a Park Service spokesman, said the agency was making an exception this year because of the historic nature of the inauguration and the public demand for a crowd estimate.Subway officials said ridership set a record Tuesday, with 973,285 trips by 7 p.m. The figure broke the record of 866,681, which was set Monday on Martin Luther King’s Birthday.Lines were long at subway stops Tuesday, and a woman fell on the tracks at a platform at the Gallery-Place Chinatown Metrorail station, disrupting service at the station and Metro Center for about 45 minutes.The woman was taken to a nearby hospital and treated for minor injuries.