https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/nyregion/rudolph-giuliani-transition-secretary-of-state.html
Rudolph Giuliani’s Worldview Still Shaped by 9/11 Attacks - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Giuliani  Rudolph W,New York City,September 11 (2001),United States Politics and Government,Giuliani Partners,Republican Party,Trump  Donald J,State Department
Nov. 15, 2016
6881
In October 1995, the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat settled into a seat at Lincoln Center in Manhattan for a gala performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. But before the third movement started, Mr. Arafat was told to leave.The order had come from the top: Rudolph W. Giuliani, the mayor of New York at the time. And though the Clinton administration referred to the ejection as “an embarrassment to everyone associated with diplomacy,” Mayor Giuliani was unmoved. Calling Mr. Arafat a terrorist and a murderer, he said the next day: “I would not invite Yasir Arafat to anything, anytime, anyplace. I don’t forget.”New York City mayors do not typically conduct foreign policy, but Mr. Giuliani, who aides to Donald J. Trump said was the leading contender to become the president-elect’s secretary of state, has never let an issue like political jurisdiction stand in his way.In his eight years as mayor, Mr. Giuliani practiced his own local form of international relations, calling for tolerance after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001, but also refusing to dine with Fidel Castro and threatening to kick the United Nations out of the city over unpaid parking summonses.After leaving office, Mr. Giuliani learned more about foreign affairs, gaining experience as an international lawyer, a security consultant and a candidate for the presidency in 2008, while honing his positions as a kind of neoconservative. He has been a staunch supporter of Israel, deeply suspicious of Iran and a proponent of aggressive military posture. His experience as a former federal prosecutor and as mayor has helped shape some of his stances, but it was his experience dealing with the Sept. 11 attacks that has had the most profound effect on his worldview.Through it all, Mr. Giuliani’s basic approach has been much the same: Peace can be achieved by showing strength, and diplomacy is sometimes best conducted by being undiplomatic.“Sometimes in diplomacy you want to set parameters, not just go in saying that, no matter what you’re going to be diplomatic,” said Stuart Gottlieb, an international affairs professor at Columbia University, who worked with several of Mr. Giuliani’s campaigns. “With the Obama years, particularly under John Kerry,” he added, referring to the current secretary of state, “we’ve often seen compromise and bending as a first principle. I think Giuliani would replace that.”Mr. Giuliani’s forays into foreign affairs as mayor were often meant for a local audience. Many of the city’s Jewish leaders, for instance, embraced his snub of Mr. Arafat. As for Mr. Giuliani’s crusade against diplomatic parking scofflaws, New Yorkers, as a rule, are easily enraged by anything related to parking their cars.Given the city’s racial and ethnic diversity, Mr. Giuliani was a vigorous supporter of open immigration, a position that could complicate his potential service under Mr. Trump. In 1996, he gave a speech at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard in which he spoke glowingly about his grandfather, Rodolfo Giuliani, who came to the United States from Italy, and condemned “fear-mongering” by the “anti-immigration movement in America,” calling it “one of our most serious public problems.”After the Sept. 11 strikes, Mr. Giuliani’s view of the world became dominated by terrorism and, at least at first, by a vision of the future based on inclusiveness and unity. A month after the attacks, he spoke at the United Nations, waxing poetic about New York’s racial and religious multiplicity. “We’re a city of immigrants unlike any other city, within a nation of immigrants,” he said, adding that “diversity has been our greatest source of strength.”It was primarily on the strength of that bipartite vision — tolerance and toughness — that Mr. Giuliani left office and entered the private sector, pitching himself as an international fixer who could revamp police departments, as he was hired to do in Mexico City, or eradicate gangs, as he suggested in a speech in El Salvador needed to be done there. His speeches and private contracts earned him millions of dollars, and have now drawn criticism for their potential conflicts of interest, among them a deal by his security firm, Giuliani Partners, advise the state-run oil company in Qatar, a United States ally that supported some Islamist movements.When Mr. Giuliani ran for president in 2008, he was mocked by his opponents for referring, repeatedly, to the terrorist attacks on New York. As Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. famously said during his own 2008 presidential campaign, there were only three things that Mr. Giuliani ever seemed to mention in a sentence: “A noun, a verb, and 9/11.”But the specter of terrorism continued to inform Mr. Giuliani’s thinking, in his own unsuccessful White House run and this year, as he advocated for Mr. Trump. On a trip to London in 2007, while he was competing in the Republican primary, he said he supported President George W. Bush’s decisions to invade Iraq and Afghanistan, though he criticized how the wars had been waged.Mr. Giuliani, a vociferous critic of the nuclear deal the United States signed with Iran last year, has long harbored concerns about that country’s intentions. Even as the United States was at war in Iraq, he said that Iran could pose a greater danger.“Iran is maybe in many ways even, or is certainly more, dangerous than Iraq,” he said at a town-hall-style meeting in 2007 during his presidential campaign. “I think this is an area in which clarity is enormously important. We’ve had wars because of lack of clarity; we’ve had great misunderstandings that have led to violence because of lack of clarity. If if you elect me as president of the United States, this will be very, very clear to Iran: I will not allow them under any circumstances to become a nuclear power. They are too irresponsible.”Though Mr. Giuliani has no formal foreign policy bona fides, he has traveled the world meeting dignitaries and advising foreign governments — at least once, on a private jet he borrowed from Mr. Trump.“I’ve probably traveled to Europe, Asia and Africa more often in the last five, five and a half, years than any of the people who are running for president,” he said in 2007. “I’ve had the responsibilities of safety and security on my shoulders for much of the last 20 or 25 years. I’ve actually dealt with terrorism. I’ve actually dealt with it firsthand.”But part of what that experience has taught him is that, even for a diplomat, diplomacy has its limits. At the Republican National Convention this summer, he gave speech in support of Mr. Trump during which it became clear that the already muscular stance on foreign policy he held eight years ago had only hardened after eight years of the Obama administration.“We must not be afraid to define our enemy — it is Islamic extremist terrorism,” Mr. Giuliani said.“You know who you are,” he added to applause. “And we’re coming to get you.”