https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/25/world/massive-refugee-plight-a-long-term-trend-relief-executive-says.html
Aid Groups Are Ill Equipped for Refugee Influx, Executive Says - The New York Times
Miliband  David,Humanitarian Aid,Refugees and Displaced Persons,International Rescue Committee,Deportation,Third World and Developing Countries,International Relations
June 24, 2015
2687
The displacement of nearly 60 million people driven from their homes by war, mayhem and persecution reflects long-term shifts that global humanitarian organizations are ill equipped to handle, David Miliband, the leader of the International Rescue Committee, said Wednesday.“We have to reposition for a world where the trends that we’re seeing are not going to be reversed,” said Mr. Miliband, the former foreign secretary of Britain and a prominent figure in that country’s Labour Party.He said those trends included a fundamental tumult in the Islamic world, rising sectarianism in religious and political identities among both rich and poor nations, and deepening divisions in international politics.Commenting on the scale of the global exodus, as reported by the United Nations refugee agency last week, Mr. Miliband said people being “displaced by persecution and conflict is a trend and not a blip.”Mr. Miliband made the comments in an interview with the editorial board of The New York Times, during which he asserted that “the forces that have driven this spike in mass deportation and displacement are not short-term.”An outspoken leader in the world of humanitarian aid, Mr. Miliband said that despite the heroism of emergency responders in the conflicts in Syria, Iraq, South Sudan and Ukraine, to name a few, there was a growing gap between the needs of victims and the aid they were receiving.In an essay published in the July-August issue of Foreign Affairs, which Mr. Miliband wrote with Ravi Gurumurthy, a vice president of the International Rescue Committee, they said amounts pledged to address crises now regularly failed to reach 40 percent of the goals set by the United Nations. While more money is obviously needed, they wrote, it must also be used more efficiently.Mr. Miliband was appointed president and chief executive of the International Rescue Committee two years ago, moving from London to New York, where it is based. The organization, a leader in emergency assistance for more than 80 years, works in more than 40 countries. It is often among the first to respond to unfolding disasters with emergency water, health care and cash.Under his leadership, the organization’s annual budget has grown to $670 million from $450 million, Mr. Miliband said, and the organization is managing 684 government grants.“We’re growing fast because the misery is growing fast,” he said.