https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/magazine/who-made-that-contact-lens.html
Who Made That Contact Lens? - The New York Times
Eyes and Eyesight,Inventions and Patents
April 11, 2014
4282
In 1887, a German doctor named Theodor­ Samisch saw a patient whose lower eyelid had been destroyed by carcinoma, leaving his cornea exposed and desiccated and his lashes curling inward. To preserve the patient’s vision, Samisch contracted with two brothers who specialized in artificial eyes. They made a protective shell of handblown glass, transparent in the middle and opaque around the edge, with reddish threads for blood vessels. “I have worn the glass supplied by you continuously, day and night,” the patient wrote the brothers 21 years later, “and my eye has always felt very well with it.”The idea of using rounded glass for vision problems had been around since at least 1827, when John Herschel proposed that a glass capsule filled with animal jelly could correct an irregular cornea. But no one put it into practice until 1887. That was also the year that a medical student named August Muller asked a microscope maker in Berlin to create a glass device, cast from a cadaver’s eye, to correct his severe myopia. And the Swiss physician Adolf Eugen Fick was testing contact-lens designs on rabbits, colleagues and himself. “It’s a bit like London buses,” says Timothy­ Bowden, a British optician and contact-lens historian. “Nothing happens for ages, and then they all come at once.”The early lenses were much bigger than what we have today, and much less comfortable. Wearers could abide them for only a few hours at a time. Eventually, a lack of oxygen to the cornea would fog their vision and make lights appear to have colored halos. At the first signs of this condition, known as Sattler’s­ veil, patients were advised to remove their lenses for an hour.Softer plastic made these problems less intense. In the 1950s, a Czech chemist named Otto Wichterle­ invented a polymer called HEMA and used it to create a more pliable contact lens. Wearers still suffered from too little oxygen and Sattler’s veil, but they no longer had to remove their contacts for lengthy periods. Instead, they could slide the flexible lenses to the sides of their eyes to give their corneas a break.Finally, in the early 1980s, a Danish ophthalmologist named Michael Bay devised a way to make lenses disposable. Until then, people kept their contacts until they were so dirty and degraded as to be unwearable. Bay’s invention made the contact lens safer and more appealing to the average patient, Bowden says. “Johnson & Johnson bought that technology and made him a multimillionaire, thank you very much.”