http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/07/arts/design/07king.html
King Center - King National Historic Site and Preservation District - APEX Museum - Museums - The New York Times
Historic Buildings and Sites,King Center,King  Martin Luther Jr,Blacks,Travel and Vacations,Southern Christian Leadership Conference,Baptist Church,King  Coretta Scott
Aug. 7, 2007
1253
ATLANTA — If you stand in the middle of Auburn Avenue, outside the Queen Anne-style home in which the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was born in 1929, and look past the King Center, past the trees leading into the National Park Service Visitor Center and past Ebenezer Baptist Church, toward the office buildings and hotels of downtown Atlanta, you can get some sense of what the precocious Martin might have felt standing in the same spot, before his family moved off the street when he was 12.Of course in the 1930s the downtown didn’t look quite so elaborate, and across from Martin’s home the narrow houses, recently restored by the Park Service, would not have appeared as pristine. Nor of course would Martin have seen all the energy, controversy and conflict as the King Center (run by members of his family) spiraled into uncertainty, as the Park Service expanded its ambitions and as a small, independent African-American museum took a different stand on the context of Dr. King’s achievement.But Martin saw Auburn Avenue about the time that it was given the nickname Sweet Auburn. It was then said to be the wealthiest street in black America, and perhaps the most economically diverse as well.If Martin had walked down Sweet Auburn then, he would have seen the building in which he was to lead the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in the civil-rights battles of the 1960s. And he would have seen the headquarters of The Atlanta Daily World, which in 1932 (a current plaque informs us) became “the first daily black newspaper in the world.”In those days too, when Atlanta’s citizens could still recall the 1906 riots in which white people attacked the city’s black residents, Auburn Avenue was home to a rising black middle class,  at least until that dream too bumped into a barrier that Martin would be so instrumental in breaking down. For a young boy conscious of race issues through his father’s teaching, this avenue, leading toward the white downtown, must have been a reminder of both high aspiration and incomprehensible restriction.There is something so intimate about the connection of Auburn Avenue with Dr. King and his movement that I feel grateful that its vantage point survives. It does largely because Coretta Scott King succeeded in preventing the demolition of her husband’s birth home and helped get the neighborhood named a historic district. Then, after founding the King Center, she lobbied for the creation of what in 1980 became the King National Historic Site and Preservation District, an amalgam of national park, shrine, museum, business-improvement district and historical village still being remodeled to reflect different periods of Dr. King’s life.This historic site, which includes the birth home, a visitors’ center, the Ebenezer Baptist Church and surrounding areas, restores the 1930s of Dr. King’s boyhood on one block. On another block the church is getting a $4 million restoration to its appearance during the 1960s, when Dr. King could be heard at the pulpit. The site attracts more than 700,000 visitors a year.The family-run King Center, meanwhile, has been in trouble. For a decade or so after moving to its current complex in 1981 it sponsored lectures and special events, advocated nonviolent causes and helped establish the surrounding site. More recently it has been characterized by slackened activity, confusion about its mission and accusations of family malfeasance and short-sightedness.This mini-saga, as first reported in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, has included battles between Dr. King’s two sons, Dexter Scott and Martin Luther III, over the center’s future; the use of its nonprofit funds to pay a for-profit company, run by Dexter King, then the center’s president; the payment of large six-figure salaries to these two sons even as the building deteriorated — all this, and much more.Meanwhile, as if confirming that the dominant interest of the center was no longer as Mrs. King envisioned — the preservation of  Dr. King’s legacy and papers — but the income it can generate, the family put a 7,000-page cache of  documents up for auction at Sotheby’s. The collection was rescued from the prospect of dispersal or private ownership in 2006, when Mayor Shirley Franklin of Atlanta put together a $32 million package to purchase the papers for Morehouse College, Dr. King’s alma mater.But continuing family debates led to more controversies earlier this year over whether to sell the center to the Park Service. The family ultimately did not sell, though the Park Service estimated that the building needed more than $11 million in repairs.In an interview Isaac Newton Farris Jr., the center’s current president, said that changes were under way. The Web site (thekingcenter.org) hasn’t been updated since 2004, and public programming has all but stopped. The center is involved with the publication of Dr. King’s papers and plans what Mr. Farris calls a scholar in residence program, but as a research institution it has problems.In the archives and library many cartons are clearly water-damaged or in piles, as if awaiting unpacking after a move; objects mailed to the center lie haphazardly on chairs and along walls; tarps cover tables. The center’s three room-size exhibitions in its Freedom Hall are overseen by the Park Service; the main room consists largely of uninspiring personal memorabilia and biographical timelines.Unless the center undergoes a much-needed redefinition, it seems to have outlived its mission. But the Park Service, judging from its visitor center, has the drive to create the kind of memorial the King Center cannot, and it could also make use of the center’s dormant auditorium. Even now the visitor center offers an impressively thorough exhibition mounted in 1996 (marred mainly by design choices that made a lot of the text difficult to read), recounting Dr. King’s life and the movement he helped lead. A survey of Atlanta’s 1906 riots in a smaller gallery will close in late August, to be replaced by a traveling exhibition about the Soviet Gulag.With such plans the Park Service sees itself expanding on the King legacy, universalizing it to explore human-rights issues. This offers opportunities of course, but it also risks creating questionable parallels. The Park Service has, for example, helped establish the 1.5-mile Carter-King Peace Walk, a path linking the King site with the Carter Center and Library established by President Jimmy Carter, creating a tenuous connection between “two of the world’s greatest peacemakers,” in the words of the Park Service.Similar challenges will face the city as it plans for a $100 million civil- and human-rights museum (which may open not in the Sweet Auburn area but downtown, near Coca-Cola’s new museum, on land donated by Coke).On the other end of Auburn Avenue a smaller museum created in 1978 by the filmmaker Dan Moore pushes in another direction, treating the civil-liberties movement not as part of the human-rights tradition but as part of African history.The APEX Museum (an acronym for the African-American Panoramic Experience) attracts more than 60,000 visitors a year and says that “every month is black history month.” Dr. King is barely a presence.The APEX approach is less concerned with accommodation and resolution and more with pain and pride. A replica of one of Atlanta’s first black-owned businesses, the Yates & Milton Drug Store, is in its main space, jarringly shared with a cutaway display of the inside of a slave ship. A temporary exhibition of artwork, from kitsch to strongly imagined images, from the National Alliance of Artists From Historically Black Colleges and Universities fills the rest of the gallery space. In a theater meant to resemble a trolley’s interior, one film pays tribute to Sweet Auburn; another recounts the history of Africa.In an interview Mr. Moore said he hopes to raise $30 million to build an African-American history museum on the site, although no money has yet been collected. His dream may also face competition from the city’s planned civil-rights museum.But the APEX, on one end of Sweet Auburn, and the King Historic Site on the other provide examples of a recurring tension in black American politics, one pole leading toward universalist liberalism, the other toward nationalist pride. Many other approaches, yet to be explored, lie between. When young Martin looked down Sweet Auburn with what must have been a mixture of aspiration and exasperation, could he have imagined how many twists and turns were to come?