https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/29/world/middleeast/once-a-qaeda-stronghold-now-a-battleground-again.html
Once a Militant Stronghold in Iraq, Now a Battleground Again - The New York Times
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Iraq,Al-Daira (Iraq),Iraq War (2003-11)
June 28, 2014
8757
AL-DAIRA, Iraq —  At one house, Iraq’s national flag fluttered atop a building that Iraqi soldiers had captured from militants two days before.At another, smashed household goods and furniture were scattered on the floor.Outside a third, hosting a meeting of Iraqi security force commanders, a captain from Iraq’s national intelligence service pointed to the far side of a murky irrigation canal.“Here it is safe now,” he said of Al-Daira. “But over there are more terrorists. That is where we will fight them next.”The village of Al-Daira lies about 30 miles south of Baghdad and within sight of Iraq’s main highway, in an area the American military called the Triangle of Death.A former militant stronghold, the area is a battleground again. The Qaeda splinter group now known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, has resumed a campaign that its predecessors started — and had appeared to lose — before the United States withdrew its troops in 2011.But the war here south of the capital is different from the group’s confident blitz out of Anbar Province nearly three weeks ago, which led to a collapse of government forces in Mosul and Tikrit. The fighting that broke out in the triangle early this year has been a slower contest, reminiscent of the earlier insurgency that hid in the same villages and date-palm groves.The group’s tactics — a hybrid guerrilla-and-terrorist campaign of ambushes, bombings and sniper and mortar attacks, organized by fighters who blend among civilians — show that the militants are much more than a juggernaut, as lately portrayed. They are adaptive and alert to the lessons of Iraq’s insurgent past, and select different tactics for different places and situations.While establishing themselves in Anbar, in the west, they methodically resumed the campaign south of Baghdad started by Al Qaeda in Iraq, the Sunni militant group that formed after the American invasion and swore allegiance to Osama bin Laden.The militants here in the triangle lack the strength to drive around openly on machine-gun trucks, or to parade in large formations with their black banners, as they have in Falluja to the west of Baghdad, or Mosul and Tikrit to the north. Instead, they have pressured Baghdad from afar by trying to sever Iraq’s principal highway.  “Their main mission has been to cut the road,” said Capt. Abbas Monther, an officer from the Iraqi Army’s 17th Division, who attended the commanders’ meeting here on Thursday.ISIS has pursued this ambition in a seeming revival of the national “Belts of Baghdad” strategy led nearly a decade ago by the militant commander, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who was killed by an American airstrike in 2006. That strategy aimed to deprive the capital of a lifeline of commerce and supply.To try to achieve that goal, ISIS fighters have newly exploited a combination of geography and demographics.The provinces south of Baghdad are overwhelmingly inhabited by Shiite Arabs, except in a zone around Al-Daira where residents are mostly Sunni. Their land holdings straddle the southern approaches to Baghdad and the route between the capital and the holy city of Karbala.It is in this cluster of mixed or predominantly Sunni cities and towns — including Mahmudiya, Yusufiya, Jurf al-Sakhar, Iskandariya and Latifiya, all spread along farmland irrigated by the Euphrates River — where fighting became routine last winter, long before ISIS marched through the north.The latest insurgency has been met by a heavy army and intelligence-service presence to reinforce the police. In recent weeks, even during the failures in the north, the government has claimed success, though the violence continues apace.Last week, a security force seized Al-Daira from a cell of ISIS fighters. “About 15 ISIS guys had houses here,” said the National Intelligence Service captain, who asked that his name be withheld because he was not allowed to speak with reporters. The fighters, he said, had moved into a section of the village and used it to prepare improvised explosives. They had also organized an Islamic court in one house.Another intelligence officer, a lieutenant who participated in the sweep of Al-Daira and also asked that his name be withheld, said that, unlike what has been seen in northern Iraq, where foreign fighters have fought beside Iraqis, these militants were all from Iraq. It can be difficult, he said, for foreign fighters to pass for Iraqis in a zone thick with government forces, and with a large Shiite population nearby.Sadiq Madlool al-Sultani, the governor of Babil Province, which includes Al-Daira, suggested that the group’s infiltration fit a pattern in which its fighters work with local tribesmen where they can, but not openly.“ISIS has some temporary places where they come and stay for a while,” he said.The triangle’s history has shown that a militant foothold, with local support, is enough to generate violence on a large scale. A car bomb in 2005 that struck the largely Shiite city of Hilla, Babil’s provincial capital, killed more than 125 people. It was one of the deadliest acts of the war.Then came macabre acts by both sides. These included the rape of an Iraqi girl and the killing of her and her family by five American soldiers in early 2006, followed by the capture and dismemberment of two American soldiers later that year. Violence subsided in the latter years of the American occupation, in part through payments to Sunni tribesmen to police their own neighborhoods.But by the time of the American withdrawal in 2011, the Shiite-led government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki was not sustaining the payments, part of what critics contend was a government practice of marginalizing the very Sunnis who had gambled on a unified Iraq. By last January, as ISIS took control of Falluja, its new campaign in the triangle had begun.The violence started with gunfights, ambushes and roadside bombs. In March, it escalated when a suicide car bomb exploded at a checkpoint in Hilla, killing motorists and security officers.The security reaction has been intense.Local officials said that the militants, who by spring had taken control of parts of Jurf al-Sakhar and were operating throughout the triangle, had been backpedaling in recent weeks. Two officers, however, said the militants remained in two districts of Latifiya and parts of Jurf al-Sakhar. And their bombing campaign has continued, suggesting that they retain a base. In one recent operation alone, according to the governor, Mr. Sultani, government troops cleared 17 improvised bombs on one of the province’s main roads.The government’s offensive has at times included an apparent disregard for law and human rights. Last week, according to four police officers, counterterrorism officers emptied a prison in Hilla of men suspected of working with ISIS, and summarily executed as many as 70 of them. The police officers described the killings as retribution against ISIS after it had gloated online over executions of what it called captured Shiite soldiers in Tikrit.If the prisoner executions occurred as the four officers described, they would qualify as a war crime.In Al-Daira on Thursday, Shiite members of a SWAT team pulled aside two journalists and cheerfully showed them gruesome smartphone photographs of a pile of about 15 bullet-ridden corpses.The officers, who said they had been present for the killings, declined to provide details or answer follow-up questions, beside saying the men had been killed in Hilla and were ISIS fighters.There had been no official reports of fighting in Hilla during that time, though violence north of there occurred regularly last week.On Wednesday, a suicide bomber in Mahmudiya exploded himself in a central market, killing at least 14 people. A mortar attack on a Shiite section of the same city on Friday killed 10 more people, the police said.A gunfight Friday night in Jurf al-Sakhar left one soldier dead and eight more wounded, local officials said. More fighting erupted there on Saturday, with conflicting reports of casualties. Government and police officials  said three police officers, three soldiers and three members of a Shiite militia died in the fighting, along with as many as 30 militants.In this climate, the security forces are visibly on edge.On Thursday, as a government convoy approached Al-Daira, it lurched to an unexpected stop.Police and intelligence officers rushed to two men standing beside a parked pickup truck. The officers forced the men down at gunpoint. An officer swatted one of the men on the head.The men had made a call on a mobile telephone as the patrol had turned onto the road; the police said they suspected he had been alerting snipers.A short while later, the officers had calmed down. A check of the man’s logged phone calls showed him to be a schoolteacher making routine calls.“They were not who we thought,” a police officer said. “They were regular people. We let them go.”