http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/22/world/americas/expanding-web-of-scandal-in-brazil-threatens-further-upheaval.html
Expanding Web of Scandal in Brazil Threatens Further Upheaval - The New York Times
Bribery and Kickbacks,Brazil,Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras,Cunha  Eduardo Consentino da (1958- ),Corruption (Institutional),Rousseff  Dilma
Aug. 21, 2015
8171
RIO DE JANEIRO —  The charges are nothing less than sweeping: Prosecutors say that Eduardo Cunha, the speaker of Brazil’s lower house of Congress, took as much as $40 million in bribes for himself and his allies, plundering Petrobras, the government-controlled oil company, while laundering money through an evangelical megachurch.But Mr. Cunha’s combative reaction to the charges filed Thursday is shifting attention to the scandal-plagued Congress. Instead of resigning, Mr. Cunha, an evangelical Christian radio commentator who is one of Brazil’s most powerful politicians, is digging in and lashing out, saying he is the victim of a conspiracy.“Resigning is not part of my vocabulary,” Mr. Cunha, 56, said Friday. He proclaimed his innocence and contended that prosecutors were singling him out in an attempt to deflect blame from President Dilma Rousseff’s governing Workers’ Party in the colossal graft scandal around Petrobras. “No one is going to constrain me.”The defiance expressed by Mr. Cunha, who is emerging as Ms. Rousseff’s main rival as segments of Brazil’s establishment maneuver to oust her, is raising concern over the potential for even more political upheaval as the government grasps for ways to deal with dismal approval ratings and a sharply contracting economy. The scandals engulfing one prominent figure after another are evolving into one of Brazil’s most acute political crises since the re-establishment of democracy in the 1980s.Officials in Ms. Rousseff’s government initially seemed relieved after Mr. Cunha was charged, according to news reports, arguing that putting him on the defensive makes the impeachment of the president a more distant possibility. As speaker of the lower house, Mr. Cunha has the authority to initiate impeachment proceedings against a sitting president.Ms. Rousseff, who has been battling for her political survival after winning re-election to a second term just 10 months ago, seems to have recently gained something of a respite. For instance, Renan Calheiros, the powerful leader of Brazil’s Senate, has publicly expressed opposition to impeachment.Political analysts say that support from Mr. Calheiros, who is also being investigated over claims that he was involved in the Petrobras graft scandal, may be crucial for Ms. Rousseff as she faces a case in a federal auditing court tied to the Congress over claims that she improperly used state funds to cover budget shortfalls. A ruling against Ms. Rousseff could open the way for impeachment proceedings.Moreover, some business leaders and prominent media groups, despite having doubts about Ms. Rousseff’s policies and governing style, have begun calling attention to the potential for a more severe crisis of confidence across the political system and the economy if she is impeached, especially since no testimony has surfaced that she personally profited from the Petrobras graft scheme.But political analysts say that Mr. Cunha’s opponents may be underestimating him, pointing to a political career in which he has successfully battled a long list of corruption accusations, including claims that he lived in an apartment paid for by a black-market money dealer and that he embezzled public funds. While resisting calls to resign, Mr. Cunha may also try to make the most out of the power he retains.“Cunha is now a wounded beast without much to lose,” said Eliane Cantanhêde, a columnist for the newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo. “Before leaving the scene or going on trial, he could press the magic button starting impeachment proceedings.”If Mr. Cunha succeeds in remaining at his post while battling corruption charges, the resilience of the Congress, already one of Brazil’s most reviled institutions, will be tested even further. Pointing to the seriousness of the charges he faces, prosecutors are requesting a potential sentence of 184 years in prison if the Supreme Court puts him on trial and convicts him.Reacting to Mr. Cunha’s claim that he is the target of a conspiracy, his critics point out that the Petrobras scandal has already produced the arrests of many business leaders, including the billionaire chief executive of the construction giant Odebrecht, and political figures, including the treasurer of the leftist Workers’ Party and José Dirceu de Oliveira e Silva, an influential party leader.Including Mr. Cunha, about 40 percent of the 594 members of Congress are facing charges of one type or another in connection with a long list of scandals, according to Congresso em Foco, a watchdog group. However, few lawmakers ever go to jail because they can be tried only by the Supreme Court, meaning years of delays and effectively enabling many of them to avoid convictions.Mr. Cunha commands loyalty from a large number of legislators, and his fight to remain speaker could draw greater attention to the impunity that has long defined Congress, in addition to producing gridlock at a time when Ms. Rousseff and her finance minister, Joaquim Levy, are trying to win congressional approval for contentious austerity measures.“It would be a slap in the face of the Brazilian people if Cunha manages to remain in his post,” said Maurício Santoro, a political scientist at the State University of Rio de Janeiro.Still, Mr. Cunha has his fair share of supporters, especially among legislators in Congress who owe him favors and groups that are clamoring for Ms. Rousseff to resign or be impeached. “Someone needs to prove he is guilty,” Jovair Arantes, a congressman from Goiás State, told reporters. “Until then, he remains in his position as speaker.”But while Mr. Cunha counts on his loyalists, Ms. Rousseff may also benefit from a fractious Congress facing the prospect of being upended by having one its most powerful leaders ensnared in scandal.Brasílio Sallum, a sociologist at the University of São Paulo, noted that two-thirds of the legislators in the lower house needed to support an impeachment vote for it to pass. For now, the figure remains out of the reach of Ms. Rousseff’s opponents, he said.“Technically speaking, the political conditions for impeachment are not yet there, meaning that the president could survive, albeit in a critical situation,” Mr. Sallum said. “It’s still very difficult to see any endgames on the horizon.”