http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/06/automobiles/test-cars-keep-returning-to-a-towns-icy-embrace.html
Test Cars Keep Returning to a Town's Icy Embrace - The New York Times
ONTARIO (CANADA),GENERAL MOTORS CORP,GENERAL MOTORS CORP,AUTOMOBILES,TEMPERATURE,WEATHER,TESTS AND TESTING
March 6, 2006
8074
KAPUSKASING, Ontario - WITH spring's arrival just weeks away -- and the prospect of winter's icy grip finally relenting -- a principal attraction of this remote Ontario outpost is fading quickly. Its draw is not one that communities normally promote: a climate that, for nearly half of the year, is exceptionally cold and exceptionally snowy.These are not the sort of conditions that lure college students on spring break, but the thermometer's annual sustained plunge does bring a regular migration to this town of 9,000, about 16 hours' drive north of Detroit, and to Timmins, about 100 miles to the southeast. The visitors are not sun-seeking vacationers but engineers with test vehicles from General Motors, Toyota and other automakers.While computer simulations can substitute for many of the routine tests done in the process of developing a new car, there is not yet a digital stand-in for the frigid winters here at the northern limit of Ontario's highway network."Most places at G.M. have safety glasses as protective equipment," said John A. Komar, manager of the company's Kapuskasing Cold Weather Development Center, as he pulled on a heavy pair of company-issue gloves. "Here, it's moose mittens."On a visit last week, it was minus 7 degrees Fahrenheit with a vigorous west wind, conditions that challenged the operation of cooling systems (making it hard to maintain proper engine temperature) as well as the technicians (it felt like 36 degrees below zero). Mr. Komar, a Canadian whose previous assignments at G.M. have included stints in Brazil and Thailand, was obviously pleased by the inhospitable chill."We're here because it's cold," he said, leaving the warmth of a building in the G.M. complex for what is effectively a 279-acre outdoor laboratory.Like many communities in this part of Ontario, Kapuskasing is supported mostly by businesses that rely on local resources, including mining and paper mills. But during World War II a group of manufacturers, including General Motors of Canada, arrived with military trucks to test their readiness for duty in Siberia. ("Wear warm clothing" a subsequent report suggested, noting the lack of heaters in the cabs.)While Kapuskasing and Timmins are not the coldest places in Canada, they are more accessible to Detroit than towns farther north and offer a better selection of necessities like motels, restaurants -- and roads. David Phillips, a climatologist at Environment Canada, a government department that provides weather forecasts, said the region's winters were an ideal combination of temperature and precipitation. "It's not the coldest place, but it has a sure cold," he said. "And unlike the coldest places, it also has a sure snow cover."Before opening the test center in 1973, G.M.'s work in Kapuskasing was an informal operation, with visiting engineers working from local dealerships to test specific components and systems. Today, much of the facility's time is devoted to the mundane tasks of validation -- assuring that new models from each of the company's brands, including European divisions like Opel, will perform well in the cold.Other automakers have tested in Ontario. Jaguar began sending engineers and camouflaged prototypes to Timmins in 1982. Rolls-Royce, Nissan, DaimlerChrysler and Hyundai have been regular visitors, and Toyota opened a test center near Timmins in 1998.Using a 1.2-mile oval of ice-encrusted gravel at the test center as well as the town's surrounding roads and highways, the G.M. drivers put the preproduction cars, sheathed in tight-fitting black nylon camouflage suits, through a series of specific driving routines. Their goal is to simulate two years of winter driving; one test, designed to measure snow intrusion into the engine compartment, requires the drivers to tailgate a chain-dragging pickup truck around the track.The tests are rigged, but not in a way that favors the subject. Each morning, regardless of the cold, the test drivers wrestle with wrenches to install a battery that has been carefully drained to hold as little as 40 or 80 percent of its full charge. In addition to premium and regular unleaded gasoline, a third pump at the test center offers "low volatility" fuel, specially formulated gas that mimics poor quality, older fuel sometimes found at rural stations.Some testing takes place on temporary courses laid out each fall at an airport near the G.M. compound. An ice skidpad, a snowy road and a plowed asphalt road are used by engineers to check braking systems and skid-control electronics -- and occasionally for a heart-stopping visitor demonstration by test drivers, two local women, trained in performance driving.Because the work in Kapuskasing is seasonal, some local employees are part-timers who work in the logging industry during the summer. Several managers at Toyota's facility in Timmins head south in the off-season, to the company's hot-weather proving grounds near Phoenix where they are based. Working at both temperature extremes applies to the vehicles, too: many G.M. vehicles arrive in Kapuskasing coated with fine dust from the company's test operations in the deserts of Arizona.Test vehicles do not arrive at just one time of year. Engineers from G.M.'s Brazilian subsidiary, for instance, wait until April, when the weather here has turned milder -- and is thus more like the worst winter conditions in Brazil.Even Kapuskasing is not cold enough for some tests, so Andrew Phillips, a supervisor of special tests, uses a series of garagelike cold-soak chambers. Inside one of the Swedish-made test cells, Mr. Phillips walked around a disguised utility vehicle. "You can tell it's a good cold by the crunching your feet make," Mr. Phillips said, hatless and dressed surprisingly lightly given the temperature of minus 49 degrees Fahrenheit.And, of course, there is always the elusive human factor."What happens to heating and ventilation as people bring slush and snow into the vehicle, that's tough to simulate," said Chuck Gulash, vice president for research and materials engineering at Toyota.