https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/24/world/asia/north-korea-detains-uva-student.html
U.S. Student’s Detention by North Korea Was a Surprise, Tour Group Says - The New York Times
North Korea,Warmbier  Otto Frederick (1994- ),Sweden,State Department,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Political Prisoners,United States International Relations
Jan. 23, 2016
9954
HONG KONG —  An American student who is being detained by North Korea did nothing obvious during a five-day trip to the country that would have angered the authorities, a member of his tour group said Saturday.The student, Otto F. Warmbier of the University of Virginia, was being held for an unspecified “hostile act” against North Korea with the goal of “bringing down the foundation of its single-minded unity,” North Korea’s state-run Korean Central News Agency said on Friday.Mr. Warmbier’s detention at the airport in Pyongyang, the North’s capital, as the tour group was leaving the country on Jan. 2 came as a surprise, said one member of the group who asked not to be named because of the delicacy of the case.While foreigners accused of “anti-state” activities, illegal entry or spreading religion have been detained in North Korea in the past, there were no signs of such behavior by Mr. Warmbier, the tour group member said.“He seemed like a normal college kid looking to see the world,” the group member said. “Like the rest of us he had this curiosity about North Korea. I never heard him talk about religion. I never heard him speak ill of the North Korean government.”The China-based tour company, Young Pioneer Tours, said on Saturday that there had been an “incident,” but gave few details. Mr. Warmbier was the last person from the group to go through customs, and a guide was told by officials that Mr. Warmbier was taken to a Pyongyang hospital, the company said in a statement.Gareth Johnson, Young Pioneer’s British chief executive officer, remained in North Korea after Mr. Warmbier’s detention. “It was during this time that it was discovered that there had been an incident,” the statement said. “Gareth remained in Pyongyang for a few days and when it became apparent that nothing would be achieved in country, he returned to China.”Mr. Johnson declined to comment further on Saturday.Mr. Warmbier is an honors student from Cincinnati who is studying economics and global sustainability at the University of Virginia, according to a classmate and social media profiles. He is a member of the Theta Chi fraternity, and his Facebook page includes photographs of him on a trip to Cuba last year and at a climate change protest in New York in 2014.The State Department said Friday that it was aware of reports of the detention of an American citizen. “The welfare of U.S. citizens is one of the Department’s highest priorities,” said Mark Toner, a deputy spokesman at the State Department. “In cases where U.S. citizens are reported detained in North Korea, we work closely with the Swedish Embassy, which serves as the United States’ Protecting Power in North Korea.”Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, a Republican running for president, said in a statement that Mr. Warmbier’s arrest was “inexcusable” adding that “he should be released and returned immediately.”The detention happened just days before North Korea’s fourth nuclear test on Jan. 6, which prompted new discussions of sanctions by the United States and its allies.American citizens in North Korea have sometimes been used as a tool to put pressure on the American government, analysts say, with North Korea forcing visits by high-level officials or former leaders to secure the release of the detainees.James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, went to North Korea in November 2014 to gain the release of two Americans. He returned with Kenneth Bae, then a 46-year-old Korean-American missionary, who had been sentenced to 15 years of hard labor after North Korea convicted him of proselytizing, and Matthew Todd Miller, a 25-year-old American who was charged with “unruly behavior” after he tore up his passport and for trying to infiltrate the country’s prison camps.Jimmy Carter traveled to North Korea to win the release of Aijalon Mahli Gomes, an American accused of illegally entering the country in 2010, and Bill Clinton went to North Korea to secure the release of journalists Laura Ling and Euna Lee in 2009.