https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/jane-austen-fans-deborah-yaffe.html
The World of Jane Austen Fans - The New York Times
Among the Janeites: A Journey Through the World of Jane Austen Fandom (Book),Scandinavians: In Search of the Soul of the North (Book),Yaffe  Deborah (1965- ),Books and Literature,Ferguson  Robert (1948- )
July 14, 2017
1313
Subscribe: iTunes | Google Play MusicIn The New York Times Book Review, Jane Smiley writes about three books about the legacy of Jane Austen, including Deborah Yaffe’s “Among the Janeites: A Journey Through the World of Jane Austen Fandom.” Smiley writes:On this week’s podcast, Yaffe talks about “Among the Janeites”; Robert Ferguson discusses “Scandinavians: In Search of the Soul of the North”; Alexandra Alter has news from the literary world; and Gregory Cowles, Jennifer Szalai and John Williams on what people are reading. Pamela Paul is the host.Here are the books mentioned in this week’s “What We’re Reading”:“Under the Glacier” by Halldor Laxness“Priestdaddy” by Patricia Lockwood“Lives Other Than My Own” by Emmanuel Carrère“The Adversary” by Emmanuel Carrère“New People” by Danzy Senna“Who Is Rich?” by Matthew Klam“The Trespasser” by Tana FrenchWe would love to hear your thoughts about this episode, and about the Book Review’s podcast in general. You can send them to books@nytimes.com.From a desktop or laptop , you can listen by pressing play on the button above.Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon.2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Inside The New York Times Book Review” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, just tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon.2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for the name of the series, and select it from the list of results. You might have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone for free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, just click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.