http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/16/your-money/nobel-laureates-in-economics-uneasy-with-labels.html
Nobel Laureates in Economics, Uneasy With Labels - The New York Times
Nobel Prizes,Economics,Sargent  Thomas J,Sims  Christopher A
Oct. 15, 2011
3985
NOBEL prizes may be the ultimate attention-grabbers. When Theodore Roosevelt became the first American to win one, in 1906, he already had a bully pulpit — the White House — and he thumped it gleefully.But Thomas J. Sargent of New York University and Christopher A. Sims of Princeton, who were awarded the Nobel in economics on Monday, aren’t accustomed to the media spotlight. And they didn’t entirely relish it last week.Asked by a Nobel representative how he would deal with being certified as an economic sage in a time of global economic distress, Professor Sargent was puzzled: “Well, I, sorry, I don’t know what’s involved in that. You know, we’re just bookish types that look at numbers and try to figure out what’s going on,” he said. “So I don’t know what to say to that!”Speechifying didn’t appeal to Professor Sims, either. At a news conference at Princeton, he was asked to comment on the fiscal and financial rescue operations in the United States.“Answers to questions like that require careful thinking and a lot of data analysis,” he replied. “The answers are not likely to be simple.” Neither he nor Professor Sargent is accustomed to talking “off the top of our heads,” he said. “You shouldn’t expect much from us.”Journalism abhors a vacuum, however. Others assigned ideological views to the Nobel laureates.An op-ed piece in The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday carried the headline, “A Nobel for Non-Keynesians,” placing the professors in the camp that opposes the interventionist philosophy of the influential British economist John Maynard Keynes.It said the two had put “a sizable chink in the Keynesians’ armor.” An editorial said the pair was “ at odds with the recent Keynesian vogue, and in tune instead with the frustration with government fine-tuning that has dominated world economic policy since 2008.”That’s a compelling narrative. But it’s not the way Professor Sims sees himself, as he told me by phone late last week. (It doesn’t seem to be Professor Sargent’s view, either, but we had only a brief e-mail exchange.)Professor Sims doesn’t want to be pigeonholed. “I’m not ‘non-Keynesian,’ ” he said, adding that he has been an active “promoter of new Keynesian macroeconomic models,” because they “are the place in our profession where theory and data and policy decision-making are coming together.”“It doesn’t really make much sense to stand on the sidelines and take potshots at them,” he said. “If you don’t like the way they’re working, you should try to do better.”He and Professor Sargent have been “trying to do empirical macroeconomics using formal tools of statistics,” he said. “Those tools aren’t in themselves ideological.”Professor Sims spoke favorably of the Obama administration’s fiscal stimulus programs, which are Keynesian in their countercyclical spending. “An expansionary fiscal policy is probably what we need right now,” he said.But he criticized traditional Keynesian thought for inadequacy in “the temporal dimension,” meaning that it didn’t focus on the consequences of running long-term deficits. “The implications of that for future stringency are very important,” he said. “Our current policy debates just aren’t doing it.”President Obama deserves praise for offering a “grand compromise” — including spending cuts and tax increases — to resolve the long-term deficit, Professor Sims said. He criticized the Republican Congressional leadership for ruling out tax increases, which, he said, most economists know are needed. And he generally approves of the accommodative monetary policies of the Federal Reserve, led by his fellow Princetonian, Ben. S. Bernanke, whom he described as a “new Keynesian.”I asked whether there is a sense in which this is a “non-Keynesian” Nobel.Yes, he said, but mainly in a historical sense that is already outdated.It derives from musty arguments from the “warring schools” period of economics in the 1970s and ’80s. William Nordhaus of Yale and the late Paul Samuelson of M.I.T. used that phrase in 1985. They listed Professor Sargent, then at the University of Minnesota, as a leader of the “rational expectations school,” which was “anathema” to “old-style Keynesians.”What is the rational expectations theory? In a 2007 essay, Professor Sargent said it described “economic situations in which the outcome depends partly on what people expect to happen.” This insight is now part of “modern mainstream” economics, Professor Nordhaus said by e-mail.In his essay, Professor Sargent says that “while rational expectations is often thought of as a school of economic thought, it’s better regarded as a ubiquitous modeling technique used widely throughout economics.” He says the idea evolved from the work of many economists — including Keynes.Here’s how Professor Sargent says it works: “The value of a currency and its rate of depreciation depend partly on what people expect that rate of depreciation to be. That is because people rush to desert a currency that they expect to lose value, thereby contributing to its loss in value. Similarly, the price of a stock or bond depends partly on what prospective buyers and sellers believe it will be in the future.”In early iterations, Professor Sims says, the theory was “ideological and controversial.” It was sometimes used to imply that government intervention in markets wouldn’t work because “the public understands what you want to do, so many of those policies will just have no effect.”Today, with or without that implication, “rational expectations are built into everyone’s model,” he says. But it’s become an old approach, and he and Professor Sargent have been moving beyond it.People don’t comprehend all economic information well or quickly, he says, and often engage in what he calls rational inattention. For example, he says, many of us only sporadically check our bank balances or digest all the information that is relevant to our stock portfolios. Incorporating such behavior into economic models is now a focus of his work, as it is for behavioral economists.The research goes on, under many labels. As another Nobel laureate, Milton Friedman, said in 1966: “In one sense, we are all Keynesians now; in another, nobody is any longer a Keynesian.” Or a non-Keynesian, for that matter.