http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/08/sports/tennis/andy-murray-succeeds-with-ivan-lendl-in-his-corner.html
Andy Murray Is Succeeding With Ivan Lendl in His Corner - The New York Times
Lendl  Ivan,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Federer  Roger,Tennis,Coaches and Managers,Murray  Andy (1987- )
July 7, 2012
4482
WIMBLEDON, England — Even before Andy Murray hired Ivan Lendl to be his coach, Murray was already hearing from Lendl what it would take to beat Roger Federer in a Grand Slam tournament.The conversation took place in Miami in December, and it was the first extended meeting between Lendl, who won eight Grand Slam singles trophies, and Murray, who is still searching for his first major title.Lendl talked about many tennis subjects, according to Darren Cahill, who was there. But Lendl focused much of his energy on explaining his views on the three men blocking Murray’s path to the greatest prizes: Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Federer.“Ivan was inspiring to listen to,” said Cahill, who was coaching Murray part time then as part of an arrangement with one of Murray’s sponsors. “I was thinking that the fact that Ivan hadn’t coached before was completely irrelevant because he was still very much in touch with the way the game is played.”Lendl, who retired in 1992, should be in even better touch after more than six months as part of Murray’s team.“Obviously, it’s different from the time I have played,” Lendl said earlier this year. “But it’s not any different from what I’ve been watching. I’ve seen all the major finals and semis and so on. The only thing I stepped up was watching more of Andy’s matches and some of them even multiple times.”Lendl, who declined interviews last week, was hired in late December because of his perspective, because of his champion’s résumé and also because of the parallels. Lendl lost his first four Grand Slam singles finals, breaking through at the 1984 French Open when John McEnroe surrendered a two-set lead.“Who better to guide Andy down that path than Ivan Lendl?” Cahill said earlier this year. “On paper, it seems like a strong partnership, but you never know. Sometimes things work and sometimes they don’t, but you do the best you can to try to make it happen, and I’m proud of Andy for stepping up and trying to turn over every stone he can to achieve those big goals, and you can’t blame him for that.”For the moment and for a change, there is no question of blame in Britain as Sunday’s men’s final approaches. After working his way through a tricky draw, Murray is where no British man has been since Henry Austin, better known as Bunny.Austin reached the final here in 1938. Murray, as fortune but hardly coincidence would have it, will face Federer.The front pages of British newspapers reflected more relief than delight Saturday. “And Finally......,” was the headline in The Times of London. But the Daily Mail chose a headline more in keeping with the traditional approach to Murray: “Now Can He Finish the Job?”Murray, like Nadal, is one of the few active players to hold a career edge over Federer. He leads their series by 8-7 but lost the only match they have played since Lendl took charge. It came on a hardcourt in the final of an event in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Federer won, 7-5, 6-4.Lendl, who does not travel to every tournament, was not in Dubai, but he has been at Wimbledon from the start, and this match with Federer is the one that matters — one in which the data and swing thoughts Lendl acquired by watching Federer through the years have a chance to play a role.Murray, with his speed and his panoply of shots, already knows what it takes to beat Federer on a minor occasion. The question is whether he has what it takes on a major occasion, with Queen Elizabeth II perhaps making the Royal Box more regal and with BBC executives anticipating one of the largest British television audiences in the past 20 years.It is a lot for a traditionally combustible young Scotsman to handle. He has not been pushed to five sets at this Wimbledon, but he has dispensed plenty of emotional energy in tough four-set matches against Ivo Karlovic, Marcos Baghdatis, David Ferrer and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga.“I guess it would be as if we never had anyone in the U.S. Open final for 74 years,” said Patrick McEnroe, an ESPN analyst and former United States Davis Cup captain.It is a strange twist in tennis that playing at home, widely viewed as an advantage in other sports, is viewed as a burden at Wimbledon. Murray, at least, has considerable experience with the phenomenon. Murray-mania, at least until now, has seemed a hyperbolic term in relation to the Hen-mania that was once reserved for the more widely popular British player Tim Henman. But Murray has been in range of winning the final for four years now, as a quarterfinalist in 2008 and a semifinalist the following three years.Clearly, reaching the final is progress, albeit in a year when Murray, although he had a difficult draw, did not have to face any of those men in the semifinals that Lendl talked about in December. Instead, with Nadal knocked out of his half in the first week by Lukas Rosol, Murray got the chance to play Friday’s semifinal against Tsonga, a spectacular grass-court player but a player who, like Murray, has never won a major singles title.But Murray will have to do something different if he is to become the first British man to win the singles title since Fred Perry in 1936. He will have to win a major final and beat Federer for the first time in a best-of-five match.“I think he has the X’s and O’s to do it,” McEnroe said. “I think he’s a better defender on grass than Djokovic. He’s more nimble. He’s a little more versatile in the way he can slice the ball. He can take the pace off the ball.”Lendl, unlike Murray’s previous coaches, has met with triumph, not just disaster, in Grand Slam tournaments and understands the pitfalls.“I think part of it is that I just sort of understand how Andy feels about not winning the first three,” Lendl said. “He may play the next five and not win or he may win the next five. Who knows? We don’t really know, but we know that it’s worth trying.”