http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/30/books/review/30heilbrun.html
The Rumsfeld Doctrine - The New York Times
IRAQ,TRAINOR  BERNARD E,GORDON  MICHAEL R,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE,TERRORISM,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE,COBRA II: THE INSIDE STORY OF THE INVASION AND OCCUPATION OF IRAQ (BOOK),COBRA II (BOOK)
April 30, 2006
8758
COBRA IIThe Inside Story of the Invasionand Occupation of Iraq.By Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor.Illustrated. 603 pp. Pantheon Books. $27.95.MICHAEL R. GORDON and Bernard E. Trainor's book about the invasion of Iraq, "Cobra II," is everything that the Bush administration's plan for the war was not. It is meticulously organized, shuns bluff and bombast for lapidary statements, and is largely impervious to attack. Like their widely acclaimed book about the first gulf war, "The Generals' War," published in 1995, it is based on stupendous research. Once again, the authors seem to have been everywhere and talked to everybody. No Pentagon source appears to have been too minor to track down, no plan too recondite to assess, no military acronym too obscure to explain. Gordon, a longtime military correspondent for The New York Times who was embedded with Lt. Gen. David McKiernan's Coalition Forces Land Component Command, and Trainor, a retired Marine Corps lieutenant general and former correspondent for The Times, have produced another must-read.But there the similarities between the two books end. "The Generals' War" appeared at the apogee of American power. Gordon and Trainor's sequel, by contrast, chronicles the crimes, follies and misfortunes of the second gulf war until the summer of 2003. By minutely recounting the tensions between Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and the military in the run-up to the war and during it, the authors seek to explain how Iraq, which was supposed to be the birthplace of the democratic crusade, has become its graveyard. Whether their explanation is completely satisfying is another matter.As Gordon and Trainor observe, the Bush administration's decision to launch a pre-emptive invasion amounted to a wholesale repudiation of the so-called Powell doctrine, which insisted on patiently assembling overwhelming force before entering any foreign conflict. This was not academic hairsplitting, but a fundamental rift in the Republican Party. Colin Powell's credo was a lineal descendant of the Weinberger doctrine, announced by his mentor, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, in 1984 to justify bolting from Lebanon after the suicide bombing of a Marine barracks -- a strategic humiliation that many Republican hawks view as the origin of America's current woes in the war on terror, since it helped convince Osama bin Laden, among others, that the United States was a cowardly weakling that would flee when hit hard.After Sept. 11, President Bush wanted to turn the tables on America's enemies by going on the offensive. As Bush had indicated in a major campaign speech delivered at the Citadel military academy in 1999, he wished to create a more mobile and lethal force that wouldn't take the six months to assemble that his father's gulf war had required. It was an early sign, missed by most, that Bush already had Saddam Hussein on his mind. As soon as Rumsfeld became defense secretary, he began to carry out Bush's mandate by waging a war on what he saw as an evil empire of hidebound Pentagon bureaucrats wedded to massive force. Gordon and Trainor don't give Rumsfeld much credit, but he was right about the problem. He went about solving it, however, in the most obtuse and ham-handed fashion.Gordon and Trainor offer the fullest depiction yet of Rumsfeld's obsession with using Iraq to show that a Slim-Fast military, equipped with the latest technological gizmos, could defeat a foe overnight. Again and again, Rumsfeld pooh-poohed concerns about the hazards of an eventual occupation as preposterous. Nation-building was sissy stuff, dating to what he saw as the Clinton administration's needlessly protracted and costly deployment of troops in the Balkans. In contrast, Iraq, an oil-rich country, would be a snap to get back on its feet, even easier than Afghanistan. "With Iraq," Rumsfeld announced publicly on Feb. 14, 2003, "there has been time to prepare." Yet Rumsfeld seems to have viewed preparations for the aftermath as themselves a sign of defeatism. Gordon and Trainor inform us that the commander of the Great Lakes and Ohio Division of the Army Corps of Engineers, who was deputed in December 2002 to come up with a plan for a postwar civilian administration, didn't receive his own budget and was forced to head to "a trade fair at the base to scrounge up office supplies. He went from booth to booth, appropriating pads, pens and staplers -- not an auspicious start for an organization charged with smoothing the path to a new Iraq."Nor does Gen. Tommy Franks, who led the invasion, come off well. No doubt there are always tensions in wartime between a commander and his generals, but Gordon and Trainor draw on the observations of Franks's subordinates to telling effect. Enraged that the Marines weren't moving more quickly to destroy Iraqi divisions toward the end of March 2003, Franks acted as though he were in charge of a bunch of modern-day McClellans. At one meeting, Franks declared that he didn't want to hear about casualties, the authors report, "even though no one had mentioned any. At that point, he put his hand to his mouth and made a yawning motion, as if to suggest that some casualties were not of major consequence to the attack."The book is most riveting in its descriptions of the war. Gordon and Trainor emphasize that from the outset, it went very differently than the administration had expected. They might have been slightly more forgiving on this front, since the fog -- or, in the Iraqi case, sandstorm -- of war wreaks havoc on most battle plans. (Given that Gordon himself wrote two articles with Judith Miller about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction that The Times later criticized in a note "from the editors," he should have been more circumspect about reproving the administration for bungling the W.M.D. issue.) Still, Rumsfeld's blithe assumptions, coupled with misleading C.I.A. intelligence about weapons of mass destruction and the prospects for an insurgency, were fateful. The authors emphasize that in late March 2003 commanders wanted to go after the Fedayeen irregulars who would form the core of the insurgency, but Rumsfeld wanted to wind the war up as soon as possible and hand Bush a gift-wrapped victory. General Franks even declared that it was as important to take risks on the way out of Iraq as it was going in by slashing troop numbers, which Jay Garner, the first head of reconstruction, thought "was plain crazy."Though Gordon and Trainor provide an excellent account of the war, their quest for detail at times threatens to overwhelm the narrative. They don't really capture the broader political context in which Rumsfeld and company were operating. President Bush is pretty much missing in action. Dick Cheney makes a few cameos. But with an administration where power is concentrated in the hands of a few, Gordon and Trainor's focus on the military bureaucracy results in a somewhat constricted portrait of what actually took place.Indeed, Gordon and Trainor's book suggests a conclusion they don't draw: the initial impulse for war may have had little to do with Iraq itself. Like the Western votaries of Communism in the 30's, who projected their various fantasies about utopia onto Spain or the Soviet Union, administration officials seem to have viewed Iraq as a kind of abstract proving ground for their pet theories about warfare, terrorism or democratization. They saw the Iraq they wanted to see. Their delusions bring to mind the British historian A. J. P. Taylor's observation that the dangerous thing isn't when statesmen cannot live up to their principles. It's when they can.'Cobra II,' by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor Jacob Heilbrunn, a frequent contributor to the Book Review, is writing a book on neoconservatism.