https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/opinion/the-supreme-court-saves-obamacare-again.html
The Supreme Court Saves Obamacare, Again - The New York Times
Editorials,Supreme Court (US),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Roberts  John G Jr,Decisions and Verdicts,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
June 25, 2015
5794
On Thursday morning, for the second time in three years, a majority of the Supreme Court rightly rejected a blatantly political effort to destroy the Affordable Care Act. The case challenging the law, King v. Burwell, was always an ideological farce dressed in a specious legal argument, and the court should never have taken review of it to begin with.Its core claim — that an ambiguous four-word phrase buried deep in the 900-page law eliminates health insurance for millions of lower-income Americans — was preposterous. The entire point of the law, as embodied in the title of its first chapter, is “Quality, affordable health care for all Americans.”Writing for a six-member majority, Chief Justice John Roberts Jr. agreed that this clear, overriding purpose was the guiding principle. “Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them.”In all the years leading up to the law’s passage, no one questioned that purpose. Not a single person involved in passing or interpreting the law — including members of Congress, health-care journalists, and Supreme Court justices themselves — ever expressed a belief that subsidies would not be available on federally-operated exchanges. But the current challenge, brought to you by some of the same tireless conservative and libertarian activists who tried and failed to kill the health reform law in 2012, fabricated an alternate history out of thin air.Their argument, based on an intentional misreading of four words, was that the tax-credit subsidies that make the law work are available only in the 13 states that fully run their own health care exchanges. Because a sub-sub-subsection of the law dealing with the calculation of those tax credits refers to an exchange “established by the state,” the challengers argued, no subsidies are available to the millions of Americans who live in the 34 states where the federal government runs the exchange.It was a grandly orchestrated charade sold to people who were already furious about the law and just needed a legal rationale, however far-fetched, to try to gut it.And it worked on the three justices whose disdain for the law has always been clear: Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito Jr. and Clarence Thomas. In a dissent laced with outrage and mockery, Justice Scalia called the court’s decision “quite absurd,” and quipped, “We should start calling this law Scotus-care.” But of course it was the justices’ choice to hear challenges to the law in 2012 and this term, even though both were legally frivolous.But as Chief Justice Roberts explained in detail, the health reform law depends on tax-credit subsidies to make health care affordable for more than six million Americans. Eliminating subsidies “could well push a state’s individual insurance market into a death spiral,” he wrote, since fewer people would enroll and premiums for everyone would shoot up — the very result Congress designed the reform law to avoid. To drive the point home, he quoted the dissenting justices’ own words in the 2012 case, in which they openly admitted that without federal subsidies, “the exchanges would not operate as Congress intended and may not operate at all.”Thursday’s decision was a powerful defense of the law, stronger than observers might have expected from this court. The justices could have upheld the provision on subsidies to federal as well as state-run exchanges as a reasonable exercise of discretion by a government agency — in this case, the Internal Revenue Service, which issued the challenged regulation. But in that case, a future president could simply have ordered the I.R.S. to change the regulation. Instead, the court focused on the broader structure of the law itself, preserving the proper reading of it regardless of the politics of the next administration.“In a democracy, the power to make the law rests with those chosen by the people. Our role is more confined —‘to say what the law is,’” Chief Justice Roberts wrote, quoting the Supreme Court’s foundational 1803 ruling in Marbury v. Madison. “In every case we must respect the role of the Legislature, and take care not to undo what it has done.”Putting aside for the moment the rank politics swirling around the Affordable Care Act — the partisan grandstanding and the questions about President Obama’s legacy  — consider what the law has already managed to accomplish.It has been a remarkable success. Today, a larger proportion of working-age Americans have health insurance than at any time since record-keeping began in 1997. The number of people under 65 who were uninsured dropped to 16.3 percent in 2014, down four points from 2013. The drop was significantly greater in states that expanded Medicaid through the health reform law than in those that did not.This is one of the things government was built to do: provide all Americans with access to quality, affordable and often-lifesaving health care. And this is what those who are determined to gut the law have been trying to dismantle. It is to the Supreme Court’s credit that in this case, the majority of justices managed to stay above the politics of this issue and do their job — which is to interpret the law Congress wrote in its entirety, not to rewrite it.