http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/12/washington/12cnd-immig.html
Bush Lobbies G.O.P. Senators on Immigration - The New York Times
Bush  George W,Immigration and Refugees
June 12, 2007
6771
WASHINGTON, June 12 — President Bush made a rare trip to the Capitol today, meeting with Senate Republicans over lunch in an attempt to revive the immigration bill and vowing not to give up.“The status quo is unacceptable,” Mr. Bush said after a meeting that apparently brought no quick breakthrough. “I want to thank those senators on both sides of the aisle who understand the time is now to move a comprehensive piece of legislation. The White House will stay engaged.”Just back from his European trip, Mr. Bush said he understood that immigration is “a highly emotional issue.”“But those of us standing here believe now is the time to move a comprehensive bill that enforces our borders and has good workplace enforcement, that doesn’t grant automatic citizenship, that addresses this problem in a comprehensive way,” the president said.Mr. Bush’s allusion to those standing with him may have been significant. They were Senators Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader; Trent Lott of Mississippi, the party whip, and Jon Kyl, the Arizona Republican who has been a backer of the Senate immigration bill. Mr. McConnell and Mr. Lott were critical of the bill when it stalled in the Senate last week.“I would hope that the Senate majority leader has that same sense of desire,” Mr. Bush said, referring to Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, who said after last week’s failure that the legislation would be shelved, at least for the time being. The bill stalled because its backers got only 45 of the 60 votes they needed to shut off debate and move to a “yes or no” vote on the bill itself.Critics of the bill have argued that, despite what its backers say, the measure would offer a form of amnesty to illegal aliens and would not do enough to secure the borders.Senator Lott said that today’s discussion with the president illustrated “democracy at its best,” and that Mr. Bush indicated he “won’t sign a bad bill.”Mr. McConnell said Mr. Bush’s ability to persuade would rest on what the immigration bill “looks like in the end  — and none of us know that yet,” according to The Associated Press.While President Bush was meeting with Republican senators, two Cabinet officers pleaded for passage of the bill and tried to rebut criticism of it.One of the Cabinet officers, Michael Chertoff, the secretary of homeland security, said the Bush administration was willing to consider a number of proposed Republican amendments, including one that would require illegal immigrants to “touch back” in their home countries (or some other country) to apply for legal status.“That’s doable,” Mr. Chertoff said, referring to the proposal by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, Republican of Texas. The administration, he said, is consulting with senators on a package of amendments “that might win over some additional support” for the bill.As the bill now stands, illegal immigrants who have been in this country since Jan. 1 could get legal status and special “Z visas,” renewable every four years. They would have to leave the United States if they wanted to apply for permanent-residence visas, or green cards.Nine conservative Republican senators, including Jim DeMint of South Carolina, sent a letter to President Bush urging him to enforce border security laws that have already been enacted, regardless of whether the Senate passes the immigration bill.Mr. Chertoff said the administration had already made a commitment to meet many goals set forth in the bill, like hiring more Border Patrol agents and putting up more fence along the border with Mexico.But Mr. Chertoff said that without the bill, his agency did not have the authority to require employers to check federal and state databases to verify that employees were eligible to work in the United States.“The single most important thing we need is a mandatory employment verification system,” Mr. Chertoff said. The verification system, he said, would relieve pressure on the border by reducing the incentive for unauthorized immigrants to seek jobs in this country.The other Cabinet officer, Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez, said that failure to pass the bill would hurt the economy.“We will see rotting fruit” in the fields, Mr. Gutierrez said. “We will see lawns that don’t get cared for. We will see patients who don’t get cared for.”Mr. Chertoff tried to inject a note of urgency into discussions of the bill.“We can’t afford to let this languish,” Mr. Chertoff said. “If we start to drift past the next couple of weeks, the danger is that people tend to get distracted. Inertia ends up playing a role at some point.”Efforts to revive the immigration bill are haunted by the ghost of a 1986 law that promised to solve the problem of illegal immigration.That law prohibited the hiring of illegal immigrants, provided new resources for enforcement along the Mexican border and offered legal status, or amnesty, to several million illegal immigrants. In the current debate, which stalled last week when the latest legislative proposal failed to clear a procedural hurdle, senators of both parties cite the 1986 law as an example of what not to do.Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said he regretted voting for the 1986 measure.“I thought then that taking care of three million people illegally in the country would solve the problem once and for all,” Mr. Grassley said. “I found out, however, if you reward illegality, you get more of it. Today, as everybody has generally agreed, we have 12 million people here illegally.”The 1986 law was a product of more than five years’ work by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, and Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of Kentucky. Both left Congress more than a decade ago.Senator Byron L. Dorgan, Democrat of North Dakota, said: “I was here in Congress in 1986. I heard all the promises of the Simpson-Mazzoli Act. None of them were true, and three million people got amnesty. There was no border security to speak of, no employer sanctions to speak of, and there was no enforcement.”Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, said: “The American people were sold a bill of goods. It didn’t work. We got an amnesty, and we got no enforcement. That is why people are so distrustful now.”One of Mr. Bush’s “first principles,” as described in a White House planning document, is, “Do not repeat the 1986 failure.” He and other supporters of the current Senate bill say it puts enforcement first this time.Mr. Bush said he was confident that the bill would move forward and become law,. “I’ll see you at the bill signing,” the president told journalists traveling with him on Monday in Bulgaria.In a letter to Mr. Bush on Monday, Senate Democratic leaders said they were “committed to Senate passage of an immigration bill this year.” But they said Mr. Bush must exert stronger leadership and deliver more votes for the legislation.Mr. Reid said he would try again on the immigration bill if the president and Senate Republican leaders showed “new cooperation and a clear way forward.”Supporters of the Senate bill acknowledge that the nation’s experience with the 1986 law has made their job harder. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said the current bill was “dramatically different from the 1986 act,” because it places more emphasis on enforcement and more conditions on the granting of legal status to illegal immigrants.But many senators are skeptical. Under the Senate bill, they note, most new enforcement measures are “subject to the availability of appropriations,” meaning Congress would have to provide additional money to finance them.Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, said he supported amnesty in 1986 “based on the very same promises we hear today.” But that law did not work, Mr. Byrd said, and “I will not vote to make the same mistake twice.”In signing the 1986 measure into law, President Ronald Reagan said, “Future generations of Americans will be thankful for our efforts to humanely regain control of our borders.”The border remains porous.Stephen J. Pitti, a professor of history at Yale, said the 1986 law “did little to slow migration to the United States,” but made crossing the border more difficult and dangerous. As a result, he said, illegal immigrants, rather than circulating back and forth between the United States and Mexico, are more likely to settle permanently in this country.Likewise, Professor Pitti said, the employer sanctions authorized in 1986 did not noticeably deter illegal immigration from Latin America, but “created a booming market for fake identity cards.”Reached Monday in Wyoming, Mr. Simpson said, “Without a more secure identifier, it was obvious that the 1986 bill could never work.”The Senate bill calls for more secure identification documents, with photographs or biometric identifiers. Employers must use a new electronic system to verify that employees are eligible to work in the United States. And the fines for hiring illegal immigrants would be much higher than under the current law.But the Senate bill, like the 1986 law, forbids the use of national identification cards.Supporters of the 1986 measure freely used the word “amnesty” at the time. President Bush insists that the Senate bill “does not grant amnesty” because an illegal immigrant would have to pay a fine, pass background checks and hold a steady job to gain legal status.But Mr. Bush will have difficulty persuading senators like David Vitter, Republican of Louisiana. Mr. Vitter said the legalization program and other provisions of the Senate bill “will inevitably repeat the mistake of 1986, only on a far broader, a far bigger, and far more dangerous scale.”