https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/us/california-today-uc-berkeley-falcons.html
California Today: Baby Falcons Take Flight in Berkeley - The New York Times
California Today
July 11, 2017
4512
Good morning.(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Today’s introduction comes from Thomas Fuller, the San Francisco bureau chief.Admission to the University of California, Berkeley, is the dream of high school students across the state and the globe. It’s also not a bad place to be a baby peregrine falcon.Last week, two baby falcons jumped from the balcony of the university’s bell tower and took their first flight as their parents warily soared above them.At this famously liberal campus, there were no safety nets for the chicks, who were hatched sometime in late May. But there was plenty of support from volunteers on the ground. The campus police were given instructions on what to do if they found a baby falcon on the pavement below.Signs were posted, and university departments were put on alert. A crew of falcon lovers led by a retired medical researcher, Mary Malec, trained a monocular on the tower and constantly scanned the skies for the babies, ready to rescue them with cardboard pet carriers and rush them to a vet if their flight failed. They called the effort “Fledge Watch.”Peregrine falcons are the world’s fastest animals, capable of diving more than 200 miles an hour to capture their prey (other birds) in midflight. The birds were on the brink of extinction five decades ago, their eggs made too fragile by the pesticide DDT, which was delisted as an acceptable pesticide by the federal government in 1972.Since then, the peregrine’s remarkable comeback has been a model case for environmentalists. The birds perch on top of cliffs and increasingly on skyscrapers and other urban structures; they were taken off the endangered species list in 1999.Peregrine falcons have had layovers on the Berkeley campus over the years but this is the first time they have been spotted nesting there. Administrators hope the parents will re-enroll next year and have more chicks.The university held a contest on social media to name the two female chicks and came up with Fiat and Lux, taken from Berkeley’s Latin motto, “Let there be light.”Gretchen Kell, a spokeswoman for the university who says she is repeatedly drawn to the tower for news of the chicks, said she couldn’t help but compare the first flights to a child leaving home.(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)• California’s Democrats are engulfed in a “civil war” over the direction of their party. The leader of the State Assembly said he’s gotten death threats. [Politico]• State lawmakers, citing diversity concerns, asked lobbying firms to provide data on their employees’ race, gender and sexual orientation. [Sacramento Bee]• Early data suggests smoking has dropped sharply in the wake of a cigarette-tax increase. [CALmatters]• “What other city has three power plants and a Superfund site on the beach?” Oxnard residents are fighting to restore their shoreline. [Los Angeles Times]• California is already well ahead of last year’s pace for wildfires. Expect it to stay nasty all summer. [San Francisco Chronicle]• Thousands of wild horses in California may live or die depending on a few lines in the federal budget. [The Press-Enterprise]• Big swells were expected at Southern California beaches thanks to a tropical storm off Mexico. [AccuWeather]• Sonoma County vineyards can’t find enough laborers. So they’re turning to a federal visa program. [The Press Democrat]• The Silicon Valley giant Intel is hurrying to catch the artificial intelligence wave. [The New York Times]• HBO’s “The Defiant Ones” is a glossy, ambitious and often fun documentary on Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine. [The New York Times]• Michael Connelly’s breathlessly paced new novel introduces Renée Ballard, a tireless Los Angeles detective on the night shift. [The New York Times]• At Kismet in Los Angeles, dishes that seem simple, like Persian cucumbers, contain complex flavors. [The New York Times]• Video: Aerial views of the blooming sunflower fields in Yolo County. [Sacramento Valley Water | YouTube]Last month, I moved with my family to Los Osos. We discovered the small coastal town after starting a house search in San Luis Obispo, the popular college town about 10 miles away, and then looked outward.Los Osos, population roughly 14,000, is surrounded by natural beauty. There’s Morro Bay, a playground of sea otters also known as the Gibraltar of the Pacific; the Elfin Forest, a sand dune landscape of miniature California live oaks; and Montana de Oro State Park, a jewel of the Central Coast.At the 12-square-mile park, hiking and biking trails open up to panoramas of rugged coastline every bit as spectacular as those in Big Sur.Yet the name Los Osos commonly elicits blank stares from Californians in other parts of the state.Antoinette Payne, a longtime real estate agent on the Central Coast, suggested that nearby cities like Pismo Beach and Cayucos enjoy greater recognition simply because, unlike Los Osos, they are visible from Highway 101 or the Pacific Coast Highway.“One of the nice things about Los Osos is that it’s kind of off the main track,” she said.That got us wondering: What are California’s other little-known treasures? It can be anything — a city, a beach, a park, a landmark.Tell us at CAtoday@nytimes.com, and please include your full name and city of residence. We may use your response in a newsletter.Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. Follow him on Twitter.California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.