http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/obama-west-wing.html
After Election, Commander in Chief Soothes White House Workers - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Obama  Barack,White House Building (Washington  DC),Washington (DC)
Nov. 11, 2016
4855
There has been weeping at West Wing staff meetings and a series of presidential pep talks, a tear-jerker of a Rose Garden gathering and anguished conversations about what will happen to President Obama’s legacy and the job prospects of his aides.Since Donald J. Trump shocked both political parties and won the presidential election on Tuesday, a White House that had expected to spend the week celebrating a historic victory that would cement Mr. Obama’s most cherished initiatives for years to come is instead experiencing the seven stages of grief.“It started with sadness and disbelief and definitely some tears around the building,” said one senior official who spoke on the condition of anonymity, unwilling to be quoted by name in detailing the crying or dwelling on the sense of loss hanging over the West Wing.“Now it’s, ‘Let’s take a moment to digest,’ but also, ‘Let’s quickly pull ourselves up by our bootstraps because we need to continue to do our jobs,’” the official added.A second senior official said she felt Hillary Clinton’s loss in her gut.“I was actually physically ill for a while,” she said. “The only time I cried was when she came out and said, ‘I’m sorry,’” she added, referring to Mrs. Clinton’s concession speech on Wednesday in a hotel ballroom, when the candidate herself briefly teared up.A cocktail party later that day for senior officials and cabinet members past and present felt “like sitting shiva,” one attendee said, referring to the weeklong Jewish mourning ritual in which friends and family grieve over a steady stream of refreshments.Through it all, Mr. Obama has played the role of consoler in chief, pulling staff members into the Oval Office or dropping in on their meetings to buck them up, reassure them and tell them that this, too, shall pass.Mr. Trump’s victory is a particularly bitter pill to swallow for the younger generation of aides in the White House, including many who had their first campaign experience as junior staff members on Mr. Obama’s improbable 2008 bid. They remember only one type of feeling the day after a presidential election: the euphoria of a history-making victory, coupled with a sense of invincibility from beating the odds.This is the opposite of that.In his private sympathy sessions, according to people who have attended, Mr. Obama has encouraged aides not to allow themselves to sink into despair.“You don’t need hope when things are going well,” he tells them. “You need it when things are not going well.”The funereal air that hung over the White House in the first hours after Mr. Trump’s victory has given way to a more brave-faced solemnity, as Mr. Obama’s team turns its attention to ensuring a smooth transition to the next administration. His aides say they are determined not to appear bitter or petty at a moment when the president is trying to telegraph professionalism and grace.But the truth is that they are all reeling, trying to process how they could have been so blindsided by Tuesday’s result, stung by the notion that the nation has just repudiated everything they have worked for, and wondering how different their lives will look from what they imagined a week ago.“Everybody’s sort of recalibrating and regrouping,” said Kathleen Sebelius, the former secretary of health and human services, who attended Wednesday’s reception at the White House. Former officials flew to Washington from around the country to participate in what was supposed to be a celebration of Mrs. Clinton’s victory but felt more like a group therapy session, she said.“It wasn’t quite a funeral — more like a memorial service,” she said. “It was a celebration of what we had done together, but with some ominous thoughts about what happens now.”Mr. Obama was upbeat, telling cabinet members how proud he was of the work they had done and the difference they had made for the good of the country.“It was helpful to hear him talk about it and to share some time with one another,” Ms. Sebelius said. “We had a pretty amazing group of people who came to serve this president, and I think all of us felt good about that. Terrible about the election result, but good about that.”Still, Mr. Obama’s efforts to accentuate the positive and the orderly passing of the baton are, in some sense, all the more jarring to members of his team who want nothing more than to hear him rail against Mr. Trump and all that he represents.“Everyone who worked so hard on these issues is feeling an actual sense of loss and, because of the unexpected nature of this, like something was really yanked away from us,” said one former official who attended Wednesday’s party. “And now the president can’t be the voice for the Obama community at the time that it’s needed the most. It’s really disorienting.”