http://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/04/style/in-the-far-west-village-a-bleecker-street-makeover.html
In the Far West Village, a Bleecker Street Makeover - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,BLEECKER STREET (NYC),APPAREL,RETAIL STORES AND TRADE
Dec. 4, 2001
7694
In the annals of New York real estate at the turn of this century, the name Oliver Dow could go down on a list of the very well-fated. Two years ago, Mr. Dow and his wife were looking for a new home when they came across a building on the corner of Bleecker and West 11th Streets, a few feet away from the Magnolia Bakery. Assuming he could bring a shopkeeper to the ground floor, Mr. Dow figured he would be able to afford to buy the building without having to subsist on cornmeal.''I was looking for someone with an investment-banker husband who wanted to sell a few candles,'' Mr. Dow said. Then one day, he got a call from Robert Duffy, the president of Marc Jacobs. ''If there is a space on Bleecker and 11th, I want it,'' Mr. Dow said, recalling the fashion executive's words. Mr. Duffy, whose company is backed by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, immediately outbid five other prospective tenants and began renovations.''If I could have 20 stores on Bleecker Street, I would,'' Mr. Duffy remarked one afternoon last week.By midwinter he will have three. There is the shop at 403 Bleecker Street, in the space leased from Mr. Dow, which opened as the Marc Jacobs men's shop a year ago. In October it reopened to house Marc, Mr. Jacobs's secondary line, for women, while the men's shop moved to a larger space next door. In February, a third shop, that will sell Mr. Jacobs's shoes and handbags, will open on the corner of Perry Street.Prompted by the LVMH investment in the area, and by rents that are still reasonable by Manhattan standards, far west Bleecker Street, between Charles Street and Abingdon Square, has become the latest stretch of the city given over to the business of rarefied fashion. Just after Labor Day, Lulu Guinness, a British handbag designer, opened her first American shop, between Perry and West 11th Streets. The store, which traffics in $500 evening purses modeled after flowerpots and cottages out of an English drawing-room comedy, replaced an emporium that specialized in incense.In August, Basiques arrived a few doors to the east. Its owner, Sheri Falk, a former publicist who had spent a number of years living in Paris, wanted a space to sell Parisian-looking shirtdresses, skirts and French-made linens of her own creation, all in white, red or black. When something called the Gift Shop opened in the spring on Bleecker, just west of Christopher Street, Ms. Falk wondered whether she should be considering some other spot. With a vinyl minidress affixed with a dog collar now in the store window, the Gift Shop attracts people whose mating practices are not generally associated with dinner and a movie starring Tom Hanks.But then Mr. Jacobs and his world of the coolly reiterated 1960's, 70's and 80's made its incursion. ''When I saw the financial commitment Marc Jacobs was making in the area, I knew my instincts were right,'' Ms. Falk said as she held a small charity event for the Urban Justice Center in her store last Thursday evening.Two months after she opened her shop, Fresh, also a subsidiary of LVMH and a purveyor of soy-milk soaps and other costly bath products, had made its way to Bleecker  between Perry and West 11th Streets. The neighborhood's true distinction as a posh shopping place came arguably a few weeks ago when it was visited by transvestite shoplifters, who absconded with some Lulu Guinness cosmetic totes. Now, Charlotte Guess, the manager of the store, said shopkeepers alert one another to suspicious browsers by calling one another and saying the word ''birdcage,'' into the phone. Although French and American country antiques stores began sprouting on Bleecker Street west of Seventh Avenue in the 1960's, most famously Pierre Deux, it is still an area monopolized by offerings of rainbow kites, kaleidoscopes, wooden giraffes, Earth Day cards, articulated dinosaurs and earrings that could brush one's collarbone.In the minds of those who have come lately, though, the advantage of Bleecker Street is that it is not SoHo. ''So many customers hated our store in SoHo,'' Mr. Duffy said of the Marc Jacobs shop on Mercer Street, which houses the designer's main women's collection. ''When we opened the store on Mercer Street, there was no Mercer hotel, nothing,'' Mr. Duffy said. ''We have so many visible clients, and once it became a heavily trafficked street they became less comfortable.''Those clients asked to come instead to the designer's Midtown showroom. ''I don't want them to come to a showroom,'' Mr. Duffy said. ''I want them to come to a store and pay retail.'' He has found that some clients are now placing orders on Bleecker Street for the main women's collection, where dresses made to look like those of schoolgirls can cost $1,400 -- ostensibly to avoid the throngs of passers-by in Rockports who fill SoHo. When Mr. Duffy finds a space large enough, he plans to move the higher-end shop to Bleecker Street as well.In the parlance of Manhattan real estate agents, the far corners of Bleecker Street are ''this year's NoLIta,'' also a neighborhood that began the last century as a haven for Italian immigrants and entered into a new one as a mecca for the fashionably acquisitive. ''NoLIta was wonderful at $40 to $50 a square foot,'' Caroline Banker, an executive at Insignia Douglas Elliman's retail division, said, referring to monthly rents. A year ago, when rents nearly tripled from those rates, storefronts on the west end of Bleecker could still be had for $100, while rents in SoHo were more than double that per square foot, Ms. Banker said.What has also made Bleecker Street appealing to stores like Fresh, which replaced a beauty parlor of the sort that had overhead dryers, is the reality of so much disposable income in the West Village. On Saturday, when the weather made New York feel more like Santa Monica, one could find Village dwellers like Sam Tabar, a young lawyer, and his lanky girlfriend shopping at the Marc Jacobs men's store, which was filled with square-jawed men and their dogs. The two were on their usual weekend trajectory west from Magnolia Bakery, which, in recent months, has increasingly become a congregating point for men and women who style themselves in the hope that they will be mistaken for Lenny Kravitz or someone who used to date Beck.Although the Bleecker Street shops suffered in the weeks following the attack on the World Trade Center, on Saturday it seemed a bit harder to support the conventional wisdom that the downtown marketplace is horribly afflicted, that shopping is now anathema to most New Yorkers, that  tourists no longer come. A couple from Detroit left Fresh with full shopping bags. Two sisters, Connell Pinckney and Elizabeth Drake, from North Carolina and Vermont, respectively, arrived at Basiques with their mother, a Floridian, who had just purchased a hair ornament at Lulu Guinness. The women had not seriously thought about abandoning their annual Manhattan shopping trip, Ms. Pinckney said.Not long after, Emily Zorbibe, a visitor from Paris, was browsing at Lulu Guinness with a full shopping bag from Marc Jacobs on her arm. Candida Smith, who lives around the block, entered on a mission to buy a purse for her stepdaughter. ''You know, I walk this block everyday to take food to the Sixth Precinct or take my kids to school,'' she told the store manager, who was wearing a full-length skirt and a fresh orchid in her hair. ''Today was the first day I looked up and noticed what was here.''