https://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/12/world/asia/12korea.html
Former North Korean Agent Makes Public Appearance - The New York Times
North Korea,Espionage,Kim Hyon Hui,Japan,Kidnapping,Women,Bombs and Explosives,Aso  Taro,Kim Jong Il,Taguchi  Yaeko
March 11, 2009
9919
SEOUL — A notorious former North Korean spy who confessed to a passenger-jet bombing   in 1987 met Wednesday with relatives of a Japanese woman abducted by North Korea 30 years ago,  in an encounter that shed little of the hoped-for  light on the missing woman’s  fate  but was expected to increase already rising tensions with Pyongyang.The abducted woman had tutored the female spy in Japanese language and culture, enabling the spy to pose as a Japanese tourist and plant the bomb. The ensuing crash killed 115 people, most of them South Koreans. The spy, Kim Hyon-hui, was sentenced to death in the case but eventually pardoned and used in propaganda against the North. She has lived in seclusion for many years.The meeting was her  first public appearance  in almost 20 years and drew intense news coverage in Japan and South Korea.In Tokyo, the government of Prime Minister Taro Aso said it helped arrange the meeting in the hope that Ms. Kim might provide fresh information about the woman who tutored her,  Yaeko Taguchi, that could be used to press the North Korean government on other cases.  In 2002, North Korea admitted to kidnapping 13 Japanese citizens to help train its spies. It allowed five to return to Japan that year but said the others had died — an assertion Tokyo has not accepted.But on Wednesday, Ms. Kim, 47, delivered no new information.At a news conference in the southern city of Busan, she said that she had “heard” in 1987 that Ms. Taguchi had been “sent somewhere” and that she had “assumed” at the time that she was still alive. But she did not refute the North Korean claim that Ms. Taguchi had died in a car accident in 1986.Still, Koichiro Iizuka, Ms. Taguchi’s 32-year-old son, said after  meeting Ms. Kim that he was convinced his mother was alive.Ms. Kim also used the occasion to try  to dispel years of speculation about her identity by stressing that she was indeed an agent who planted the bomb on a Korean Air Boeing 707, which  exploded near Myanmar and killed all aboard.“I am not a fake,” she said. “It was an act of terror by North Korea.”She and an accomplice were apprehended in Bahrain, after they had planted the bomb and left the flight. Both took poison; only Ms. Kim survived.She was extradited to South Korea, where she was sentenced to death, but leaders in Seoul pardoned her and portrayed her as an innocent duped by the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, into attempting to disrupt the 1988 Seoul Olympics.Ms. Kim eventually married a South Korean intelligence officer who had investigated her and has written several best-selling books.By late Wednesday, there was no reaction from North Korea about Ms. Kim’s appearance, but analysts predicted that the public reminder of that incident and the abductions would irritate Pyongyang.“This meeting is not good for North Korea-Japan relations,“ said Kim Yong-hyun, a North Korea expert at Dongguk University in Seoul. Also, he said, “this is not good for South Korea-North Korea relations.”