https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/27/world/asia/chinese-family-in-forced-abortion-case-still-under-pressure.html
Forced to Abort, Chinese Woman Under Pressure - The New York Times
Feng Jianmei,China,Abortion,Birth Control and Family Planning,Women and Girls,Communist Party of China
June 26, 2012
3583
BEIJING — A woman who was forced by local officials to abort a seven-month-old fetus this month and whose case has spurred a national discussion about China’s one-child policy said on Tuesday that she was “under a lot of pressure” and was being watched by guards in a hospital, who do not allow her to leave.The woman, Feng Jianmei, has been in a county hospital in Shaanxi Province since her child, a girl, was stillborn after officials induced labor on June 2. Ms. Feng’s sister-in-law, also at the hospital, said Tuesday that her brother — Ms. Feng’s husband — was beaten last week and that local officials had led peasants in a march to denounce the family members as “traitors.”The reported harassment came despite the fact that local officials were punished for the forced abortion after a photograph of the bedridden mother and the bloody fetus was posted on the Internet in mid-June. Xinhua, the state news agency, reported Tuesday night that after an investigation, two county-level or lower officials were fired, and five others received warnings or demerits. The report also said the county government had been ordered to give a living subsidy to Ms. Feng.Ms. Feng’s case has been a topic of intense discussion on the Internet.Hu Xijin, the chief editor of Global Times, a state-run newspaper that often prints nationalistic editorials, wrote on his microblog on June 12 that what Ms. Feng had endured was “barbaric.”“We should promote civilized family planning,” he wrote. “However, I am against using this one incident to reject China’s family planning policies. Family planning has served China rather than harmed it.”In a telephone interview on Tuesday, her voice filled with exhaustion, Ms. Feng, 23, said: “My body is slowly recovering. I still have headaches. I’m not allowed to leave the hospital.”“The hospital staff brings us food three times a day,” she added. “The food is O.K. But I feel I’m under a lot of pressure.”Ms. Feng has been in the hospital with her 5-year-old daughter and sister-in-law, Deng Jicai. Ms. Feng’s husband, Deng Jiyuan, had been missing since Saturday, when he left the hospital to talk with county officials, but Ms. Deng said she got a call from her brother on Tuesday afternoon saying he was safe. He refused to tell her where he was, she added. The family is from the village of Yuping in Zengjia township of Zhenping County, and family members say officials from both the township and county have been harassing them.Local officials could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.The Chinese state news media reported that officials had visited Ms. Feng and apologized to her.But on Friday, when Mr. Deng tried to go to Beijing to see a civil rights lawyer and sit for a television interview, he was stopped by men in cars and beaten up, Ms. Deng said.After the forced abortion, Mr. Deng opened a microblog account and began recounting the family’s ordeal. He and other family members said Ms. Feng was abducted by family planning officials after she refused to pay a $6,300 fine for her second pregnancy.A post on Mr. Deng’s microblog on Monday by a younger brother said local officials led a parade of peasants in denouncing the family. They carried a banner that said “traitors” and yelled out, “Take down Deng Jiyuan.”Asked whether she planned to have a second child, Ms. Feng said: “That depends on how my body recovers. Yes, if I can get my health back.”