https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/27/us/politics/revamped-healthcaregov-opens-with-new-tools-for-gauging-true-cost-of-insurance.html
Revamped HealthCare.Gov Opens With New Tools for Gauging True Cost of Insurance - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),HealthCare.gov,Health and Human Services Department,Obama  Barack,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Oct. 26, 2015
9313
WASHINGTON —  Consumers on Monday began shopping online for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act on a newly remodeled version of HealthCare.gov that worked more or less as promised by the government.Entering the health act’s third open enrollment season, the site offered consumers a relatively easy way to renew coverage they had this year through the marketplace established by President Obama’s signature domestic achievement. A new feature of the website allows consumers to get an estimate of their total costs under different health plans, depending on whether they expect to use a low, medium or high volume of medical services in 2016. Consumers can begin purchasing plans Nov. 1.“The website now has a cost calculator,” said Robert M. Krughoff, the president of the Center for the Study of Services, also known as Consumers’ Checkbook. “That’s a big improvement.”At the same time, Mr. Krughoff said, “it’s strange that the website does not allow you to sort plans by total costs.”The Obama administration said that eight in 10 consumers returning to HealthCare.gov would be able to find health insurance with a premium less than $100 a month, after taking account of subsidies. And seven in 10 can obtain insurance for less than $75 a month, officials said.In states served by the federal insurance exchange, the premium for a benchmark “silver” plan will increase by an average of 7.5 percent, the administration said. However, to save money and avoid a larger increase in premiums, consumers must, in many states, switch to a different plan offered by a different insurance company.When they switch plans, consumers have no guarantee that they can keep their doctors, and to get low premiums, they sometimes will have to accept a more limited choice of physicians and hospitals.A snapshot issued Monday by the Department of Health and Human Services shows that the premium for a benchmark silver plan will increase next year by about 35 percent in Montana and Oklahoma, 32 percent in Alaska and 25 percent in New Mexico and South Dakota. But premiums for the benchmark plan will decline by 13 percent in Indiana, 8 percent in Mississippi and 1 percent in Ohio and Maine.When a consumer searches for health plans on the federal website, the results are listed in order of price — the premium — from the cheapest to the most expensive. But consumers can also see plans ranked by deductible, or the amount they must pay up front before the insurance begins to pay.In the last two years, the federal marketplace tended to steer people toward health plans with the lowest premiums, even though such plans often had such high out-of-pocket costs that consumers ended up spending more.“The administration is making progress,” said Jocelyn A. Guyer, a health policy analyst at the law firm Manatt, Phelps & Phillips. “The new website helps consumers understand the importance of looking beyond premiums to consider deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs when selecting a plan.”The information posted Monday at HealthCare.gov indicates that many insurers are trying to hold down premiums by requiring consumers to pay high deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs — a trend cited with concern by supporters of the Affordable Care Act, including Hillary Rodham Clinton, and by critics.For people in Portland, Me., the website offers a choice of 31 health plans — 11 low-cost bronze plans, 15 midlevel silver plans and five more costly gold plans — sold by Anthem, Harvard Pilgrim and Community Health Options, a nonprofit cooperative.For a 30-year-old man in Portland, the benchmark silver plan has a premium of about $250 a month. But the deductible is $4,000 a year, and consumers may have to pay as much as $6,000 in out-of-pocket costs, not counting premiums.In Kingsport, Tenn., consumers have a choice of 42 health plans — 28 sold by BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, six by Cigna and eight by the United Health Group.For a 40-year-old woman in a low-cost silver plan, the premium is about $290 a month, and the deductible is $4,000. The website estimates that costs under the plan, including premiums, deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses, could total $4,500 a year for a person using a moderate amount of medical care and $10,000 for a person using a large amount.Subsidies, in the form of tax credits, tend to smooth out large differences in premiums from state to state, according to the new website. For a 45-year-old woman with income of $45,000 in Juneau, Alaska, the cheapest silver plan will have a premium of about $770 a month, but she can obtain a subsidy of $450 a month, reducing her premium to $320 a month, the site says.A woman of the same age with the same income in Chicago would not receive a subsidy, but would have a much larger selection of plans and could find a silver plan for $220 a month, the site says.