https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/world/asia/china-panama-papers.html
China Censors Mentions of ‘Panama Papers’ Leaks - The New York Times
Panama Papers,Censorship,China,Panama,International Consortium of Investigative Journalists,Tax Evasion,China Digital Times,Mossack Fonseca & Co,Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China
April 5, 2016
9842
HONG KONG — The release of the “Panama Papers” is setting off a political firestorm the world over, prompting protests calling for the resignation of Iceland’s prime minister and drawing stern replies from the Kremlin.But in China, where the names of relatives of several top leaders have been found in the leak of millions of pages of documents from a Panamanian law firm that expose the murky world of offshore companies, most citizens will never hear of the news, which the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released on Sunday.Censors have been working hard to ensure that news of the leaks does not penetrate China’s “Great Firewall” of Internet controls. Searches using the Chinese characters for “Panama” early on Tuesday on Weibo, China’s equivalent to Twitter, turned up information on regulations for importing fruit, including some from Panama. But by the afternoon in Beijing, queries resulted in the following terse message: “Sorry, searches for ‘Panama’ came up with no relevant results.”A censorship notice sent by a Chinese provincial Internet office told editors to delete reports on the leaks, according to China Digital Times, a website affiliated with the University of California, Berkeley, that monitors the Chinese Internet.“If material from foreign media attacking China is found on any website, it will be dealt with severely,” the notice said. China Digital Times said it did not name the body issuing the notice to protect its source.The top censored phrases monitored on Monday on Weibo by the University of Hong Kong’s Weiboscope all appeared to be related to the Panama Papers: tax evasion, file, leaked, Putin and company.The leaks, from the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca, show that relatives or business partners of several current and former members of China’s ruling Politburo were tied to offshore companies that had the effect of obscuring their ownership interests.Surely the most politically sensitive leak, for China’s censors, was the revelation that Deng Jiagui, the brother-in-law of President Xi Jinping, had set up two British Virgin Islands-registered companies through Mossack Fonseca in 2009, when Mr. Xi was vice president but already marked as the heir apparent for the country’s top position.The consortium did not find what the two companies — Best Effect Enterprises and Wealth Ming International — were used for, and by the time Mr. Xi became China’s top leader in late 2012, the companies were dormant, reported the group, based in Washington.The new revelations add to previous exposés of Mr. Deng, who is married to Mr. Xi’s older sister, Qi Qiaoqiao. In 2012, Bloomberg News reported on the vast business empire built by Mr. Deng and Ms. Qi both inside China and through offshore companies that amounted to hundreds of millions of dollars. In early 2014, the consortium’s first report from leaked offshore accounts also turned up information on an offshore company where Mr. Deng was an owner.Another politically powerful Chinese couple that had been the subject of previous revelations by the consortium was Li Xiaolin, the daughter of the former premier Li Peng, and Ms. Li’s husband, Liu Zhiyuan. The Panama Papers leaks showed that Ms. Li and Mr. Liu were the owners of a foundation based in Liechtenstein that in turn owned a company in the British Virgin Islands, Cofic Investments. A lawyer for Cofic told Mossack Fonseca that the company’s profits came from helping the law firm’s other clients export heavy machinery from Europe to China, the consortium reported.Ms. Li’s name has turned up in each of the three exposés by the consortium on leaked offshore accounts and Swiss bank accounts that have been published in the past two years. Last year, she and Mr. Liu were listed as the owners of a Swiss bank account that held as much as $2.5 million.Another relative of a top leader revealed to have offshore accounts is Jasmine Li Zidan, the granddaughter of Jia Qinglin, a former member of the Politburo Standing Committee. Ms. Li’s father, Li Botan, was a central figure in a report last year by The New York Times on the political ties of the Dalian Wanda Group chairman, Wang Jianlin. Companies linked to Mr. Li made hundreds of millions of dollars in capital gains from their holdings in Wanda property and entertainment enterprises.One of the few mainland news outlets to mention the Panama Papers was Global Times, a newspaper run by the Chinese Communist Party.In a commentary published on Tuesday, the newspaper questioned the lack of a named source for the documents, and the Chinese version of the article suggested that Western intelligence agencies could easily slip fake information into such a large trove of records.The article accused the Western news media of using the leaks for ideological purposes by attacking President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. It said that Iceland’s prime minister, who is under fire after the leaks disclosed that he and the woman who is now his wife set up a British Virgin Islands company in 2007, was an insignificant figure by comparison.“The Western media has taken control of the interpretation each time there has been such a document dump, and Washington has demonstrated particular influence in it,” Global Times wrote. “Information that is negative to the U.S. can always be minimized, while exposure of non-Western leaders, such as Putin, can get extra spin.”The Global Times article omitted any information about the leaks pertaining to Chinese leaders.