https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/fashion/mens-style/andre-royo-the-wire-los-angeles-home.html
A Tour of Andre Royo’s Los Angeles Home - The New York Times
The Wire (Movie),Empire (Movie),Royo  Andre,Interior Design and Furnishings
Jan. 9, 2017
4366
Age 48Occupation Actor, “The Wire,” “Empire” and most recently as the star of the film “Hunter Gatherer”Location Los AngelesFavorite Room The living room of the 600-square-foot apartment he shares with his wife and teenage daughter in the Highland Park neighborhood. The small dimensions remind him of his roots in the Bronx, but the view is pure Los Angeles. “Three windows that look out to palm trees,” Mr. Royo said. “My wife loves light.”Did you have a hand in choosing the place and decorating? Because I’m away a lot, I said to my wife, “You get to pick the place.” Happy wife, happy life. That’s the rule. I’m not going to lie — I thought we were going backwards, like Benjamin Button or something. It’s like some tiny New York apartment. Before I could say it’s a little tiny, she said, “We’re living here.”I do see your influence, though. Like the Calvin and Hobbes artwork. I love the comic strip. It’s a reminder to stay young at heart, stay exploring, don’t take everything so seriously. We wanted to hide the thermostat. I told my wife, “We’re going to hide the thermostat and we’re going to be reminded to keep it fresh.”What do you like to do when you’re back from a shoot? There’s a white table; it’s right next to a bookshelf. I sit there. It’s the area that gets me and allows me to be me without judgment. I kind of feel like I’m back from all my travels. I can take off all the masks in this space. I ain’t got to talk about how the set was, how I should’ve had more lines. What’s important here is being a good husband, being a good dad.Tell me about this doll of Bubbles, your character from “The Wire.” Dolls are usually for the Marvel Universe, the pop-culture phenomenon movies. I was on Twitter and saw this guy made a Bubbles doll. A Bubbles doll? I got to have it. I contacted the guy. I was like, “This is Bubbles.” “The Wire” was one of those shows that was overlooked by the masses. We may have never gotten an Emmy or a Golden Globe. But I got a doll.