http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/21/us/politics/jeb-bush-promises-to-curb-lobbying-and-cut-size-of-government.html
Jeb Bush Vows to Curb Lobbying and Trim Government - The New York Times
Bush  Jeb,Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Government Employees,Organized Labor,Republican Party
July 20, 2015
1515
Jeb Bush, who entered the 2016 presidential campaign vowing to wage war on a bloated and self-serving Washington establishment, outlined a wide-ranging plan on Monday to rein in the size of the federal government and curb the influence of lobbyists who live off it.Portraying himself as a political outsider — despite his family’s 12 years in the White House — Mr. Bush called for a 10 percent reduction in the federal work force, an immediate hiring freeze, a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget and a six-year waiting period before members of Congress can lobby on Capitol Hill.“We need to help politicians rediscover life outside of Washington,” Mr. Bush said at a speech in Tallahassee, Fla., not far from the state house where he was governor for eight years. “Which — who knows? — might even be a pleasant surprise for them.”His proposals, modeled on his record as a budget-cutting governor, amounted to a pointed rebuttal to his rivals for the Republican nomination, who have questioned the depth of his conservatism, and an assault on the culture of Congress, which remains deeply unpopular with American voters.His most provocative idea: docking pay for members of the House and Senate when they are absent from work.Much of his agenda would, of course, face stiff resistance in a fractious Congress and a powerful lobbying industry could present a set of obstacles Mr. Bush rarely faced as governor, when the Republican Party dominated state government.“Unrealistic,” was the diagnosis of former Representative Thomas Reynolds of New York, when asked about the stricter congressional lobbying ban and punitive measures for missed votes. Trying to “tell Congress how to run itself I think it will be a futile exercise.”Anticipating such resistance, Mr. Bush used his address, delivered before a screen emblazoned with the words “Reform D.C.,” to hold up Washington as a model of unyielding dysfunction.“The overspending, the overreaching, the arrogance, and the sheer incompetence in that city — these problems have been with us so long that they are sometimes accepted as facts of life,” Mr. Bush said. “But a president should never accept them, and I will not.”Mr. Bush said his policies could reduce the size of the federal work force by 10 percent in four years. Much of that, he said, would be accomplished through attrition and a strict system of replacing every three departing federal workers with one new employee.In a proposal likely to be greeted with deep opposition from federal workers and the unions that represent them, Mr. Bush demanded changes to the Civil Service system that would make it far easier to punish and replace employees.“There are a lot of exemplary employees in the federal government, but they’re treated no better than the bad ones,” Mr. Bush said. “And the bad ones are almost impossible to effectively discipline or remove.”But he held out a carrot along with the stick: merit pay and bigger raises for high-performing workers and managers who save money for the government.Diana Furchtgott-Roth, a former chief economist at the Department of Labor and a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a conservative think tank, said that Mr. Bush’s plan for overhauling Civil Service rules was practical and overdue. The federal government, she said, has long protected workers whose skills are no longer in need and whose roles are unnecessary.But she predicted that the influential labor organizations who represent those workers would angrily protest. “Jeb Bush will definitely have a battle with those unions,” she said.Elements of Mr. Bush’s agenda seemed at odds with the campaign he is running. For example, Mr. Bush took direct aim at K Street, Washington’s collection of lobbying firms that have long employed former lawmakers to do the bidding of major corporations.He proposed heightened levels of disclosure that would require members of Congress to use their websites to report every meeting with a lobbyist on a weekly basis. And his six-year ban on lobbying for United States lawmakers is far tougher than the current requirement: one year for members of the House, two for those in the Senate.But as a candidate, Mr. Bush has harnessed the fund-raising prowess of the K Street crowd, bringing in hundreds of thousands of dollars for his campaign through Washington lobbyists, political operatives, lawyers and business leaders.Despite accepting their donations, Mr. Bush insisted he is not interested in making friends with Washington’s power brokers, a fact that seemed clear from his punitive proposal to encourage members of Congress to show up for votes.“The reality,” he said, “is that Congress is in session for three days in a typical week anyway, so it’s not asking too much that every member be there and work on those days.”