https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/01/nyregion/port-authoritydelays-picking-builder-for-a-terminal-at-la-guardia.html
Port Authority Delays Picking Builder for a Terminal at La Guardia - The New York Times
LaGuardia Airport (Queens  NY),Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Airports,Stations and Terminals (Passenger),New York City
April 30, 2015
7680
The Central Terminal Building at La Guardia Airport, which has been derided as a “third world” eyesore, should be transformed into a grand portal that welcomes travelers into a unified airport, officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said on Thursday.Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the authority, used Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s oft-quoted description as he explained why a decision on who will rebuild the central terminal had been delayed for another month, until late May. Mr. Foye spoke at a meeting of the authority’s board of commissioners, the first held at the World Trade Center site since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.Two consortiums of developers have been waiting for several months to hear which of them will receive a contract worth close to $4 billion to rebuild the terminal. A decision appeared imminent last fall, just before New York’s governor, Andrew M. Cuomo, issued an open call for comprehensive designs for an overhaul of the airport.But on Thursday, Mr. Foye explained that the two bidders had acquiesced to a postponement and had been asked for their reactions to key elements of the plan being worked up by Mr. Cuomo’s design panel.Those ideas include having a main entrance to the airport with the central terminal serving as a “grand hall,” and a “connector” between that terminal and Terminal C, Mr. Foye said. Other elements of the redesign could include a “people mover” inside the airport, an “airtrain” to connect the airport to the subway system and a hotel with as many as 200 rooms, he said.Those ideas were among about a dozen outlined in a letter sent to Port Authority officials by Daniel Tishman, a construction company executive whom Mr. Cuomo appointed as chairman of the panel.John J. Degnan, the chairman of the authority’s board, said he thought the grand hall concept was a “neat idea.” But he said that neither he nor the members of the governor’s panel had any idea of what it might cost. Mr. Degnan said he expected Mr. Tishman to release his letter publicly on Thursday, but messages seeking a copy went unanswered.Mr. Degnan said the two bidders had been asked to estimate the cost of implementing the panel’s ideas. “I will refrain from speculating until I see what they have to say, but it raises questions for me,” Mr. Degnan said.While the authority mulls over the right recipe for an improved La Guardia, other expensive projects are bubbling up.On Thursday, the commissioners agreed to spend $40 million to study how to replace the AirTrain system that shuttles travelers and employees around Newark Liberty International Airport. The estimated cost of a new AirTrain is $1.6 billion to $2 billion, none of which is in the 10-year capital plan the authority adopted last year.During the meeting, in the new boardroom at 4 World Trade Center, commissioners expressed consternation at hearing that the 19-year-old AirTrain will essentially be obsolete by 2022 and that construction on a parallel system should begin within three years.The commissioners also heard an update on the plan to extend the PATH commuter train to Newark Liberty from downtown Newark. The estimated cost is $1.4 billion to $1.7 billion, but just $1 billion has been included in the capital plan for that project.The authority is operating under a policy of holding to its capital budgets, so any new project must be offset by eliminating other spending plans. The commissioners intend to revise the capital plan this summer to account for the AirTrain project and the rebuilding of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, which is not in the plan and has an estimated cost of $8 billion.During and after the meeting, the commissioners and Mr. Foye deflected questions about the investigation into whether former officials of the authority misused their offices to exact revenge against political enemies or to help themselves. Prosecutors are reportedly looking into whether David Samson, who preceded Mr. Degnan as chairman, pressured United Airlines to operate a “chairman’s flight” between Newark and South Carolina, where he has a weekend home.Mr. Degnan did make a joke about the situation. When a New Jersey legislator complained about the board’s meetings being held on Thursdays instead of Wednesdays, Mr. Degnan said, “We were trying to accommodate the chairman’s flight.”