https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/19/fashion/weddings/bridget-nugent-and-dean-reineking-embracing-an-adventure-of-a-lifetime.html
Bridget Nugent and Dean Reineking: Embracing an Adventure of a Lifetime - The New York Times
Vows (Times Column),Weddings and Engagements
July 17, 2015
8429
Growing up in Massapequa, N.Y., Bridget Nugent lived less than a block from the Great South Bay, in a Victorian house with a conch-shell-like turret, several balconies, a wide front porch and 75 windows, many with pale blue or yellow stained-glass panes, like weathered sea glass you might find on the beach.Living in the house was an adventure. Occasionally, birds or squirrels would fall down the chimney, landing in a pile of soot. The house has creaky wood floors, and what the family says is at least one ghost, a nice one who mainly inhabits the kitchen, cooking apple pies. The smell of apples will mysteriously and suddenly fill the house, they say. “My mother calls it the ‘apple pie ghost,’ ” said Ms. Nugent, 27.Her parents, Clare and Kevin Nugent, bought the place in the mid-1980s, when it was so dilapidated that every window was broken and overgrown prickly bushes prevented anyone from reaching the front door.The former owners collected cars and car parts. “There were 22 cars in the backyard that were sunk down to the wheels,” Kevin Nugent said. “They were all Cadillacs, late 1950s Cadillacs. Each individual room was a particular Cadillac part, so there was one room that was all Cadillac fenders — big, huge chrome fenders. The front room was a pile of starter motors, and one room was just steering wheels.”Ms. Nugent and her younger sisters, Erin and Mollie, grew up repairing the house alongside their parents. “I don’t balk at any kind of work,” said Ms. Nugent, who looks like Kate Hudson and speaks in succinct, grammatically correct sentences. “I saw my parents put love and heart into everything. They would tackle a project and figure out how to fix it.”In the family, she was the one most interested in overachieving.As an undergraduate at Georgetown University, she studied Chinese, economics and medicine; worked as an emergency medical technician; ran marathons; and wrote extra papers for classes if she didn’t feel challenged enough.“There’s a lot of people who will do anything to succeed, and she will,” the bride’s mother said. “She just works and works and works, but she will not give up on her soul. She believes in doing what’s right. I’m so proud she’s been able to hold on to that.”Nicholas Giaquinto, a childhood friend who was once banned from the Nugent house after he tried to climb a ladder into Ms. Nugent’s bedroom, ostensibly to help her deal with a mouse, added: “She is so bright. She walks into a room and she lights it up. She’s happy, and she transfers her energy very well.”After graduating from the University of Notre Dame Law School, Ms. Nugent moved to Miami in August 2013 to begin a yearlong clerkship for a federal judge.One night, she attended a get-together at St. Augustine, a Roman Catholic church adjoining the University of Miami campus. There, she met Dean B. Reineking, who was working toward a master’s degree in architecture at the university. “He had just come back from a run so he was glowing and very confident,” she said.In his family, Mr. Reineking, now 28, is known for being diligent and meticulous in everything he does, from building campfires to drawing maps. Like Ms. Nugent, he rarely slows down.“He’s very motivated, very adventurous,” said Jessica Dalimata, his younger sister. “He’s not the type of person who would go on vacation and sit on the beach. He would want to be up at 6 in the morning hiking and mountain climbing and rafting. He just needed someone who would be up for that level of activity and adventure all the time, and Bridget definitely is.”Mr. Reineking and Ms. Nugent became friends, and one night he invited her to look for alligators while carrying flashlights and riding bikes along the border of a swamp. “It’s dark, it’s spooky,” said Mr. Reineking, who grew up in Memphis and took his Boy Scout training so seriously that he rarely forgets to bring matches on any outing. “But she was willing to go, and we were laughing the whole time.”He was more fearless and honest, Ms. Nugent said, than any guy she had ever known. “When he asked me out, he said: ‘I would like to take you out on a date. Would you go to dinner with me?’ ” she said. “He gave such clear signals at every stage of the relationship. That to me was unbelievable. I would love to be able to write a letter to my younger self: ‘You don’t have to stress. You don’t have to worry. You’ll find it. You’ll find love.’ ”She added, “After three dates, he said, ‘I really, deeply appreciate your companionship and I would like to be your boyfriend.’ Everything you think a man would be afraid to say, he said, and because of that I thought of him as even more of a man. So I said, ‘That’s exactly what I want.’ ”At the end of the school year in late May 2014, he left for Washington, where he now works for David Schwartz Architects. Before leaving, she said, he told her that he was in it for the long haul.He also devised an elaborate scavenger hunt for her that included one clue in Morse code and another that involved nautical coordinates and a beautiful antique-looking compass he found on eBay. He gave her one clue a week all summer.He was visiting her three months later in Miami, on Aug. 22, when she completed the last clue, which led to a buried tackle box on the golf course of the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, where the two often ran together and once carved their initials into a tree (they remain).Inside the box, she found mementos from their relationship like cough drops (he had had a cold when they first met), a wine cork from their first date, seashells from a kayaking trip and a proposal letter wrapped in several plastic bags. As she read the letter, he proposed aloud. “She didn’t say yes,” he said. “She said, ‘That would be the adventure of a lifetime.’ ”Ms. Nugent had always wanted to have her wedding reception in the backyard of her parents’ house, but there was one problem. In October 2012, Hurricane Sandy had nearly destroyed the place.Her parents remained at home during the storm, which they later regretted. “We were standing on our second floor and we saw the ocean surge come straight toward us,” the bride’s mother said. “I have never seen a force of nature like I did that day. When the water receded, we actually had the Atlantic Ocean running through the bottom of our house.”The house didn’t have electricity or heat for months. “It was just the two of us and a candle,” the bride’s mother said. Their Christmas card that year was a picture of them, wrapped in a Red Cross blanket, with the caption, “Merry Christmas and Keep Warm.”The neighborhood was covered with debris: fallen trees, wrecked docks, a pile of smashed sailboats, kitchen utensils and clothes flung about, a piano on someone’s lawn. “It was immediate acceptance of the surreal,” said Ms. Nugent, who will soon join Latham & Watkins, a law firm in Washington, as a litigation associate.By the time Ms. Nugent and Mr. Reineking began planning their wedding last fall, her parents’ yard was still a mess. The house, with cracks in the walls, a sunken foundation and a front door that wouldn’t open, was unlivable by many people’s standards.Her parents had been working on it, but the damages were overwhelming to the point of being paralyzing. Yet the kitchen continued to occasionally fill up with the smell of apples.Determined to have their reception at the house and wanting to help, Ms. Nugent and Mr. Reineking traveled to Massapequa almost every weekend for the last nine months to pitch in with repairs. They found an ad for free dirt on Craigslist, cleared and leveled the backyard, planted flower gardens and arranged rocks that had rolled in with the ocean to create borders.Using wood from a busted dock that had washed up, the couple built a bar that eventually stood at the entrance to their wedding reception. They also repurposed pallet boards found in the backyard debris and used them to create centerpieces for the dinner tables — wooden boxes that contained seashells, sand, candles and bottles of wine.They rebuilt the brick steps leading to the house, fixed the foundation and got the front door to open. “It’s been like the phoenix rising,” the bride’s mother said.On July 11, after a wedding ceremony officiated by Msgr. James McNamara at St. Martin of Tours Church in Amityville, N.Y., the bride, groom and 190 guests gathered in the backyard — on a bright green new lawn — under a clear blue sky.In the days before the wedding, the house and yard were full of friends and relatives helping however they could. An uncle of the bride showed up with a box of Christmas lights and hung them. Friends of the bride’s father arrived and set up a cigar and whiskey bar, their gift to the family. “My friend Mamie flew in from London and helped put tulle in random places to make it look whimsical and pretty,” the bride said.On the day of the wedding, all of the work showed in several ways. The bride had thistle scratches and poison ivy up and down her arms, as did Mollie Nugent, a bridesmaid, and several guests.“Marriage is between two people fundamentally,” the groom said. “But at the end of the day, the help you get from family and friends is so critical.”Read more: Katherine Vaz and Christopher Cerf: Kermit Will AttendDr. Jennifer Downey and Robert Reid: Yes, They Can Get a Witness