https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/01/nyregion/brooklyn-man-recalls-2013-beating-and-his-pleas-for-help.html
Brooklyn Man Recalls 2013 Beating and His Pleas for Help - The New York Times
Assaults,Shomrim Volunteer Patrol,Patterson  Taj,Brooklyn (NYC),Herskovic  Mayer,New York City,Jews and Judaism,Hasidism,Williamsburg (Brooklyn  NY)
Aug. 31, 2016
9741
A few days after Thanksgiving 2013, a woman was driving down Flushing Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, when suddenly, lurching from the street, a man ran toward her car, banging on her window and hollering for help. It was nearly 4:30 a.m. The man was young, black, terrified. The woman kept driving but quickly placed a call to 911.On Wednesday, the young man who had begged for her assistance, a former college student named Taj Patterson, told a judge what had happened just before the encounter and what happened after. Sitting on the witness stand in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, Mr. Patterson said he had been out at a birthday party the night before with friends. Early in the morning, he said, while walking home alone, he was set upon by a group of 15 or 20 Hasidic Jews. He testified that they beat and kicked him so badly that he eventually lost sight in one of his eyes.“I started getting punched in the face,” Mr. Patterson said, adding that at one point he managed to get in a couple of punches himself. “I got punched more, I was knocked down to the ground, I was tripped — they were kicking me.” In an almost distant tone, he went on: “I was kicked in the face. I was dragged. I was being held between cars. Fifteen other people were blocking my view from cars driving by.”Mr. Patterson, 25, gave this account at the trial of Mayer Herskovic, a member of Williamsburg’s Orthodox Jewish community and the only man so far to have stood trial in connection with the assault. A few months after the attack, prosecutors charged four other men along with Mr. Herskovic. Two of the men, Pinchas Braver and Abraham Winkler, pleaded guilty in May to a lesser charge of unlawful imprisonment and were sentenced to probation and community service. Two others, Aharon Hollender and Joseph Fried, had the charges against them dismissed after witnesses who had initially identified them changed their minds.Video surveillance footage introduced at the trial and witness statements have indicated that some of the men involved in the assault were associated with the shomrim, a Hasidic neighborhood watch group that serves Orthodox communities across New York. But there has been no direct evidence that Mr. Herskovic was a member of the shomrim.For much of the afternoon, Mr. Patterson, who was studying fashion marketing at the time of the assault, told his story to Justice Danny K. Chun, who is considering the case as a bench trial. After the night of drinking — Mr. Patterson said he had two margaritas, a shot of brandy and a bit of rum — the bus dropped him back in Brooklyn. It was around 4 a.m. and he decided to walk home to his apartment in Fort Greene.Not long after setting out, Mr. Patterson said he heard someone yelling at him from behind and turned to find a man chasing after him. Soon, he testified, the one man became two, the two became three. He tried to stop a car going by, he said, by banging on its window and calling out: “Can you please help me? Please stop!” But the car sped off — as did a second. Eventually, Mr. Patterson said, three Hasidic men grabbed him, pinned him against a chain-link fence and started beating him as perhaps a dozen more surrounded them.After the assault, he said he woke up at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn, uncertain of what had happened. When a friend handed him a mirror, he finally saw what he looked like. “My eye was the size of a tennis ball, swollen shut,” he said. “I didn’t realize I couldn’t see out of it until that moment.”On cross-examination, Mr. Herskovic’s lawyer, Israel Fried, tried to suggest that Mr. Patterson’s recollections from the evening were hazy because of alcohol. Mr. Patterson was unable to conclusively identify his attackers even in the early days after the assault. Mr. Fried questioned him many times about who specifically had chased him, who had pinned him to the gate and who had punched him. Mr. Patterson acknowledged that his memories were fuzzy and that Hasidic men “all look alike to me” because, as the fashion student in him put it, of the “uniformity of their ensembles.”Mr. Patterson was, however, sure about one thing. Tim Gough, the lead prosecutor in the case, played him a video surveillance clip from the night of the assault that showed him moving away from a large group of what looked to be Hasidic men.“What’s happening there, Mr. Patterson?” Mr. Gough asked.He said, “People are coming for me.”