https://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/25/nyregion/25polls.html
In Diverging New York Polls, Methods Mattered - The New York Times
Polls and Public Opinion,Elections,Quinnipiac University,Siena College,Marist College,New York State,Cuomo  Andrew M,Paladino  Carl P
Sept. 24, 2010
3339
The campaign for governor of New York was shaken up this week by the release of polls that offered vastly different impressions of the race more than six weeks before Election Day.On Wednesday, a poll by Quinnipiac University suggested a close race. Andrew M. Cuomo, the Democratic candidate, was supported by 49 percent of 751 likely voters, while the Republican, Carl P. Paladino, was backed by 43 percent.The next day, Siena College released a poll of 801 registered voters showing Mr. Cuomo with a 33-point lead over Mr. Paladino, 57 percent to 24 percent. That poll, unlike the Quinnipiac one, included Rick A. Lazio, who lost the Republican nomination to Mr. Paladino but remains on the ballot as the Conservative Party candidate. Eight percent of the voters polled by Siena said they were planning to vote for Mr. Lazio.On Friday, yet another poll was released, this one conducted by Marist College, which reported results for both registered voters and likely voters. It also suggested that Mr. Cuomo had considerably more support among voters than Mr. Paladino, although his margin shrank slightly when only those deemed likely to vote were included. Mr. Cuomo was supported by 52 percent of the 617 likely voters, Mr. Paladino was backed by 33 percent and Mr. Lazio got 9 percent.All three polls were done by telephone and were conducted after the Sept. 14 primary elections. They have comparable sample sizes, and all have margins of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. When similarly conducted polls have such discrepancies in results, they can be attributable to factors like voter definition, the order in which questions were asked and how the questions were worded.Quinnipiac and Marist have developed likely-voter models based on the respondents’ intention to vote and interest in politics. “Especially in an off-year election, it is important to take into account who is likely to actually vote,” said Douglas Schwartz, director of the Quinnipiac Poll.There are more older voters and more men among Quinnipiac’s likely voters — and to a lesser extent among the likely voters in the Marist Poll — than there were in the last election for governor, according to a 2006 exit poll conducted by Edison/Mitofsky. This could reduce a Democratic candidate’s lead.“We are finding men are more enthusiastic at this point in the campaign,” Dr.  Schwartz said.Siena College based its percentages on all registered voters without applying a likely-voter model. “This was a conscious choice — six weeks out and so many candidates are unknown to the voters,” said Steven A. Greenberg, the pollster at the Siena College Research Institute. “In October, we will move to the likely-voter screen.”An additional factor is the way each organization asks respondents to identify their party affiliation. Quinnipiac asks which party they identify with: 36 percent of the likely voters identified themselves as Democrats, and 22 percent said they were Republican. The rest were independent or something else.Siena and Marist ask respondents about their party registration. The Siena poll, which weights its data to match party enrollment records for the state, had 48 percent registered Democrats and 24 percent registered Republicans.The Marist Poll does not weight its data by party but found similar party numbers: 46 percent of likely voters were registered Democrats, and 33 percent were Republicans. There are other variations in weighting. For example, Marist adjusts for voter turnout by county in statewide elections, which Quinnipiac and Siena do not.“Things are too volatile at this point to pin down the race with any single poll,” said Monika L. McDermott, an associate professor of political science at Fordham University who is experienced in polling. “In a situation like this, poll methods have much more influence over the results. Later in the campaign, once people get to know Paladino better, and things settle down, these differences should diminish.”