http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/us/politics/gary-johnson-libertarian-big-moment.html
Gary Johnson Sees This Election as the Libertarians’ Big Moment - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Johnson  Gary E,Libertarian Party (US),New Mexico
Aug. 23, 2016
6666
TAOS, N.M. — Voters may wonder whether the fire in Gary Johnson’s belly burns hottest for recreation. If he doesn’t win the presidency, the Libertarian Party nominee plans to ski 120 days next year.His support in the polls is a little shy of 10 percent, suggesting he’ll get that chance. Yet Mr. Johnson, the former Republican governor of New Mexico, is hoping to have an impact, if only by hastening the fall of his old party and the rise of his new one as a national political force.“That’s going to be the consequence of what we do, at a minimum,” Mr. Johnson said in a breakfast interview near his mountain home here.He wears bicycle gear after riding 14 miles uphill to reach the restaurant. For Mr. Johnson, that’s a respite from the cross-country media blitz he hopes will lift him to the 15 percent threshold required to qualify for presidential debates with the Democratic and Republican nominees, Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump, beginning next month.Mr. Johnson has always looked different from other politicians. He began his government career after building a successful construction business, winning New Mexico’s governorship as a limited-government Republican in 1994. Over two terms he cut state spending, vetoed hundreds of bills and took pride in having “never raised a penny of tax.”That perspective remains at the center of his agenda. Mr. Johnson wants to scrap the Dodd-Frank law regulating Wall Street. He insists government can only equalize opportunity, not incomes.“Nothing is free,” Mr. Johnson said, mocking Democratic rhetoric. “Was there anything that Hillary didn’t promise in her acceptance speech the other night, to anybody?”Mr. Johnson turned away from Republicans for different reasons. He rejected the party’s prescriptive social conservatism, embracing individual choice across issues including abortion, gay marriage and marijuana use (which he wants to legalize).Hailing from a state where Hispanics represent nearly half the population, Mr. Johnson also rejects the propensity of the Republican Party’s Trump-era base to blame immigrants for cultural and economic problems.“Thirty percent of Republicans believe the scourge of the earth is Mexican immigration,” he said. “What’s the reason for why I don’t have a job? Well, make Mexican immigration the scapegoat for that.”“They’re not taking jobs that U.S. citizens want,” Mr. Johnson argued. “They are contributing to the economy.”He also distinguishes himself from most contemporary Republicans by accepting the reality of what he calls “man-caused” climate change. As a solution, he wants to explore taxing carbon — not for the revenue, but to provide a financial inventive to reduce emissions.“That may have the result of being self-regulating,” Mr. Johnson said. “The market will take care of it.”No Libertarian candidate has drawn more than 1 percent of the vote; Mr. Johnson fell just short of that level as the party’s 2012 nominee. Hoping to do better, he offers practical amendments to Libertarian philosophy, opposing the platform’s call to phase out Social Security and backing cost-saving changes instead.His near-term goal is crossing the 15 percent level in the polls. Without reaching the vast debate audience, Mr. Johnson concedes, he and his running mate, William Weld, have “no chance” to win.Recent history offers little encouragement. No third-party candidate has reached the general-election debate stage since Ross Perot in 1992.Yet even if Mrs. Clinton holds her lead and wins the White House, Mr. Johnson envisions a decisive fracture of the two-party system.“This is the demise of the Republican Party,” he said. “This is an opportunity, I think, for the Libertarian Party to become a major party.”If that happens, Mr. Johnson has only so much of his time to give the party. Unless he’s in the White House next year, he also plans to enter a 3,000-mile bike race.