https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/05/us/politics/trumps-travel-ban.html
Where Trump’s Travel Ban Stands - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Immigration and Emigration,Trump  Donald J,Robart  James L,Refugees and Displaced Persons
Feb. 5, 2017
6301
WASHINGTON — A fast-moving legal fight over President Trump’s targeted travel ban reached the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, late Saturday. Here is a look at where things stand.Lawyers for the federal government asked the appeals court to stay a temporary restraining order issued Friday by Judge James Robart of the Federal District Court in Seattle. Judge Robart was appointed by President George W. Bush.Acting on a request from two states, Washington and Minnesota, Judge Robart temporarily banned the administration from enforcing two parts of Mr. Trump’s order: its 90-day suspension of entry into the United States of people from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, and its limits on accepting refugees, including “any action that prioritizes the refugee claims of certain religious minorities.”Judge Robart’s order allowed people from the seven countries who had been authorized to travel, along with vetted refugees from all nations, to enter the country.In its brief, the administration said that Judge Robart had “improperly second-guessed the president’s national security determinations.” The brief said the president had vast power over immigration under the Constitution and federal law.The court declined to issue an immediate administrative stay, but it said it would consider the federal government’s emergency motion for a stay after receiving more briefs. The court set a very fast briefing schedule, asking the states to respond by midnight Sunday Pacific time, with the federal government to file a second brief by 3 p.m. on Monday.There is every indication that the court will act promptly.The appeals court’s order was issued by Judge William C. Canby Jr., who was appointed by President Jimmy Carter, and Judge Michelle T. Friedland, who was appointed by President Barack Obama. They are two of the three Ninth Circuit judges designated to hear motions in February. The third, Judge Richard R. Clifton, was appointed by President George W. Bush.Motions for stays are typically decided based on paper filings.Almost certainly. The losing side will very likely ask the justices to review the appeals court’s ruling on the emergency stay.The ultimate decision on whether the executive order is lawful will not come quickly. That means people seeking to travel or settle here may be whipsawed until the case is finally resolved.