http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/19/us/politics/with-tough-immigration-talk-gop-again-risks-losing-latinos.html
Donald Trump Paints Republicans Into Corner With Hispanics - The New York Times
Illegal Immigration,Presidential Election of 2016,Hispanic-Americans,Trump  Donald J,Primaries and Caucuses,Polls and Public Opinion,United States Politics and Government,Immigration and Emigration,Republican Party,Bush  Jeb,Cruz  Ted,Graham  Lindsey,Huckabee  Mike,Christie  Christopher J,Kasich  John R,Walker  Scott K,Perry  Rick,Jindal  Bobby,United States,Iowa
Aug. 18, 2015
7233
Republicans thought they had learned a lesson after 2012: Turning off Latino voters ensures defeat in the general election.But as the disruptive presidential candidacy of Donald J. Trump continues to gain support, his hard line on immigration has driven rivals to match his biting anti-immigrant language and positions long considered extreme. It risks another general election cycle in which Hispanics view the party as unfriendly no matter who the nominee is, Republican strategists warned.This week, several of Mr. Trump’s Republican rivals, including Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, echoed his call to end automatic citizenship for the American-born children of undocumented immigrants, repealing a constitutional right dating from the Civil War era.And Mr. Trump’s plan for mass deportations — “They have to go,” he said — which is supported by a sizable minority of Republican voters nationwide, has encouraged rivals to similarly push the edges on immigration.Senator Ted Cruz of Texas introduced a bill last month named for a woman who was shot to death in San Francisco by an illegal immigrant, a case first highlighted by Mr. Trump. Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana went further, saying mayors of sanctuary cities — where local law enforcement officials decline to cooperate in federal deportations — should be arrested as accomplices when illegal immigrants commit felonies.National Republican strategists warn that catering to the most hard-line voters on immigration in the nominating contest will hurt the party in the general election, as it did the 2012 nominee, Mitt Romney, who endorsed “self-deportation” for illegal immigrants and attracted historically low Latino support.“If Republicans want to be competitive in the general election, they have to distance themselves from Trump on both illegal and legal immigration,” said Alfonso Aguilar, an official in George W. Bush’s administration and the executive director of the American Principles Project’s Latino Partnership, a conservative group. “His proposal on birthright citizenship is very insulting to Latinos, and every day, this is the top story on Spanish language media. Right now, if the other candidates don’t respond to Trump, Latinos will buy the argument that Republicans agree with him.”Demographics suggest Republicans have an even bigger challenge with Latinos in 2016 than in previous elections. The number of Latino voters has been growing rapidly. The population of Latinos eligible to vote by 2016 is expected to increase by 18 percent over 2012 to about 28 million people, more than 11 percent of voters nationwide, according to projections by the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, a nonpartisan organization.Mr. Walker, who led in Iowa polls for months before being eclipsed recently by Mr. Trump, took a harder anti-immigration position on Monday by seeming to support an end to birthright citizenship during a visit to the Iowa State Fair.At the same time, Mr. Trump’s hard-line positions, including seizing remittances sent by undocumented workers to Mexico and severely restricting legal immigration, are allowing some rivals to define themselves more clearly in opposition to him.Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina called Mr. Trump’s plan “gibberish” at the Iowa fair on Monday, saying, “You’re not going to get 11 million people and drive them back out of this country,” he said. “That’s just not practical. That’s going to kill the Republican Party.”For now, the major Republican candidates who are relative moderates on immigration — Mr. Graham, Jeb Bush, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida — do not have the momentum or the news media attention enjoyed by Mr. Trump, who is not only denouncing illegal immigrants in nativist language but seeking severe limits on legal immigration. And his calls to deport illegal immigrants are resonating with many voters.“I’m O.K. with that,” said Jessie McInville, a medical technologist from Urbandale, Iowa. “We all have to abide by our laws.” Her husband, Jason, who said he twice voted for Mr. Obama for president, agreed.Bruce Anderson, a farmer and auctioneer from Orion, Ill., agreed with Mr. Trump’s plans to restrict legal immigration on the ground it has taken jobs from citizens. “All immigration should be shut down in America for a while,” Mr. Anderson said.Perhaps the most difficult issue for the Republican Party is Mr. Trump’s call to deport not only all illegal immigrants, but also young people who came to this country as children and have received protections though executive actions by Mr. Obama.“We have to keep the families together, but they have to go,” Mr. Trump said on “Meet the Press” in an interview, broadcast on Sunday, aboard his jet at the Des Moines airport.It is an issue that other Republicans had tried to duck, focusing on securing the southern border. At the first Republican debate for the bottom seven candidates in the polls, former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas framed the issue typically, saying that only when the border is sealed tight will Washington be “up to a conversation to deal with the millions of people that are here illegally.”A sizable core of Republicans favors such mass deportations, including 43 percent in a recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll. But that position is out of step with three-fourths of Americans — including 76 percent of independents — who believe illegal immigrants should be allowed to stay in the country if certain conditions are met, according to a Pew Research Center survey in June. And a narrow majority of Republicans favor giving undocumented immigrants a path to legal status or citizenship.Representative Steve King of Iowa, one of Congress’s most hawkish Republicans on immigration, discounted concerns that the issues raised by Mr. Trump would hurt the party’s brand.“They often say anytime you don’t pander to Hispanics, you cost Republican votes,” he said. “I think Trump gets stronger with this position that says enforce our immigration laws.”No matter who emerges as the Republican nominee, experts in Hispanic voting say many will remember the harsh anti-immigrant tone of the primaries. That was a lesson top Republican strategists drew from 2012, writing in a self-critical “autopsy” that called on the party to enact comprehensive immigration reform in Congress — or continue being swamped in general elections by the growing Latino vote.Well before Mr. Trump came along, his current rivals were toughening their immigration stances. Mike Huckabee, who as governor of Arkansas supported a state Dream Act giving in-state college tuition for undocumented students, said in March in Iowa that he wanted to “stem the tide” of people from Mexico who have “heard there’s a bowl of food just across the border.”Mr. Walker, who in 2013 favored a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants, reversed himself this year, telling Fox News, “My view has changed; I’m flat-out saying it.”Ryan Call, a former chairman of the Colorado Republican Party, noted that Republicans like Senator Cory Gardner won election in the state in 2014 by opening a “meaningful dialogue” with Hispanic voters.“Trump’s plan and rhetoric takes us in exactly the opposite direction and will undermine much of the progress we have made in reaching out to the growing population of Hispanics and immigrants in Colorado and in other battleground states,” Mr. Call said.