http://www.nytimes.com/1997/02/15/arts/an-emma-both-darker-and-funnier.html
An 'Emma' Both Darker And Funnier - The New York Times
REVIEWS,TELEVISION,JANE AUSTEN'S EMMA (TV PROGRAM)
Feb. 15, 1997
7281
''I am going to take a heroine whom no one but myself will much like,'' Jane Austen wrote of ''Emma,'' vastly underestimating her readers' good taste. The trick of adapting ''Emma'' is to recapture Austen's delicate balance, which allows us to see why the heroine still has friends and social influence, despite being the worst matchmaker and busybody in the village of Highbury. In this smart and spirited new version. Kate Beckinsale's Emma walks that fine line beautifully. Her Emma meddles in her friends' lives with near-disastrous results, and of course remains blind to her own romantic feelings for her old friend Mr. Knightley. But her sure-fire social assumptions are innocently wrongheaded, not willfully arrogant.In this and almost every other way, this new television film called  ''Jane Austen's Emma'' represents the flip side of last year's movie with Gwyneth Paltrow. Though both are faithful to Austen's plot, the earlier film was all about brightness and pretty gardens. It was a slick commercial ''Emma,'' whose appeal depended on Ms. Paltrow's graceful looks; not a bad idea, but not nearly what Austen had in mind. Among the flood of recent Austen movies, this new ''Emma'' has the most in common with ''Persuasion,'' sharing a smaller scale, a darker tone and a focus on psychological nuance.Ms. Beckinsale's Emma is plainer looking than Ms. Paltrow's, and altogether more believable and funnier. She came to the role well prepared, after playing another socially self-assured comic figure in the recent film ''Cold Comfort Farm.''The screenplay by Andrew Davies (who also did the wise television adaptations of ''Pride and Prejudice'' and ''Moll Flanders'') does a deft job of letting viewers pick up the social cues that Emma misses. We see, as she should, the glances between the handsome, eligible Frank Churchill and the poor Jane Fairfax. We can guess that the clergyman Mr. Elton has designs on Emma and her dowry, not on her penniless friend Harriet.This version also makes it clear why Emma and Knightley are such a good match. Like Ms. Beckinsale's Emma, Mark Strong's Knightley does not have movie-star looks, but these two make excellent verbal sparring partners, vehemently matching wits and social observations. Prunella Scales also stands out as Miss Bates, the flibbertigibbet, motor-mouthed neighbor whom Emma callously insults at a picnic.Occasionally this film plays out Emma's fantasies. There is a brief glimpse of Harriet marrying Mr. Elton, and Frank Churchill's portrait comes alive and speaks to Emma, saying, ''Miss Woodhouse, we meet at last.'' The device is used just enough to add an imaginative touch without becoming a useless gimmick.After so many Austen films, it would be easy to overlook this latest, but its charms are those Austen herself might have valued. It is understated and sly, loaded with a sense that even a society as well-ordered as Emma's leaves plenty of room for comic misjudgments and happy endings.JANE AUSTEN'S EMMAA&E, tomorrow at 8 P.M.Screenplay by Andrew Davies, based on a the novel by Jane Austen. A co-production of A&E/United Film and Television Productions for Meridian Broadcasting in association with Chestermead Ltd. Music by Dominic Muldowney. Diarmuid Lawrence, director; Sue Birtwistle, producer; Joy Spink, associate producer; Remi Adefarasin, director of photography; Delia Fine, executive producer for A&E; Simon Lewis, executive producer for U.F.T.P.WITH: Kate Beckinsale (Emma Woodhouse), Mark Strong (Mr. Knightley), Bernard Hepton (Mr. Woodhouse), Samantha Morton (Harriet Smith), Samantha Bond (Mrs. Weston), James Hazeldine (Mr. Weston), Dominic Rowan (Mr. Elton), Lucy Robinson (Mrs. Elton), Prunella Scales (Miss Bates) and Raymond Coulthard (Frank Churchill).