https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/30/us/university-of-cincinnati-officer-indicted-in-shooting-death-of-motorist.html
University of Cincinnati Officer Indicted in Shooting Death of Samuel Dubose - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Tensing  Ray (1989- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Colleges and Universities,University of Cincinnati,Cincinnati (Ohio)
July 29, 2015
4500
A University of Cincinnati police officer was indicted Wednesday on a murder charge in what a prosecutor called “a senseless, asinine shooting” of an unarmed man during a minor traffic stop. Officials say it was the first time such a charge had been leveled against an officer in the county.The Hamilton County prosecuting attorney, Joseph T. Deters, released a graphic and much anticipated video of the shooting of Samuel Dubose taken by the officer’s body camera that he described as crucial evidence that Mr. Dubose did not act aggressively or pose a threat to Officer Ray Tensing, and that Officer Tensing had lied about being dragged by Mr. Dubose’s car. A grand jury, Mr. Deters announced, indicted the officer on a murder charge, punishable by life in prison, and a voluntary manslaughter charge.“It was a senseless, asinine shooting,” Mr. Deters said at a news conference, using stark terms to denounce the July 19 killing, the officer’s claims and the officer himself. “This doesn’t happen in the United States, OK?” he said. “This might happen in Afghanistan. People don’t get shot for a traffic stop.”“This office has probably reviewed 100 police shootings, and this is the first time we’ve thought, ‘This is without question a murder,’ ” he said.In an interview with an Ohio television station, a lawyer for Officer Tensing, Stew Mathews, disputed Mr. Deters’s comments and said that other video of the shooting would tell a different story. He said his client cried when he heard of the indictment.The county prosecutor’s office said that no law enforcement officer in Hamilton County — whose county seat is Cincinnati — had ever before been indicted on murder charges for use of force while on duty. At the news conference, Mr. Deters said Officer Tensing “should never have been a police officer,” but he declined to elaborate.Asked if he thought Officer Tensing, 25, had tried to mislead investigators, Mr. Deters said, “Yeah, yes, I think he was making an excuse for the purposeful killing of another person.”Mr. Deters added, “I think he lost his temper because Mr. Dubose wouldn’t get out of his car.”The death of Mr. Dubose, who was black, at the hands of Officer Tensing, who is white, joined a string of recent cases — in places including Staten Island; Cleveland; Baltimore; North Charleston, S.C.; and Ferguson, Mo., among others — that have raised hard questions about law enforcement’s use of force and the role of race in policing. Video cameras have recorded many of these episodes and other, nonlethal encounters — like the arrest of Sandra Bland, who died three days later in a Texas jail cell — offering disturbing evidence of the confrontations that often contradicts the accounts of those involved.“I’m so thankful that everything was uncovered,” Mr. Dubose’s mother, Audrey, said at a separate news conference. “I thought it was going to be covered up.”Even so, she said of Officer Tensing, “If he asks for forgiveness, oh yeah, I can forgive him.”She and other family members said that if it were not for the body camera worn by Officer Tensing, his story would have been accepted and he would have gone unpunished. Choking back tears, Terina Allen, a sister of Mr. Dubose, said, “Every day now, I’m going to be marching for video cams.”Rashanda Reid said her twin, Dashanda, and Mr. Dubose had gotten engaged the day before he died. “They didn’t get a chance to set a date,” she said.Officer Tensing turned himself in for arrest, and the university, which had put him on administrative leave, said Wednesday that he had been fired. The University of Cincinnati, part of Ohio’s state university system, is typical in having its own force of sworn police officers who carry firearms and have arrest powers; the overwhelming majority of public colleges and universities do as well, according to Justice Department surveys. Most private colleges employ only nonsworn officers who do not have guns.Mr. Deters said that the university police force should be disbanded because policing is not what a university knows how to do, and that the campus should be patrolled by the Cincinnati Police Department.In a statement, the university’s president, Santa J. Ono, said the university would "take necessary steps to address any training, staffing and hiring policy issues that may be indicated by this tragic event."City officials, religious leaders and members of Mr. Dubose’s family pleaded for peace on the city’s streets, hoping not to see the kind of violence that shook Baltimore in April after Freddie Gray died in police custody, or Cincinnati, itself, in 2001, after another young black man, Timothy Thomas, was killed by a police officer. The officer in the latter case was charged with negligent homicide and was acquitted.Officer Tensing “was wrong, and when we’re wrong, we have to be held accountable,” Jeffrey Blackwell, the Cincinnati police chief, said on Wednesday. But, he added, “make no mistake, we are operationally ready to respond.”The chief added, “Violence and lawlessness will not be tolerated.”Several hundred people braved an early-evening thunderstorm to rally for about 90 minutes outside the Hamilton County Courthouse, chanting “Black lives matter” and “I am Sam Dubose.”Don Allen, who identified himself as Mr. Dubose’s nephew, told the crowd that his family was satisfied with the indictment, but he said justice would be served only when Officer Tensing was proved guilty. “What Tensing did was unjustified” he said. “This time, Ray Tensing will be convicted.”Mr. Dubose, 43, was just south of the university campus, driving a green 1998 Honda Accord without a front license plate, about 6:30 p.m. when Officer Tensing began following him. Officials said the university police shared jurisdiction with city officers on streets around the campus, where the officer began following Mr. Dubose, but where the driver was pulled over and shot is a few blocks away, outside that zone.On the video, Officer Tensing repeatedly asks Mr. Dubose to produce a driver’s license. Mr. Dubose says several times that he has one, before acknowledging that it is not with him. He shows that he has the missing license plate with him, in the glove box.At one point, the officer asks, “What’s that bottle on the floor?” Mr. Dubose reaches down, picks up a bottle of gin and hands it to the officer.Officer Tensing starts to open the driver’s door and tells Mr. Dubose to remove his seatbelt; Mr. Dubose pulls the door closed again and restarts his car. What happens next is a flurry of blurred movements: The officer steps to his left; the engine can be heard revving; the officer reaches into the car with his left hand; he yells “stop” twice; he draws his gun with his right hand and fires once; and then he appears to fall backward.From the moment the officer touches the door handle to the fatal shot, less than five seconds elapse. Then he runs after the car as it rolls off before coming to a crashing halt a short distance away, its driver fatally wounded or already dead.Another university officer who arrived shortly after the shooting, Eric Weibel, wrote in his report that Officer Tensing told him that “he was being dragged by the vehicle and had to fire his weapon,” and that he “was almost run over.” A third officer, he wrote, said he saw Officer Tensing being dragged.“Looking at Officer Tensing’s uniform, I could see that the back of his pants and shirt looked as if it had been dragged over a rough surface,” Officer Weibel wrote.On the video, Officer Tensing repeatedly tells other officers who arrive on the scene that he was dragged, his left arm caught in the car, possibly in the steering wheel. He tells them the arm tingles and hurts a little, but he is otherwise uninjured.“I almost got run over by the car,” the officer said. “He took off on me. I discharged one round. Shot the man in the head.”Mr. Deters would not say what Officer Tensing told prosecutors. But he insisted that the officer had not been dragged. “He fell backwards after he shot him in the head,” the prosecutor said. “People want to believe that Mr. Dubose had done something violent toward the officer,” Mr. Deters added. “He did not.”Even if the car had begun to roll, Mr. Deters said, no use of force was called for, and certainly not use of deadly force.He said he had no idea whether race played a role in the episode.“He wasn’t dealing with someone who was wanted for murder,” he said, adding that “this was, in the vernacular, a pretty chicken-crap stop.”Officers are trained not to reach into a car during a stop, specifically because of the risk of being dragged, said Seth W. Stoughton, a law school professor at the University of South Carolina and a former police officer.“It’s called ‘officer-created jeopardy,’ and it puts them at more risk,” he said. “And then because they are at more risk, then to escape the situation they have to use more force than they should have used otherwise.”Dr. John Eck, a professor of criminal justice at the University of Cincinnati, said that while he had been “a body camera skeptic,” the video in this case had changed his mind.“This is one of those poster boys for why you want them,” he said.