https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/10/us/link-shows-how-lobby-firm-cultivates-influence.html
Link Shows How Lobby Firm Cultivates Influence - The New York Times
Bondi  Pamela J,Dickstein Shapiro LLP,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Kalani  Lori,Attorneys General,Florida,Republican Attorneys General Assn,States (US),Conflicts of Interest,Ethics Commission (Fla)
Nov. 9, 2014
4976
Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida, after taking a free ride on a chartered jet last year to a resort island far from her home state, made an unusual offer to one of the corporate lawyers from Washington who helped foot the bill: an invitation to stay at her Tampa home while recuperating from surgery.The hospitality was extended to Lori Kalani, a lobbyist and lawyer from Dickstein Shapiro, the Washington-based firm that specializes in building personal relationships with state attorneys general to help corporate clients avoid becoming targets of investigation.The circumstances of the trip to Mackinac Island, Mich., and the subsequent offer to host Ms. Kalani in convalescence were uncovered as part of a continuing investigation by The New York Times into the relationship between private lawyers and state attorneys general. They make vivid how aggressively Dickstein and firms like it have worked in recent years to try to influence top state law enforcement officials.Representatives from Dickstein Shapiro did not respond to requests for comment. A spokeswoman for Ms. Bondi declined to comment for this article. The Florida Commission on Ethics is reviewing a sworn complaint filed by a Florida resident asking it to investigate whether Dickstein violated state law by not registering as a lobbying firm in the state.The complaint was filed after an earlier article in The Times reported that Ms. Bondi and other attorneys general had taken actions favorable to Dickstein’s clients after intervention by its lawyers. Ms. Kalani and two other partners at her firm were among the lobbyists and lawyers who flew on a chartered Boeing 737 to upstate Michigan from Washington, a ride that cost the Dickstein partners $4,500 each. In return for the payment, they secured the right to join a half-dozen Republican attorneys general for the round-trip flight to the weekend retreat.Dickstein Shapiro separately donated $35,000 last year for membership to the Republican Attorneys General Association, campaign finance reports show. Money was then passed on from the association to Republican candidates like Ms. Bondi to help with their election campaigns.The donations also helped cover the $2,394 cost of Ms. Bondi’s flight, hotels, meals and beverages during the weekend at the Grand Hotel,  a landmark Michigan resort, according to a gift report filed by Ms. Bondi with the Florida Commission on Ethics.Lawyers and lobbyists at Dickstein contacted Ms. Bondi’s office last year on behalf of nearly a dozen clients, including Pfizer, the pharmaceutical giant; Travelocity, the online reservation company; Bridgepoint Education, the for-profit college chain; and Herbalife, the nutritional shake company; according to emails sent to Ms. Bondi’s office last year by Ms. Kalani and others at Dickstein Shapiro. The emails were obtained through an open records request by The Times.One particular focus for Dickstein during the Mackinac Island event was to urge Republican attorneys general like Ms. Bondi not to join an investigation into marketing claims used by 5-Hour Energy, according to several people who attended the event but asked not to be named because the conversations were supposed to be confidential. The inquiry was initiated in early 2013 by more than 20 states.Ms. Kalani, other partners at Dickstein and their clients also donated money directly last year to a Florida campaign group run by Ms. Bondi. It included a $10,000 payment from ETC Capital, an investment fund controlled by the owner of the 5-Hour Energy brand, as Dickstein Shapiro sought to ensure that Florida did not join the investigation into the company.The invitation to stay at Ms. Bondi’ s home in Tampa came after Ms. Kalani showed up at the Michigan resort with a foot injury, according to two people who attended the event. Ms. Bondi urged Ms. Kalani to consult with her own physician in Florida. After Ms. Kalani did so, Ms. Bondi invited her to stay as she recovered from surgery.Dickstein Shapiro may be violating Florida law by failing to register as a lobbying firm, given the nature of the appeals it has made to Ms. Bondi and her office, which include advocating policy on issues that are important to its clients, instead of just legal matters, said Charles H. Rose III, a professor at Stetson University College of Law in Gulfport, Fla. At the request of The Times, Mr. Rose reviewed copies of emails that firm executives had sent to Ms. Bondi’s office.“Law firms engaging the attorney general on general policy matters, as opposed to a specific client issue, should register as lobbyists,” Mr. Rose said. He pointed in particular to the unusual dual role of attorney general as both a law enforcement official and a member of the so-called Florida Cabinet, making decisions regarding the operation of Florida state government.Neither Ms. Kalani nor Bernard Nash, a lawyer who leads the Dickstein Shapiro practice that focuses on state attorneys general, is licensed to practice law in Florida, according to the Florida Bar. As such, Mr. Rose said, it would be hard to see how they could argue that they were working solely on legal matters when communicating with Ms. Bondi and her staff.Even so, Mr. Rose added, lawyers and government officials often do become friends. For that reason, he said, he did not see an ethical issue for Ms. Bondi to invite Ms. Kalani to stay at her home.But Lisa G. Lerman, a law professor at Catholic University and a co-author of the widely used casebook Ethical Problems in the Practice of Law, said that a law enforcement official like Ms. Bondi should maintain some personal distance from lawyers or lobbyists representing private parties. Her office has an enormous amount of discretion when it comes to deciding whether to initiate investigations into companies represented by Dickstein, or how to settle cases that have already been started.“You want these relationships with the law enforcement official to be arm’s length to help ensure the decisions would be dispassionate,” Ms. Lerman said. “This seems like the opposite of that. I think it is unseemly.”An ethics complaint has already been filed by a retired carpenter, Charles P. Swofford, asserting that staff members from Dickstein Shapiro have been “calling, emailing and meeting with members of the executive branch of Florida state government,” yet are not registered as lobbyists.“It seems reasonably clear what these people are doing is lobbying,” said Mr. Swofford, a registered Democrat and a former Connecticut resident who has a history of filing complaints against government officials who he believes are involved in misdeeds.Kerrie J. Stillman, a spokeswoman for the Florida Commission on Ethics, said complaints filed with the commission are considered confidential until they have been investigated. If Dickstein is found to have violated the state law, it could be fined up to $5,000 and barred from lobbying in Florida for two years.