http://www.nytimes.com/1999/06/03/us/advance-seen-in-sharing-bone-marrow.html
Advance Seen In Sharing Bone Marrow - The New York Times
DANA-FARBER CANCER INSTITUTE,NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE,TRANSPLANTS,CTLA4-IG (DRUG),BONE MARROW,CANCER,IMMUNE SYSTEM
June 3, 1999
9421
A new, highly selective immune-suppressing drug may allow cancer patients to receive bone marrow transplants from poorly matched donors without  life-threatening complications.The drug suppresses only the part of the immune system that causes the complications, and doctors say this may allow patients to receive marrow transplants without the need for drugs that raise the risk of infection and other problems by broadly suppressing the body's immune defenses.In today's New England Journal of Medicine, researchers reported surprising results in the first experimental use of the drug on terminally ill cancer patients, and said it might also be useful in transplant operations. Dr. Eva C. Guinan of Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, where the approach was developed and tested, said the treatment could make more transplants possible by eliminating the need for near-perfect matches between donors and recipients.Donated bone marrow is treated with the new drug, CTLA4-Ig, before it is transplanted. The drug blocks a  dangerous complication called graft-versus-host disease, which occurs when foreign tissue is placed in the body. The drug blocks only the white blood cells that promote this response, leaving intact the rest of the immune function of the newly transferred marrow.Doctors tested the new approach on 12 young patients with advanced leukemia for whom only poorly matched marrow was available. No severe graft-versus-host disease occurred. Five of the patients have survived for five to 29 months. The others died of complications and a return of the cancer.Without the marrow transplants, the doctors said, all the patients would have died, and ordinary transplants would probably have caused serious graft-versus-host disease in most or all of the patients.In an editorial, the journal's deputy editor, Robert S. Schwartz, who helped pioneer immune suppression for organ transplants in the 1950's, called the results impressive, but cautioned that this ''must be balanced against the small number of patients, the high death rate and the lack of information about immunologic reconstitution in the survivors.''