https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/24/world/middleeast/al-jazeera-journalists-mohamed-fahmy-baher-mohamed-egypt-pardon.html
Egypt Pardons Al Jazeera Journalists Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed - The New York Times
Egypt,Political Prisoners,News and News Media,Fahmy  Mohamed Fadel,Mohamed  Baher,Al Jazeera English,Freedom of Speech and Expression,Freedom of the Press
Sept. 23, 2015
8669
CAIRO —  President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi pardoned two imprisoned journalists from the Al Jazeera English news network on Wednesday, as well as dozens of other political prisoners, effectively voiding a raft of widely criticized convictions handed down by Egypt’s courts.The pardoning of the journalists, Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed, and of prominent leftist activists arrested at protests, provided their families with a measure of relief and stanched a source of international criticism of Mr. Sisi’s government a day before he was scheduled to fly to New York for a United Nations General Assembly gathering.The pardons appeared to be part of a customary prisoner release on the eve of the Eid al-Adha holiday. In a statement, Mr. Sisi’s office said 100 people had been pardoned for humanitarian and health reasons, and “in line with the president’s initiative last December to release detained youth.”Amid the celebrations, Mr. Sisi’s willingness to discard the convictions with the stroke of a pen revived questions about why the defendants had been charged at all. The pardons also raised new doubts about the ability of Egypt’s judiciary to fairly settle the cases of thousands of other people also imprisoned on political charges. Since Mr. Sisi led the military takeover of the government more than two years ago, the authorities have systematically rounded up perceived opponents, including Islamists and secular-leaning activists, filling Egypt’s jails.“While these pardons come as a great relief, it is ludicrous that some of these people were ever behind bars in the first place,” Amnesty International said in a statement after the decree.Mr. Fahmy, Mr. Mohamed and a third Al Jazeera colleague, Peter Greste, were arrested in December 2013 in the room they had used as an office at the Marriott Hotel in Cairo, and charged with broadcasting false news. They were also accused of belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamist movement that Mr. Sisi shunted from power. Mr. Greste was deported in February.Their prosecution drew international attention because Mr. Fahmy, a Canadian, and Mr. Greste, an Australian, were foreign citizens. All three had at one time or another worked for large international news agencies.But prosecutors never presented any evidence that the journalists had belonged to the Muslim Brotherhood or that they had been engaged in anything other than reporting the news. Rather, their arrests were seen as part of a wider crackdown on free speech and dissent by the military-backed government, as well as a result of Egypt’s feud with Qatar, which owns Al Jazeera and has been the main international supporter of the Brotherhood.The journalists were convicted in their first trial and drew terms of seven to 10 years in prison. In January, Egypt’s highest court ordered a retrial, in what appeared to be an acknowledgment of the many flaws of the first.At the same time, Egyptian officials, including Mr. Sisi, made it clear that they viewed the prosecution of the journalists as an annoying, unnecessary source of international scrutiny, raising hopes that a retrial might result in acquittal.But in August, a judge sentenced Mr. Fahmy and Mr. Mohamed to three years in prison, repeating the charge that they had fabricated news reports. At the time of the sentencing, Mr. Greste had already been deported under a decree that allowed Mr. Sisi to expel foreign citizens convicted of crimes.After his release on Wednesday, Mr. Fahmy said in a phone interview that he had spent a sleepless night before the pardons, anticipating that Mr. Sisi might make some “strategic” gesture, like freeing prisoners, before heading to the United Nations. Over the 21 months since his arrest, similar hopes had been repeatedly dashed. “I wasn’t sure we would be included,” he said. “I am so happy.”The Committee to Protect Journalists said on Wednesday that at least 18 other journalists remained imprisoned in Egypt, including a freelance photographer, Mahmoud Abou Zeid, who has been held in pretrial detention since August 2013.Others ordered released by Mr. Sisi on Wednesday included Omar Hazek, a poet who was arrested at a protest in Alexandria in 2013, and two political activists, Yara Sallam and Sanaa Seif, who were arrested in 2014 at a demonstration protesting a government law that banned protests.The list of those pardoned did not include several other leftist activists arrested at protests, or prominent Islamist opponents of the government.Even so, the pardons amounted to “a card in the hand of the government” as Mr. Sisi prepared to travel to the United Nations headquarters, said Mohamed Lotfy, the executive director of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms. “It’s a small gesture, but it provides the government with an argument: ‘We have gotten people out of jail. We are not as crazy as people want to portray us.’ ”It also sent another message. “When people benefit from the government,” Mr. Lotfy said, “it is through a decision from the top.”