http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/us/politics/donald-trump-ohio-state-attack-refugee.html
Donald Trump Calls Ohio State Attack a ‘Tragic Reminder’ on Immigration - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Illegal Immigration,United States Politics and Government,Des Moines (Iowa),Ohio State University,Colleges and Universities,Refugees and Displaced Persons,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Immigration and Emigration
Dec. 8, 2016
2382
DES MOINES — President-elect Donald J. Trump said Thursday that the stabbing attack by a refugee last week at Ohio State University was a “tragic reminder” of the need to take a hard line on immigration, arguing that his administration would put the safety of Americans first in a way the Obama administration never has.Mr. Trump, who visited the university’s campus on Thursday before speaking at a victory rally in Des Moines, said the attack — carried out by a Somali-born refugee who Mr. Trump has said should not have been in the country — had been “yet one more tragic reminder that immigration security is now national security.”“No more games, folks, no more games,” he told several thousand people in a large event hall in downtown Des Moines, packed with supporters wearing bright-red caps emblazoned with Mr. Trump’s “Make America Great Again” mantra. “A Trump administration will always put the safety and security of the American people first. It’s going to be the American people first — it hasn’t been that way.”In a 46-minute speech, Mr. Trump said his administration would crack down on visa abuses that harm American workers and reorder the nation’s immigration and trade policies to prioritize native-born people over foreigners, reprising some of the unalloyed nativism of his campaign.“We will put our people — not people from other lands, our people — back to work,” Mr. Trump said.“We’re not going to be the stupid people anymore,” he added as he portrayed the Obama administration as feckless on China, unconcerned with the plight of the middle class and unwilling to employ the firm tactics he said were needed to protect Americans against foreign threats.“We must reject the failed approaches of the past,” Mr. Trump said. “Government must stop listening to the special interests and start delivering for the national interest.”Mr. Trump was briefly joined onstage by Terry E. Branstad, the longtime Iowa governor and staunch campaign supporter whom he has chosen to be ambassador to China. He said Mr. Branstad would help improve the United States’ relationship with China, a country that he said had been cheating on trade and other issues and must be brought into line.“They haven’t played by the rules, and I know it’s time that they’re going to start,” Mr. Trump said. “You have the massive theft of intellectual property, putting unfair taxes on our companies, not helping with the menace of North Korea like they should, and the at-will and massive devaluation of their currency and product dumping.”It was the third stop in a multistate tour he has begun to express thanks to the supporters who fueled his presidential bid. As much as anything, the rallies appear to be for his own enjoyment: Mr. Trump, who reveled during the campaign in huge rallies electrified by raucous, often angry chants, wants to continue such events once he is sworn in, his aides have said.At the rallies, he spends several moments backstage absorbing the cheers of the crowd and hearing his name chanted. On Thursday, he lingered on a catwalk over the crowd as red, white and blue spotlights swept across the cheering supporters, their cellphones raised to capture images of the president-elect.He indulged in a dramatic recounting of his surprise victory on election night, listing states he had won and noting dryly that many observers, including some on his own team, had been shocked at his success.He returned to the theme often. Thirty-five minutes into his speech, he interrupted his talk of immigration policy and jobs to give his audience another opportunity to applaud him.“By the way, are you glad I ran for president?” he asked the crowd, which shouted its approval. “It’s a movement.”Mr. Trump’s speech was also interrupted by protesters who unfurled a banner bearing a swastika and chanted: “No Trump! No K.K.K.! No fascist U.S.A.!”Attendees shoved the protesters and tried to grab their banner before police officers approached to escort them out of the hall. The president-elect — who, during the campaign, often egged on supporters who became aggressive with protesters — took an unusually conciliatory tone.“That’s all right,” he said. “I think they’re actually on our side. They just don’t know it yet.”Mr. Trump said he would build a wall on the border with Mexico, as promised, rewrite trade agreements to stop other countries from dumping products on the American market, and “defend every last American job.”He also said he would ask Congress to pass a package of legislation addressing women’s concerns, an issue championed by his daughter Ivanka, who is considering taking a leave from the family empire and her own businesses to advise her father in the White House.“I’m asking Congress to pass legislation to make safe and affordable child care accessible to all, while fighting to get higher pay for women in the work force — that’s what has to happen — and ensuring women-owned small businesses can access the capital they need,” he said.He defended his prospective cabinet against criticism that it is too packed with wealthy people, arguing that the ultrarich are precisely the ones who should be leading the government.“I want people that made a fortune, because now they’re negotiating with you, O.K.?” Mr. Trump said. “It’s no different than a great baseball player or a great golfer.”“These people have given up fortunes of income in order to make a dollar a year, and they’re so proud to do it,” he added.