http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/10/realestate/at-home-with-michael-a-clinton-of-hearst-magazines.html
At Home With Michael A. Clinton of Hearst Magazines - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Clinton  Michael A,Hearst Corp,Upper East Side (Manhattan  NY),Interior Design and Furnishings,New York City
May 8, 2015
3249
You could call Michael A. Clinton an escape artist.As he has climbed the New York media pyramid — from reporter at Fairchild Publications, to publisher of GQ, to executive vice president of Condé Nast and, finally, to president for marketing and publishing director of Hearst Magazines — Mr. Clinton has always found time to slip away from his over-scheduled life. Far away. Over the years, he said, “I’ve visited 123 countries.”His home on the Upper East Side is an escape, too. “I’ve created this mini-adventure lodge in a prewar building in Manhattan,” said Mr. Clinton, who is in his late 50s. That way, he added, “I can relive a lot of the experiences I’ve had.”Indeed, his two-bedroom apartment is outfitted with exotic furniture and curios, as well as photographs from his travels — not all of which were relaxing. “I’ve run marathons on all seven continents,” he said. “I’ll show you my medals.”The basket of beribboned medallions in the den testifies to his achievement. “The last one was in Antarctica,” he said.He trains for these competitions close to home, however. “Last winter was brutal in New York, and running all over the city in the freezing cold weather was good prep work,” he said. “I run to the George Washington Bridge and across the Brooklyn Bridge. Living close to Central Park is a godsend.”Over the sofa, a collection of midcentury black-and-white photographs, one of them a Margaret Bourke-White picture of a DC-4 flying over Manhattan, is a paean to two other hobbies, flying and photography, which sometimes go together.“I got my pilot’s license about 20 years ago,” he said. “On a nice day, I’ll fly to Block Island.”One of his favorite photographs is an aerial view of a small plane over the deserted Skeleton Coast in Namibia. “I was flying a plane above it when I shot it,” he said.Mr. Clinton, whose sixth book of photographs, “Closer: Seeing the World in Details,” will be published this month by Glitterati ($25), describes photography as “an über-hobby.”The images in “Closer” allow him to focus on the little things that give a culture its character: the way eggs are displayed in cellophane bags in a market in Laos, the candles dripping wax in a candelabrum in Puglia, Italy.And like the rest of his books, “Closer” reveals his contemplative side. “If you’re on a mountaintop in Bhutan or Mongolia, there is not a lot of distraction,” Mr. Clinton said. “You have to focus on the beauty around you and your inner self. That is the whole reason I like to go to these places.”Mr. Clinton’s 2013 collection of essays, about his travels, which also has photos, and is called “The Globetrotter Diaries,” is commemorated by a chair painted to resemble the book’s cover, a gift from his sister. In the sunken living room, one wall is devoted to images by other photographers, arranged salon-style on picture rails. “You know Steve McCurry?” he asked. “You know this picture, the girl with the green eyes from Afghanistan that was on the cover of National Geographic? I’m like a Steve McCurry groupie.”Another hero is Nick Brandt. “The giraffe photographs are by him,” said Mr. Clinton, who is a trustee of the International Center of Photography. “He’s been a big rising star in the past few years.”On the same wall is one of two elaborately painted chests that he purchased in Kathmandu. (The other is on the opposite wall.) “Frankly, they were probably smuggled out of Tibet to protect them,” he said. “They were being restored and sold to raise money for Tibetan refugees.”Then there are the Nepalese bells on the windowsill in the bedroom, the silver-and-tin coffee urns from souks in Turkey and Morocco that sit on a bookcase in the front hall, and the boxes made by Cambodian silversmiths in the shape of an elephant, a pumpkin and a pig on top of the toilet tank in the master bathroom. “I like to glance at them while I’m shaving,” he said.“What I have been trying to do here,” he said, summing up his decorative philosophy, “is to create, in the big world of New York, a sanctuary, if you will, with all the mementos of a lifetime of going all over the world.”Of course, Mr. Clinton doesn’t just collect. He has long made a practice of seeking out local residents when he travels to developing countries, doing whatever he can to help out.On a trip to Mozambique seven years ago, for example, he stayed in an eco-lodge that had established a school for a village. “We went to visit it,” he said, “and the kids were dressed in tattered clothes.” After he returned to the United States, he added, “My friends and I had a clothing drive and shipped boxes of clothes to them.”But the piecemeal nature of this sort of philanthropy was less than satisfying, so in 2010, he and some of his traveling companions founded Circle of Generosity, a foundation with the slogan “Granting random acts of kindness to individuals and families in need.”So far, the foundation’s donations include 575 pairs of shoes for children in an orphanage in Luang Prabang, Laos, and Home Depot gift cards for families in New York trying to rebuild their homes after Hurricane Sandy.“All of these donations are made anonymously,” he said, “which is a purer way to give. Without sounding too woo-woo, the only thing we ask in return is that the recipients complete the circle by giving some act of generosity in their lives someday.”