https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/opinion/expect-a-cozy-trump-telecom-alliance.html
Expect a Cozy Trump-Telecom Alliance - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,AT&T Inc,Federal Communications Commission,Telephones and Telecommunications,Antitrust Laws and Competition Issues,Net Neutrality,Editorials,Series,Time Warner Inc,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,What's at Stake (Series)
Dec. 16, 2016
4773
During the campaign, Donald Trump railed against powerful corporations and promised to prevent  blockbuster mergers like the proposed $85.4 billion deal between AT&T and Time Warner. That was then. Since the election, Mr. Trump has been decidedly less interested in constraining the power of big companies, especially those in the telecommunications industry.It now appears that the AT&T acquisition of Time Warner might be approved after all, according to The Financial Times. One antitrust adviser to Mr. Trump, Joshua Wright, argued last month in The New York Times that “a high level of concentration in an industry simply does not mean the industry lacks competition.”Investors and financial analysts are already betting that the Department of Justice and the Federal Communications Commission under Mr. Trump will be more likely to approve mergers in this industry, including perhaps a deal between Sprint and T-Mobile that was discussed in 2014. Such a merger would almost certainly lead to higher prices for cellphone service by cutting the number of national wireless companies to three, from four.In addition to being more open to big deals, Mr. Trump appears ready to do away with regulations on this oligopolistic industry. As it is, a lack of competition for some services is driving up prices. The cost of expanded basic cable TV service, for example, increased at twice the rate of inflation from 1995 to 2005, according to the F.C.C. Another commission report found that 51 percent of Americans live in areas served by only one broadband landline provider (10 percent live in places where there is no such service).On the chopping block are net neutrality rules adopted by the F.C.C. in 2015 to prohibit companies like Comcast and Verizon from giving preference to some content over others. For example, Comcast is not allowed to engineer its broadband network to download movies and TV shows from its NBC Universal subsidiary faster than movies from Netflix. These rules were upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in June. But the F.C.C. under Mr. Trump is likely to repeal them. Once Mr. Trump appoints a new F.C.C. chairman, probably early next year, Republicans, who have been inveterate opponents of telecom regulation in recent years, will have a 3-to-2 majority on the commission; Democrats have a majority now.One Republican commission member, Ajit Pai, for instance, said last week that net neutrality’s “days are numbered.” And a member of Mr. Trump’s transition team, Mark Jamison, suggested in October that most of the F.C.C. could be eliminated, with the much smaller agency focused on licensing wireless frequencies.Public interest groups, Democratic lawmakers and sensible Republicans in Congress ought to vigorously oppose Mr. Trump’s deregulatory agenda. This won’t be easy, but they could, for example, try to challenge policy changes by filing lawsuits against the F.C.C., a tactic the telecom industry has used countless times over the years to stymie or delay regulations they opposed.Early next year, Senate Democrats will get to choose a new commissioner for the F.C.C. after the departure of Chairman Tom Wheeler, who announced his resignation on Thursday, and Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel, who is also leaving.The Senate would have to confirm the Democratic appointee as it would Mr. Trump’s choices. Democrats ought to pick a strong consumer advocate who will use the position to speak out forcefully for more competition in the industry and common-sense approaches like net neutrality rules. Susan Crawford, of Harvard Law School, and Tim Wu, of Columbia Law School, are two experts who specialize in telecommunication issues and fit that bill. Proper oversight, equitable access to services and fair pricing in telecommunications ought to be bipartisan concerns.