https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/17/opinion/sunday/immigration-politics-at-the-court.html
Immigration Politics at the Court - The New York Times
Editorials,Supreme Court (US),Executive Orders and Memorandums,Obama  Barack,Deportation,Immigration and Emigration,Texas,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Illegal Immigration,States (US)
April 16, 2016
8384
On Monday, the Supreme Court will hear oral arguments in United States v. Texas, one of the most flagrant examples in recent memory of a naked political dispute masquerading as a legal one.In this case, 26 Republican-led states brought suit against President Obama’s November 2014 executive actions to protect millions of immigrants from deportation. And once again, the prospect of a 4-to-4 split on the court threatens to spur widespread legal chaos by effectively giving these 26 states the power to set national immigration policy. But it need not come to that. If the justices follow their own precedent as well as longstanding practice, they should reject the plaintiffs’ absurd claim.Mr. Obama’s challenged action, taken after years of waiting in vain for Congress to pass comprehensive immigration reform, is a sensible response to the issue of the more than 11 million undocumented immigrants living, working and raising families in the United States. It would be impossible to deport them all, so in 2014 Mr. Obama offered a three-year reprieve from deportation to more than four million undocumented parents of American citizens or permanent residents. (A previous executive action, in 2012, allowed young immigrants brought here as children to get work permits and be exempt from deportation.)This is both smart politics and humane policy, and it falls well within Mr. Obama’s authority. As the Supreme Court reiterated in 2012, the federal government has “broad, undoubted power over the subject of immigration and the status of aliens.”Presidents from Dwight Eisenhower to George W. Bush often wielded such power — which includes deciding whom to deport, and when — with virtually no opposition. And Mr. Obama has deported 2.5 million undocumented immigrants, more than any president in history. But Republican governors and state officials are infuriated with his 2014 executive action, claiming it violates immigration law and is an unconstitutional overreach of his authority.As a matter of law, this lawsuit should never have made it this far. The president’s actions did not change anyone’s legal status; it just allowed certain undocumented immigrants to temporarily seek work without the constant fear of being torn from their children and families. Besides, the states have no standing to bring the suit in the first place because, despite their contorted claims, they will suffer no demonstrable harm. If the states are allowed to prevail in this case, states conceivably could sue over almost any federal policy decision they oppose.Chief Justice John Roberts Jr. likes to say that the court is above politics. This case, which has never been more than a highly politicized anti-immigrant crusade wrapped in legal briefs, gives him and the court a clear opportunity to reaffirm that principle and leave fights like these to the political process.