https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/us/50-years-after-watts-riots-a-recovery-is-in-progress.html
Watts, 50 Years On, Stands in Contrast to Today’s Conflicts - The New York Times
Watts (Los Angeles  Calif),Blacks,Police,Los Angeles (Calif),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Hispanic-Americans,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Police Department (Los Angeles  Calif),Race and Ethnicity
Aug. 10, 2015
5755
LOS ANGELES — Donny Joubert watched the boy round the corner of the housing project holding what looked like a handgun. The barrel was pointed at him and the two officers from the Los Angeles Police Department. The boy was 10 or 11 years old, Mr. Joubert figured, and had more gleam than anger in his eyes. Mr. Joubert, a community activist who grew up in the project, shouted and lunged for the gun.It was plastic. The police officers did not even reach for their holsters.“Somewhere else, that kid would be dead,” Mr. Joubert said.That interaction, Mr. Joubert said, is the best illustration of the way the community has changed significantly in the 50 years since the Watts riots broke out on the streets here for six days starting on Aug. 11, 1965.Confrontations between African-Americans and the police are once again convulsing the country; in Ferguson, Mo., where protesters gathered over the weekend to commemorate the anniversary of the death of Michael Brown and the riots that ensued, a gunman fired at the police on Sunday night and was shot, and other gunfire and skirmishes broke out. But Watts — once a symbol of urban strife and racial tensions — stands as a stark contrast. There were fewer than a dozen homicides in the neighborhood last year, compared with hundreds in 1965. Community leaders like Mr. Joubert, a former gang leader turned peacemaker and respected mentor, say relations with the police have never been better.“They don’t think the kid is out to kill them; they’re not out to kill the kid,” Mr. Joubert said. “They walk and they know who they are talking to. We’ve been through this before, we’re still kind of recovering and saying there’s another way.”Still, this is no utopia.Each summer, Mr. Joubert, 54, helps run a jobs program for teenagers at Nickerson Gardens, the low-slung public housing complex where he was raised. Twice last week, the teenagers were summoned inside because of shootings, as administrators worried that a stray bullet would endanger them. And little of the trust Mr. Joubert has for the police has filtered to these teenagers.“They harass us all the time,” said Raydon Boyce, 19.“Don’t matter what you do,” Nigel Ewers added, echoing the sentiment expressed by all of the teenage boys taking a break one morning last week.This is not the same Watts their parents grew up in. While the area remains persistently poor, demographics have transformed it from an African-American enclave to a neighborhood that is more than 70 percent Latino. Many blacks have moved to the suburbs in the Inland Empire and the desert north of Los Angeles. Those changes have brought their own tensions; many black residents talk of feeling pushed out while Latinos have struggled to rise to political leadership.“Sometimes we’re all against everyone,” said Steve Torres, 17, whose sister left Watts for a small town in Virginia last year. Sitting across the table, an African-American teenager spoke of police officers “killing us off.”“Don’t really matter who you are; we’re just labeled as bad people,” Mr. Torres said.Big questions hang in the air, sometimes asked aloud: Could what happened in Ferguson happen here? Could Watts explode as it did five decades ago? Alternatively, could the improvements in Watts happen in Ferguson? There is a deep generational divide in the answers.Last summer, when Los Angeles police officers shot and killed Ezell Ford, an unarmed mentally ill black man, less than a mile away, protesters wanted to march from downtown to Watts. Mr. Joubert and other leaders urged them to stay away, he said.“There’s always a sense things can boil over,” said Nina Revoyr, the chief operating officer for the Children’s Institute here, which runs dozens of programs and offers free mental health services in the neighborhood. “But there’s a sense of maturity here; the neighborhood has been through all this before and the transformation has happened. There’s a true relationship — you see a problem, and you talk about it.”After the police caught a group of youngsters who had been stealing from the offices of the Children’s Institute, Ms. Revoyr worked with officers to avoid pressing charges and instead sent them to a diversion program where they completed hours of community service.Every week for the better part of a decade, Mr. Joubert and other local leaders have met as part of the Watts Gang Task Force, exchanging information with the police and trying to find ways to quell tensions in the community, whether they stem from a gang fight or a police interaction.In some sense, the changes in the area are evidence of the uniqueness of the neighborhood, which covers just more than two square miles. It is, as some residents put it, the smallest neighborhood with the biggest reputation.The city’s Housing Authority has poured more than $10 million into special projects there in the last several years. The Police Department has dedicated 10 officers and a sergeant to each of the housing complexes, with officers generally signing on for a five-year commitment to patrol the area by foot each day. The police officers have begun a football league for 9- to 11-year-olds and work as coaches on their days off.There are signs, too, of enormous challenges. The perimeters of the sports fields at one middle school are fortified with mounds of dirt, meant to protect students from bullets. Residents celebrated a park when it opened this year on what had been a weed-infested lot. Now, the gate to the park is locked, and the slides and skateboard ramps were empty on recent summer afternoons.The area remains physically isolated, crisscrossed by freeways and railroads. There is still no sit-down restaurant, but the father of the city’s food trucks, Roy Choi, has announced plans to open one. The Children’s Institute will soon unveil plans for its new building designed by Frank Gehry, which it hopes will function as a community center.The persistent doubts remain.“We look around at what other places have, and we just don’t see the opportunities here,” said Tim Watkins, who runs the Watts Labor CommunityAction Committee, which his father created after the 1965 uprising, as locals refer to it. “There’s still a lot of desperation around here, and that can lead to desperate acts at any time.”Sgt. Emada Tingirides, who grew up in the neighborhood and now serves as the coordinator of the Community Safety Partnership program in the housing projects, said hardly a day goes by without talking with residents here about police shootings in other parts of the country.“If it happened here, we would know what to do after the fact,” she said. But she acknowledged change does not come easily and officers still face mistrust from the young men in the neighborhood. “This is a cultural shift that is going to take time, not just years but decades and generations.”She thought back to the boy who approached her with the toy gun about six months ago. Mr. Joubert snapped the object in half and then persuaded the ice cream trucks and liquor stores to stop selling them.That boy, she said, might be someone who now believes the police are out there to protect him, or at least not out to get him.