https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/us/politics/fact-check-is-karen-handel-georgias-first-female-representative.html
Fact Check: Is Karen Handel Georgia’s First Female Representative? - The New York Times
Fact Check,United States Politics and Government
June 21, 2017
1802
If a conservative makes history, asked Donald Trump Jr., does she make a sound?Celebrating Karen Handel’s win in a special House election in Georgia, Mr. Trump complained that the significance of her victory was hardly noted.Ms. Handel defeated her Democratic opponent, Jon Ossoff, in the closely watched contest, the most expensive House campaign ever. The race made history in campaign finance; did Ms. Handel do the same for women in Georgia politics?It depends on what Mr. Trump meant by “Rep.” If the abbreviation stood for representative, he’s off by about 95 years.Georgia first sent a woman, Rebecca Latimer Felton, to Congress in 1922. A political activist, writer, suffragist and the first female senator, Mrs. Felton was appointed to fill a vacancy by a governor who supported the 19th Amendment. She served just a day, giving her the distinction of also having the shortest term of service.According to her Senate biography, she concluded her only Senate speech with a nod to gender equality. “When the women of the country come in and sit with you,” she said, “you will get ability, you will get integrity of purpose, you will get exalted patriotism, and you will get unstinted usefulness.”Since Mrs. Felton’s term, Georgia’s congressional delegation, like the rest of Congress, has been overwhelmingly male. Just five women from Georgia have served in Congress since then. The state’s first female representative, Florence Reville Gibbs, was voted into office in 1940, through a special election called after the death of her husband. She was followed by Helen Douglas Mankin in 1946, Iris Faircloth Blitch in 1955, Cynthia McKinney in 1993 and Denise Majette in 2003.If Mr. Trump meant Republican, he would have been more accurate. All of Ms. Handel’s female predecessors in Georgia have been Democrats, and no woman currently represents the state. But this definitive moment for Republican women hasn’t gone unnoticed. National and local news outlets alike have written about Ms. Handel making history.Ms. Handel’s victory merits celebration for bringing the number of women in Congress to the highest ever at 105, said Kelly Dittmar of the Center for American Women and Politics at Rutgers University. But that increase was marginal, from 19.4 percent to 19.6 percent, she added, and bears a reminder that women are still underrepresented in politics.The congresswoman proudly noted the historical import herself in her victory speech, as The Times reported.“I am also very well aware of another obligation that comes with tonight’s decision by the voters, the obligation of being the first Republican woman elected to Congress from the great state of Georgia,” she said Tuesday night. “Tonight reminds us — it reminds me — that anything is possible.”A century earlier, in 1917, America’s first female representative was sworn in: Jeannette Rankin of Montana, also a Republican.“I may be the first woman member of Congress,” Ms. Rankin said upon her election. “But I won’t be the last.”