https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/world/asia/trump-call-gauged-positively-but-cautiously-in-taiwan.html
Trump Call Gauged Positively, but Cautiously, in Taiwan - The New York Times
Democratic Progressive Party (Taiwan),Tsai Ing-wen,Trump  Donald J,Hung Hsiu-chu (1948- ),Taiwan,International Relations,China
Dec. 5, 2016
2389
TAIPEI, Taiwan — What a difference a phone call makes.In Taiwan — rendered nearly invisible in global affairs by decades of accommodation to Chinese pressure — the reaction to the call between President Tsai Ing-wen of Taiwan and President-elect Donald J. Trump late last week has been broadly positive, if tinged with caution.Ms. Tsai took office in May with a mandate to reduce Taiwan’s economic reliance and close political ties with Beijing.China claims Taiwan as its territory and threatens to use force if Taipei officially acknowledges its de facto sovereignty. At her inauguration, Ms. Tsai said she wanted to improve relations with China, while also deepening ties with the United States and Japan.Ms. Tsai has moved her party, the Democratic Progressive Party, away from its pro-independence roots to a more nuanced form of Taiwan nationalism. The party’s charter still features a clause advocating eventual official independence in the form of a Republic of Taiwan, although in July Ms. Tsai proposed replacing the clause with language that favors maintaining the status quo.On Sunday, Hung Hsiu-chu, the chairwoman of the opposition Nationalist party, or Kuomintang, said she was glad to learn of Mr. Trump’s support for Taiwan.“I am happy to see anything good for Taiwan,” the KMT’s website quoted Ms. Hung as saying.Ms. Hung’s comment was notable because she has previously advocated unification with China. Her party lost the presidency this year after eight years of moving closer to Beijing, which did not reduce its threat to Taiwan. China has more than 1,500 missiles pointed across the Taiwan Strait.In interviews in Taipei, the capital, on Monday, residents said they were pleased about the phone call.“I think that for the majority of Taiwanese people, this is the happiest thing that’s happened to us since 1978, before the U.S. broke off diplomatic relations,” Hsieh Jin-ho, a publisher and commentator, said in a phone interview.The United States formally recognized the People’s Republic of China in 1979, abrogating its ties with Taiwan under the One China policy.Mr. Hsieh added that in general, Taiwanese had two different takeaways from the call.“One conclusion is that Taiwan needs to seize this opportunity in order to upgrade to fuller relations with the U.S. and expand its international friendly relations,” he said. “Another group of people fear that China’s continually increasing pressure will grow even larger” and threaten Taiwan’s future.Speaking at her cafe in Taipei’s Zhongshan district, Annie Hsieh, unrelated to Mr. Hsieh, smiled when asked about the call.“I think it’s great,” Ms. Hsieh said. “Reading that it’s the first time in 37 years that the Taiwanese president and American president-elect have spoken, I feel like it’s major progress by the new government.”Chen Hui-ling, a lawyer, praised Ms. Tsai, whose party controls Taiwan’s presidency and legislature for the first time.“People who voted for the D.P.P. are paying attention to what it’s doing,” she said. “They’re looking to see if it will do something courageous, something different from the past.”Ms. Chen said she was struck by how most European lawyers she encountered on a recent business trip to London knew little about Taiwan.“They may have heard that there are some problems between Taiwan and China, but that’s all they know,” she said.Albert King, a fund manager, said the call was the main subject of conversation among his friends and associates.“I think all Taiwanese are happy to see the president-elect of the United States say it’s O.K. to say ‘president of Taiwan’ or talk to the Taiwanese people as if we are a normal country,” he said. “I don’t know how Americans look at this, but I think the president-elect has won the hearts of us Taiwanese.”Yet he also sounded a note of caution.“We all know from our history that international politics is about realpolitik,” he said. “We have good faith, but we’ll refrain from wishful thinking.”In 1978, when Washington announced it would shift official recognition of China to Beijing, it sent Taiwan into the diplomatic wilderness in which it still resides. Since then, Taiwan has evolved from a oppressive martial state into a wealthy, progressive democracy.“It’s a long-awaited vindication of our denial by the world,” Mr. King said of the Tsai-Trump call. “Even after we’ve achieved so much as a democracy, as a society, as an economy, we are not treated as equal to other countries.”Although happy with Taiwan’s moment in the sun, Jodie Lee, who works at an international nongovernmental organization in Taipei, is reluctant to place much faith in Mr. Trump.“Does this mean Trump is going to restore relations with Taiwan?” Ms. Lee asked. “Or did he only pick up the phone because the U.S. sells us a lot of weapons?”Mr. King described an increasingly unpredictable regional political environment, with the Philippines entering China’s orbit, while Beijing’s relations with Singapore have soured. And China will make important leadership changes next year.“It’s all very delicate right now, so I’m not surprised that China has been showing self-restraint,” Mr. King said. “I think that’s a good sign, but I would not be surprised if they change their mind and decide to react very strongly.”“The tectonic plates are shifting, we know it will bring earthquakes,” he said. “Risk is definitely rising — I’m an investor, I can see that.”