https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/world/asia/kabul-afghanistan-protest-bombing.html
Protest at Kabul Bomb Site Turns Deadly - The New York Times
Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Terrorism,Taliban,Afghanistan,Kabul (Afghanistan),vis-multimedia
June 2, 2017
3502
KABUL, Afghanistan — A protest on Friday that began at the site of a huge bombing in Kabul earlier this week and made its way to the gates of the Afghan presidential palace turned deadly, with security forces firing to disperse angry crowds trying to get inside.At least four dead and 15 wounded people were taken to Emergency Hospital, one of Kabul’s main trauma centers, according to the hospital. One witness said he had seen at least six dead bodies.The Kabul police chief, Gen. Hassan Shah Frogh, said some of the protesters were carrying weapons and had fired at the police, wounding four officers. “Police also fired, and only one or two protesters may be wounded,” he said.Video from the protest showed officers firing in the crowd’s direction, but it was unclear whether those bullets were hitting anyone.General Frogh added that Salem Izidyar, the son of the deputy speaker of the Senate, was among the protesters who had been killed.Haroon Mutaref, one of the protest organizers, said the demonstrations would continue despite the clashes. “We are still here, although the police shot at people,” he said. “We are here, and we will not leave until we reach our goal of getting justice.”The police also fired water cannons and tear gas into the crowd.With emotions running high after the clashes, there were fears that political strongmen might try to take advantage of the anger produced by the bombing deaths to move against the government.“No one can stop people from protesting, and they used force. They rammed military vehicles into crowds setting up protest tents,” said Gul Haider, a former warlord from the northern part of the country and military commander who joined the protests after he heard news of the clashes. “If we wanted to push our way in, we would have reached the palace.”He said he had seen dozens of wounded at the hospital, and six dead bodies from the protest.Several hours after the protests began, President Ashraf Ghani put out a lengthy statement asking for calm.“Civil and peaceful protests are the rights of all citizens of the country,” Mr. Ghani’s statement said. “But among them, those who want to agitate and hurt public order, their issue is separate — they will not be allowed to use the people’s emotions against the people’s interest.”Mr. Ghani’s coalition partner, the government’s chief executive Abdullah Abdullah, put out a video message saying the administration was ready to sit down for talks with the protesters.The United Nations mission in Afghanistan sought calm as well. “It is imperative to seek ways to listen to and voice grievances peacefully,” said Tadamichi Yamamoto, the United Nations secretary general’s special representative for Afghanistan. “I strongly discourage any actor from seeking opportunistically to use these very emotional and fragile moments to destabilize the situation and risk further harm to civilians.”Amnesty International has called for an investigation into the use of force by security agencies against protesters, saying it “illustrates the authorities’ contempt for the lives” of the Afghan public.“While there are reports that a minority of protesters used violence including throwing stones at the police, this does not justify such an excessive and deadly response,” said Biraj Patnaik, Amnesty International’s South Asia director.The protests began peacefully on Friday morning, as hundreds of people from across the city chanted for the government to resign as they gathered near the bombing site, in the city’s diplomatic quarter. The bombing, during morning rush hour on Wednesday, killed nearly 100 people and wounded more than 450.The protest continued as demonstrators began moving toward the presidential palace.“Death to the Taliban! Death to Haqqani!” the protesters also chanted, referring to the wing of the Taliban that the Afghan intelligence agency has said was behind the bombing.Among the early participants was Saleh Mohammed, 75, who had walked for an hour and a half from the Qalai Zaman Khan neighborhood after he heard news of a gathering early in the morning.“The leaders say they are good Muslims, but they don’t prove it in action — it’s all nepotism and ethnic prejudice,” said Mr. Mohammed, teary-eyed as he looked at the site of Wednesday’s blast.Mr. Mohammed said he knew there were threats to the protest, as militants have targeted previous peaceful rallies, but he came in solidarity with the young people in front of him. “If something happens, I want to be in the middle of it,” he said. “If my young are dying, I am nothing more than them.”As the crowds grew, however, with new groups arriving from other parts of the city, the atmosphere grew more tense.One group of about 400 protesters who came from the north of the city were particularly angry as a strong police presence along their route repeatedly tried to prevent them from coming to the city center to join the protest. Dozens of trucks dotted their route, and several fire trucks hosed them with water.Some of the crowd started moving toward the palace, but the road leading to it was blocked by security vehicles and hundreds of officers. The security forces first used water cannons and riot gear, but when that failed to disperse the crowd, the officers started firing bullets into the air.In the early afternoon, the situation seemed to be getting more violent as the Afghan forces started firing for long stretches. They also used armored vehicles to chase protesters out of the area. By early evening, the protesters had largely dispersed, but the area remained a military zone.Just around the corner, a tent had been erected where protest organizers tried to chart their next moves. One, Mujib Zia, said the protest had been meant to hold the government accountable for a tremendous security failure on Wednesday.“Our demands are just: How did that big truck filled with explosives got here? They have to answer us,” Mr. Zia said. “We asked for justice, they shot us in the face. Now they have to answer that.”