https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/dining/corn-casserole-recipe.html
Finding Comfort in Scalloped Corn - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Corn
July 14, 2017
9508
I haven’t had nearly my fill of corn on the cob this year: plain, boiled and buttered; roasted in the husk and drizzled with olive oil; or grilled over coals and rubbed with something spicy. There is something wonderful about its simplicity. Fetchingly wrapped in a bright green husk, a fresh ear of corn is as beautiful as it is ready to cook. We grasp it, steaming, in our hands as we nibble at the kernels, as we savor its sweet flavor, as the cob is quickly denuded.Still, it’s best not to fall into a rut: There are many other wonderful ways to cook corn. The other day, I found myself suddenly craving not corn on the cob, but rather old-fashioned scalloped corn. A quintessentially American comfort food, it’s a homey, bubbling, creamy casserole, crowned with toasted, buttery cracker crumbs. I vividly recall the scalloped corn that I was served for dinner, many years ago, on a small farm in western Washington, made with freshly picked corn and rich cream from the morning milking. Baked ham and hot biscuits were also served, but scalloped corn was clearly the star.Well loved throughout the United States, scalloped corn is often attributed first to New England. There, any number of other foods are scalloped — potatoes, oysters, clams, onions, tomatoes. The term usually refers to something baked in cream, sometimes with cheese, similar to a French gratin. Cooks differ over whether to use heavy cream, condensed milk or white sauce (béchamel), but nearly all agree that buttered cracker crumbs or bread crumbs are essential for the topping.The seasoning for scalloped corn tends to be fairly restrained: just salt and pepper. For a more flavorful version, an old edition of “The Fannie Farmer Cookbook” suggests adding a few drops each of Worcestershire and Tabasco sauces, and chopped green pepper. Some recipes call for diced ham. I’m all for increasing the flavor quotient if so inclined. The basic recipe leaves plenty of room for innovation. My scalloped corn relies on diced red bell pepper for color and sweetness, but a little crushed hot red pepper or chopped fresh Fresno chile would not be amiss. Scallions or chives could figure in. A Southwestern variation might include roasted green chiles and queso fresco.I admired a scalloped corn casserole at a potluck once and asked for the recipe. It was easy to remember: one large can of cooked corn kernels and one large can of creamed corn, mixed with an egg and some grated cheese. It was excellent.Recipe: Old-Fashioned Scalloped CornFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.