http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/29/us/pennsylvania-to-purchase-private-care-for-its-poor.html
Pennsylvania to Purchase Private Care for Its Poor - The New York Times
Pennsylvania,Medicaid,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Corbett  Thomas W,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Federal Aid (US),States (US)
Aug. 28, 2014
6142
WASHINGTON —  Pennsylvania will become the 27th state to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, the Obama administration announced Thursday, using federal funds to buy private health insurance for about 500,000 low-income residents starting next year.Gov. Tom Corbett, a Republican, had proposed the plan as an alternative to expanding traditional Medicaid under the health care law, which he opposes. Now that federal officials have signed off, Pennsylvania will join Arkansas and Iowa in using Medicaid funds to buy private coverage for the poor.The Republican governor of Indiana, Mike Pence, has proposed a similar plan but has not yet received approval from the Obama administration. The so-called private option has increasingly appealed to some conservatives as a free-market alternative to traditional Medicaid, a government-run program that critics say has out-of-control costs.Pennsylvania’s plan includes requirements for the Medicaid expansion population that go beyond the traditional program. For example, people with annual incomes above the poverty level — $11,670 for an individual — will have to pay premiums equaling up to 2 percent of their household income starting in 2016.Most states have already received the federal government’s permission to charge premiums to some of their Medicaid enrollees, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health care research group.Mr. Corbett had initially wanted to charge premiums to people earning as little as half the poverty level, but federal officials pushed back. He also tried unsuccessfully to require adults who worked fewer than 20 hours a week to search for jobs as a condition of eligibility.“From the beginning, I said we needed a plan that was created in Pennsylvania for Pennsylvania — a plan that would allow us to reform a financially unsustainable Medicaid program and increase access to health care for eligible individuals through the private market,” Mr. Corbett said in a statement.Joan Alker, executive director of the Georgetown University Center for Children and Families, said Pennsylvania’s plan was different from Arkansas’s and Iowa’s because the newly eligible Medicaid population would not choose private plans through the new online insurance marketplace. Instead, Ms. Alker said, they will enroll in managed-care plans offered by private insurance companies outside the exchange.“To me it’s a lot of rhetoric,” she said. “The majority of Medicaid beneficiaries in Pennsylvania already get their services through managed care, from private insurance companies that the Medicaid program contracts with. So he’s really just adding a layer of complexity here.”Eight other Republican governors have already expanded Medicaid under the new law, including some who did so over the protests of Republican legislators. The law allows states to extend Medicaid to people who earn up to 138 percent of the poverty level — up to $16,105 for an individual or $32,913 for a family of four — with the federal government paying the entire cost through 2016. From that point on, the law requires the federal government to pay 90 percent of the cost.Many states not participating in the expansion sharply limit who qualifies for Medicaid, which has traditionally been financed jointly by states and the federal government.Mr. Corbett is running for re-election but faces low approval ratings and poll numbers. His Democratic opponent, Tom Wolf, has said he would support expanding traditional Medicaid, as most states that have embraced expansion have done.Health advocacy groups hailed the announcement as good news, particularly for Pennsylvania residents who fell into the so-called coverage gap: those who did not qualify for Medicaid without the expanded program, but who earned too little to qualify for federal subsidies created to help people with incomes above the poverty level buy private insurance.“There never should have been a coverage gap in Pennsylvania,” said Antoinette Kraus, director of the Pennsylvania Health Access Network, “and we share the relief of hundreds of thousands of uninsured Pennsylvanians in knowing it’s finally on track to close.”But Ms. Kraus said she remained worried about changes to the state’s traditional Medicaid program. The waiver that the state received from the Obama administration to pursue a private option for newly eligible Medicaid enrollees also allows it to put most working-age adults in the traditional program in a “low risk” health plan with basic benefits. People with complex health problems would qualify for a “high risk” plan with more benefits.