https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/us/politics/the-right-and-left-react-to-russia-health-care-and-more.html
The Right and Left React to the Collapse of the Health Care Bill, and More - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government
July 18, 2017
4
The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’s why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.Has this series exposed you to new ideas?Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com.• Rich Lowry in National Review:“If the Republican attempt to repeal and replace Obamacare ultimately fails, it will be a lesson in the wages of political bad faith.”On the heels of the Senate health care bill’s collapse, Mr. Lowry looks at the prospective landscape for legislative health care action. And he doesn’t see many paths for success. He calls President Trump’s newly proposed plan to repeal first and then replace a “non-starter” because “if there aren’t 50 Republican votes for today’s relatively generous bill” than all the more austere measures would be even less politically viable. Read more »_____Phillip Klein in Washington Examiner:“The problem for Republicans is that they cannot have all things. They cannot simultaneously have a cheaper, less regulated market, with lower taxes and spending, that provides relief to Obamacare’s victims — without being willing to accept that a certain amount of disruption will occur to the law’s beneficiaries.”Mr. Klein, a conservative writer who has written a book on replacing Obamacare, believes there is a fundamental problem blocking congressional Republicans from addressing health care: themselves. He argues that the caucus is too divided between those who want “root and branch” repeal of Obamacare for a market-based solution and those who would be uncomfortable taking benefits away from constituents. And a “bill that isn’t governed by any clear vision, and thus isn’t representative of coherent policy” can never succeed. Read more »_____• Denise C. McAllister in The Federalist:“Our education about sex of any sort is woefully lacking if it focuses only on the physical. Children’s minds and souls need to be educated as well.”Ms. McAllister responds to the recent controversy about a sexual advice column in Teen Vogue with a larger look at the state of a growing sexualized culture and the demands placed on sexual education in the classroom. Read more »_____• John Fund in National Review:“I’m glad the news media is pursuing the Trump-Russia scandal, but let’s not forget the differences between how they are covering Russia compared with how they reported a similar story — this one involving Communist China — that developed during Bill Clinton’s 1996 re-election campaign.”Mr. Fund does not let us forget. He concisely and authoritatively summarizes the specifics of the Clinton-China incident as he makes the case for perspective. The Trump campaign is not the first to have questions raised about its relationships with a foreign state. Read more »• Ezra Klein in Vox:“The Republican failure to craft an effective replacement for Obamacare isn’t an accident. It’s a function of the fact that Obamacare is largely working, and Republicans who spent years persuading themselves and their base it’s a catastrophic failure are now slamming into that reality.”Mr. Klein identifies the problems with the Affordable Care Act: it works poorly in certain pockets of the country, deductibles are too high, and premiums are volatile. He then launches through a thorough analysis of its achievements, points to positive polling numbers and argues that Republicans are politically boxed-in because Democrats already “took many of their best ideas on health care” in crafting the existing legislation. Read more »_____• Stephen Stromberg in The Washington Post:“Trump has shown little capacity to learn and change, but this should be a lesson for his still-young administration. People care about more than just winning. They also care about how they win and what they gain in winning.”In the wake of the health care bill’s collapse, Mr. Stromberg imagines that a bipartisan coalition could rally behind a package that includes “reinsurance programs to drive down premiums, fully funds Obamacare subsidies, repeals the mandate on employers to provide health care insurance and offers states more flexibility.” Read more »_____• Eliza Newlin Carney in The American Prospect:“Wherever federal and congressional investigations lead, the danger posed by foreign interference in U.S. elections goes beyond the Trump campaign.”Ms. Carney wants to draw more attention to the regulatory process at the Federal Election Commission. The commission is grappling with questions about what Russia’s reported interests in American elections could mean — independent of any discoveries made during the ongoing investigations. In the wake of the Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United ruling that lifted the limits on political contributions from corporations, some see a potential loophole for foreign nationals to exploit. When Ms. Carney looks to how the commission is handling these questions, she finds a partisan divide. Read more »_____• Norm Ornstein in The Atlantic:“What emerges is a truly disturbing picture of a failed legislative process built on a deep distortion of representative democracy. A thoroughly partisan, ill-conceived and ill-considered bill, slapped together without the input of experts or stakeholders, done not to improve the health care system.”Mr. Ornstein is displeased with the way health care is being deliberated in Congress. He discusses the history of the Affordable Care Act and says that Republicans who reflexively opposed it have offered no alternative framework. Instead he taunts an “ideological view that cutting government magically brings freedom and prosperity and good health.”• The Rev. Joshua J. Whitfield in The Dallas Morning News:“The rush to repeal the A.C.A. at this stage was simply inhuman, plainly immoral politics. Everyone agrees that reform is necessary — but not that way.”Father Whitfield, a parochial vicar at St. Rita Catholic Church in Dallas, writes of the need for more debate and information gathering as Congress considers health care legislation. He argues that theoretical abstraction makes the “bills that were under discussion read like cuneiform.” He thinks we should consider the “personal particulars of human lives” first, before ideological philosophies frame the debate. Read more »_____• David Darby in The Billings Gazette“For the moment what we have is a government of the minority, by the minority, and for the minority.”Mr. Darby points out that the executive and legislative branches of the federal government are Republican controlled by slim margins. And yet the stated intentions and policy actions taken in the first six months of the Trump administration seem to be exclusive of any attempts to reach out to broader political constituencies. Mr. Darby wonders if an agenda like that can work. Read more »_____• Saikrishna Bangalore Prakash in Vox“Those pining for the political destruction of Donald Trump run the risk that the villagers will not come running if and when a wolf finally appears.”Mr. Prakash, the James Monroe distinguished professor of law at the University of Virginia, preaches patience to opponents of the Trump administration. He pours water on the idea that anything we have learned about the Trump campaign’s relationship with the Russians has been illegal. And he argues that failure to “distinguish what might be significant from the trivial or inconsequential will cause many Americans to throw up their hands and tune out.” Read more »_____Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We’re Reading Newsletter.Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com.