https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/31/world/middleeast/israel-west-bank-outposts-mitzpe-danny.html
Israel Quietly Legalizes Pirate Outposts in the West Bank - The New York Times
Israeli Settlements,Palestinians,West Bank,Israel,Netanyahu  Benjamin
Aug. 30, 2016
7072
MITZPE DANNY, West Bank — One night in the fall of 1998, a self-professed “outpost entrepreneur” brought three trailers to a rugged hilltop in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and established his first pirate settlement.Dozens of youthful supporters came to cheer on the entrepreneur, Shimon Riklin, whose wife, newborn and toddler joined him a few days later. A second family also moved in. To their initial surprise, nobody from the military or government came to remove them. “After six months,” Mr. Riklin said in a recent interview, “I understood it was a done deal.”They named their outpost Mitzpe Danny, after a British immigrant stabbed to death by a Palestinian at the settlement across the highway, and went on over the next few months to help establish Mitzpe Hagit and then Neve Erez a short drive away. “I jumped from hill to hill,” Mr. Riklin said.Today, more than 40 Orthodox Jewish families live in Mitzpe Danny, one of a string of outposts on a strategic ridge with breathtaking views southwest to Jerusalem’s Mount of Olives and east all the way to Jordan. They are part of an expansive network of about 100 outposts established mostly over the past two decades without government authorization.At least one-third of these have either been retroactively legalized or — like Mitzpe Danny — are on their way, in what anti-settlement groups that track the process see as a quiet but methodical effort by the government to change the map of the West Bank, now in its 50th year under Israeli occupation, by entrenching the outposts that spread like fingers across it.With the Israeli-Palestinian peace process dormant and the international community increasingly suspicious of the right-wing Israeli government’s commitment to the eventual establishment of a Palestinian state, the outposts are being seized on as evidence that the conflict may be impossible to unwind. In its July report, the so-called Quartet of Middle East peacemakers — made up of the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia — listed it as a trend “imperiling the viability of the two-state solution.”Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who was in his first term when Mitzpe Danny was founded, has since endorsed the idea of a Palestinian state alongside Israel, and said that his government would not build new settlements or expropriate land for existing ones. But Ziv Stahl, the research director at Yesh Din, one of the left-wing advocacy groups, said “they are authorizing them in disguise.”Israel, Ms. Stahl said, has tried to avoid international censure by registering outposts like Mitzpe Danny as “neighborhoods” of established settlements, though some are far apart and function as separate communities.Pointing to other Israeli measures, including the demolitions of unauthorized Palestinian structures in the West Bank, she added, “We see it as a very gradual move toward annexation.”Asked about the legalization of outposts — and the international criticism — Mr. Netanyahu’s spokesman, David Keyes, did not respond directly, but instead turned the question to the Palestinian leaders’ stance that no settlements could remain in the West Bank under a future deal.“The frequently echoed Palestinian demand to ethnically cleanse their future state of Jews,” Mr. Keyes said via email, “is outrageous, immoral and antithetical to peace.”The outposts are strategically located alongside more than 120 settlements that were formally approved by Israel, and are home to a fraction of the West Bank’s 350,000 Jewish settlers.One group stretches east of Shilo, like beads on a chain: Shvut Rahel, Adei Ad, Ahiya, Kida, Esh Kodesh. These outposts command the hilltops between Palestinian villages like Qusra, Jalud, Al-Mughayyer and Duma, the scene of last year’s deadly arson attack in which one young Israeli has been charged with murder and another with conspiracy.Rabbah Hazameh, a Palestinian whose family owns olive orchards and agricultural fields in the area, said that settlers prevented him and his relatives from working their land close to Adei Ad, and that trees had been damaged and poisoned. He said that his uncle had submitted 86 complaints to the Israeli police over the years, but “nothing happened.”While most of the world considers all of these settlements a violation of international law, Israel itself makes distinctions, including whether they sit on privately owned Palestinian land and whether they had government approval for construction.A government-commissioned 2005 survey by Talia Sasson, a former state prosecutor, counted at least 105 outposts that were established in “blatant violation of the law” and called for “drastic steps,” including the immediate removal of those on private lands.But in 2012, Mr. Netanyahu commissioned another panel that came to starkly different conclusions.Led by Edmund Levy, a retired Israeli Supreme Court justice, this report concluded that the West Bank is not actually occupied — in part because Jordan’s previous 19-year hold there was never internationally recognized — and that there was no impediment to approving outposts that were built on state land with what it called the “implied agreement” of senior Israeli officials. The Levy report, though, upheld the Israeli policy that settlements on private Palestinian land are illegal.Under international pressure, Israel has repeatedly pledged to remove unauthorized outposts. But it has also tried to salvage some, even on private land, such as Amona, which is scheduled to be dismantled by Dec. 25 under an order of Israel’s Supreme Court. The residents of another such outpost, Migron, which Mr. Riklin also helped establish, were moved in 2012 to temporary homes on nearby public land.Mr. Netanyahu’s government in 2011 had already quietly introduced what it called a new “combined policy.” The idea was that Israel would remove settlement structures built on privately owned Palestinian land, but, in areas that Israel has declared as state land, would instead “regulate the planning status” — or, in other words, legalize construction after the fact.The first indications of changes in status of specific outposts have mostly emerged in the Israeli government’s responses to court petitions by anti-settlement groups.This was the case late last year, when the Israeli Supreme Court dismissed a petition for the demolition of an illegal structure in Mitzpe Danny after the state told the court that it was advancing a process to authorize the outpost.The court cited an October 2015 decision of an Israeli planning committee to promote an old master plan for Jewish population growth in that area.Mitzpe Danny is defined in the plan as a “neighborhood” of Ma’ale Michmash, the mother settlement across the highway, though part of the outpost lies outside the settlement’s broadest boundaries. According to the blueprint, Mitzpe Danny is projected to accommodate 189 permanent homes by 2040.The outpost lacks the kind of detailed urban plan required to be fully authorized by Israel, and the court acknowledged that the planning process was moving slowly. But Peace Now, another anti-settlement group, says at least 20 outposts have already completed the planning process or have detailed plans in the works with the defense minister’s approval; 14 others are in the pipeline.Hagit Ofran, the director of Peace Now’s settlement watch program, said the government’s message was “build and we will sort it out retroactively.”The Defense Ministry and the Civil Administration — the arm of the Israeli military that deals with civilian affairs in the West Bank — declined to discuss the outposts or provide any data about their status. Settler leaders said they also struggled to get information about how many outposts were being legalized. “I am not sure if it is a third or half or 100 percent,” said Oded Revivi, the chief foreign envoy of the Yesha Council, which represents settlers.Most of the approval process takes place cautiously and with a degree of ambiguity. Mr. Riklin, the founder of Mitzpe Danny and its neighboring outposts, described it as “all cat and mouse” between Mr. Netanyahu and President Obama, who has consistently said any settlement expansion is an obstacle to peace.Yigal Dilmoni, the deputy chief executive of the settler council, said that groups like Peace Now have actually done settlers a favor by suing the state because those cases often force the government to commit to a position. After one court petition led to government authorization of illegal building in a settlement and an outpost, the council sent Peace Now flowers.The note accompanying the bouquet said, “We will happily consider naming a street ‘Peace Now’ in the new neighborhoods.”Ariel Sharon, in 1998, as Israel’s foreign minister, had urged the settlers to “run and grab” the West Bank hilltops. But there was nothing haphazard about the outpost project.Ms. Sasson’s 2005 survey outlined how officials in the housing, defense and other ministries worked systematically to establish the new settlement points, financing them and helping provide infrastructure.Settler groups had drawn up the first plans for Mitzpe Danny — which like many outposts straddles public and private land, according to the Sasson survey — in the early 1990s. It sits above a winding route named for Yigal Allon, an Israeli general and Labor Party politician who, soon after the Arab-Israeli War of 1967, advocated Israeli withdrawal from most areas of the West Bank that were densely populated by Palestinians while keeping strategic territory along the Jordan Valley.Mr. Riklin and other activists went into action as Mr. Netanyahu, during his first term, was negotiating a 1998 accord ceding additional West Bank land that Israel had captured from Jordan in the 1967 war to the fledgling Palestinian Authority.“I felt there weren’t enough settlers in Judea and Samaria to ensure the future of the settlements,” said Mr. Riklin, now 53 and a strident pro-settler voice in the Israeli news media, referring to the West Bank by its biblical name. “We felt we had to go out of the fences.”Danny Frei, the slain British immigrant for whom the outpost was named, had been Mr. Riklin’s neighbor in Ma’ale Michmash. He was a 28-year-old computer engineer who was killed in his home while his 18-month-old daughter slept.About two weeks after Mr. Riklin and his friends arrived to take over the hilltop, the Binyamin Council — the regional government authority that now covers 50 settlements and outposts in the area — provided generators and water in tankers. Mr. Riklin said the housing minister also showed up and asked what he needed. He described an atmosphere of “euphoria.”The outpost now has dozens of trailers, as well as a few spacious, stone-clad houses and a new basketball court in a crevice not easily visible from the highway. There is a kindergarten and a playground that were guarded by a soldier on a recent day. Its residents include a lawyer, an architect and teachers.At a scenic lookout point, an audio system describes Jewish settlement of the area as the fulfillment of Jeremiah’s prophecy: “Thy children shall return to their border.”Mr. Riklin, the outpost’s founder, ultimately remained in Ma’ale Michmash. The current leaders of the outpost refused to be interviewed for this article.Yehuda Naamad, 30, who works in a spice shop, moved to Mitzpe Danny from Jerusalem two years ago “for the space,” he said. This month, he moved again, to another trailer home in the settlement of Hemdat in the Jordan Valley, where building plans were recently approved after a 19-year freeze.“I believe this is our land,” he said of the West Bank, adding, “God brought us back. God writes our history.” Of the Palestinians, he said, “Whoever accepts us can live here comfortably.”Mr. Naamad was not fazed by the wait for a permanent home. “It is written that redemption evolves slowly,” he said. “Like nature. Like an olive tree.”