https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/sports/tennis/french-crowds-love-and-hate-their-own.html
French Crowds Love and Hate Their Own - The New York Times
Tennis,French Open (Tennis),Lokoli  Laurent
May 31, 2014
4477
PARIS —  It has been many years since a French teenager with no Grand Slam experience captivated the Roland Garros crowd the way Laurent Lokoli did last week.Lokoli, 19, lost in five thrilling sets over two days to the American Steve Johnson, but he whipped up a frenzied atmosphere on Court 7.“I have seen the passion of my fans, and it gave me strength,” he said.But there are two sides to French sporting crowds. They have long had a rather tempestuous love affair with their players, and nowhere is this more true than Roland Garros.Win — in the style they demand — and the French fans will love you forever. But dare to underachieve or, worse, fail to display the etiquette they expect of a tennis player, and you risk crossing the fine line where cheers turn to jeers.“They’re very demanding if you’re not winning,” said Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, who defeated Jerzy Janowicz on Friday and will face Novak Djokovic in the fourth round. “The French crowd is special because if you win, you can do what you want, more or less. But if you lose, then anything you do, the slightest details, you’re going to pay for it. That’s how the French are. You have to accept it.”Tsonga did not acknowledge it, but he might have been casting a rueful glance back to last year’s semifinals. The atmosphere was dead when he arrived on court against David Ferrer with most spectators recovering from a five-hour epic between Rafael Nadal and Djokovic. As a player who thrives on energy, Tsonga never got going, and after a one-sided loss, the boos were soon ringing in his ears.“It’s disappointing if people shout against you,” he said. “We are all proud and we have a personality. And it really hurts when this happens.”Although the French public set high expectations for the players they perceive as potential title contenders (a French player has not won at Roland Garros since Mary Pierce in 2000), they can be equally uncompromising when it comes to on-court behavior.Alize Cornet, France’s top-ranked woman, is not afraid to let her frustrations show when a match is not going her way. During a pre-Roland Garros tuneup in Strasbourg, France, the crowd turned against her during her first-round loss to Camila Giorgi.“In the past, Alize has got mad at the officials and yelled, and they see that as ‘spoiled brat,’ ” said Carole Bouchard, a reporter for L’Équipe Magazine. “And if they think you are that kind of person, next time they are not going to tolerate anything. They have this perceived notion of what a tennis player should do.”Cornet said she found it hard to comprehend that mentality and might limit the number of French tournaments she plays.“I try to stay focused on my game,” she said, “but it’s really tough to deal with a tough opponent and a tough crowd, especially when you’re home, which is weird. I was trying my best, but they just don’t like me in Strasbourg. It makes me not want to go back there.”Cornet described her matches at Roland Garros this year as a terrific experience, though. She lost to Taylor Townsend in the second round, but Cornet felt the thrill of hearing her name chanted around the stadium.With an eye for spectacular winners and an equally strong tendency for eccentricity, Benoit Paire has experienced both sides of the French crowd during his career. The Parisians inspired him to pull out some memorable victories at Roland Garros last year, but six months later they booed him off the court at the Paris Masters for apparently not trying hard enough.“When they don’t support me in France, it’s never easy,” said Paire, who lost in the second round of this year’s French Open. “Right now, I don’t have the solution for when that happens. But I know if we play Roland Garros, we have to fight. Last year, it was unbelievable when I played on Suzanne Lenglen Court and people were getting behind me. But I wasn’t sure if I was going to play or not this time because I’ve been injured, and if I go on court at Roland Garros, I know I have to be ready to fight.”Every year at Roland Garros, French players exceed expectations.Kristina Mladenovic, for one, said she fed off the crowd last Tuesday when she defeated No. 2 Li Na.“For us French players, it can be really tough sometimes to play in front of our crowd,” said Mladenovic, 21, who is ranked 103rd. “But, you know, once you get at that stage, when it’s a really close result against a really good player and if you have great attitude, good game, and they enjoy it, it can be really good for us to have the crowd with us.”But Cornet said she thought the ultimate adulation was reserved for the male players.“I have the feeling that when there is someone like Jo or Gaël Monfils or Gilles Simon or Jérémy Chardy, you feel like they are really into the match 100 percent,” she said. “When the girls are playing, it’s a little bit less. Maybe because the male players have more personality and character.”But no matter how flamboyant their characters and how illustrious their past results, players will find that the French crowds can be fickle, and that will probably never change.Bouchard said: “Roland Garros is not like the Australian Open crowd who are really into sports, know all the rules and are just there to enjoy the competition. Here, they come to see the stars, they come to see a show, and they expect the players to deliver what they want.”