https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/asia/japan-women-renho-murata.html
Opposition Figure’s Rise Could Pave Way for Female Leaders in Japan - The New York Times
Japan,Democratic Party (Japan),Women's Rights,Discrimination,Legislatures and Parliaments,Taiwan,Appointments and Executive Changes,Murata  Renho (1967- ),Women and Girls
Sept. 14, 2016
3672
TOKYO — Among democracies in the developed world, Japan has one of the worst records of putting women in positions of political power.Yet if, as widely predicted, Renho Murata, a member of the upper house of Parliament, prevails in a leadership contest on Thursday and becomes the first woman to lead the opposition Democratic Party, she will be the third woman to assume a high-profile political post in Japan in less than two months.In July, Tokyo elected its first female governor, Yuriko Koike, and last month, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe appointed Japan’s second female defense minister, Tomomi Inada. (Ms. Koike was the first.) Both are members of Mr. Abe’s conservative party, the Liberal Democrats.A victory by Ms. Murata, 48, a former model and television news announcer who has served in Parliament for more than a decade, would hardly usher in an era of female dominance. Women still represent less than 15 percent of all seats in Parliament, and Mr. Abe was forced to concede last year that his government would not achieve its goal of placing women in 30 percent of management roles by 2020.Still, with three women in positions that could be steppingstones to the prime minister’s office, it would be a noteworthy moment for Japan, which is far behind nations like South Korea, Taiwan, Britain and Germany, which have elected female leaders, and the United States, which has its first female major party candidate for president.Some analysts in Japan say elevating more women to leadership positions is long overdue.“Given that it’s already 70 years since the Constitution was established, where gender equality is advocated, I have to say it is too late,” said Mayumi Taniguchi, a law professor and the founder and chairwoman of All Japan Obachan Party, a women’s advocacy group, referring to the country’s constitutional prohibitions against discrimination by gender.Japan has experienced such watershed moments before. Nearly 30 years ago, the Socialist Party, then Japan’s largest opposition party, elected Takako Doi as its first female leader. Ms. Doi helped bring more women into Parliament, leading pundits to proclaim a “Madonna Boom.” But the trend did not last.More recently, both the governing Liberal Democratic Party and the Democratic Party have attempted to recruit more women, with limited success. In 2014, just a month after Mr. Abe appointed five women to his cabinet, an all-time high for women in minister-level positions, two of them, Midori Matsushima and Yuko Obuchi, resigned because of election campaign scandals.Given this track record, Ms. Taniguchi said she was wary about predicting more progress. “I’m tired of being happy about ‘the first woman something’ forever,” she said. “But I still welcome it if it will bring momentum for a new women’s era.”Political experts say that it has been difficult for women to gain traction in Japan because they have often been at the mercy of men who make token gestures of support but fail to follow up in the long run.“Unless the political will is there to mentor the women who are already there,” measures to promote women tend to be “one-off,” said Emma Dalton, a lecturer in Japanese at La Trobe University in Melbourne, Australia. “The key problem is, people at the top are still men. So Renho becoming leader of the party will be quite significant if it happens.”Ms. Murata, who goes simply by the name Renho, is a member of the reformist wing of the left-of-center Democratic Party that favors cutting wasteful public projects. In campaigning to take the helm of the party, a combination of the legacy Democratic Party that dates from the 1990s and Ishin no To, another opposition party, she has not been shy about emphasizing that her election would make history.“As the first woman leader, I would like to break the glass ceiling and create a new generation of the Democratic Party by assembling everyone’s power,” she declares on her website.As of Wednesday, Ms. Murata had the support of nearly half the Democratic Party members in the Diet, as Japan’s Parliament is known. She is running against two men: Seiji Maehara, a former leader of the party who served in cabinet positions during the party’s brief stint in power from 2009 to 2012, and Yuichiro Tamaki, a former Finance Ministry bureaucrat who was elected to the Diet in 2009.Ms. Murata has assumed the lead in the race despite a haze of controversy that has dogged her because she is partly of Taiwanese heritage. Though she was born in Japan to a Japanese mother and a Taiwanese father, and grew up there, she was classified a citizen of Taiwan because Japan only granted citizenship to children with Japanese fathers at the time.She received Japanese citizenship in 1985, at the age of 17, when the law was changed. But she did not formally renounce her Taiwan citizenship, and nationalist critics have accused her of duplicity and disloyalty because Japanese law prohibits dual citizenship.Ms. Murata at first said that she had relinquished her Taiwan citizenship as a teenager. But on Tuesday, she told reporters that she had recently learned she was still officially on Taiwan citizenship rolls and had asked to be taken off.“As a politician, I’ve never acted as anything other than a Japanese person,” she said at a news conference, apologizing for any misunderstanding. “I’ve worked for Japan and would like to do so from now on as well. My desire to change the party has not changed.”If she is elected party leader, Ms. Murata will be the de facto head of the opposition to Mr. Abe, who remains popular in Japan despite a sluggish economy and contentious security proposals. The Democratic Party, which only held power for three years and three months before Mr. Abe became prime minister in 2012, is still in disarray over what is widely regarded as a failed term that included the disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant.She will confront both the overt and subtle sexism of the political culture where, as in many places, male leaders favor other men, and women are still judged by their looks.“She looks very beautiful and very powerful and is very popular in Japan,” said Katsuyuki Yakushiji, a professor of politics at Toyo University in Tokyo. “But from the viewpoint of politicians, she doesn’t have enough experience as a politician. I listen to what she wants to do when she wins, but it is not enough to understand, because it is very abstract,” he said. “It’s not clear what she wants to do.”Japanese feminists hope that Ms. Murata will champion causes important to women, like better child care, equal pay and protection from domestic violence.In response to a question at a news conference, Ms. Murata said she hoped to help more women get elected to Parliament and wanted to promote the right of women to keep their maiden names after marriage. In 2015, Japan’s highest court upheld a law dating back more than a century that requires married couples to share the same surname, rejecting a claim that it discriminates against women by effectively forcing them to give up their names in favor of their husbands’.But some political experts said they feared that Ms. Murata, like other women in leadership positions, might be forced to prove her mettle by playing down so-called women’s issues.“Women in Japanese politics are so minor, so they have had to adapt to men’s norms and practices,” said Mari Miura, a professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo. “If you don’t behave like men, you will be underappreciated or valued, so because of that, Renho and any woman leader has to behave like men to some extent.”