https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/01/nyregion/ex-advisers-to-cuomo-plead-not-guilty-in-bribery-scandal.html
Ex-Advisers to Cuomo Plead Not Guilty in Bribery Scandal - The New York Times
Bribery and Kickbacks,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Competitive Power Ventures Holdings LLC,State University of New York,Bharara  Preet,Howe  Todd R (1960- ),Kaloyeros  Alain E (1956- ),Percoco  Joseph,New York State,Caproni  Valerie E (1955- ),Cuomo  Andrew M
Dec. 1, 2016
5486
Two former advisers to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo pleaded not guilty on Thursday to charges stemming from a bribery and bid-rigging scandal that reached into Mr. Cuomo’s innermost circle of friends and associates.Six other defendants, executives whose companies had done business with New York State, also pleaded not guilty to charges contained in a federal indictment returned in November in United States District Court in Manhattan.The former advisers are Joseph Percoco, a close friend of the governor’s who had served as his executive deputy secretary, and Alain E. Kaloyeros, the former president of the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute, who helped to oversee hundreds of millions of dollars in state development funds.The indictment charges “two wide-ranging and overlapping criminal schemes involving bribery, corruption and fraud in the award of hundreds of millions of dollars” in New York State contracts and other official benefits.On Thursday, the judge, Valerie E. Caproni, did not set a trial date for the eight men but said that her goal was to do so at the next court conference in March.A prosecutor, Janis Echenberg, told her that discovery materials in the case included “voluminous bank and phone records,” more than two million pages of documents, and two terabytes of data from various forms of electronic media that were seized by the government.“This is an ongoing investigation,” Ms. Echenberg added, saying that the amount of discovery materials could increase. She estimated that the trial could last four to six weeks.The charges came after a long-running investigation into the Cuomo administration’s efforts to bring jobs and businesses to upstate New York by making available hundreds of millions of dollars in state funds to developers.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said in September, when his office unsealed a criminal complaint that detailed the charges, that there were “no allegations of any wrongdoing or misconduct by the governor anywhere in this complaint.”Mr. Cuomo, speaking to reporters on Wednesday in Hornell, N.Y., said the charges were “very sad.”“They’re sad to me personally, and we’ll now let the justice system take its course,” he said, adding, “We’re implementing reforms to make sure situations like that don’t happen again.”Mr. Percoco has been accused of receiving more than $315,000 in bribes from an energy company, Competitive Power Ventures, which was building a power plant in the Hudson Valley, and from COR Development, a Syracuse-area firm, in return for Mr. Percoco’s taking various official actions that benefited both firms. Dr. Kaloyeros has been accused of steering state contracts to COR and LPCiminelli, a development firm in Buffalo.Both men’s lawyers declined to comment after the hearing.The six executives charged in the indictment are Peter Galbraith Kelly Jr., who oversaw lobbying for Competitive Power Ventures; Steven Aiello, the president of COR Development; Joseph Gerardi, another COR executive; Louis Ciminelli, LPCiminelli’s founder; and Kevin Schuler and Michael Laipple, two of the firm’s executives.Each of the eight defendants rose individually to answer three questions posed by the judge: Had they read the indictment, discussed it with their lawyer and how did they plead?“Not guilty,” each man responded.Another former Cuomo aide, Todd R. Howe, has already pleaded guilty to extortion, wire fraud and related conspiracy charges and is cooperating with the government, Mr. Bharara’s office has said.