https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/sports/golf/in-golfs-birthplace-an-effort-to-keep-the-game-alive.html
In Golf’s Birthplace, an Effort to Keep the Game Alive - The New York Times
Golf,Sporting Goods and Equipment,Scotland
July 16, 2017
1278
WEST KILBRIDE, Scotland — For decades, Calum McPherson’s father made golf clubs. McPherson played golf for Scotland as a teenager and eventually joined the family business.But when he was ready to introduce his young children to golf, their response shocked him.“They hadn’t hit a golf ball, but they weren’t interested — they had no pals there, it was a difficult game and the clubs were too heavy,” said McPherson, 50.That is not an unusual reaction for children, even in Scotland, the birthplace of golf.As a membership crisis looms, golf clubs across Scotland are feeling the financial strain and trying to make the sport more accessible for a new generation of golfers.“Boys are down 35 percent in the last five years and girls by almost a half,” said Cameron Ross, who organizes junior programs at West Kilbride, a club on the Ayrshire coast a few miles north of Royal Troon, Prestwick and Turnberry. “Lots of clubs are really struggling to get juniors in. The minority of clubs in Ayrshire now have junior sections. It’s a national problem.”Last year, the Scottish Boys’ Championship failed to attract a full field of 256 for the first time in its 80-year history. To increase participation this year, the tournament was moved to midsummer from its season-opening slot in April, and the boys’ and girls’ championships were played at the same time, with a total of 225 participants.Video games, smartphones, dress codes, antiquated traditions and the weather all play their part in the waning interest, but some also point to something more basic: Golf is not as fun as it used to be in Scotland.“I know fun and golf don’t seem right together,” said Linzi Allan, the assistant pro and junior coach at West Kilbride. “Sometimes it’s not; it can be the worst game in the world.”With a donation of 1 million pounds (about $1.3 million) generated from the 2014 Ryder Cup at Gleneagles, Alex Salmond, Scotland’s first minister at the time, pledged to give every 9-year-old in Scotland the chance to play through the ClubGolf government initiative, which was established in 2003. More than 400,000 children have been introduced to golf through that program, but critics say that 9 is too late to start, and that children from 4 or 5 years of age were already playing other sports.Faced with his children’s indifference to golf, McPherson said, “I thought: ‘I am not accepting this. Let’s have a think of root cause to find a solution to overcome this.’”He went to the hardware store, bought a lump of resin and started carving clubs in the garden shed. “We cast some prototypes and gave it to the kids,” he said. “Immediately they started whacking the ball and loved it.”His tinkering evolved into a line of clubs called Golphin. They are designed for children rather than being cut-down adult clubs. They are lighter and have a bigger sweet spot, with the head and shaft weighted for juniors. The clubs have won innovation awards, and Open winners Dustin Johnson and Henrik Stenson have bought sets for their children.More accessible equipment is only half the battle, though, McPherson said. He sees programming as more important, saying that for decades Scottish clubs have not created the proper environment for training children under 9.At West Kilbride primary school, a local amateur brought 26 7- and 8-year-old students outside for a lesson using Golphin equipment. After some simple instruction, they played golf in soccer nets with their friends. When asked if they had fun, almost all stick up a hand.“Generally all the clubs have found their junior members declining,” said Brian Craig, a volunteer instructor who has played for 44 years and helps with the schoolwork. “Clubs are all realizing that it’s their future membership, so for their survival they need to hold onto them.”There is no formal golf education in Scottish schools, either. “There aren’t enough golf pros around with the skill set to go into primary schools,” McPherson said.McPherson has designed a program that requires starting children in golf at a younger age, finding trainers and then connecting them to clubs willing to change to include younger members.“In the past, members could ignore the juniors, but they need them now,” McPherson said. “Teaching an adult is easier, one to one, and you’re making more money as opposed to getting a bunch of 30 kids together and they are running about like maniacs, being kids and enjoying themselves.”Assuming all this might work, another hurdle lies beyond.“There are so many distractions now and golf is hard,” Allan said. “I notice with some of my juniors if they don’t get it the first time around, they don’t want to try because they are used to getting everything instantly now.”