http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/18/world/asia/tsai-ing-wen-taiwan-president.html
Taiwan’s New Leader Faces a Weak Economy and China’s Might - The New York Times
Tsai Ing-wen,Taiwan,China,Democratic Progressive Party (Taiwan),Women and Girls,Taipei (Taiwan),Ma Ying-jeou,Chen Shui-Bian,Chinese Nationalist Party (Taiwan),Appointments and Executive Changes
Jan. 16, 2016
3390
TAIPEI, Taiwan —  Before Tsai Ing-wen felt the thrill of victory on Saturday by becoming the first woman to be elected president of Taiwan, she was no stranger to the sting of defeat.A pragmatist elected to turn around Taiwan’s economy and balance nationalist fervor with the realities of maintaining ties with mainland China, she was rejected by voters just four years ago. But it was a career-long commitment to shrewdly shaping policy, rather than stoking the passions of her constituents, that helped Ms. Tsai win the election, experts said.In 2008, she was named head of the Democratic Progressive Party, after it had suffered major setbacks in legislative and presidential races. The party she inherited was in disarray. Chen Shui-bian, who broke the Kuomintang’s long hold on power in 2000 to become the first president from the D.P.P., had stepped down and faced prosecution. He was later convicted of embezzlement and taking bribes.“That was probably the lowest moment ever for the D.P.P.,” said Joseph Wu, the party’s secretary general. “The party was seriously in debt. We had very low morale after the presidential defeat, and no one was willing to serve as party chairperson to pick up the pieces.”Ms. Tsai was elected D.P.P. chairwoman in what was seen as a caretaker role, but she soon proved her abilities, clearing the party’s debt and organizing candidates for by-elections and local races. She became the party’s presidential nominee in 2012, losing a close and hard-fought race to the Kuomintang’s Ma Ying-jeou. When Ms. Tsai conceded, she told a crowd of supporters, many drenched from a winter rainstorm, that “one day we will come back and we will not give up.”She stepped down as party chairwoman after the loss, but took up the position again two years later. D.P.P. officials said they returned to her because she represented the best hope of winning. “Even though she lost in 2012, her campaign gained a lot more support than we had in 2008,” Mr. Wu said. “The party and her followers seemed to recognize she was the most popular politician and the one most capable of leading the party to ultimate victory.”Four years ago, she was undercut by criticism from Kuomintang and American officials that her election would raise tensions with China, which considers Taiwan a part of its territory. In this round, Ms. Tsai changed her approach and defended herself more effectively against those attacks. The D.P.P. has traditionally favored formal independence for Taiwan, but in the most recent campaign, Ms. Tsai pledged to maintain the status quo.“She has developed this complex and veiled way of speaking about cross-strait relations,” said Shelley Rigger, a professor of East Asian politics at Davidson College in North Carolina. “It is a much more subtle position and allows for, and actively invites, interpretation.”China’s Taiwan Affairs Office said it had noted the results of the election and was willing to develop exchanges with “all parties and groups that recognize both sides of the strait are one China.” A commentary published by China’s state-run Xinhua news agency called on Ms. Tsai to be prudent, saying Taiwan independence was a “poison” that was rejected by mainstream opinion on the island.A former law professor, Ms. Tsai, 59, is single and has no children. She was educated at National Taiwan University, Cornell and the London School of Economics. And she differs from many D.P.P. politicians, having risen through a series of bureaucratic positions rather than grass-roots campaigning.Ms. Tsai was a trade negotiator in the 1990s, then served as an adviser to the National Security Council under President Lee Teng-hui. When Mr. Chen was elected in 2000, he named her chairwoman of the Mainland Affairs Council, the body that manages ties with China. She later joined the D.P.P. and was elected to Parliament in 2004.“She isn’t tainted with the old, ideological nationalism of Chen and further back, and is able to portray herself as rational and moderate to a greater extent than any other potential D.P.P. candidate, which is very important to assuage voters’ concerns and inoculate against KMT attacks,” said Jonathan Sullivan, an associate professor at the School of Contemporary Chinese Studies at the University of Nottingham.Ms. Tsai is also known for her strong will and ability to corral sometimes fractious party elements.“She is a very strong political actor,” Professor Sullivan added. “Don’t be fooled by the quiet demeanor.”At a D.P.P. campaign rally last Wednesday, at a baseball stadium in the central city of Taichung, thousands of people waited in the rain to hear Ms. Tsai speak. They waved flags and sounded air horns as legislative candidates exhorted them to oust the Kuomintang from power. When Ms. Tsai finally took the stage, the crowd roared. She criticized the Kuomintang for fear mongering by warning voters of potential instability if the D.P.P. came to power. She said that if she became president, she would welcome voters’ criticism if she failed to live up to their expectations. “There is no turning back on this road,” she said. “I know that other than reform, there is no other path.”Chen Chih-chuan, 49, a bakery owner standing at the back of the huge crowd, said he appreciated Ms. Tsai for being different from the D.P.P.’s traditional politicians.“She’s calm and rational,” he said. “Her speeches aren’t about inciting people or confrontational. She’s more like a leader.”Mr. Chen said he supported Ms. Tsai because he believed she would pull Taiwan back from the deepening embrace of China that he feels is being pushed by the current government. “She can help Taiwan to walk its own road,” he said. “We don’t have to be united with China.”In office, Ms. Tsai’s immediate concern will be reviving the economy. The gross domestic product contracted in the last quarter of 2015 and is estimated to have grown at just 1 percent last year. Her campaign emphasized innovation and improving trade ties with Southeast Asia, Japan and the United States. The Kuomintang, in comparison, have continued to focus on the importance of trade with China.“I think her priorities will mainly be domestic, mainly the economy and trying to nurture opportunities for young people,” Professor Rigger said.Some in Taiwan have questioned whether Ms. Tsai has presented a strategy that could stimulate growth.“From the perspective of the business community, there’s a perception problem,” said Ross Darrell Feingold, a Taipei-based senior adviser at DC International Advisory, a political risk consultancy. “The D.P.P.’s record on economic development during the eight years it held the presidency from 2000 to 2008 wasn’t much better than Ma over the past eight years.” And while managing the relationship with China might not top Ms. Tsai’s agenda, it will remain a huge task, Professor Rigger said.“Even if she wants to just keep things the way they are, she’ll have to work at it,” she said.