https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/briefing/liu-xiaobo-donald-trump-jr-emmanuel-macron.html
Liu Xiaobo, Donald Trump Jr., Emmanuel Macron: Your Friday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 13, 2017
4642
Good morning. Here’s what you need to know:• Rights advocates around the world are mourning Liu Xiaobo, China’s most prominent political prisoner and a Nobel peace laureate. He died Thursday, still silenced and under guard at a government hospital, his writings still banned.His fate reflects how human rights issues have receded in Western diplomacy with China.Mr. Liu, who kept vigil at Tiananmen Square in 1989 to protect protesters from soldiers and initiated the Charter 08 petition for democracy, had been jailed since 2009.“Even if I am crushed into powder,” he wrote his wife before his trial, “I will embrace you with ashes.” She remains under house arrest._____• Tributes to Mr.  Liu are pouring out around the world. He is in the pale blue shirt in the photograph above. It was taken at Tiananmen Square on June 3, 1989, just hours before government forces opened fire on the student-led protests.A friend and collaborator on Charter 08 offered praise for Mr. Liu’s defiant optimism.And Nicholas Kristof, who covered Tiananmen Square for The Times, mourned China’s backward march and “the timidity of world leaders at the brutalization of one of the great men of modern times.”_____• President Trump is in France, for Bastille Day celebrations that will also honor the 100th anniversary of America’s entry into World War I.The visit appears to be smoothing over an initially strange and tense relationship with President Emmanuel Macron, and possibly vaulting France ahead of Britain and Germany as a point of U.S. contact.En route to Paris, President Trump spoke to members of the traveling press corps about North Korea and China, and defended his eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., for trying to get discrediting information about Hillary Clinton from Russian government sources during his presidential campaign.In Paris, a video of Mr. Trump telling Brigitte Macron, the French president’s wife, that she was “in such good shape” and “beautiful” was widely spread online._____• Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, above with his Qatari counterpart, left the Middle East after three days of shuttle diplomacy that failed to resolve a bitter dispute among regional allies.The strategic consequences of the feud may surface next week, when representatives of 70 countries fighting the Islamic State convene in Washington.The Trump administration hopes a united Arab world will help rebuild and govern Mosul and other areas of Iraq, but such unity may be difficult to achieve._____• The U.S. Justice Department charged 412 people nationwide, including dozens of doctors, in schemes that collectively defrauded the government of about $1.3 billion. Nearly one-third were accused of opioid-related crimes.Drug overdoses, fueled by synthetic opioids often made in and sold from Asia, are now the leading cause of death among Americans under 50. (Above, medics responding to an overdose.) Our magazine looked at one small-town police officer’s war on drugs._____• We enlisted our international photographer Adam Ferguson to help us expand our coverage of his native Australia.He spent three months exploring its vast interior and came back with portraits of remote, fascinating landscapes and the slow erosion of traditional ways of life for ranchers, stockmen like the one above, miners and even crocodile farmers. An Aboriginal community leader showed him how to suck the sweetness from honey ants.The outback has “become a kind of myth,” Mr. Ferguson said in a Q. and A. after returning to his base in New York. “And the point of the trip, for me, was to inquire what that myth has now become.”_____ • In today’s edition of The Breakdown, news and notes from Australia, we look at the acrimony — and worse — directed at cyclists.• Hollywood is having a tough time in  China. Ticket sales for imported films are up 34 percent this year, to roughly $2.3 billion, but American films account for less than 2 percent of the rise.• The competition to lead Uber is robust, despite a year of scandals. Here’s a look at the hiring process, and some of the intriguing candidates.• Deals: A former ore-trading company paid $500 million for the rights to broadcast the English Premier League in China; and San Miguel, the Philippine beer company, bought Barossa, an Australian bottling company.• In disrupter news, hundreds of tech companies united to protest the U.S. government’s plan to scrap net neutrality rules. And we look at pop-up employers — “flash organizations” that build a team, do the job and say goodbye.• U.S. stocks were up. Here’s a snapshot of global markets. • Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the enormously influential Brazilian ex-president, was convicted of corruption and sentenced to nearly 10 years. We look at his rise and fall. [The New York Times]• India banned waste dumping within 500 yards of a polluted 310-mile stretch of the Ganges River. [BBC]• Taiwan is hosting the president of Paraguay, the island’s only remaining diplomatic ally in South America. [Associated Press]• News that North Korea may have developed a missile capable of hitting Alaska has been largely met with a shrug there. [The New York Times]• In Melbourne, concrete blocks set to stop militant attacks have become targets for guerrilla artists seeking to beautify the Australian city. [Reuters]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Tempted by takeout? Make moo shu pork at home instead.• Who really needs to be gluten-free?• What prospective college students do online could have some consequences in real life.• Explore the arks of the apocalypse. Our magazine portrays scientists around the world who are building repositories of nature — from seeds to ice to mammal milk — in a race to preserve an environmental order that is fast disappearing.• A bilingual child is a rare and beautiful gift. Raising one is “worth it,” a psychologist said, “but it’s a lot of work.”• And a medical breakthrough: A U.S. panel recommended approval for the first gene therapy to fight cancer. The treatment, for a type of leukemia, transforms a patient’s cells into “a living drug” that bolsters the immune system.The banning of high-value bank notes, as India did last year, is nothing new. Many nations have done the same.On this day in 1969, the U.S. said its $500, $1,000, $5,000, and $10,000 bills would be discontinued. By then, the bills had not been printed since 1945. The Federal Reserve even burned them, citing lack of use.The Times archives attest to the bills’ rarity. In 1910, we reported on the furor after a Wall Street errand boy lost a $10,000 bill, which featured Salmon Chase, a Treasury secretary and Supreme Court chief justice. (The reporter wryly noted that entire fortunes had been lost in that neighborhood with less fuss. The errand boy was eventually convicted of larceny.)In 1942, a girl found a $500 bill (bearing President William McKinley’s portrait) in Bloomingdale’s mailroom. (Given a $250 reward, she bought war bonds and roller skates.)Two years later, The Times reported on Lieut. Gen. George S. Patton Jr.’s denial to his superiors that he had landed in Europe waving a $1,000 bill (which has pictured Alexander Hamilton and President Grover Cleveland) and making bets on reaching Berlin.Patton, above, offered a simple alibi: “I have never seen a $1,000 bill.”_____We have briefings timed for the Australian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.