https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/world/europe/us-consulate-istanbul-attack.html
Attackers in Istanbul Open Fire Outside U.S. Consulate - The New York Times
Turkey,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Revolutionary People's Liberation Party-Front (Turkey),Kurds,Kurdistan Workers' Party,Erdogan  Recep Tayyip,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Istanbul (Turkey)
Aug. 10, 2015
8933
ISTANBUL —  Attackers opened fire outside the United States Consulate here on Monday morning, setting off a brief gun battle with the police as violence in Turkey continued to escalate nearly two weeks after the government began what it called a major counterterrorism effort, including increased cooperation with the United States in the fight against the Islamic State.No Americans or Turkish police officers were wounded in the attack, which ended when the two assailants fled. Turkish special forces later caught an injured woman at a house in the Sariyer district of Istanbul suspected of having taken part in the attack, according to the Anadolu news agency.The assault was one of four major incidents of violence across Turkey on Monday, none of them attributed to the Islamic State. They were instead linked to the Marxist and anti-American Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-Front, which claimed responsibility for the consulate attack, and the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or P.K.K. That group has fought an insurgency in Turkey for more than three decades, and the government views it as a primary threat.The pattern of increased violence in recent weeks has raised alarm among the Turkish public, and comes against the backdrop of political instability. After national elections on June 7, the Islamist Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P., which has governed for more than a decade, was left without a majority in Parliament, and has failed to agree on a coalition with opposition parties since then. With those talks seemingly deadlocked, the prospect of new elections, probably in November, has become more likely.The June election was a significant defeat for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who had hoped for a large A.K.P. majority in a bid to rewrite the constitution to establish an executive presidency. Many critics now accuse him of renewing an armed struggle with the Kurdistan Workers’ Party to foster nationalist sentiment and reclaim lost votes in new elections.That long conflict with the P.K.K. had waned in recent years as a fragile cease-fire took hold and the P.K.K. and its affiliates began fighting Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria. The successes that a party offshoot has had in fighting the militants, with American support, and the momentum of Syrian Kurds in beginning to carve out an autonomous enclave along the Turkish border have unnerved Turkey.The Turkish government views the enclave as a security threat, fearing it could incite Kurds in Turkey to seek more autonomy. But the attacks on the P.K.K. and its affiliates have left Turkey, a NATO member, in the position of bombing an ally of the United States that is coordinating attacks for American bombing runs against the Islamic State in northern Syria.Parallel to the renewed attacks against the P.K.K., Turkey has taken a more aggressive approach toward the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh. Turkish officials have granted American warplanes access to their air bases to help strike Islamic State positions in Syria and Iraq, which would help the United States clear the Islamic State from a stretch of the border with Syria. In recent days Turkey’s top religious body, which is overseen by the state, said it would begin distributing anti-ISIS sermons to mosques around the country.The decision by Turkey to play a bigger role in the fight against ISIS was welcomed by the United States, which had been sharply critical of Turkey’s leadership for more than a year for failing to do more in the fight against the militants.The consulate attack came a day after the United States said it had sent six fighter jets to the Incirlik air base in southern Turkey. The Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party-Front has attacked American interests in Turkey before and appeared to be motivated by the American military presence here.“Our struggle will continue until imperialism and its collaborators leave our country and every parcel of our homeland is cleared of U.S. bases,” the group said in a statement on its website. In 2013, the group claimed responsibility for a suicide attack against the American embassy in Ankara, the capital.Officials at the United States Consulate in Istanbul said in a statement that they were working with the Turkish authorities to investigate the attack and that the consulate would be closed to the public until further notice.The gunfight near the consulate occurred a few hours after a bomb attack at an Istanbul police station that left one officer dead and at least 10 people wounded. Two people who were believed to have been involved in the bombing were killed in a shootout, according to Turkish news reports, and no group claimed responsibility.There were two attacks on Monday in the Kurdish-dominated southeastern province of Sirnak, where tensions have flared in recent weeks as people prepared for the return of a war they had hoped was ending while Mr. Erdogan pursued peace talks in recent years.In one of the attacks, a roadside bomb in Silopi killed four police officers, according to local news reports. A Turkish soldier was killed in a separate attack in Sirnak Province after Kurdish militants opened fire at a military helicopter, the military said in a statement.As the P.K.K., which has faced Turkish airstrikes on its bases in the mountains of northern Iraq, have increased attacks inside Turkey, Kurdish politicians here have scrambled to rein in the violence and preserve gains they made in the elections. The pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party, or H.D.P., passed a 10 percent threshold to enter Parliament for the first time, gains that experts said came at the expense of votes for the A.K.P.The H.D.P. and the P.K.K. largely share a constituency in Turkey, but they tend to operate separately. Selahattin Demirtas, co-chairman of the H.D.P., said at a peace rally in the southeastern province of Van on Saturday, “The P.K.K. must take its hands off the trigger immediately and declare that it will abide by the terms of the cease-fire.”At a rally on Monday, Mr. Demirtas charged that the government had supported ISIS — a widely held view among Kurds in Turkey — and said that Mr. Erdogan was using war to reverse his electoral defeat.