https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/dnc-obama-hillary-clinton-convert.html
Obama at D.N.C.: Character Witness and Prominent Clinton Convert - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Democratic National Convention,Democratic Party,Obama  Barack,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J
July 24, 2016
7573
WASHINGTON — As Donald J. Trump accepted the Republican nomination at his party’s convention last week in Cleveland, President Obama did some subtle counterprogramming at the White House, hosting a reception honoring Muslim-Americans and inviting the Mexican president for a visit to highlight their close bond.The implied contrast could not have been stronger between Mr. Trump, whose convention speech depicted a divided nation in crisis, one fearful of outsiders, and Mr. Obama, who spoke of inclusion, prosperity and cross-border partnership.This week, Mr. Obama will take a more direct approach to countering Mr. Trump as he works to unite Democrats around Hillary Clinton’s candidacy and persuade independent voters to back her as well. In media interviews and a prime-time televised speech scheduled for Wednesday night, his aides say, the president will defend his economic and foreign policy record, arguing that the nation is safer and more prosperous because of them — and that Mrs. Clinton is best positioned to protect them.“The accumulation of work that we have done moved the needle,” Mr. Obama told CBS in the first of those appearances, an interview that aired on Sunday on “Face the Nation.” “It didn’t revolutionize the country, but it bent that arc, and my job is to make sure that when I leave this place, America is a little bit better off. It’ll be up to the next person to continue that process.”His press secretary, Josh Earnest, phrased it more sharply last week in describing what Mr. Obama’s message to Democrats will be: “We can’t afford to flush that progress down the drain,” he said.Mr. Obama will also bring some of his own signature campaign themes of aspiration and renewal as he works to bolster Mrs. Clinton’s standing with young and minority voters. Democratic strategists acknowledge that some of those may be less inclined to embrace her — a candidate who is inextricably linked with the Democratic administrations and politics of the past — than they were Mr. Obama when he was a young, first-term senator.Mr. Obama is well positioned to be a character witness for Mrs. Clinton, his advisers argue, because of his popularity — 53 percent of Americans approve of his job performance, according to this month’s New York Times/CBS News poll — and because he is a prominent convert to her cause, a once-bitter campaign rival who came to trust and respect her.In the interview on Sunday, Mr. Obama said he had become friends with Mrs. Clinton, but the two are not “bosom buddies.” The president said he was “cleareyed” about her strengths and weaknesses.“This is somebody who knows as much about domestic and foreign policy as anybody; is tough as nails; is motivated by what’s best for America and ordinary people; understands that, in this democracy that we have, things don’t always happen as fast as we’d like, and it requires compromise and grinding it out,” Mr. Obama said. “She’s not always flashy — and there are better speechmakers — but she knows her stuff.”The convention will be an important valedictory moment for Mr. Obama — a prime-time speech making the case for his leadership and his accomplishments, and defining the choice of his successor — at the fourth Democratic convention in a row in which he has played an outsize role.He was the marquee presence in 2012 and 2008, accepting his party’s presidential nomination. And in 2004, a relatively unknown Mr. Obama, then a state senator, burst to national prominence with a speech in which he called for Americans to reject the partisan divisions of red states and blue states and embrace common values.Those themes, now tempered by seven and a half years of experience in just how stubbornly those rifts persist, will probably resurface as Mr. Obama looks to challenge Mr. Trump.“He was elected in large part because of his focus on hope, and in response to the darkness of the Republican convention, particularly Donald Trump’s speech. I think he will find it important to talk about what the stakes are and what the consequences are of electing someone who is so full of fear and anger and divisiveness,” said Bill Burton, a former top adviser who was among Mr. Obama’s earliest presidential campaign aides.“He will walk onto that stage aware of the challenges the American people are feeling, but he also sees the best of America and likes to talk about it. He has an ability to elevate the conversation,” Mr. Burton added.The last time a popular second-term president played a prominent role at his party’s convention was Bill Clinton in 2000, who savored one of his final moments in the spotlight as president. Mr. Clinton made a dramatic entrance as screens in the convention hall in Los Angeles showed a live camera shot of him making his way through the hallways backstage, like a top athlete entering an arena to play a final game before an adoring crowd.Mr. Obama also says he is at the top of his game; only now, he appears to be as concerned about defeating Mr. Trump as he is about cementing his own governing legacy.“I feel as if I’m a better president than I’ve ever been,” Mr. Obama said on CBS, adding that his team is operating at a “peak level.”“But I also think that it’s really important for self-governance and democracy that we go through this process,” Mr. Obama added, “and I’m able to turn over the keys.”