https://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/23/business/23yuan.html
Chinese Leader Wen Jiabao Talks to Executives in New York - The New York Times
Wen Jiabao,International Trade and World Market,United States,China,Gates  Bill,Kissinger  Henry A,Dimon  James,Stiglitz  Joseph E,Blankfein  Lloyd C,Chenault  Kenneth I,Nooyi  Indra K,Rubin  Robert E
Sept. 22, 2010
4186
When Bill Gates confronts the prime minister of China on the need to honor software copyrights, it helps to have a referee — say, a Henry Kissinger — to moderate the debate.That, in fact, is what happened at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel on Wednesday morning in Midtown Manhattan.In a remarkable 90-minute meeting, with Mr. Kissinger playing M.C., Mr. Gates and other heavyweight executives and economists from the West engaged Prime Minister Wen Jiabao. He listened patiently, and often volleyed back, on topics including currency and trade policies, foreign investment and whether China needed to improve its social safety net.Others in the circle — literally a large ring of a few dozen chairs — included Jamie Dimon, the head of JPMorgan Chase; Lloyd C. Blankfein, the Goldman Sachs chief; Joseph Stiglitz, winner of the Nobel in economics; Kenneth I. Chenault, chairman and chief of American Express; and PepsiCo’s chief executive, Indra K. Nooyi.China’s top leaders rarely meet Western executives. But Mr. Wen, in New York for a session of the United Nations General Assembly, agreed to sit down with the group, possibly in the hope of helping ease growing tensions between the United States and China over various  issues.The session, which Chinese officials called a dialogue with “economic celebrities,” was civil and respectful. But there were some pointed words for the Chinese leader, who listened and spoke through an interpreter.Mr. Chenault told Mr. Wen that the most important asset American companies have is their brand. Seeming to hint that Chinese companies were competing unfairly, Mr. Chenault asked the prime minister for his views on brand value.Mr. Wen responded, “We will never usurp others’ brands.”Ms. Nooyi of PepsiCo told Mr. Wen that China should create incentives for companies to build factories to high environmental standards. She also said that her company had invested billions of dollars in China and was already his country’s biggest private potato grower, and she asked whether American companies would get equal treatment to Chinese companies there.The prime minister replied, “You put forward two good proposals, and the Chinese government will accept these.”Robert E. Rubin, the former Treasury secretary, contended that China’s huge trade surpluses with the United States could have disastrous consequences.“The trade imbalances are unsustainable,” Mr. Rubin told Mr. Wen, urging China to restructure its economy away from exports and toward domestic consumption. “And this trade imbalance is creating political problems” in the United States.Mr. Wen acknowledged that global imbalances were a problem, and said Beijing was working to make changes. But he took issue with the widely held idea that China takes the largest share of trade benefits.“An iPod is sold at $299, and China in the manufacturing link will only get $6 for it,” he said. The implication was clear: The bulk of the profits in producing the item accrue to Apple and others in the supply chain.On one of the most contentious issues — China’s currency policy — Mr. Wen had little to say. But Wednesday evening, in a separate speech to a group of dignitaries involved in United States-China relations, Mr. Wen said more sharply that China’s exchange rate was not the problem, and indicated that China would continue to resist pressure from Washington.“There is no basis for a drastic appreciation of the renminbi,” he said. “You don’t know how many Chinese companies would go bankrupt. There would be major disturbances. Only the Chinese premier has such pressure on his shoulders. This is the reality.”It is a topic likely to come up when he and President Obama meet in New York on Thursday on the sidelines of the United Nations. China has repeatedly signaled that it would like to move toward a more flexible currency, and Mr. Wen said Wednesday that China did not “intentionally” seek a huge trade surplus — something that critics say Beijing does by keeping its currency, the renminbi, artificially cheap.But while China has allowed the renminbi to appreciate slightly against the dollar this year, China’s trade is booming again.Several of the Americans at the Waldorf on Wednesday warned that the United States’ sluggish economy and high unemployment rate were inflaming protectionist sentiment in this country and could lead Congress to impose tough trade sanctions or other measures.Stephen Roach, a Morgan Stanley economist and a teacher at Yale, warning that American politicians were threatening to take the “low road,” urged Mr. Wen to ignore calls for China to fix its currency and instead focus on pushing for “pro-consumption” policies at home. That, Mr. Roach said, would allow the Chinese to consume more — and also buy more American goods.As for Mr. Gates, he said that he was preparing to travel to China for the Gates Foundation, his philanthropy, but that he also wanted to press a long-running concern about counterfeiting of American software and other intellectual property in China.After saying that Microsoft’s research lab was progressing well in China, Mr. Gates said: “I’ll mention one thing that is not going well, and that’s related to the enforcement of intellectual property, such as copyright. If you look at the numbers, over the last five years there hasn’t been much progress.”Mr. Wen took the question in stride. “Mr. Gates,” he said. “You are a business person I hold in high regard. You also have morality running in your veins. I fully support the Gates Foundation.”Then, Mr. Wen — who is called Grandpa Wen in China because of his populist approach and habit of racing to the scene of natural disasters to comfort victims — applied his charms on Mr. Gates.“I do admit these problems exist,” Mr. Wen said. “We have to put in administrative measures. I think we should have higher moral and ethical standards in this matter.”