https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/us/retro-hair-analysis.html
A Closer Look at the Evidence - The New York Times
Forensic Science,Hair,Justice Department,Innocence Project,Sessions  Jefferson B III
April 26, 2017
2587
Reverence for science has not been a conspicuous guiding spirit of the Trump administration, and forensic science is no exception. That was affirmed this month when Attorney General Jeff Sessions ended an advisory panel created under President Barack Obama to improve the reliability of crime-solving techniques like hair analysis, ballistics testing, bite-mark evidence, blood typing and shoe-print comparisons.This panel, the National Commission on Forensic Science, was made up of scientists, judges and lawyers whose brief was to raise the standards of laboratory work in criminal cases. What will emerge in its place is not clear. But perhaps not surprisingly, prosecutors in the main applauded the Sessions decision, and defense lawyers fretted that the rights of their clients could be undermined.The reality is that forensic science is not the infallible discipline that television shows like “CSI” may lead many viewers to believe. That point is underscored in this brief offering from Retro Report, a series of video documentaries re-exploring major news stories of the past. In real life, crime labs are not the exclusive domain of unerring Gil Grissoms and Dr. Quincys. Mistakes happen. And often enough, errors send innocent people to prison and even, in some instances, to death row.The video focuses on hair analysis, a staple of forensic work for decades. The advent of DNA testing in the late 1980s showed that hair samples found at crime scenes did not necessarily match those of criminal suspects, no matter what lab technicians may have concluded. “About 11 percent of the time, mitochondrial DNA said: ‘No, that hair actually came from someone else,’” Max M. Houck, a former forensics expert for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, told Retro Report. “It kind of shook us up.”And so it should have, says the Innocence Project. That advocacy group, based in New York, relies on DNA analysis to absolve people wrongly convicted of crimes. It has overseen more than 300 exonerations, and faulty hair analysis was a factor at least 20 percent of the time.This is not to suggest that the jails are filled with innocents. DNA testing routinely confirms suspects’ guilt previously established by hair samples, bite marks and other evidence. Still, a committee of the National Academy of Sciences found “serious problems” with lab results. Aside from DNA analysis, the committee said in a 2009 report that “no forensic method has been rigorously shown to have the capacity to consistently, and with a high degree of certainty, demonstrate a connection between evidence and a specific individual or source.”Mr. Sessions said that with the fade-out of the old commission, an in-house group at the Justice Department would work on a new strategy for forensics procedures. Nonetheless, his critics say they are troubled that an independent voice on science has been silenced.