https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/sports/soccer/25-years-after-stadium-disaster-liverpool-still-mourns.html
25 Years After Stadium Disaster, Liverpool Still Mourns - The New York Times
Liverpool (Soccer Team),Hillsborough Stadium (Sheffield  England),Soccer,Disasters and Emergencies,Stadiums and Arenas,Deaths (Fatalities)
April 12, 2014
9898
LIVERPOOL, England —  In the middle of the bustling city center last week, not far from the merriment of the famed Albert Dock, a man set up a makeshift kiosk to peddle Liverpool F.C. scarves. Over the course of a lunch hour it seemed he always had a customer or two, and to understand the emotions that drive most fans here, one needed to look only at the three scarves displayed prominently across the top of the man’s tent.In the center of the first red scarf, in big block letters, was the club’s name: LIVERPOOL.In the center of the second red scarf, in big block letters, was the name of the club’s star striker: LUIS SUAREZ.And in the center of the third red scarf, in big block letters, was the mission that has lingered over Liverpool fans — Liverpool residents, really — for the last 25 years: JUSTICE.In many ways, it was appropriate that the messages were next to one another but separate. For although there is an easy story line to seize upon — a city still mourning a vast tragedy finds inspiration in the chase for an unexpected championship — the truth is a bit more complex.It has been 25 years since 96 Liverpool fans died inside Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, a disaster that defined a city, a region and, to some extent, a country. And as Liverpudlians deal with their emotions as that anniversary nears, the club itself is in position to win its first title in England’s top league since 1990. Put it all together, and it isn’t so much a Hollywood cliché as an overwrought headline writer’s dream.But to juxtapose those two circumstances, it seems, gives short shrift to the sentiment many fans have lived with. For years, the official verdict on what happened on April 15, 1989, was that the deaths were accidental, and that rowdy and violent fans were largely to blame for so many people losing their lives after being crushed on an overcrowded terrace.Only recently has evidence supporting a more sinister version emerged: a staggering lack of communication that led to the police and stadium workers’ being grossly negligent. Many fans and longtime residents of the city have said that it is specious to link the anniversary of such a controversy to a pleasing turn of form on the field.“Many people, especially in the tabloids here, will run that kind of a story, I suppose, but it just isn’t so,” said Phil Scraton, the founder of the Hillsborough Project, which researched the legal processes that followed the tragedy. Scraton was also a member of the Hillsborough Independent Panel, which first identified, in 2012, the safety deficiencies and subsequent cover-up by the local authorities.Scraton added: “I don’t think winning the league would add a different dimension or anything like that because then the suggestion would be that if they were doing badly, it would diminish the impact of the 25th anniversary. The truth is that the 25th anniversary is a massive moment because of where the campaign for justice is at this moment — and that is the case whether the team is doing well or not.”The juxtaposition of the two circumstances has required some significant compartmentalizing. Particularly in the last few weeks, Liverpool fans have spent most days reliving their Hillsborough emotions as a new proceeding has begun, in which a jury will hear much of the evidence revealed in the panel’s report, and then render verdicts on the cause of death for all 96 victims.The process could last up to a year and has included wrenching personal statements about each of the victims from family members or others who were close to them.Those following the inquest heard last week about, among others, Kevin and Christopher Traynor, who were one of three sets of brothers to die at Hillsborough; Steven Brown, who left behind a wife who was six months pregnant; Henry Rogers, who was 17 and enmeshed in his college planning; and Sarah and Victoria Hicks, teenage sisters whose parents sent them to a soccer match and never saw them alive again.“The loss of all your children is devastating,” their father, Trevor Hicks, told the jurors. “You lose everything: the present, the future and any purpose.”Each day, there have been more stories, more reminders of what was lost. For fans of a certain age, it is impossible not to relive memories of that afternoon, one that was supposed to be a high point for the club. It was the F.A. Cup semifinal against Nottingham Forest, and the match was being played at Hillsborough, a neutral site.As with many historic events, good and bad, seemingly any Liverpool resident can tell you what he or she was doing at 3:07 p.m., the time when the game was stopped because of what was happening in the stands.Catherine Wingle, 56, was chattering in the kitchen at a friend’s house when she heard, “Something’s happened!” from those watching on television in the next room.Peter Hooten, a longtime Liverpool fan and former member of the Farm, a British rock band, was at the match but happened to be sitting in one of the sections on the side of the stadium instead of standing on the terraces behind the goals.“We saw people ripping up the advertising boards and using them as stretchers to try and help those who were hurt,” Hooten said. “I remember walking onto the field and going up to a police officer, who was standing in a line with other policemen at midfield. I was pointing to people who were lying on the ground and needing CPR and the police officer just stood there. They never moved. They said they couldn’t go anywhere unless they were ordered.”Crowding, outside stadium gates and on the terraces, which were mostly unorganized standing areas, was common at that time. It was only after Hillsborough that laws about each fan having a specific seat were put in place. Hooliganism and fan violence were also recurrent problems, and the terraces often became mob scenes: fans jammed shoulder to shoulder, unable to move.“There’d be people holding rolled-up newspapers in front of themselves” and urinating in the middle of the crowd, said Tim Doyle, 49, shaking his head at the memory. He added: “It was bloody awful on the terraces. Don’t get me wrong, fans can be pigs — but in the disaster, it’s been shown that lives could have been saved. People needed help and didn’t get it. That’s justice; it has nothing to do with winning.”Doyle quickly added that he was not dismissing the winning. Most observers thought Liverpool would be a top-four team this season, though not in the mix for a title. If the Reds win Sunday against Manchester City, however, they will be in control of the race, guaranteed first place with victories in their final four games.It is a heady position. But the club has generally soft-pedaled any links between play on the field and the Hillsborough anniversary. Even Steven Gerrard, the Liverpool captain whose cousin died at Hillsborough, has been reluctant to speak on the subject. As Hooten, the musician, said: “After Hillsborough, football didn’t matter in this city for quite a while. We keep them separate. It’s always been that way.”And so it will be again this week. On Sunday, the chase for glory streaks toward the finish. Then, on Tuesday, at the 25th anniversary memorial service, there will come another reminder that justice may yet still be a ways away.