https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/dining/king-restaurant-review-soho.html
Some Food, a Plate, a Room. That’s Enough at King, in SoHo. - The New York Times
Restaurants,King (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),SoHo (Manhattan  NY)
June 6, 2017
9547
A friend who has made herself a regular at the SoHo restaurant King sums up its appeal, with deep approval, as “food on a plate in a room.” This undersells the place — King offers much more than that — but she has a point.The restaurant, which opened in September, is not a show-off. The dining room is small, tidy and nearly square, painted the pale color of butter in the winter. Windows stretching to the ceiling along the north wall look out on the dormered Federal townhouses of King Street. The facing wall is broken up with a single abstract painting, a doorway to the kitchen and a long opening behind which the four people who make up the entire kitchen staff can be seen at work. It is a room content with being just a room, and letting you focus on the people you’re with and the food that’s on the plate.There will be papery curls of carta di musica before anything else arrives. Brushed with rosemary, this Sardinian flatbread shatters when you tap it. It will be gone in a minute, but it serves as a brief introduction to King’s culinary realm.After this gift from the kitchen, an order of panisse may seem redundant. It isn’t. At King, these chickpea fritters are long, thin tongues that puff up like pommes soufflés and are scented all over by fried sage. They’re beautiful. They were on the menu last month, but they may not stay long.Nothing does. King’s two chefs, Jess Shadbolt and Clare de Boer, cook a different slate of dishes each night. The changes tend to be evolutionary, drawing from a fixed repertoire of ideas. The first time I had halibut there, it was grilled, and its skin had been deeply charred without drying out the rich white meat right under it. The plate was filled out with spinach and white coco beans soft enough to mash with a spoon.The next time I ate halibut at King, it was poached, the beans were back and the greens had been replaced with small artichoke hearts simmered in white wine and amaranth. I’ll eat either dish again in a minute if the chefs give me a chance.Their food borrows liberally from the home cooking of those parts of Italy and France where New Yorkers of a certain generation dreamed of buying a summer house. This style has gone out lately, but a few years ago it was the default for the breed of American chefs who led their staff in fava-shucking parties each spring. Ms. Shadbolt and Ms. de Boer practice an English variant of the style they learned in the kitchen of the River Cafe in London.Anybody who’s eaten at that restaurant or has gone to bed with one of its cookbooks will experience occasional flashbacks at King. Polenta and almond flour go into a classic River Cafe dessert and into a different one that recurs at King. If you see it on the menu, especially if it is weighted with nectarines, pounce.Chefs can’t get far on imitation. They need to understand the how and why of things, and Ms. Shadbolt and Ms. de Boer do. Once you get past King’s debt to River Cafe, what you really notice is how many little moves they know that can raise a recipe from good to exceptional.Olive oil blended with nettles is an excellent sauce for boiled fingerling potatoes. What makes King’s even better is that a few fingerlings have been crushed into the purée, so from time to time you bite into a chunk of potato hiding inside the sauce. This was a side dish that traveled alongside a guinea hen, roasted whole with a bath of verdicchio in the bottom of the pan. Wilted nettles sprawled over its crisp skin. With a squeeze of lemon, it was one of the most appealing guinea hens I had ever come across.If you eat at King often, you can see the chefs making subtle adjustments to keep flavors in balance. Ravioli under spring peas and raw pea shoots were filled with minimally seasoned ricotta one week. The next, the ricotta inside floppy tortellini got an extra spur from lemon zest. The citrus might have stepped on the sweetness of the peas, but it helped the tortellini, because the only competition on the plate was fresh marjoram.And when some new seasonal ingredient appears on the scene, you can see the chefs strike like cobras. Saltwort, the salt-marsh-loving succulent that Italians call agretti, was the exciting foundation for a May salad built with wild arugula and raw ovals of asparagus stalks, making one of their first appearances of the year. Salty goldenrod bottarga was shaved over everything, even the white rim of the plate.To be won over by King, it helps not to expect things you’ve never seen before. Even those meeting saltwort for the first time will find that the rest of the meal looks familiar. What Ms. de Boer and Ms. Shadbolt offer is not a wild vision of new ways to cook but a solid vision of how to eat. They put pleasure at the table above gymnastics on the plate. For reasons I don’t want to understand, I associate this trait with other female chefs around town, including Rita Sodi, Missy Robbins, Gabrielle Hamilton, Sara Jenkins, Angie Mar and April Bloomfield, another River Cafe alumna.At King, the vision extends to how to drink. Annie Shi, who superintends the dining room and is a third business partner with the chefs, can offer guidance with the wine list. She favors French and Italian producers, many of them not quite famous, whose wines gracefully weave in and around the cooking.At the compact bar by the front door, cocktails are put together with the simplicity and respect for aperitif wines that you find in Italy. There is a kir and a sbagliato, which is nothing more than Campari and red vermouth on the rocks topped up with prosecco. These and other drinks slip into the bloodstream without knocking the palate out of alignment.The desserts are cafe style. They don’t look like extraterrestrial landscapes but rather recognizable slices and scoops.One of the few things at King that didn’t make perfect sense was a tiramisù; it went too heavy on the espresso and too light on the mascarpone. Every other dessert was just what I wanted, even when I didn’t know I wanted it. Chilled, thickened cream flavored with Pernod? I’m a fan now. I’m also a new convert to something called the Colonel. It’s a cup of lemon granita served with a tiny pitcher of cold vodka. You pour one over the other.I have no idea why the vodka makes the granita taste better, but it does.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.