http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/22/nyregion/22edc.html
Bloomberg to Name New Deputy Mayor for Economic Development - The New York Times
Steel  Robert K,Bloomberg  Michael R,Politics and Government,Appointments and Executive Changes,New York City
June 21, 2010
6867
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is expected to announce Tuesday that he has selected a former Wall Street banker as the  next deputy mayor for economic development, according to administration and business officials.The banker, Robert Steel, worked at both Goldman Sachs and Wachovia and served  as under secretary for domestic finance in the federal Treasury Department during the financial crisis in 2007 and 2008.Mr. Steel, 58, who lives in Greenwich, Conn., will replace Robert C. Lieber, also a former  banker, who announced his departure last month.Kathryn S. Wylde, president of the Partnership for New York City, a business group, said Mr. Steel’s selection served as a signal that Mr. Bloomberg would not be coasting to the end of his term.“It’s a terrific choice,” Ms. Wylde said. “He understands the challenges, particularly those facing the financial services industry. It’s somebody who can really make sure that we retain our stature in the world of global finance.”A spokesman for the mayor, Stu Loeser, declined to comment on the appointment on Monday.Mr. Bloomberg has often gone outside government circles to pick top members of his administration. He recently appointed Stephen Goldsmith, a former mayor of Indianapolis and a management expert, to succeed Edward Skyler as deputy mayor for operations, despite his unfamiliarity with New York.But now Mr. Bloomberg has added a deputy mayor who will have to learn quickly about the complexity and limitations of government’s role in stimulating economic development. At the same time, he will have to balance the city’s often difficult relationship with the governor’s office over major projects, including ground zero,  Battery Park City and the convention center.“When you put Steel together with Goldsmith, they’ll really need a lot of staff people who know New York City,” said an executive who has worked in government and the private sector and who requested anonymity to avoid being seen as criticizing the mayor. “They’re smart guys, but they’re going to have to deal with the Byzantine politics and craziness that is New York.”