https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/us/in-kentucky-and-arkansas-access-to-health-care-improves-study-says.html
Better Health Care Access in Kentucky and Arkansas, Study Says - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Medicaid,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Arkansas,Health Affairs (Journal),Kentucky,Insurance,States (US),Texas
Jan. 5, 2016
2973
WASHINGTON —  Low-income adults in Kentucky and Arkansas have had similar improvements in access to medical care under the Affordable Care Act, a new study found, despite the two states’ differing approaches to expanding Medicaid.Both states expanded their Medicaid programs in 2014 to cover most adults with incomes under 138 percent of the federal poverty level, as the health law allows. While new enrollees in Kentucky joined its traditional Medicaid program, Arkansas chose to buy private coverage for poor people through the new federal insurance marketplace using federal Medicaid funds, a model that several other states have since followed. Its program, known as the private option, was intended to appeal to Republicans who opposed expanding a federal entitlement program.The study, published in Health Affairs, found that Arkansas and Kentucky had significant reductions in the number of low-income adults without insurance from 2013 to 2014. In Arkansas, the number of uninsured for the group dropped to 19.4 percent from 41.8 percent; Kentucky’s rate dropped to 12.4 percent from 40.2 percent. The finding is consistent with recent surveys that put Arkansas and Kentucky among the states with the largest overall declines in people without insurance since the health law expanded coverage in January 2014. The study also looked at Texas, whose Republican leaders have refused to expand Medicaid under the law, and found far more modest gains in coverage and access to care among low-income people.Kentucky and Arkansas had similar increases in rates of regular care among low-income adults with chronic conditions, the study found, and similar decreases in the percentage of such adults who skipped medications because of cost. But the study found one notable difference between the two states: Low-income people in Kentucky reported significantly less trouble paying medical bills after getting coverage.Specifically, the number of people who had trouble paying medical bills dropped 14.3 percent in Kentucky from 2013 to 2014, compared with 7.6 percent in Arkansas.Dr. Benjamin Sommers, a professor at the Harvard School of Public Health who conducted the study with two colleagues, said the difference could be in the handling of co-payments. Enrollees in Arkansas who earned above the poverty level could be charged co-payments totaling up to 5 percent of their income for medical care in 2014. In Kentucky, co-payments for the Medicaid expansion population were generally negligible.“It looks to us like Kentucky’s traditional expansion was requiring people to spend less on their medical care,” Dr. Sommers said.The study was based on telephone surveys of 5,665 adults ages 19 to 64 in the three states, all American citizens who reported family income below 138 percent of the poverty level. The surveys were conducted in late 2013 and late 2014. They asked about type of insurance, access to a usual source of care, cost-related barriers to care, use of care, out-of-pocket spending and self-reported mental and physical health. Survey respondents were also asked whether they had been found to have a chronic condition such as asthma, hypertension, diabetes and depression.Over all, emergency department visits among low-income adults did not change significantly from 2013 to 2014 in any of the three states. But the study did find that Medicaid expansion was associated with an increase in use of emergency departments because of a lack of available outpatient care. On the other hand, it found that people who enrolled in Medicaid under the Arkansas and Kentucky expansions were less likely than before to rely on emergency departments as a usual source of care.Also somewhat surprising was that the study did not find significant changes in how often low-income adults in Arkansas and Kentucky sought medical care after they obtained insurance, or in their perceptions of their own physical and mental health.“It is possible that our sample size was too small to detect such changes after only a single year,” the authors wrote.The study is continuing in all three states, but the future of expanded Medicaid is uncertain in Kentucky and Arkansas. Kentucky’s new Republican governor, Matt Bevin, has promised to reshape the program, perhaps by requiring some enrollees to pay premiums and co-payments. Arkansas, too, is looking to change its alternative program, including by charging premiums to enrollees with incomes above the poverty level.“All of this is subject to change,” Dr. Sommers said. “That’s why we are continuing the study.”