https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/arts/design/art-and-museums-in-nyc-this-week.html
Art and Museums in NYC This Week - The New York Times
Art,Museums
July 6, 2017
1251
Our guide to new art shows — and some that will be closing soon.‘ANISH KAPOOR: DESCENSION’ at Brooklyn Bridge Park (through Sept. 10). The British sculptor Anish Kapoor has installed an antimonument by the East River: a circular fountain, 26 feet in diameter, from which water doesn’t gush forth but is sucked into the earth instead. This is not the first time Mr. Kapoor has explored the sculptural properties of water and suction (an earlier version was seen at the Palace of Versailles two years ago), but it’s hard to miss the blunt metaphorical resonance in today’s America of this permanent abyss, whose mushroom-colored water rushes around the drain before getting sucked into the ground. But don’t point that out to the children flocking to the fountain’s edge: They love it. (Jason Farago)publicartfund.org‘KATJA NOVITSKOVA: EARTH POTENTIAL’ at City Hall Park (through Nov. 9). This young artist from Estonia, who is representing that country at this year’s Venice Biennale, has filled the park outside the mayor’s office with her uncanny photo collages, drawn from scientific and astronomical websites and printed on aluminum panels. She likes to emphasize the dissolution of scale that digital images allow: In one work, a roundworm is magnified to appear as large as an image of Titan, Saturn’s Earth-like moon. Not much is gained by seeing these in public rather than a pristine gallery space, but there is something nifty, you’ve got to think, about Wall Street workers shuffling every day past a giant blown-up image of the E. coli bacterium. (Farago)publicartfund.org‘PEDER BALKE: PAINTER OF NORTHERN LIGHT’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (closes on July 10). This modest, magnetic show of mostly small canvases introduces one of 19th-century Romanticism’s best-kept secrets, an artist nonetheless revered in his native Norway, who found his Mont Sainte-Victoire at the top of the world in the boxy headlands of the country’s North Cape. It and other astounding land formations, along with thunderous waves, dominate these miraculous works, some not much larger than postcards. (Roberta Smith)212-535-7710, metmuseum.org‘POPE.L: PROTO-SKIN SET’ at Mitchell-Innes & Nash (closes on July 14). For a potent introduction to one of the most challenging, societally astute, multitalented artists of our time, see this show of 18 gripping paintings on scavenged paper — most started in the late 1980s or early ’90s and exhibited here for the first time. They compress onto finite surfaces the essence of his barbed sensibility and innovative materiality, pursued primarily in performance, installation, video, sculpture and theater. The catalog extends his run of remarkable interviews. (Smith)212-744-7400, miandn.com