https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/us/politics/trump-environmental-protection-agency-budget-cuts.html
With E.P.A. Cuts, States Would Lose Help in Emergencies - The New York Times
Environmental Protection Agency,Federal Budget (US),Hazardous and Toxic Substances,Water Pollution,Water,States (US),Federal-State Relations (US),Environment,Pruitt  Scott,Trump  Donald J,Ohio,Corpus Christi (Tex)
March 16, 2017
7836
WASHINGTON — Late one Friday night in 2014, Ohio’s environmental agency received word of a frightening test result from Toledo’s water supply: A toxic greenish substance had rendered the drinking water of half a million Toledo residents unsafe to drink.“Immediately we reached out to the Environmental Protection Agency,” said Craig Butler, the director of Ohio’s environmental agency. “Because of the scale of the problem, and the technical knowledge required, we needed their expertise.”State officials flew water samples from Toledo to an E.P.A. laboratory in Cincinnati, where staff scientists identified the substance as microcystin, a rare but toxic substance that is produced by algae blooms in water and causes liver damage in humans.The resources to respond to those emergencies, along with much of the other state-level work performed by the agency, would be eliminated or sharply reduced by President Trump’s proposed budget for fiscal 2018, which cuts the E.P.A. by 31 percent, more than any other agency.While the agency may be known for sweeping regulations to curb climate change, increase auto fuel efficiency or mandate smokestack controls, the agency’s bread and butter is more prosaic. The staff and scientists at its regional offices and laboratories across the country regularly respond to emergency calls from city and state officials: a December 2016 chemical leak from an asphalt plant into the water supply of Corpus Christi, Tex.; airborne drifts last summer in southern Missouri of dicamba, an herbicide that damages non-genetically modified crops; a 2014 fire at a perfume factory in Bridgeport, Conn., that spewed dangerous chemicals into the surrounding neighborhood.Funds to respond to many of those calls would no longer be available under Mr. Trump’s budget. He proposed lowering the agency’s $8.1 billion budget to $5.7 billion, and cutting 3,200 jobs from the its staff of 15,000.The proposal appears to be a realization of the federalist philosophy of the agency’s new administrator, Scott Pruitt, who has ardently championed states’ rights. He has said repeatedly that he wants to pare down the agency’s overreaching federal authority and return the work of environmental regulation to states.But former E.P.A. officials say that in the case of responding to emergencies like the one that polluted Toledo’s water supply, states often lack the expertise and resources of the federal government.“What he fails to understand is that states do not have the technical capability to do some of this work,” said Gina McCarthy, who led the agency under the Obama administration.Even in states like Ohio, which voted for Mr. Trump, officials like Mr. Butler say they are deeply concerned by the president’s proposed cuts to the agency.Nearly half of its current funding is passed directly to state environmental agencies. Over all, about a third of all state funding for environmental regulation is supplied by the E.P.A., according to an analysis by the Environmental Council of the States, a nonpartisan group that represents state environmental agencies.That funding is used to enforce federal environmental laws at the state level. If that federal funding is cut, “it is extremely unlikely that states would be able to make up the funding,” said Alexandra Dunn, the executive director of that group.If federal funding for states to enact regulations and respond to emergencies is cut, experts say, it may be hard for states to make up the difference.“I’m a huge fan of cooperative federalism,” Mr. Butler said. “This process of reviewing the federal budget and removing programs that are duplicative is completely appropriate.”But he added, “Where that message conflicts with the president’s budget is where they say, ‘Hey, states, we want you to do this work, but we’re going to cut your budget to do it.’”