https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/20/opinion/riding-and-raging-on-the-rail-road.html
Riding and Raging on the Rail Road - The New York Times
Long Island Rail Road Co,Twitter,Commuting,Editorials,Delays (Transportation)
Aug. 19, 2013
8719
 Starting my morning off right with the commute from hell, courtesy of the ever-reliable & always punctual LIRR. The tweets started at the height of Monday morning’s rush hour from Long Island Rail Road riders whose trains into Manhattan were stopped, crawling or canceled because of some problem they weren’t quite sure about. "The 9:33 train has been held, due to power problems” what does that even mean? How long? Forever? Not forever, though it surely felt that way to people about to be late to job interviews. An electrified rail had failed in a tunnel under the East River, bringing the nation’s busiest railroad to its knees. One stuck train had to be moved out of the way. Ten trips were canceled; four were diverted to Brooklyn. Many, many more were just late — 15 minutes, a half-hour, an hour. Thousands of riders fumed. But they did not suffer alone: Thanks, Twitter! Took my 8 year old to work today. “Daddy, why are we an hour late?” “Because Long Islanders have to take the LIRR, son.” One rider had a constructive idea: Instead of LIRR Conductors punching tickets today, they should be handing out passenger slips saying “We made your employee late today.” The East River tracks are Amtrak’s responsibility, which the L.I.R.R. took pains to tell riders. But keeping riders informed is the L.I.R.R.’s job. It did send tweets and e-mails. But riders without smartphones had to rely on conductors for information. Many were left in the dark. About all they heard were regrets. If I had a nickel for all of the sincere apologies received from the LIRR for countless delays over the years, I’d have zero nickels. Humor: always a good substitute for rage. Instead of thanking us for our patience, they should say, “Thanks for not becoming feral and killing and eating us.” 