https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/world/americas/obama-and-raul-castro-meet-as-us-cuba-ties-deepen.html
Obama and Raúl Castro Meet as U.S.-Cuba Ties Deepen - The New York Times
Castro  Raul,Obama  Barack,Cuba,Embargoes and Sanctions,General Assembly (UN),United States
Sept. 29, 2015
6807
UNITED NATIONS —  President Obama and President Raúl Castro of Cuba met Tuesday for the second time in six months, continuing a gradual warming of ties that has chipped away at decades of tension between the nations but upset conservative critics of Mr. Obama and some Republican presidential candidates.Mr. Obama smiled broadly during a brief photo opportunity before the meeting with Mr. Castro, who said with a laugh that the American president, far taller, towered over him. The two men then grew more serious, buttoned their suit coats and shook hands for the cameras. Neither answered shouted questions from reporters, who were quickly shooed out of the meeting room as the two leaders sat down to talk.According to the White House, the two men chatted about the recent visits of Pope Francis, who was a crucial go-between in the opening of formal diplomatic ties between them. And Mr. Obama highlighted efforts he intends to take to further improve ties and to help the Cuban people, the White House said.“The president, as he always does, reaffirmed our commitment to seeing the Cuban government doing a better job of not only respecting but also actively protecting the human rights of the Cuban people,” said Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary.The meeting capped a period of remarkable change in the relationship between Cuba and the United States. In April, Mr. Obama and Mr. Castro held the first face-to-face discussion between leaders of the two countries in a half-century. Then in July, the countries reopened embassies in Havana and Washington. The change in status has been hugely popular among diplomats here and globally — Mr. Obama’s references to his Cuba policy on Monday in his General Assembly speech got the biggest applause.The opening to Cuba has even been well received among many in the United States, although not with conservatives or some Cuban-Americans in Florida. Senator Marco Rubio, a Republican from Florida who is running for his party’s presidential nomination, has criticized Mr. Obama’s policy toward Cuba as one that rewards the Castro government for its repressive tactics and “threatens America’s moral standing in our hemisphere and around the world.”Next week, Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker is expected to fly to Cuba in hopes of increasing trade and exchanges between the two countries, and perhaps to complete a civil aviation agreement that would allow direct commercial flights to Cuba from the United States.But Mr. Obama can do only so much with the trade embargo still in place, and there is little chance Congress will lift the embargo without clear signs that Cuba is changing politically. Mr. Obama would like to follow Ms. Pritzker with his own visit to Cuba near the end of his term, but he might not be able to do so without facing criticism unless Cuba makes political changes after the opening of relations.The next steps appear to rest largely with Mr. Castro, an 84-year-old Communist patriarch who has shown little appetite in his twilight years for embracing the kind of bold political changes that might threaten his government’s grip on power. In his own speech before the General Assembly on Monday, Mr. Castro said relations between Cuba and the United States could not return to normal until the United States lifted its 53-year trade embargo. Mr. Castro also called for the return of land occupied by the American military base at Guantánamo Bay.Mr. Obama partly agreed with Mr. Castro, saying in his speech on Monday that as contacts between the two countries increased, “I’m confident that our Congress will inevitably lift an embargo that should not be in place anymore.”At the meeting on Tuesday, Mr. Obama and Mr. Castro discussed recent advances in relations between the United States and Cuba, as well as additional steps each government could take to deepen cooperation.Mr. Obama highlighted American regulatory changes that would allow more Americans to travel to and do business with Cuba. The president welcomed the progress made in establishing diplomatic relations, and said continued reforms in Cuba would increase the impact of the American regulatory changes. Mr. Obama also detailed steps the United States intends to take to improve ties between America and Cuba, and reiterated support for human rights in Cuba.Cuba’s foreign minister, Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, said in a statement that the meeting had been “held in a respectful and constructive climate.”But he also said at a news conference at the United Nations that the pace of normalization would depend on the lifting of the American trade embargo. He also criticized the Obama administration for what he called its slowness in easing the embargo’s impact, through executive actions that do not require congressional approval.“The executive power of the U.S. president is very broad,” the foreign minister said. Asked if he thought Mr. Obama should do more to use it before his term expires in 2016, Mr. Rodríguez said: “He has not done so. I expect him to do so.”