https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/style/new-york-design-destinations-you-cant-miss-this-month.html
New York Design Destinations You Can’t Miss This Month - The New York Times
Design,Conventions  Fairs and Trade Shows,Museums,New York City,NYCxDesign
April 27, 2017
5417
NYCxDesign, the citywide celebration of design, fashion, architecture and art, officially runs from May 3 to 24. But throughout the month, galleries, showrooms, museums and trade fairs will host exhibitions, tours and conversations. Here are some standouts.Designing WomenThe three female founders of Egg Collective present works by 15 leading New York designers who happen to be women. Objects will be sold at the SoHo showroom and online, with 20 percent of sales benefiting Girls Inc. of New York City.Through May 26 at 304 Hudson Street, No. 307; eggcollective.com. Our Flag: Design Stands TogetherA show at the TriBeCa gallery R & Company features contemporary objects inspired by the American flag. All profits will be donated to the American Civil Liberties Union.Through June 15 at 82 Franklin Street; r-and-company.com.Kips Bay Decorator Show HouseContributors to the 45th annual show house include the designers Ken Fulk, Nick Olsen and Robert A. M. Stern. All proceeds benefit the Kips Bay Boys & Girls Club.Through June 1 at 125 East 65th Street; $40. Tickets for the May 1 opening-night reception start at $200; kipsbaydecoratorshowhouse.org.Glass and Georgia at the Future PerfectThe NoHo design gallery is showing pieces by the American glass artist John Hogan and furnishings by Rooms, a studio based in Tbilisi.Through early July at 55 Great Jones Street: thefutureperfect.com.Odd Experiments at Cooler GalleryAn exhibition of work by furniture designers who are challenged to ignore practicality.Through May 20 at 22 Waverly Avenue, Brooklyn; opening night reception 7-10 p.m.; cooler-gallery.com.Collective Design FairMore than two dozen galleries display limited-edition collectibles, and a posse of experimental designers show how they make the most of their materials. There’s also a retrospective of neo-Baroque works by the Swiss-born designer Mattia Bonetti and 3-D-printed objects by emerging designers.Through May 7 at 550 Washington Street; $30 plus handling fee and sales tax; collectivedesignfair.com.Midcentury French Design at Demisch Danant“Innovation: Made in France II” features works from 1965 to 1975, a robust era for French design and technology (think of the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris).Through July 1 at 30 W. 12th Street; demischdanant.com.Design Shopping at the SeaportWantedDesign opens two stores in the Seaport District: one selling furniture, lighting and fashion (there’s also a coffee lounge); the other accessories, jewelry and children’s items.6 Fulton Street (home and lifestyle) and 16 Fulton Street (design market); wanteddesignnyc.com.A Decade of Friedman BendaThe Chelsea design gallery celebrates its 10th anniversary with works by 21 artists, including Ettore Sottsass and Faye Toogood, aiming to “shine a light onto the beautiful chaos that is contemporary design.”Through June 10 at 515 West 26th Street; friedmanbenda.com.Bklyn DesignsThe event is a showcase for more than 50 local designers and includes talks on subjects like color trends and indigo dyeing. Pop-up shops will sell jewelry and decorative but usable cornhole game boards. Installations include a play space called the Imagination Playground and a lounge area with the theme Design Against Hate.Through May 7 at 72 Noble Street, Brooklyn; $15; bklyndesigns.com.Sculptural Furniture at Les Ateliers CourbetThe first New York exhibition of the Italian designer Mauro Mori includes hand-carved pieces in Seychelles wood, Carrara marble and metals.Through June 3 at 175 Mott Street; ateliercourbet.com. The Jazz Age: Tea & Talk at the Cooper HewittPauline Metcalf, a design historian, discusses women’s pioneering roles in the practice of interior design with the curators of “The Jazz Age: American Style in the 1920s,” on view through Aug. 20 at the Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum.3-4:30 p.m. at 2 East 91st Street; $35 (price includes refreshments and museum admission); cooperhewitt.org.Deputy Mayor Dialogue: New York and LondonAt the Center for Architecture, Alicia Glen, New York City’s deputy mayor for housing and urban development, and Jules Pipe, London’s deputy mayor for planning, regeneration and skills, discuss the future of both cities in an age of explosive growth.12-2 p.m. at 536 LaGuardia Place; $10; cfa.aiany.org.Japanese-Inspired Tableware at the MoMA Design StoreSixteen international designers teamed up with artisans from Arita, a Japanese porcelain center, to produce modern dishware under the brand name Arita 2016/. The collections will be introduced at the MoMA Design Store. Through June 10 at 44 West 53rd Street; store.moma.org.Conversation: The Future of FashionLi Edelkoort, a trend forecaster, and Hazel Clark, the curator of “Fashion After Fashion,” on view through Aug. 6 at the Museum of Arts and Design, wrestle with this question: Is fashion obsolete?6:30 p.m. at 2 Columbus Circle; $10; madmuseum.org.All Dressed Up and No Place to GoBergdorf Goodman’s Men’s Store displays four windows by the British interiors and product designer Lee Broom. The themes are exercise, work, play and explore.Continues into June at 745 Fifth Avenue; bergdorfgoodman.com.“Flora Noir” at Twenty First GalleryEleven furniture pieces ornamented with actual petals are shown by Marcin Rusak, a Polish-born, London-based designer who is the son and grandson of florists.Through June 16 at 458 West 22nd Street; 21stgallery.com.“Common Sense” FestivalA/D/O, a creative space founded by Mini, hosts a one-day program of lectures and workshops on how design can cut across differences.10 a.m. to 5 p.m. at 29 Norman Avenue, Brooklyn; $199; a-d-o.com.FAD MarketAn itinerant fashion, art and design marketplace with more than 40 vendors comes to the Great Hall of the Brooklyn Historical Society.Through May 14 at 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn; fadmarket.co.WantedDesign BrooklynInternational design collaborations and socially beneficial projects dominate this annual show at Industry City in Sunset Park. On Saturday, May 20, and Sunday, May 21, visitors may also tour the open studios of nearly 100 of the complex’s artist-tenants.Through May 23 at 238 36th Street, Brooklyn; wanteddesignnyc.com.Design PavilionOpen throughout NYCxDesign as an information center, this Times Square plaza will host five days of public activities and installations. Includes a “movement bar” made of Corian, objects fashioned from recycled materials in a show called “Made Out of WHAT?!”, and a market stocked with goods from Kikkerland Design, American Design Club and others.Through May 22 at 45th to 47th Streets between Broadway and Seventh Avenue; design-pavilion.com.Tribeca Design District NightGalleries and showrooms, including Colony, David Weeks Studio and Stillfried Wien, will stay open late and may even give parties.Hours vary; tribecadesigndistrict.com.Sight Unseen OffsiteHighlights of the fourth annual fair include a virtual reality experience of 2017 interiors trends, an interactive wallpaper installation and works by emerging talents. From May 16 through May 23, Sight Unseen will also tuck design installations and events into a dozen New York shops and restaurants.Through May 22 at 100 Avenue of the Americas; $10; sightunseen.com.“Making/Breaking” at the Cooper HewittA show of 45 recent contemporary acquisitions by the design museum.Through Oct. 29 at 2 East 91st Street; $18; cooperhewitt.org.WantedDesign ManhattanThe Chelsea location of the contemporary design showcase hosts 80 international exhibitors.Through May 23 at 269 11th Avenue; open to the public May 20-21; wanteddesignnyc.com.Matter MadeThe SoHo design store Matter presents its 2017 Matter Made collection.6-8 p.m. at 405 Broome Street; mattermatters.com.Snug Harbor: A Marvel of Adaptive ReuseA tour of Staten Island’s Snug Harbor Cultural Center & Botanical Garden.12-2 p.m. at 1000 Richmond Terrace, Building C, Staten Island. ICFF NYCThe show, formerly known as the International Contemporary Furniture Fair, returns for its 29th year with more than 750 exhibitors. Contingents from Spain, Britain, Portugal, Italy, Brazil, France, Austria, Norway, the Philippines and Romania will be in the mix, along with projects from 16 design schools.Through May 24 at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center; open to the public May 24; $60; icff.com.Scandinavian-American FurniturePieces by the Copenhagen-based design company Muuto, which is working for the first time with the New York-based textile company Maharam.Through May 24 at 531 West 36th Street, Second Floor; maharam.com.SoHo Design District Design NightThe more than two dozen showrooms, from Artemide to Valcucine, that are part of the SoHo Design District will be open.6-9 p.m.; sohodesigndistrict.org.Tech Plus ExpoA trade show of innovative tools and technologies in architecture, engineering and construction, sponsored by The Architect’s Newspaper.8:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. at 639 West 46th St; $99; techplusexpo.com.Lightness: The Full SpectrumClosing reception for the Colony exhibition (on view beginning May 18) to benefit the American Civil Liberties Union.6-9 p.m. at 324 Canal Street, Second Floor, $5; goodcolony.com.