http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/08/nyregion/some-see-third-world-as-too-kind-for-la-guardia.html
Some See Biden’s ‘Third World’ Description of La Guardia as Too Kind - The New York Times
Airports,Airlines and Airplanes,Airport Security,Travel and Vacations,LaGuardia Airport (Queens  NY),Biden  Joseph R Jr,Infrastructure (Public Works)
Feb. 7, 2014
7677
The indignities of modern air travel are legion.From the cramped cabins and stale air to the interminable security lines where, along with their liquids, travelers surrender a little bit of their soul with each pat-down, the joy of jet-setting has departed long ago.But in some places, the airport itself can provide refuge.In Hong Kong, travelers can play a round of golf while waiting for a connecting flight. In Seoul, South Korea, people can strap on skates and kill time on the ice at the Sky Rink. And in Paris, parents are provided with free strollers as they cruise newly upgraded terminals.At La Guardia Airport, the best a traveler can hope for is a stool at a crowded bar, an available electrical socket or a lukewarm pretzel from Auntie Anne. There are no day spas, no hotels within its grounds, no free Internet service, and even luggage carts, free in many international airports, cost $5. The situation is so bad that when Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. wanted to illustrate the dire state of infrastructure in the United States, he chose La Guardia as the prime example, likening it to what one might find “in a third world country.”As the crowd laughed, he added: “I’m not joking.”Mr. Biden’s comments on Thursday in Philadelphia might be perceived as insulting or funny, if they did not have an element of truth.“I agree with him,” said Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the region’s major airports.For the past decade, Mr. Foye said, the Port Authority had devoted much of its time and billions of dollars to rebuilding the World Trade Center complex. But it is now finally able to turn its attention to the airports — something that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said was long overdue.“La Guardia Airport is ranked as the worst airport in America, believe it or not,” Mr. Cuomo said in his annual State of the State address this year. “That is a disgrace.”In its $27.6 billion capital budget unveiled this week, the Port Authority is committing $8 billion to improvements at Newark Liberty International, John F. Kennedy and La Guardia Airports.Many countries in Asia and the Middle East have already been engaged in an arms race of sorts, according to people who have studied the industry, building better and bigger airports as they vie to become essential travel hubs that will draw flights, as well as investment and visitors. Even countries that could be considered third world have recently invested in their airports as a way to lift their economies.A quick survey by the Global Gateway Alliance, at the request of The New York Times, found that many airports in less-developed nations offer amenities that La Guardia does not.Grantley Adams International Airport in Barbados has free Wi-Fi, a post office and fast-track service through customs. Jorge Chavez International Airport in Peru has a hotel, spa and post office on site, and is undergoing a major expansion. The international airport in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, has a children’s play area and free Internet access, but also offers “Express Rail” train service to the city center in under 28 minutes. There are, undoubtedly, places in the world that would be worse to land than La Guardia. But Cindy Josseran, a legal assistant at the International Criminal Court, said that while some African airports may lack some of the comforts of more developed countries, they had their own advantages.“At least in Liberia, people wait for you outside in group singing and dancing,” she said. “That definitely won’t happen in New York.”Despite the chorus of people criticizing La Guardia, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Mr. Biden’s comments were “inappropriate,” saying that while the airport needs “an upgrade,” “as a proud New Yorker, I didn’t like that comment and I think it was not the right way to talk about it.”A centerpiece of the improvement plans at La Guardia will be the replacement of its aging central terminal with a modern 35-gate, 1.3-million-square-foot building that will be able to handle 17.5 million passengers by the time it is scheduled to open in 2021. The projected cost is $3.6 billion. Advocates for travelers are pushing for improvements that would be faster to introduce, like free Wi-Fi and better amenities at the terminals.Getting to the airport is another area that could stand improvement; there is no train to La Guardia, and the only public transportation to the airport is by bus.On Friday, a trip on the M60 bus from 106th Street and Broadway to La Guardia took nearly 90 minutes. “It’s a hassle,” said Katrina Amara, 44, who lives on the Upper East Side. “But the cabs are so expensive.”Another bus rider, Nina Sudarsan, 25, a Columbia law student, said Mr. Biden’s comments have been widely discussed among her friends on Facebook, most in agreement.“Having been in and out of third world airports, I think Joe Biden is being unfair to them,” she said. “Every other airport beats it out. They are more modern, nice seats, windows, nicer eating places. This is not somewhere you want to be stranded.”