https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/briefing/poland-turkey-roger-federer.html
Poland, Turkey, Roger Federer: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 17, 2017
4648
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• We dug deeper into the meeting Donald Trump Jr. set up in June last year with a Russian lawyer after he had been offered damaging information about Hillary Clinton.Also there was a Soviet veteran, who in earlier interactions with our reporters had shown himself to be a skilled operator in the muscular Russian version of opposition research.And here’s a profile of Aras Agalarov, a Russian property developer whose name appeared in emails about arranging the meeting. Above, Mr. Agalarov with Vladimir Putin, the Russian president.President Trump spent the weekend watching a golf tournament at one of his clubs. There, he turned to Twitter to excoriate Mrs. Clinton and the news media._____• Thousands took to the streets in Poland to denounce measures by the governing Law and Justice party that the European Union and the opposition say risk undermining the independence of the judiciary.Parliament passed a bill that gives it greater say in appointing judges. And the governing party introduced another bill that would replace Supreme Court judges._____• “We will rip off the heads of those traitors.”That was Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish president, at a rally commemorating a failed coup last year, reiterating his threat to reinstate the death penalty.An elaborate day of pageantry implicitly portrayed Mr. Erdogan as a national hero.Turkey’s row with Germany took another turn for the worse when it barred German lawmakers from visiting German troops at a second NATO base in Turkey._____• Iran sentenced an American graduate student to 10 years in prison on espionage charges. The move seemed bound to further antagonize relations between Iran and the U.S.Meanwhile, Iran won, and the United States lost control of Iraq,  our correspondent writes from Baghdad, where Tehran’s growing influence has become paramount and has heightened sectarian tensions around the region.We look at why Qatar, the tiny emirate with close ties to Iran, is facing a regional blockade: Doha has become a refuge for a diverse medley of fighters, financiers and ideologues with long lists of enemies._____• Roger Federer won his record eighth Wimbledon singles title by defeating Marin Cilic. Mr. Federer, who turns 36 next month, is now the oldest man to win Wimbledon in the Open era.And by defeating Venus Williams, Garbiñe Muguruza became the first Spanish woman to take the Wimbledon singles title since 1994.At the Tour de France, Bauke Mollema from the Netherlands won stage 15. Chris Froome retains the overall lead._____•  Stock markets have so far remained buoyant despite the prospect of further interest rate increases. Investors will watch for what Mario Draghi of the European Central Bank has to say on Thursday.• To understand Facebook’s new emphasis on private groups, our reporter joined more than 100, ranging from gardeners to flat-earth truthers. There’s concern that such groups could further insulate users.• The death of a Silicon Valley lawyer prompted his ex-wife to investigate. She discovered  a shocking prevalence of drug abuse among high-powered lawyers.• An audacious economic experiment is happening in China’s cities: an increasingly cashless society.•  Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Emmanuel Macron, the French president, denounced French collaboration with Nazi Germany at a memorial event in Paris for the roundup of more than 13,000 Jews in 1942. Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, attended the event. [France 24]• Relatives of the 298 people who were killed on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17, which was shot down over Ukraine three years ago today, will gather in Amsterdam to unveil a forest monument to honor the victims. [RFE/RL]• Negotiations on Britain’s departure from the E.U. resume today in Brussels. The Irish border and citizens’ rights are on the agenda. [New York Times]• Europol said that 66 people have been arrested on suspicion of selling Portuguese and Spanish horse meat unfit for human consumption across Europe. [Reuters]• Wildfires are still raging across Italy, Croatia and Montenegro. [Associated Press]• In Washington, Senate Republicans delayed a vote on their heath care bill as John McCain’s absence after eye surgery poses a new obstacle to winning enough support for it to pass. [The New York Times]• In Venezuela, a woman was killed as gunmen shot into a crowd during an unofficial referendum by the opposition that aimed to undercut President Nicolás Maduro’s legitimacy. [The New York Times]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• A quick dinner need not lack flavor. Try shrimp in yellow curry.• A list of under-$50 items that might improve your life, and more, in our weekly newsletter.• Most of us experience an “acute gastrointestinal event” at least once a year. Reading the clues might reduce your risk in the future.• “Game of Thrones” is back. Here’s our review of the season premiere. Sign up here for exclusive interviews and explainers.• “Doctor Who” will finally, after 36 seasons and 12 doctors, have its first female lead in Jodie Whittaker.• Here’s the tale of a former Methodist church in Cornwall, England, that was saved by a check from Dubai’s ruler.• Test your knowledge of international affairs with our global news quiz.• In memoriam: Maryam Mirzakhani, the only woman to win a Fields Medal, the most prestigious honor in mathematics, died at 40. George Romero, the father of the zombie movie genre, died at 77, and Martin Landau, the actor, died at 89.On this day in 1955, the first Disneyland opened in Anaheim, Calif., on what had once been an orange grove. Walt Disney himself greeted the very first of that day’s estimated 15,000 guests.The opening was covered on television on par with “the dedication of a national shrine,” The Times wrote and later explained the appeal: “Children see their old friends from nursery songs and fairy tales impersonated by local characters.”Perhaps the best-known of those childhood friends, Mickey Mouse, turns 90 next year.The Mickey phenomenon first swept across the world during the Great Depression. Some reacted with skepticism, some countries banned it, but most found solace in the story of an irreverent mouse.“Perhaps it is the bitterness of the struggle to earn a living in Europe this year that has brought Mickey Mouse such tremendous success — Mickey who is forever gay, Mickey who is only made of ink and cannot possibly be hungry, cold or weary,” a report from Germany in 1931 read.And the character’s popularity endures. When the latest major Disney theme park opened last year in Shanghai, mouse ears were one of the biggest sellers._____This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.