https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/15/business/world-economic-forum-davos-trade-in-the-trump-era.html
Trade in the Trump Era: The ‘Politics of Resentment’ - The New York Times
Rivoli  Pietra,International Trade and World Market,Trump  Donald J,United States Economy,Labor and Jobs,Unemployment,Productivity,Georgetown University,United States Politics and Government,automation
Jan. 15, 2017
7162
WASHINGTON — Ahead of Davos, The New York Times’s deputy Washington editor, Jonathan Weisman, sat down to talk trade in the Trump era with Pietra Rivoli, a professor at Georgetown University who teaches finance and international business. She is the author of an award-winning book on international trade, “The Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global Economy.” Following is a condensed and edited version of the conversation.I want to talk to you about the Trump postglobalization era, if there is such a thing. You were inspired by a protester in Georgetown who was worried about the sweatshops that created the sweatshirts at Georgetown. Your sense was that the protesters “didn’t get it.” What might U.S. voters not have gotten about trade and globalization?I actually think they probably got a great deal right. I started working on this book in 1999, and there were a certain set of concerns there regarding sweatshops and labor abuses and so forth. [In mid-December], Georgetown students again occupied the university president’s office over the same issue.So there’s the human cost abroad, and then there is a human cost in the United States. If you talk to the students who are protesting at the president’s office, they are concerned about workers in Vietnam, and if you talk to some of the workers in Pennsylvania, they are more concerned about economic conditions here. But if you join these two forces together, a population that contains both Bernie Sanders supporters and Donald Trump supporters, politically we’re talking bigger numbers now. It’s a more important political phenomenon.Do these two camps recognize each other as kindred spirits?There’s a lot of space in between those two groups that hampers dialogue, but what’s critical is that if you look at the sentiments that were expressed about trade in this past election season, there was an awful lot of convergence across the spectrum. This isn’t a Trump thing. If you look at the U.S. economy, we are actually one of the least trade-dependent countries in the world. I think we’re ranked seventh from the bottom.Because of the size of our domestic market?Because of the size of the market, the diversity of the productive assets that we have. You have a country that has relatively low trade exposure, but if you look at the polling and opinion data, we are among the most negative about trade. You look at Europe for example, they have lost the same kinds of jobs as we have, they’re less protected. Yet, politically, they aren’t as opposed.If I’ve got people in Germany who have lost their low-end manufacturing jobs, then why are they more in favor than we are? I think it has to do with safety nets and institutions that eliminate some of the costs associated with churn. What you have in the United States is a quite rational response to the failure of policy to deal with these dislocations. If I have easily portable health insurance, if I have retraining, if I have mechanisms that facilitate search and relocation, if I have these things in place to ease these transitions, then I’m not going to be so opposed.I’m not sure they don’t get it. They might get it just fine. Now that doesn’t address the thing that many economists would say, which is that they are conflating the effects of automation and trade.You were inspired to write your book by the Seattle protests against the Doha Round, which was to produce a global trade agreement that depended on the World Trade Organization’s authority, and you know the Doha Round has been moribund ever since. Do you think that multilateral trade agreements are now a thing of the past?I think it’s going to be very difficult to move on these agreements, certainly in the United States, for a while. But the other thing that gets confounded is trade and trade agreements. You can be opposed to trade agreements and be in favor of trade.I’m O.K. without a forward march on more trade agreements, especially given the openness of the U.S. economy. I don’t think it will be a huge drag on trade itself.So let’s say these movements on the right and the left, they halt trade agreements, not necessarily trade itself, but mechanization moves forward. Four years from now, the guy in Scranton, Pa., says, I still don’t have a job. Where does the antitrade deal movement lead?It’s not just that they don’t have a job. There are mortality effects, health effects, there are opiate addiction effects. I’m not optimistic about the ability of certain parts of the country to generate employment that matches up well with the human resources in those areas. Now that doesn’t mean I’m pessimistic over all, because if you look at certain regions that have been able to turn around, if you look at Pittsburgh, if you look at Charlotte, N.C., if you look at Birmingham, Ala., these aren’t rural areas, but they are becoming postindustrial, and providing opportunities.So what is the difference between the Pennsylvania cities of Pittsburgh, Scranton and Wilkes-Barre? Pittsburgh is now a thriving, high-tech medical center, and Scranton and Wilkes-Barre have turned to President-elect Trump.There’s this whole literature in economics over what they are calling network effects, which is just that we’re all more valuable if we’re together in one place. In Pittsburgh, there was an ignition switch that was largely related to health care and universities. In Charlotte, it was financial services. And in Birmingham, it was related to autos.You have to start with something.So what does that tell policy makers in areas that don’t seem to have this network effect? Is it possible to implant something that begins to grow a network?That’s a great question. The fact that you’re talking about a 300-year-long trend in urbanization isn’t going to give you an optimistic story. Even if you look at the urbanization from agriculture, we weren’t able to come up with stuff to keep people in the cornfields.But you wrote about how cotton has remained king in the United States, in large part because of government policy. Does that mean you favor that?Here’s where I think there’s a lot of confusion. Cotton has succeeded because of its political influence, but it’s cotton that has succeeded. It’s not employment. There are no people in the cotton business. It’s a lot easier to protect an industry than to protect employment in the industry.Should we do with manufacturing what we did with cotton, which actually accelerated mechanization? Most of us wouldn’t say that is welfare enhancing.In your book, you say the importance of trade is overstated by opponents and proponents. Explain that.I was just having a conversation with one of the students who was occupying the president’s office [in mid-December], and he is a left-leaning kid who has been caught up in a lot of social justice stuff. And he actually thinks global capitalism is evil. There’s this idea of a faceless market force that is essentially profit seeking, and profit seeking is cost minimizing, and if you’re minimizing cost, then there’s this race-to-the-bottom logic where things like wages as well as environmental protections and labor protections all spiral downward. On the positive side, you get the argument of most economists, which says competitive markets mean better mousetraps will create more employment, and eventually more productivity and more consumption.In both cases, you have a machine, this market mechanism that is leading to outcomes, both negative and positive. What I tried to say in the book is, you know, if we actually look under the hood of this machine, I’m not sure if it works the way you say it works.I spent a fair amount of time in China, and in Beijing there was a food street, a dumpling street. It looked like a perfectly competitive market. Whoever had the best dumplings at the best price should win. But fortunes did not rise and fall on how good your dumplings were. Through a variety of mechanisms, some guys were able to get a good spot. And that’s my analogy. You’re not really talking about a mechanism that necessarily generates the best mousetrap. There are ways to influence the rules and institutions.And today, that is what you’re hearing in the so-called politics of resentment.Last year was the first time in modern history that global trade flows actually declined.If you start with the question, what kind of productive assets and people do we have to make things for the global economy, you’re going to use what you’ve got. In the United States, we have a lot of land and we have fancy machines. That’s what comparative advantage is.But it results from two kinds of differences: differences in productive assets and differences in preferences. We sell China all of our chicken feet. They want them. We don’t. If those differences go away, you lose the fundamental logic that drives trade. That’s the way I see this in a longer-term frame.The homogenization of taste is going to be the doom of trade?That’s certainly going to contribute. If you have convergence in both those things, you’re going to have reductions in trade. That’s not a bad thing.Donald Trump campaigned on getting good deals, keeping jobs in the United States, rebuilding our manufacturing. Does the political power structure in the United States have any way to actually reverse the course of economic history?A: No. But I think it’s reversing itself.