https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/26/us/politics/democrats-allege-dnc-hack-is-part-of-russian-effort-to-elect-donald-trump.html
Democrats Allege D.N.C. Hack Is Part of Russian Effort to Elect Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Cyberattacks and Hackers,Democratic National Committee,Russia,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Pelosi  Nancy,Trump  Donald J,Mook  Robby
July 25, 2016
7649
PHILADELPHIA — Cold War-era intrigue permeated the 93-degree heat in Philadelphia on Monday, as Democrats sought to spread the idea that the release of thousands of hacked emails from the Democratic National Committee is part of a Russian effort to help elect Donald J. Trump.“I do know this: that the Russians did the D.N.C. hack,” Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, told reporters.She said she had learned of Russian involvement not through intelligence briefings, but through other means.The hacking embarrassed party officials by showing that they seemed to favor Hillary Clinton over Senator Bernie Sanders in the primary, when they were supposed to be neutral.Ms. Pelosi, asked whether she thought Mr. Trump played any role in the hack or release of the 20,000 emails, said, “I have no reason to think that.”Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manger, Robby Mook, tried to deflect attention from the content of the emails, which led to the resignation of the party’s chairwoman, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, and keep it on the Russians.“There have been larger forces at work to hurt Hillary Clinton,” Mr. Mook said Monday, calling the hacking an attempt to undermine her campaign.Saying he would leave the details of the hacking to intelligence experts, Mr. Mook added, “It was the Russians who perpetrated this leak for the purpose of helping Donald Trump and hurting Hillary Clinton.”Proving a cyberattack is difficult, but researchers have said the D.N.C.’s server had been breached by Russian intelligence agencies, which had also targeted the White House and the State Department.But the Russian-intervention narrative fits with Mrs. Clinton’s efforts to establish the idea that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia wants to see Mr. Trump elected to weaken America and hurt its closest NATO allies. Mr. Trump has suggested he would not automatically defend NATO allies if they were attacked.Mr. Trump has praised Mr. Putin, and throughout her campaign Mrs. Clinton has tried to tie Mr. Trump to to the Russian leader, with whom she clashed as secretary of state.“He praises dictators like Vladimir Putin and picks fights with our friends,” Mrs. Clinton said last month.“I don’t understand Donald’s bizarre fascination with dictators and strongmen who have no love for America,” she once said.“Putin will eat your lunch,” she said in a speech aimed at Mr. Trump.And if Mr. Trump were elected president, she has said, it would be like “Christmas in the Kremlin.”On Twitter Monday morning, Mr. Trump dismissed the idea that the Russians were behind the hack and said the Clinton camp had spread the idea to distract from its own convention drama.But later Monday, while speaking in Roanoke, Va., Mr. Trump at least seemed to accept that the Russians might have been involved. Speaking of Ms. Wasserman Schultz, he said: “She worked very, very hard to rig the system. Little did she know China, Russia, one of our many, many friends, came in and hacked the hell out of us.”