https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/05/us/politics/05congress.html
Budget Talks Hit Serious New Obstacles - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),United States Politics and Government,House of Representatives,Republican Party,Senate,Democratic Party,Obama  Barack,Boehner  John A
April 4, 2011
7875
WASHINGTON — Trying to head off a crisis, President Obama invited  Congressional leaders to the White House for a meeting Tuesday to try  to resolve the impasse that is threatening to shutter a large part of  the federal government as of Saturday.The administration also accelerated preparations for a potential shutdown even  as House Republicans demanded on Monday that the president and Senate  Democrats agree to federal spending cuts beyond $33 billion for this  year as budget talks hit serious new obstacles just four days before  financing for federal agencies runs out.“We  are aware of the calendar, and to be prudent and prepare for the chance  that Congress may not pass a funding bill in time, O.M.B. today  encouraged agency heads to begin sharing their contingency plans with  senior managers throughout their organizations to ensure that they will  have their feedback and input,” Kenneth Baer, a spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget, said Monday.Facing  the prospect of a politically charged impasse, House Republicans on  Monday night began preparing a one-week stopgap measure that would  combine $12 billion in new cuts with a measure financing the Pentagon  through Sept. 30.  Republicans  could then send it to the Senate and try to force Democrats to either  accept it or confront accusations that they were responsible for  shutting down the government. Republicans said they were also preparing  guidance to lawmakers on House operations in the event of a shutdown.The White House injected another element into the widening disputes Tuesday, with the Treasury Department sending  a letter to Congressional leaders to announce that the federal  government will exhaust its ability to borrow money under current law  during the second week in July.The government will hit the debt limit — the maximum amount that it can borrow — “no later than May 16,” the letter said. After that, “extraordinary measures” can  create roughly eight weeks of wiggle room. Some Republicans have said  they would not vote to increase the debt limit without commitments from  the administration and Congressional Democrats for substantial  reductions in spending.But the administration warned of consequences in the event of a stalemate. “The  longer Congress fails to act, the more we risk that investors here and  around the world will lose confidence in our ability to meet our  commitments and obligations,” Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner wrote in the letter.The announcement by Speaker John A. Boehner that  Republicans would not settle for the $33 billion in cuts that Senate  Democrats and the White House have portrayed as the agreed-upon middle  ground in the spending fight added a new complication to  already-strained talks between House negotiators and the Senate  leadership.Mr. Boehner also accused Democrats of relying on “smoke and mirrors” to make their proposed reductions look more substantial.“It’s  become sadly evident to me, and to the American people, that the White  House and Senate Democrats are just not serious yet about enacting real  spending cuts,” Mr. Boehner said in a statement.Democrats said Mr. Boehner was increasingly caught between conservative members of  his rank-and-file who were insisting that House Republicans not budge  from the $61 billion in cuts already approved by the House and his own  efforts to find an agreement and avoid a shutdown that could damage his  party.Some  suggested that Mr. Boehner was talking tough to show House Republicans  that he was fighting on their behalf, but they hoped he would still  ultimately make some deal. “As long as he continues to negotiate, it’s O.K. by us if he needs to strike a different pose publicly,” said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, the No. 3 Democrat.Aides  said negotiations over the weekend faltered somewhat over the push by  Democrats to get $8 billion of the cuts from automatic spending in  programs like transportation, health care, Pell grants for needy college  students and agricultural subsidies.But  Mr. Boehner and his fellow Republicans have raised objections to some  of those proposals as gimmicks, saying, for example, that the suggested  reduction in transportation financing amounted to a one-time cut in  money that most likely was not going to be spent regardless.On  the other hand, Democrats familiar with the negotiations said members  of their party were resisting the Republican push for about $2.5 billion  more than they wanted in certain programs.The  additional spending that Republicans have proposed include $840 million  for military construction, which mostly covers projects on bases in the  United States and  overseas; $1 billion for the Pentagon; $500 million for commerce,  justice and science programs, and $200 million for domestic security  spending.Democrats  said they also proposed a list of previously approved spending to  rescind, but Republicans rejected it. The list included money for  weaponry unrelated to continuing conflicts overseas, for the National  Guard and for unrelated research. Both  Republicans and Democrats said that they were eager to avoid shutting  down the government but that the tightening time-frame increased the  odds that government agencies could be closed for lack of financing.Inside  the White House there seemed to be an increased sense of urgency.  Administration officials have spent weeks resisting the idea that they  are actively preparing for a shutdown, and have said only that federal  agencies are updating their existing plans. But on Monday, some  officials said privately that the pace of preparations was accelerating — even as Jay Carney, the White House press secretary, pushed back against the idea that the administration is bracing for the budget talks to fail.“There is nothing unusual that this government, this administration is doing with regards to the situation we are in now,” Mr. Carney told reporters, “so I would not say bracing for, because we at the White House and the president believes that there is room — ample room for compromise.”