https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/01/us/politics/congress-budget-deadline-planned-parenthood.html
No Shutdown Expected on Planned Parenthood - The New York Times
Planned Parenthood Federation of America,United States Politics and Government,McCarthy  Kevin (1965- ),Federal Budget (US),Shutdowns (Institutional),United States,House Committee on Appropriations,Senate,House of Representatives,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Reid  Harry,Pelosi  Nancy,McConnell  Mitch,Congress
Nov. 30, 2015
5965
WASHINGTON —  Days after a gunman killed three people at a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado, the House majority leader, Kevin McCarthy, said that Republicans were not planning to force a showdown with the White House over cutting federal financing to the group as many conservative lawmakers had been demanding just a few weeks ago.“I do not hear people shutting the government down over it right now, so that’s the bottom line,” Mr. McCarthy said at a news conference at the Capitol on Monday, where he was pressed about whether a measure cutting off Planned Parenthood’s funding would be attached to a must-pass spending measure later this month.Mr. McCarthy did not retreat from his party’s criticism of Planned Parenthood, but his remarks on Monday signaled a recognition by Republican leaders in Congress that a renewed debate over the organization would be ill advised after the shooting in Colorado Springs on Friday, in which a police officer and two civilians were killed.Democrats accused the Republicans of creating a hostile atmosphere that provided context — if not direct instigation — in Friday’s attack. Five Republican-led congressional committees are investigating Planned Parenthood.Many Republicans had issued emotional calls for an end to government financing of Planned Parenthood after the release last summer of several videos in which Planned Parenthood officials appeared to discuss the use of tissue from aborted fetuses in medical research, not knowing that they were speaking with anti-abortion activists posing as biotechnology workers.In September, some Republicans had even called for shutting down the federal government by blocking a temporary spending measure unless the bill ended financing for Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood has said the videos were edited heavily by the anti-abortion activists who made them to alter the debate. Planned Parenthood has denied any wrongdoing, and President Obama and many Democrats have defended the organization.The partisan nature of the dispute was evident again on Monday as some Democrats accused Republicans of fomenting hostility.“We in the Senate should not fail to see the context in which this vile assault took place,” the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, said in a speech on the Senate floor. “I hope everyone understands that I stand with Planned Parenthood,” Mr. Reid continued, adding: “We, as leaders, must be mindful of our words and actions. Whipping people into a frenzy of hate and anger while providing them with easy access to firearms has proved disastrous in this country.”Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, called on Speaker Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, to disband a special select committee that has been investigating Planned Parenthood.“Since 1977, there have been 11 murders, 17 attempted murders, 42 bombings and 186 arsons against abortion clinics and providers. It is time to stop the witch hunt against Planned Parenthood, stop the demonizing rhetoric and disband this committee immediately,” Ms. Boxer wrote.After Representative Marsha Blackburn, the chairwoman of the select committee, defended her panel’s work on Monday, Planned Parenthood also weighed in. “Enough is enough,” Dawn Laguens, a spokeswoman for the group, said.At Monday’s news conference, Mr. McCarthy initially sought to sidestep questions about Planned Parenthood and the Colorado shooting, only to be asked about the issue at least seven more times. Mr. McCarthy noted that Representative Tim Murphy, Republican of Pennsylvania, had drawn up legislation aimed at overhauling the nation’s mental health care system even before the Colorado shooting.“This man was mentally ill,” Mr. McCarthy said, referring to the accused gunman, Robert L. Dear Jr. “This individual, this shooting, the thing that drove him most was he was a very evil, crazy man.”Mr. McCarthy also brushed aside a question about Republican rhetoric against Planned Parenthood. “If you want to talk rhetoric, I see rhetoric from all different issues,” he replied.But in response to the repeated queries, Mr. McCarthy said that the select committee was merely designed to uncover the truth about the videos, and he noted that Planned Parenthood had already agreed to make policy changes, including no longer accepting any reimbursement of expenses involved in donating fetal tissue for medical research.Mr. McCarthy also said his own view was that Planned Parenthood should not receive any federal dollars, and he said he expected the issue would surface in debate of the omnibus spending measure over the next two to three weeks.While the debate over the spending bill is arguably the most important piece of legislative business facing Congress ahead of the Christmas holiday, Mr. McCarthy said many Republicans now viewed security in the wake of the Paris terrorist attacks as a primary focus.Even before Friday’s shooting in Colorado, Republican leaders had hoped to avoid entangling the spending bill in the Planned Parenthood debate, and they had pushed forward with separate legislation — a budget reconciliation measure — that would cut off Planned Parenthood’s financing. The White House has said Mr. Obama will veto that bill.It was not immediately clear how some of the harder-line Republicans in Congress would react to the leadership view. Many of them were unlikely to support the omnibus spending measure under any circumstances because the bill increases federal spending in accordance with a recent bipartisan budget accord that they also opposed.Some conservative critics of Planned Parenthood urged lawmakers not to be deterred in seeking to end financing for the organization. Those funds are mostly Medicaid payments to Planned Parenthood for providing health services to low-income Americans; federal law prohibits funding of most abortions and nearly half of Planned Parenthood centers do not perform abortions.Heritage Action, an influential conservative group, is calling for lawmakers to oppose the government spending bill without several policy additions, high among them the demand to defund Planned Parenthood.In the wake of the Colorado killings, “If anything’s changed it’s on the Democrat side where they feel emboldened, which is a pretty sick and grotesque commentary on their political worldview,” said Dan Holler, a Heritage spokesman. “For conservatives, the challenge here is combating the Democrats’ newfound vigor to defend Planned Parenthood’s practices.”