https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/22/us/rhode-island-investigating-ex-attorney-general-on-lobbying-rule.html
Rhode Island Investigating Former State Attorney General - The New York Times
Rhode Island,Lynch  Patrick C,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Caesars Entertainment Corporation,United States Politics and Government,Attorneys General
Nov. 21, 2014
4974
Rhode Island officials are investigating whether a former attorney general violated state lobbying rules by making appeals to his former colleagues on behalf of a Nevada gambling casino, among other corporate clients, even though he had not registered as a lobbyist.The investigation of Patrick C. Lynch, a Democrat, who served two terms as attorney general, from 2003 to 2010, comes in response to an article in The New York Times last month that examined the surge in lobbying of state attorneys general across the country, much of it by former officials like Mr. Lynch.Since Mr. Lynch left office, he has developed an extensive lobbying practice representing clients like payday lenders, the video game software industry, Caesars Entertainment Corporation, Comcast and Monsanto, emails obtained by The Times show.But Mr. Lynch has not registered as a lobbyist in the two dozen states that The Times checked, including Rhode Island, even though he contacted attorneys general there on behalf of his clients.In Rhode Island, state law requires registration by individuals being paid by a private party with the intent of influencing a policy-making decision involving the executive branch of the government, although there is an exemption for lawyers representing clients in legal proceedings.Mr. Lynch, the emails show, does not appear to be handling legal matters or investigations of his corporate clients. Instead, he routinely urges the attorneys general he contacts to take public positions that will benefit his clients, or not do so if that is to their advantage.This year, Mr. Lynch asked his successor as Rhode Island’s attorney general, Peter F. Kilmartin, not to sign a letter that a rival of Caesars Entertainment was distributing urging Congress to ban online poker. Caesars is seeking to profit from the online poker trade.“Can you please let Patrick know that we did not sign on,” said an email in January from Mr. Kilmartin’s office to an aide for Mr. Lynch. “Because of his outstanding advocacy ... Thanks!”Rhode Island’s secretary of state, A. Ralph Mollis, has already contacted Mr. Lynch’s office as part of the inquiry, said Raina C. Smith, a spokeswoman for Mr. Mollis.“We are in the process of corresponding to attorney Lynch in an attempt to gather specific facts or information from him as to whether or not his actions either justify registration or are exempt from registration under Rhode Island state law,” Ms. Smith said in a statement on Friday.Mr. Lynch did not respond to requests to comment. But he told a reporter from The Associated Press this month that he had not violated state law. “I am an attorney, and I have been and continue to be in full compliance with all laws pertaining to me and my professional employment,” Mr. Lynch said in an email.John Marion, the executive director of Common Cause Rhode Island, who reviewed the emails obtained by The Times that Mr. Lynch sent to the Rhode Island attorney general’s office, said, "Patrick Lynch was trying to influence decisions within his former office.”But Mr. Marion added that the Rhode Island legislature should consider re-examining the state’s lobbying law to make sure it is explicit that lobbying the attorney general requires registration.Already, the newly elected secretary of state, Nellie Gorbea, said she would examine the issue after she takes office in January.“There’s a need to launch a thorough review of the registration system and its enforcement, which Secretary of State-Elect Gorbea will do when she comes into office,” said Steve Gerencser, a spokesman for Ms. Gorbea.Other states, including Missouri and Florida, are also conducting investigations into possible violations of state law or other inappropriate actions during lobbying of their attorneys general.