https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/world/europe/denmark-refugees-confiscate-valuables.html
Denmark Moves to Make Refugees Hand Over Valuables - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Denmark,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Law and Legislation,Rasmussen  Lars Lokke,Public benefits
Jan. 13, 2016
8992
LONDON — Denmark is poised to pass a law requiring newly arrived refugees to hand over valuables, including gold or jewelry, to help pay for the costs of lodging them. Under the proposal, asylum seekers who enter the country with more than 10,000 kroner, or about $1,450, in assets would have to help finance their stay.The proposal, which has outraged humanitarian activists and raised the ire of United Nations officials, is the latest in a series of migrant-deterring steps taken recently by Denmark, which once prided itself on its openness to foreigners. The government took out newspaper ads in Lebanon informing would-be asylum seekers that welfare benefits for refugees had been cut in half. Its prime minister warned that the 1951 United Nations treaty governing the rights of refugees might have to be revised. And last week, it imposed temporary controls along its border with Germany.Critics say the latest measure evokes Europe’s darkest hours, when the Nazis seized valuables from Jews during the Holocaust. The government has amended the bill to exempt from confiscation “objects with sentimental value,” like wedding and engagement rings and family portraits. A vote is scheduled for Jan. 26, and approval with wide cross-party support is expected.Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen defended the bill this week. “This is probably the most misunderstood proposal in the history of Denmark,” he was quoted as saying by Politiken, a Danish daily newspaper. “Looking at the debate, you almost get the impression that we are going to turn people upside down to see if we can shake the last coin out of their pockets. That is completely distorted and wrong.”Mr. Rasmussen said the bill would merely make the same requirement of refugees that Danish law already does for the country’s citizens — that they must use their own resources before they can qualify for welfare benefits.Other countries in Europe, even the most hospitable, have also been tightening their borders against the flow of thousands of asylum seekers, citing economic and security concerns. Fears are growing that terrorists are entering Europe masquerading as refugees. Finland has called on asylum seekers to work without pay, and Sweden introduced identity checks last week for travelers arriving from Denmark, prompting Denmark to do the same along its border with Germany.In Denmark, as in countries like France and Sweden, a far-right populist party, the Danish People’s Party, has been attracting voters by railing against immigration. Mr. Rasmussen’s governing center-right party, which does not have a majority in Parliament, often needs the Danish People’s Party’s support to pass legislation.Analysts said the recent moves by Denmark reflected a concerted effort to make the country less attractive for refugees. Among the new bill’s provisions is a three-year waiting period before asylum seekers can apply to bring their families to Denmark, which human rights activists have criticized as unusually cruel.The United Nations refugee agency has called the proposed legislation an affront to refugees’ dignity and said it would send a worrying signal to other countries. In a statement this month, before the bill was amended, the commission said it “could fuel fear, xenophobia and similar restrictions that would reduce — rather than expand — the asylum space globally and put refugees in need at life-threatening risks.”Jens Rohde, a Danish member of the European Parliament, said in an interview on Wednesday that the bill represented an image of Denmark that he did not recognize. Mr. Rohde left Mr. Rasmussen’s center-right party, Venstre, in December in protest over the bill, saying that the party had lost its way and that it was in thrall to the far right.“Even with the latest changes to the bill, the legislation still paints a bad image of Denmark in the international community, and I don’t recognize myself or the Danish people in this bill,” Mr. Rohde said. “The bill is less horrible than before, but still undignified.”The bill has had particular resonance in Denmark because the country has historically been known for its tolerance and generosity. During World War II, when Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany, Danish citizens managed to save most of the country’s 7,800 Jews by smuggling them to neighboring Sweden before they could be rounded up. Denmark also took in a large number of refugees during the Balkan wars of the 1990s.Last year, Denmark received 21,000 asylum seekers, according to the Danish Refugee Council. Sweden, in contrast, received about 163,000 asylum seekers, and Germany was expected to have received more than a million, the council said.Jakob Nielsen, the editor of Politiken’s online edition, said it was paradoxical that Denmark was trying to make the country less attractive for immigrants. “Danes are known for being some of the happiest people on earth, with one of the most generous welfare states, and now the government is trying to worsen our image to give the message: Refugees, don’t come here.”