http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/02/world/asia/02iht-fta.1.5110252.html
U.S. and South Korea sign free-trade agreement - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
April 2, 2007
910
SEOUL — American and South Korean negotiators struck the world's largest bilateral free-trade agreement on Monday, giving the United States a badly needed lift to its foreign trade policy and South Korea a chance to reinvigorate its export economy.Negotiators announced the agreement, reached after 10 months of tortuous negotiations, just in time to comply with a legislative deadline in the United States, after which President George W. Bush's "fast-track" authority to negotiate foreign trade deals without amendments from Congress would expire."This is a strong deal for America's farmers and ranchers, who will gain substantial new access to Korea's large and prosperous market of 48 million people," Karan Bhatia, the deputy U.S. trade representative, said in Seoul on Monday."Neither side obtained everything it sought," he said.If ratified, the trade deal would eliminate tariffs on more than 90 percent of the product categories traded between the two countries. South Korea agreed to lift trade barriers for iconic American products like cars and beef, while the United States abandoned a long-standing demand that Seoul eliminate subsidies on South Korean rice.The agreement marks a significant victory for the Bush administration,  which needed a high-profile deal with clear benefits for U.S. producers to shore up support for bilateral trade pacts with Panama, Peru and Colombia, which have thus far received a cool reception from a skeptical Congress.Free trade between the United States and South Korea - the world's largest and eleventh-largest economies, respectively - could give American companies an important new stronghold in Asia, where they have steadily ceded market share to European, Japanese and Chinese competitors.The deal may also prompt a wave of bilateral trade pacts as an alternative to stalled multilateral negotiations under the World Trade Organization, economists said Monday.As South Korean workers and farmers protested in the streets  -  one man even set himself alight on Sunday  -  negotiators haggled to a bitter end early Monday morning.The breakthrough came when both sides unveiled compromise positions on the most sensitive, deal-breaking issues. Washington dropped its demand that the South Korean government stop protecting its politically powerful rice farmers, and Seoul agreed to resume imports of American beef, which were halted three years ago over fears of mad cow disease, if, as expected, the World Organization for Animal Health declares U.S. meat safe in a ruling scheduled for May.South Korea also agreed to phase out the 40 percent tariff on U.S. beef over 15 years.  It will remove an 8 percent import duty on cars and revise a domestic vehicle taxation system that U.S. officials say discriminates against American cars with bigger engines.The United States will eliminate the 2.5 percent tariff on South Korean cars with engines running on power of less than of 3,000 cc; phase out a 25 percent duty on imported trucks over 10 years; and remove tariffs, which average 8.9 percent, on 61 percent of South Korean textiles.The deal "will generate export opportunities for U.S. farmers, ranchers, manufacturers and service suppliers, promote economic growth and the creation of better paying jobs in the United States," Bush said in a letter notifying Congress of his intention to sign the accord.Bush said that the trade pact will strengthen the U.S.-South Korean ties - an assessment shared by analysts who had repeatedly warned that the alliance, forged during the Korean War, had frayed during the terms of Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun, largely over policy toward North Korea.The deal is the biggest of its kind for the United States since the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, which was enacted in 1994. It is Washington's first bilateral trade pact with a major Asian economy.Studies have estimated that the accord would add $20 billion to bilateral trade, estimated last year at $78 billion. Potential gains to the U.S. economy range from $17 billion to $43 billion, according to Usha Haley, director of the Global Business Center at the University of New Haven. South Korean exports to the United States are expected to rise in the first year by 12 percent, or $5.4 billion.Analysts doubt that the deal will provide an immediate boost for U.S. car manufacturers. Only 5,000 American cars were sold in South Korea last year, while South Korean automakers sold 800,000 vehicles in the United States. The gap accounted for 80 percent of the $13 billion U.S.  trade deficit with South Korea last year.American officials hope that the deal will placate angry American cattle farmers, who are struggling to recapture global market share following a localized outbreak of mad cow disease in late 2003. Before the import ban, South Korea was the world's third-largest consumer of American beef, importing $800 million of beef a year.Consumers in both countries are the deal's biggest winners. Hyundai cars and Samsung flat-panel TV sets, as well as Korean-made clothing, will become significantly cheaper in the United States.American beef and oranges, as well as Ford cars and Toyota vehicles built in the United States, will be more affordable in South Korea. South Korean TV networks will be able to broadcast more American movies and TV serials like  "CSI," which already command a huge following here, after Seoul eases a cap on foreign content to 80 percent of total airtime from 75 percent.The deal entails heavily political costs for South Korea, which can expect to see tens of thousands of farmers lose their jobs. Up to two trillion won, or $2.1 billion, in agricultural revenues will be lost  as cheap American corn, soybeans and processed foods flood the country, according to studies by South Korean economists. Once hailed for seeking a greater distance from Washington, Roh now stands accused by his leftist supporters of turning his country into a "51st state" of the United States.But the South Korean government is desperate to reverse a decline in its competitiveness, as a resurgent Japan outspends it in research and development and China offers an ever-increasing variety of goods produced with low-cost labor."President Roh believes the free-trade agreement with the United States will serve as a springboard for South Korea to become an advanced economy," said Roh's spokesman, Yoon Seung Yong.Originally, U.S. officials said that a deal needed to be wrapped up by March 31, but later said that the deadline was April 1. Shortly after midnight Monday, the White House released Bush's letter, dated April 1, to congressional leaders.Congress must ratify or reject a trade deal submitted under the special authority, but cannot amend it.Prime Minister Surayud Chulanont of Thailand arrived in Japan on Monday to meet with Japanese leaders and sign a free-trade agreement, The Associated Press reported from Tokyo.Surayud will hold talks with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and sign the trade pact on Tuesday, the Thai Embassy in Japan said. The two leaders are also expected to discuss other bilateral and regional issues.he trade pact will reduce or remove tariffs between the two countries on a wide variety of goods, including agricultural products. However, Japan insisted that Thai rice be excluded to protect Japanese farmers.