http://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/27/business/former-treasury-secretary-joins-leadership-triangle-at-citigroup.html
Former Treasury Secretary Joins Leadership Triangle at Citigroup - The New York Times
CITIGROUP,REED  JOHN S,RUBIN  ROBERT E,WEILL  SANFORD I,APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES
Oct. 27, 1999
6852
Robert E. Rubin, arguably the best-known financier of his generation and the recently retired Treasury Secretary, has taken a top position at Citigroup, the nation's largest financial services company.Mr. Rubin, 61, a former top official of Goldman, Sachs & Company, said yesterday that he had joined Sanford I. Weill and John S. Reed, the chairmen and chief executives Citigroup, in what Mr. Reed described as a ''three-person office of the chairman'' that will oversee what has become the first true American financial conglomerate since the Depression.The appointment came less than a week after the Clinton Administration and Congress agreed on a compromise bill that would overhaul the laws that regulate the financial industry, a measure that removes many of the restrictions preventing banks, securities firms and insurance companies from buying one another or engaging in one another's businesses. Both Mr. Rubin and Citigroup strongly supported the bill, which would greatly benefit the company. Mr. Rubin said he played a role in arranging the final compromise that will probably lead to the repeal of the so-called Glass-Steagall legislation. But he said that had nothing to do with his decision to join the company.The appointment settles the speculation about what Mr. Rubin, who presided over the Clinton Administration's economic policy during one of America's longest economic booms, would do for an encore. Mr. Rubin also discussed jobs with American International Group, a leading life insurance company, and Warburg Pincus, a New York investment firm, before agreeing to join Citigroup, said people who were told about Mr. Rubin's negotiations. He also had discussions with Goldman, Sachs about serving on his old firm's board, people close to Mr. Rubin said.Mr. Rubin declined to discuss his talks with other companies, and officials of those three companies also declined to comment. Citigroup officials said that while Mr. Rubin would be free to pursue outside endeavors, including a role in New York or national politics, he would not work for any financial company that competes with Citigroup.Mr. Rubin will not become a third chief executive with Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed, who brought Citigroup together last year by joining Citicorp, one of America's leading banking companies, with Travelers Group, the large insurance company and investment bank. They have had a sometimes rocky relationship since then. But Mr. Rubin will head the executive committee of Citigroup's board, work full time at the company and participate in all significant managerial and strategic decisions, the three men said. Mr. Rubin will also have a corner office alongside Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed in the company's blond-wood and glass executive suite in midtown Manhattan.''I really like the issues of managing a large institution, and I want to really get back involved,'' Mr. Rubin said in an interview. ''I'd also like to fish, read books and play tennis, but life is a trade-off.''Mr. Rubin's role at Citigroup appears to be a delicate balance between his desire to take an active role in plotting the company's future and his wish to avoid becoming a chief executive with day-to-day responsibilities. No Citigroup employees will report to him directly. But Mr. Rubin plans to bring Michael Froman, his former Treasury Department chief of staff, to work at Citigroup.The terms of his employment took five weeks of almost constant meetings to negotiate, people close to Mr. Rubin said.''Bob has the best job in the company: no line responsibility, but he will be a full partner,'' Mr. Reed said during a meeting to announce Mr. Rubin's appointment at Citigroup's headquarters on the East Side of Manhattan. ''He will not play a role as an executive officer of the company, as Sandy and I have to.''But after years as the Government's top economic official, Mr. Rubin brings to Citigroup a Rolodex of contacts that one bank analyst called priceless. To the extent that he is willing to use his contacts to promote  Citigroup's banking business around the world, Mr. Rubin could generate  hundreds of millions of dollars in fees for the bank.Some analysts also saw the Rubin name on Citigroup's marquee as a draw for star bankers on Wall Street, potentially making the firm's Salomon Smith Barney investment bank a more formidable competitor to other firms, including Goldman, where Mr. Rubin spent the bulk of his career as a bond trader and senior executive.''He has to be one of the most well-regarded individuals among senior Government officials and corporations worldwide. He can get a meeting with anyone he wants,'' said Joan Solotar, who analyzes Citigroup for Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette. ''They will win deals that they would not otherwise have won.''Mr. Rubin's return to Wall Street is not unprecedented. James A. Baker 3d, the former Bush and Reagan Administration official, joined Carlyle Group, a venture capital and buyout firm. Nicholas F. Brady, a Bush Administration Treasury Secretary, also followed Mr. Rubin's circular path from Wall Street to Washington and back. Mr. Brady now heads Darby Overseas Investments, an emerging-markets investment fund.Citigroup, however, cuts a much higher profile. It has 100 million clients in 100 countries and is on course this year to earn $10 billion in net profits, far ahead of any of its rivals in the finance industry. It was also one of the leading forces in Washington pushing for an overhaul of financial laws, in part because Citigroup might have had to sell some of its businesses, including its insurance underwriting subsidiary, if Congress had not agreed to pass reforms this year.Federal law requires retired Government officials to refrain from interceding with their former agency on behalf of a new employer for at least one year after leaving public service. The Clinton Administration requires its top officials to pledge that they will not lobby their agency for at least five years.Mr. Rubin said that he would take a ''belt and suspenders'' approach to ethics questions, regularly consulting with a lawyer, if necessary, to make sure that his work for the company did not raise questions about influence peddling or conflict of interest.''I don't think there should be any political sensitivity here,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''I am involved in the business of this organization, not in lobbying.''Mr. Rubin acknowledged that even while he negotiating his own job with Citigroup, he had helped broker the compromise agreement repealing Glass-Steagall. He said he had a hand in urging Congress and the White House to preserve the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires banks to channel a portion of their lending to poor, inner-city areas. The future of that act had been a sticking point between Republicans and the White House that held up agreement on the financial overhaul package.''I care greatly about C.R.A.,'' Mr. Rubin said, adding that he was pleased with the final legislative compromise. ''I did have conversations about that.''Mr. Rubin and Mr. Weill said that they had come to know one another while Mr. Rubin was in office and Mr. Weill was constructing Citigroup, the formation of which involved required extensive talks with  regulators. Mr. Weill was also perhaps Wall Street's most active lobbyist on behalf of the financial services overhaul, in which Mr. Rubin played a guiding role. Though both men are avid Democrats and have spent their careers in New York financial circles, they said they had not been close friends before.But both Mr. Rubin and Mr. Weill said that they had not discussed Mr. Rubin's future when Mr. Rubin was at the Treasury Department. Citigroup officials said that Mr. Weill first raised the offer of a job at the company in mid-September, more than two months after Mr. Rubin resigned his post.''It would have been inappropriate to discuss that while I was in office,'' Mr. Rubin said.Mr. Rubin, Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed all said that Mr. Rubin's role at the firm would go far beyond cajoling corporate executives and government officials to hire Citigroup bankers. He intends to help plot the company's strategy. He and the two Citigroup executives said they would be walking in and out of one another's offices all day, running the company as a troika.Citigroup officials declined to discuss Mr. Rubin's compensation package, although details will have to be disclosed in a proxy statement next spring because Mr. Rubin will be a director. Asked about his pay, Mr. Rubin declined to comment. But asked whether it would top his $150,000 salary as Treasury Secretary, he deadpanned: ''That's a fair assumption.''He does not need the money. When he entered Government service in early 1993, Mr. Rubin put his assets, most of which consisted of partnership shares in Goldman, into a blind trust. The trust at the time was valued at about $100 million, though it has possibly increased considerably in value given the bull market in stocks since then.Yet by leaving Goldman and accepting cash in exchange for his shares, Mr. Rubin missed the windfall other partners enjoyed when Goldman became a public company earlier this year. Had he remained the top executive at Goldman, the assets would have increased at least threefold and totaled more than half a billion dollars.Moreover, his old Goldman pay pales in comparison with what Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed now earn at Citigroup. Last year, Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed had total compensation, including stock options, valued at about $27 million each. Mr. Rubin seems unlikely to earn as much as either Mr. Weill or Mr. Reed because he does not have the same executive responsibilities. But his senior role in the company suggests that he could easily earn more than $10 million in salary, bonus and stock options each year.One of the most intriguing aspects of the yesterday's announcement had more to do with the relationship between Mr. Weill and Mr. Reed than with Mr. Rubin's new job.People at Citigroup have said that the two executives have had difficulty working together, a conflict that resulted in a formal division of responsibilities made public several months ago. Mr. Weill was perceived as the victor in that reshuffling, with Mr. Reed agreeing to focus primarily on specific areas of the company,  including legal affairs and Internet strategy.Mr. Reed was candid about their earlier conflict yesterday, though he said their relationship had improved.''I think we found it difficult,'' Mr. Reed said. ''The buzz word is control, and in this kind of thing you lose control. You can't make decisions -- you can't even schedule a meeting -- without talking with the other guy. We had an adjustment process.''He said that in recent months, he and Mr. Weill had begun to work together ''reasonably well, even quite well.''''Our ability to reach out to Bob like this says we are beginning to figure it out,'' Mr. Reed said.