https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/06/us/politics/fact-checking-trumps-defenses-of-his-wiretapping-claim.html
Fact-Checking Trump’s Defenses of His Wiretapping Claim - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods,Trump Tower (Manhattan  NY),Comey  James B
March 6, 2017
7626
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s accusations that President Barack Obama spied on him have stirred another tempest in his early months in office.Mr. Trump offered no evidence to support his claims that Mr. Obama wiretapped his phones and rejected the assertion by the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, that the wiretapping claim was false, according to Sarah Huckabee Sanders, a White House spokeswoman.Here is an assessment.False. The White House has criticized the use of anonymous sources in reporting, yet has offered its own anonymous sources to support claims or policies. Mr. Spicer’s suggestion that articles citing unnamed officials have turned up nothing is wrong.In recent weeks, Michael T. Flynn resigned as national security adviser after news reports with unnamed sources revealed he had been in contact with Sergey I. Kislyak, Russia’s ambassador to the United States. Similarly, Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself from investigations into Russia after journalists found he had also spoken with Mr. Kislyak, based on conversations with anonymous sources.This is misleading. The White House forwarded The New York Times several articles about investigations into the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia that include the word “wiretapping.” None contend, as Mr. Trump did, that Mr. Obama personally ordered the surveillance of Trump Tower phones.The BBC reported, based on anonymous sources, that intelligence agencies obtained a FISA warrant in October 2016 to intercept electronic records from two Russian banks. HeatStreet, a libertarian-leaning blog, also cited unnamed sources claiming that the warrant covered a computer server at Trump Tower. Neither claimed Mr. Obama was responsible.The White House also cited two Times articles, one about the National Security Agency’s expanded authority to share its data  and the other on the continuing investigation into links between Mr. Trump’s associates and Russian officials. Neither article claimed that Mr. Trump or his associates were the target of wiretapping.False. While the White House is calling for a congressional inquiry, Mr. Trump did not merely raise the possibility on Twitter but was emphatic that the incident did occur.Needs context. Ms. Conway is cherry-picking remarks from Mr. Mukasey, who led the Justice Department under President George W. Bush, as proof that Mr. Trump was right.“I think the president was not correct certainly in saying that President Obama ordered a tap on a server in Trump Tower,” he said on ABC. “However, I think he’s right in that there was surveillance and that it was conducted at the behest of the attorney — of the Justice Department through the FISA court.”Mr. Mukasey later added that this conclusion was based on the same news reports that the White House has cited and said that he does not believe a special inquiry or prosecutor is necessary to look into Mr. Trump’s claims.This is misleading. Mr. Chaffetz said he is not aware of evidence backing up Mr. Trump’s claims, but noted that the Obama administration is “notorious” for similar behavior. None of the incidents he mentioned, however, are parallel to Mr. Trump’s accusations of illegal wiretapping ordered by Mr. Obama.The Justice Department’s 2013 investigation of Mr. Rosen, a journalist at Fox News, was authorized by a court order and included scanning his emails. Mr. Rosen himself clarified on Fox News that he was not wiretapped.The Internal Revenue Service was accused of singling out conservative groups applying for nonprofit status between 2010 and 2013. Investigations by the FBI, Senate and Justice Department were divided over whether the agency acted in politically motivated ways but found no evidence of criminal wrongdoing.And in 2015, 45 Secret Service agents read, without authorization, Mr. Chaffetz’s records at the agency where his application had been rejected more than a decade earlier. Mr. Chaffetz was one of the most outspoken critics of the Secret Service after a series of security breaches.