http://www.nytimes.com/1999/11/01/us/crash-egyptair-990-overview-egyptian-jet-carrying-217-plunges-into-atlantic.html
THE CRASH OF EGYPTAIR 990: THE OVERVIEW; EGYPTIAN JET, CARRYING 217, PLUNGES INTO THE ATLANTIC; CAUSE OF CRASH IS UNKNOWN - The New York Times
EGYPT,NEW YORK CITY,LOS ANGELES (CALIF),CAIRO (EGYPT),FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION,NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD,BOEING CO,EGYPTAIR,FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION,COAST GUARD,CLINTON  BILL,PATAKI  GEORGE E,GIULIANI  RUDOLPH W,AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES,KENNEDY INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (NYC)
Nov. 1, 1999
8825
An Egyptian jetliner bound from New York to Cairo overnight with 217 people aboard plunged suddenly into the Atlantic southeast of Nantucket Island 33 minutes after takeoff early yesterday. One body and some debris but no survivors were found in an exhaustive daylong search, and the disaster's cause was not immediately known.The aircraft -- Egyptair Flight 990, a Boeing 767-300 carrying 199 passengers, many of them Americans -- and 18 crew members, left Kennedy International Airport at 1:19 a.m. (Eastern Standard Time) on a scheduled 11-hour nonstop flight to the Middle East. While takeoff was late, everything seemed normal.But at 1:50, with the twin-engine, wide-bodied plane cruising at 33,000 feet in a clear night sky lit by a half-moon, something went terribly wrong, and the aircraft began plummeting, out of control, aviation officials said. There was no distress call from the cockpit, the last voice contact with ground controllers having been routine. Two minutes later, the plane vanished from radar screens.It was unclear what happened: Had an explosion erupted? Was there a mechanical failure? Was the aircraft even in one piece as it went down? All that was known was that the jetliner, without warning, plunged out of the sky and into the dark, rolling sea about 60 miles southeast of the Massachusetts island of Nantucket.Federal officials said radar sweeps at 12-second intervals showed that the aircraft fell from 33,000 feet to 19,100 feet -- a drop of 13,900 feet -- in 36 seconds, indicating that it was falling ''like a rock,'' as one aviation expert put it. The rate of descent was more than 23,000 feet per minute, while a normal descent is 1,500 to 2,000 feet a minute.Even if the plane was still intact as it fell, aviation experts said, the high-speed impact with the water would have shattered it, and the chance that anyone survived was small. The water was a chilly 59 degrees, and 250 to 270 feet deep, a cod and tuna ground that would have been dotted with fishing boats and lobstermen in early October but was all but deserted early yesterday.Coast Guard rescue ships swarmed to the scene, followed by helicopters and reconnaissance planes. As dawn broke, a body and a flotsam of wreckage -- none with burn marks that might have suggested an explosion -- were found adrift in the choppy sea. Throughout the day, officials insisted that they were still seeking survivors, but the grim search seemed all but hopeless.''I want to re-emphasize our focus, and that is a continued effort to find victims who may still be alive,'' Rear Adm. Richard M. Larrabee of the Coast Guard said at news conference in Boston late in the afternoon. ''This is still a search-and-rescue case, and we are very mindful of the families, the trauma they are going through, and making every effort to keep them informed.''Meantime, federal investigators began what was sure to be a long inquiry into a catastrophe that was hauntingly reminiscent of the fate of Trans World Airlines Flight 800, which took off from Kennedy Airport on a calm July evening in 1996, climbed out over the sea south of Long Island and exploded in midair, also without warning, killing all 230 people aboard. A bomb was long suspected, but officials now believe a fuel tank accidentally blew up.There were no indications that the Egyptair plane had been sabotaged and no claims of responsibility by terrorists, American and Egyptian officials said, although the Federal Aviation Administration had warned airlines a month ago of a threat to bomb an unspecified flight out of Los Angeles or New York. Egyptair Flight 990 had originated in Los Angeles on Saturday.Weather conditions did not appear to be a factor. Fog had shrouded Kennedy Airport at the time of takeoff and through much of the day yesterday, but there were no storms in the vicinity of the crash, winds were light and visibility was 10 miles or more, meteorologists said.It was equally unclear whether some mechanical failure on the 10-year-old jet, which had no history of serious problems, or human error had contributed to the disaster, which ranked with a score of crashes as among the worst in aviation history. It was one of a few fatal crashes in the 67-year history of Egyptair, a state-run airline that has 38 planes and flies to 85 cities.By daylight, four and a half hours after the crash, a small armada of Coast Guard ships and planes were on station, methodically searching a 36-square-mile region of ocean. Among their first discoveries were a body and wreckage -- seats, seat cushions, a wheel, clothing, life jackets, passports, two partly inflated yellow life rafts and other small items that were not identifiable.In Cairo, Egyptair's chairman, Mohammed F. Rayan, said those aboard the jetliner included 62 Egyptians, 2 Sudanese, 3 Syrians, 1 Chilean and 131 others, many believed to be Americans. Three of the 18 crew members were described as nonpaying Egyptair employees.A Boston-based travel agency said the airplane was carrying a group of 54 people, all over 50 years old and many from Colorado, Arizona and the Pacific Northwest, who were heading for a 14-day tour of the Nile. Others were from New York, Connecticut, New Jersey and Vermont.Through the day, five Coast Guard cutters and as many as 11 helicopters and airplanes joined the search, tracing routes worked out by computer. More wreckage and any other bodies recovered were to be brought to the United States Naval Base in Newport, R.I., for identification.A primary focus of the search was the wreckage of the plane itself and its black boxes -- the flight data and cockpit voice recorders -- which hold a range of information, from speed and altitude to the talk of pilots, and could prove invaluable in the inquiry. The boxes have pingers that signal their location, but equipment to detect the pings was not expected to be available until today.Darkness forced the planes back to their bases last night, but the ships planned to continue their search for survivors through the night, and full operations were to be resumed today. The U.S.S. Grapple, the Norfolk-based Navy ship used to locate John F. Kennedy Jr.'s doomed plane off Martha's Vineyard last July, was expected to join the search today.The National Transportation Safety Board quickly took charge of the inquiry, with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Coast Guard and other agencies in supporting roles. The F.B.I., which had long clung mistakenly to suspicions of a bomb in the T.W.A. case, was clearly taking a subordinate role, with rivalries that had marred previous cooperative efforts put aside.At Kennedy Airport, federal investigators and officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport, quarantined trucks that had refueled Egyptair 990, and began questioning mechanics, ground crews, food handlers, customer service personnel and anyone else who had come into contact with the plane. Manifests of the passengers and crew were also being examined.A wealth of paperwork that was not available yesterday was expected to be in hand over the next few days to provide a much clearer picture of the flight path, altitude and speed of the plane in its final minutes.Since the aircraft fell in international waters, Egyptian officials might have taken charge, but they authorized the United States yesterday to conduct the many-sided investigation, which was expected to unfold in New York, Cairo, Los Angeles and Newark -- all points where the plane had landed over the weekend -- as well as in Boston, Newport and Nantucket, where search and rescue operations were being coordinated.Grieving families and friends of the crash victims gathered in Los Angeles, New York and Cairo to await news and to meet with chaplains and other counselors. Many were sobbing in desperation over the loss of loved ones, while others were angry or in denial, unable to make sense of a tragedy that seemed to have no explanation.A Montreal daily newspaper, La Presse, announced that its deputy publisher, Claude Masson, and his wife, Jeannine Bourdages, both 58, were on Flight 990. Egyptair did not release the names of the passengers .The airline identified 15 of the 18 crew members. They were Ahmed el-Habashy, Raouf Noureddin, Adel Anwar, Gameel el-Bitash and Hatem Rushdy, who were all identified as pilots; members of the cabin crew were identified as Hisham Sabri, Farouk Tahan, Amal Fayed, Neama Riad, Janet Fam, Amina Ahmed Fathi, Hassan Farouk, Adel Erian, Maha el-Mahrouky and Mohammed Galal.In Washington, President Clinton ordered American agencies to coordinate efforts to investigate the crash and aid the families of victims. ''Like all Americans, Hillary and I are very saddened by the crash of the Egyptair flight,'' he said.In New York, Governor George E. Pataki also voiced sympathy for the families of the victims and ordered state agencies to provide them with counseling and other assistance, and to cooperate with Massachusetts, Rhode Island and federal officials.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani spent much of the day at the Ramada Plaza near Kennedy Airport, helping Red Cross workers, Muslim clerics and counselors to console the families of 16 victims. ''It's horrible in there,'' said Mahmoud Hamza, who lost two friends on the flight. ''Everybody's crying, everybody's in mourning.''Boeing 767's, which went into service in 1982, have a good service record, with only two other fatal crashes, one in Thailand in 1991 that killed 223 people when an engine went into reverse and sent it into an uncontrollable dive, and one off the Comoros Islands in 1996 that killed 125 of the 175 people aboard after hijackers refused to let it refuel. It has become a workhorse of trans-Atlantic travel.Egyptair has had three fatal crashes in the past three decades -- one in Libya in 1971 that killed 16 passengers and crew members, another on Cyprus in 1973 that left 37 dead, and one in Thailand in 1976, when a Boeing 707 slammed into a textile mill, killing 52 on board and 20 others on the ground.The plane that crashed, a sleek white craft with a blue tail and trim, twin aisles in the passenger cabin and twin Pratt & Whitney engines  used by more than 60 airlines, was delivered to Egyptair in September 1989, and in the past decade had accumulated 33,334 flying hours and more than 6,900 takeoffs and landings. It had regular inspections and no record of serious problems. It typically made five round-trips a week -- Cairo to New York to Los Angeles as Flight 989, and back again as Flight 990. Its last trip began in Cairo on Friday night. Kennedy Airport was socked in by fog on Saturday morning, so the plane was diverted to Newark before going to Los Angeles.The first leg of the return flight began at 7:30 p.m. Saturday, two hours late, because of poor visibility at Los Angeles International Airport. The plane arrived at Kennedy at 12:48 a.m. -- still Eastern Daylight Time. The plane refueled and took on 167 new passengers, who joined 32 staying on from Los Angeles.Robert Kelly, director of aviation for the Port Authority, said all the baggage had been scanned by the most sophisticated X-ray machines in the industry, using color coding to show the contents, and each of the passengers was checked twice. Armed security guards routinely fly on Egyptair flights, and this was no exception, officials said.The plane left for Cairo at 1:19 a.m., standard time. It flew directly out over the Atlantic and veered north toward Nantucket on a roughly similar route taken by another ill-fated plane, Swissair Flight 111, which crashed off Nova Scotia last year with 229 people aboard.As Egyptair 990 climbed to 33,000 feet, its cockpit crew had several routine conversations with ground controllers, the last at 1:47 a.m., officials said. Three minutes later, the aircraft began its precipitous descent into the sea.A transponder signal broadcast by the plane to radar devices recorded the plunge for 36 seconds, and then the transponder stopped sending signals, said James Hall, chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board. But radar -- picking up the reflection of the aircraft's metal skin -- continued to track the dive for about 90 seconds, until 1:52 a.m., when the plane hit the water and vanished.