https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/04/us/politics/failed-co-ops-add-ammunition-to-gop-war-on-health-law.html
Failed Co-ops Add Ammunition to G.O.P. War on Health Law - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Health and Human Services Department,United States Politics and Government,Federal Aid (US),Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,Cooperatives,Start-ups,Republican Party
Nov. 3, 2015
2960
WASHINGTON —  The financial failure of more than half the nonprofit health insurance companies created under the Affordable Care Act has handed Republicans a new weapon in their campaign against the health law, thrown the Obama administration on the defensive once again and left more than a half-million consumers in the cold.“Any start-up faces the inherent risks of building a business from the ground up,” Dr. Mandy Cohen, the chief operating officer at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, told Congress on Tuesday at a contentious hearing of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health. “As with any new set of business ventures, some co-ops have succeeded while others have encountered more challenges.”So far, 12 of the 23 nonprofit insurance plans created as a result of President Obama’s signature domestic achievement have announced — voluntarily or under pressure from federal and state regulators — that they will not offer coverage next year. The most recent announcement came on Tuesday, just hours before the House hearing, when Consumers Mutual Insurance of Michigan posted a notice on its website saying it will not sell health plans in 2016 on the insurance marketplace.New Yorkers were dismayed to receive notices over the weekend saying insurance policies from their co-op, Health Republic Insurance of New York, “will not be available after Nov. 30.” With more than 155,000 members, the New York insurer was the largest of the co-ops.Congress created the co-ops to increase competition in state insurance markets and to offer additional choices to consumers, with the hope of holding down premiums. Democrats in Congress authorized the co-ops after concluding that they did not have the votes to create a government-run health plan — the so-called public option — to compete with private insurers.Dr. Cohen told Congress on Tuesday that federal officials had not been lax or negligent in supervising the insurance co-ops.But, she said, the co-ops faced stiff challenges as they struggled to create networks of doctors and hospitals, win the support of consumers, and compete with larger, more experienced insurers. Unlike established insurers, she said, the co-ops had no claims experience on which to base prices for the health plans they sold in the new public insurance exchanges, or marketplaces.Congress, she said, also played a role, eliminating nearly 60 percent of the $6 billion that Democrats had hoped to offer the fledgling insurers.Over all, the 23 co-ops have received $2.4 billion in federal loans to help pay start-up costs and to meet state solvency requirements. Dr. Cohen said the government would “use every tool available to recover taxpayer dollars” from the co-ops going out of business, but she declined to say how much she expected to recoup.Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and chairman of the health subcommittee, said he doubted that the government would get its money back. The co-op program was fundamentally flawed, he said, because it was “artificially trying to inject competition in the market through shoddily designed start-ups.”“Only in Washington would a group of bureaucrats think they knew how to micromanage competition instead of letting consumers and markets do what they do best,” Mr. Brady said.Republicans predicted hundreds of millions of dollars will have been wasted.But Representative Jim McDermott of Washington, the senior Democrat on the subcommittee, said Republicans had sabotaged the co-op program.Dr. Cohen said Congress was responsible for some of the co-ops’ problems because Republicans had cut the budget so deeply.More recently, she said, Congress restricted the administration’s ability to help insurers with unexpectedly large costs.Despite their problems, Dr. Cohen contended co-ops were still needed to promote competition because the planned mergers of several big health insurance companies could reduce competition in the industry and in some markets.State insurance regulators have taken the lead in shutting down co-ops that were losing money with no immediate prospects of financial success. Some of the failed co-ops set relatively low premiums in an effort to attract consumers, but then found they did not have enough money to pay actual and expected claims.Dr. Cohen said the administration was working with these co-ops to “wind down their operations in an orderly way while minimizing disruptions to consumers.” Co-op customers will be able to shop for insurance sold by other carriers in the three-month open enrollment period that began Sunday and continues through Jan. 31.Daniel R. Levinson, the inspector general at the Department of Health and Human Services, said in July that most of the co-ops were losing money and falling short of their enrollment goals. But the administration expressed confidence in the program at that time, saying the co-ops “may experience short-term ups and downs,” like start-ups in any industry.In a separate initiative, the administration said on Tuesday that it would hold a forum on the high prices of some prescription drugs.Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, said the conference, scheduled for Nov. 20, would seek ways to speed the discovery of innovative drug treatments while making them more affordable.The move came amid stories of price manipulation and opinion polls that identify drug prices as a top concern for many consumers and voters. Hillary Rodham Clinton and other Democrats have called for efforts to stop what they call price gouging by drug makers.