http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/20/world/middleeast/20nile.html
In Egypt, Town Built on Patronage Is Test of New Order - The New York Times
Egypt,Politics and Government,Mubarak  Hosni,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots
Feb. 20, 2011
8810
BAGOUR, Egypt — In a town he represented in Parliament for 46 years, Kamal al-Shazli left his mark. There is the Kamal al-Shazli School on Kamal al-Shazli Street, around the corner from the Kamal al-Shazli Mosque, which is a little ways from the cafe where Mr. Shazli held court when he was the only man in town who got things done.“Giving without limits” read his posters on a bridge that Mr. Shazli found money for.Mr. Shazli died a few months ago of cancer at the age of 76, before the revolution that was meant to sweep away the decaying system represented by this Willie Stark-like figure, known here simply as “the minister.” To Egypt’s residents, the town was derisively referred to as the Republic of Shazli, the Republic of Bagour or, most accurately, a State of Personalities.One of the greatest challenges of Egypt’s revolution is to replace that order, which has ruled Egypt for 60 years, knit together by patronage, greased by bribes, enforced by a ubiquitous security force answering only to itself and guided by the principle that the ruling party knows best.Far from the tumult of Tahrir Square, in the lush but crowded countryside of the Nile Delta, the challenge of Bagour may determine how far Egypt’s revolution goes. Suffused with optimism, residents celebrate the fall of Mr. Shazli’s state, even as many  acknowledge reaping its rewards.Former President Hosni Mubarak’s party remains here, as does its machinery, along with the dreaded apparatus of State Security that only last week beat protesters trying to visit relatives in a nearby prison. To a remarkable extent, everyone talks about change — even party officials — but no one quite agrees on what it represents.“The very way of thinking about the system has to change,” said Moussa Eid, the owner of the cafe Mr. Shazli frequented, sipping coffee and scolding customers for daring to interrupt him. “Here! Here!” he shouted, pointing to his head. “That has to change.”Along dirt paths plodded by donkey carts whose drivers solicit “rubabikiya,” or junk for sale, the countryside is roiled with expectations of that change. To farmers outside Mr. Mubarak’s hometown, Kafr al-Musalha, his government felt like the canals that water their fields — slow-moving, opaque and suffused with trash.“His fall was the judgment of God himself,” said one farmer, Mustafa Abu Youssef, who seized the opportunity to start a tirade about all that was wrong in rural Egypt: the high rents he had to pay as a tenant farmer, the few hundred dollars in bribes he faced for adding floors to his house and the $70 billion that some claim Mr. Mubarak accumulated at the expense of Egypt. “How could he even count that high?” he asked.“Ibn al-balad” is a phrase of endearment here — literally, a son of the country. Nasser al-Zayad, another farmer, said that Mr. Mubarak was not, and that that was his problem.“He always talked about getting rid of the poverty, but he never understood what our poverty meant,” Mr. Zayad said. “He didn’t really consider himself from here.”Mr. Shazli did, and his relationship to his hometown speaks to the success and eventual failure of the government of Mr. Mubarak, who was forced to resign on Feb. 11.Near Mr. Shazli’s tomb, a meeting hall adorned with hundreds of pictures of him speaks to Mr. Shazli’s ascent, a script for the very old guard who ruled until Mr. Mubarak’s last years in office.The first ones show a wiry and earnest young man, whose father was a teacher from a modest but reputable family in Bangour, a 90-minute drive north of Cairo. More pictures show him with the barrel chest of a party enforcer,  invigorated with the heady promises of Arab nationalism.An older Mr. Shazli, by now a senior official under President Anwar el-Sadat, rubs shoulders with the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya. In his later years, he was the potentate of a party that had long stopped believing in its own slogans.With the fleshy face of satisfied power, he is portrayed almost always with a microphone, delivering orders that came with his authority as the longest-serving Parliament member (from 1964 until his death in 2010), a minister of parliamentary affairs and the chief whip of the governing National Democratic Party. A picture outside the hall shows him as  many saw Mr. Shazli in the end: His portrait is superimposed over Parliament, bigger than the institution itself.To many, he was a loathed figure, inspiring the character of the fat and corrupt party hack in the famous Egyptian novel “The Yacoubian Building.” But to a generation in Bangour, he was appreciated, even loved. He had a politico’s knack for names and faces, along with encyclopedic knowledge of Egypt’s families and figures. For residents here, he was the sole mediator between them and a distant state.He built a Cairo-style overpass in a town that did not need it. He got natural gas delivered to residents’ homes and electricity wires buried that had electrocuted people when they were strung aloft. He had a catalog of projects for which he secured financing: schools, a hospital and a youth center. Roads were paved and government jobs — by the estimate of a doctor with firsthand knowledge — were provided to thousands of youths.“Bagour belonged to Kamal al-Shazli,” said Ahmed Ibrahim, a business student.But Mr. Ibrahim did not mean it as a compliment, and for his generation, the refrain of failure and corruption that echoed across Tahrir Square punctuated his conversation with friends, who remember Mr. Shazli most from their parents’ nostalgia.“We can sacrifice one good person, Kamal al-Shazli or anyone else, if it’s for the good of our country and toppling an unjust regime,” said Ahmed Habib, a law student.They complained of taxes “on the air we breathe,” bribes that beget more bribes, even to get a driver’s license, and the dim future for aspiring college graduates in the countryside like themselves. One told of a friend who disappeared, only to show up in a neighboring village a few days later after he was beaten by the police.All lamented the utter corruption of Mr. Shazli’s party. Not lost on any of them was the oddity that with Mr. Shazli dead, they no longer had the connections — known as “wasta” here — to get ahead.“We want parties that express our opinion,” Mr. Ibrahim said. “If we don’t change the local government and the ruling party, then nothing else is going to change here.”Down the street in Bagour, though, the dead hand of the past still has life in it. At the headquarters of Mr. Mubarak’s party, the pictures of the former president remain: “Yes to Mubarak, man of peace.” So do the tired slogans. “Serious youth build, they don’t destroy,” one read.Affable and polite, Tariq Abdel-Zahar has worked with the party here for 15 years, and on this morning, he lamented the collapse of the party’s leadership in Cairo before it mobilized more of its three million members to take on the protesters in Tahrir Square. “We were waiting for orders,” he said, “but they never came.”He was dismissive of the complaints of Mr. Ibrahim and his friends, pulling out paper after paper from a dusty binder that advertised jobs with a salary of $120 a month that no youth wanted.“Lazy,” Mr. Abdel-Zahar called them. “Every youth in Egypt wants an office in some government agency and a chair to sit on, and nothing more than that.”For much of republican Egypt, the governing party embodied the state, almost a mirror of its functions, and even in a small town like Bagour, its reach remains vast, underpinned by security forces that remain far more intact in the countryside than in Cairo.Mr. Abdel-Zahar leads a local council of 24 members in Mit Afif, a few miles away, one of 13 such councils that help administer Bagour and its environs. Without exception, all members belong to Mr. Mubarak’s party, regardless of their beliefs. In fact, the head of Bagour’s council, Abdel-Azim Farid, looked perplexed when asked what the party’s ideological bent was beyond representing Mr. Mubarak and his government.“Socialist?” he finally answered.But he and colleagues sitting in the office, strewn with cigarette butts, were adamant about the role a revived party would play in any election. They had the infrastructure, with a party office in every village. And, they contended, they had the experience: In a state that relentlessly crushed opposition, they were the only ones with it.“Without us, there would be anarchy,” said Alaa Salim, one of the members of Bagour’s local council. “After 30 years, what are you going to change in a few months?”There is a proverb that several people offered in Bagour: “Equality in injustice is justice.” It held during the three decades that Egypt was at war with Israel, when the country shared a sense of sacrifice. But in the three decades since, Dr. Hamdi al-Sirsawi said, he watched as peasants lost out to landlords, his own children graduated without jobs and party members in Bagour profited from their connections to the state.Sitting outside his pharmacy, he spoke with conviction that sounded more like hope, echoing an enthusiasm that rural Egypt shares with its cities. Mr. Mubarak’s party is “a cardboard outfit,” he said, and “God willing, it will all disappear in a week.”He shrugged his shoulders, smiling. “Why wouldn’t it?” he asked.