http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/24/opinion/a-big-victory-for-fast-food-workers-in-new-york.html
A Big Victory for Fast-Food Workers in New York - The New York Times
Editorials,Fast Food Industry,New York State,New York City,Cuomo  Andrew M,Income Inequality,Musolino  Mario J,Minimum Wage
July 23, 2015
7477
The “Fight for $15” effort for higher pay won a major victory on Wednesday, when a wage board formed in May by Gov. Andrew Cuomo proposed raising the minimum wage for fast-food workers in New York to $15 an hour. The increase would be fully phased in by the end of 2018 for workers in New York City and by mid-2021 for those in the rest of the state. Currently, fast-food pay in New York is about $9 an hour.Under New York law, the governor can appoint a wage board, composed of business, labor and public representatives, to recommend raises in occupations where pay is judged to be too low to support a basic living; the state labor commissioner can then order the increase without legislative approval. In the past, the process has been used to raise pay for tipped workers and young workers.The acting state labor commissioner, Mario Musolino, is expected to promptly approve the board’s recommendation, which applies to about 140,000 workers in New York who are employed by restaurants with 30 or more locations nationwide. The first of the incremental increases — to $10.50 within the city and to $9.75 elsewhere — is expected in December.The raise itself, however, is likely to be only one of several outcomes of the board’s action. A fast-food wage of $15 could push up wages in New York more broadly because it sets a new bar for retailers, home care agencies and other low-wage employers to meet or exceed.It also paves the way for even more muscular use of such boards in New York, both to raise pay in other low-wage occupations and in geographic areas, like New York City, where the state’s minimum wage, set to reach $9 an hour at the end of this year, is clearly not enough to live on.The new fast-food wage in New York will reinforce the notion that $15 an hour is a minimally decent wage, not a symbol or an extravagance. There is no principled justification for less than subsistence wages at profitable corporations with highly paid executives. The fast-food workers who initiated the Fight for $15 in 2012 and others who have joined the effort also have compelling economic arguments for higher wages: low pay dampens economic growth, worsens inequality and forces taxpayers to pick up the tab for public assistance to workers whose employers do not pay enough to get by.Pay has long declined or stagnated for the vast majority of workers, with low-wage workers particularly hard hit. Three major cities — Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles — have enacted minimum wages of $15 an hour. With the pay raise to $15 an hour for fast-food workers, New York will join their ranks and provide momentum for more victories to come.