http://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/28/world/americas/refugees-rush-to-canada-to-beat-an-asylum-deadline.html
Refugees Rush to Canada to Beat an Asylum Deadline - The New York Times
CANADA,ILLEGAL ALIENS,ASYLUM (POLITICAL),CITIZENSHIP,IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES
Dec. 28, 2004
2466
WELLAND, Ontario, Dec. 27 - José Fabio Gutiérrez and his wife had promising careers in Colombia working at an airport before they began receiving threats from Marxist guerrillas.The rebels wanted Mr. Gutiérrez, a security guard who is now 31, to look the other way as they hauled drugs and ammunition onto planes. They wanted his wife, Amparo, a ticket agent who is now 29, to pay no heed as the guerrillas and their sympathizers flew using false identification. When they both refused, they said, the death threats followed with a ferocity that forced them to leave in 1999 for New York, where they lived for nearly five years -- first on a tourist visa, and then illegally.Now, with their two babies, they are among several thousand immigrants who fear persecution in their homelands and are rushing to the border to apply for political asylum in Canada before a new refugee agreement with the United States takes effect on Wednesday."We Colombians have nowhere else to go," Mr. Gutiérrez said matter-of-factly during an interview at a makeshift shelter in an old nursing home in this manufacturing town near the border. "If we are thrown out of Canada, we would have to go back to Colombia, where we would be targets of the FARC," he added, using the Spanish acronym of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the most powerful rebel group.Refugee shelters on both sides of the border are overflowing with young, middle-class families from Colombia, Congo, Sudan and other strife-stricken countries who have had the wherewithal to get here and hope to beat the deadline. As many as 1,000 are in Buffalo, with Canadian immigration officers processing their refugee claims as quickly as possible. Hundreds more are living in shelters or being taken in by Canadian families along the border.The sudden exodus to Canada was caused by the Safe Third Country Agreement signed by Ottawa and Washington in December 2002. The treaty takes effect Wednesday and is meant to prevent what officials in both countries call "shopping for asylum." It requires refugees seeking asylum to do so in whichever country they reach first.Canada is generally considered the more liberal of the two countries in refugee matters, but it is more difficult to reach than the United States because it receives international flights from far fewer countries and there are more American consular offices around the world to process claims.Officials said the agreement would enhance the orderly handling of asylum claims in two countries historically committed to the protection of refugees."It will reduce abuses of the refugee program here in Canada," said Robert Gervais, a spokesman for Canada's Border Services Agency.But advocates for refugees warn that the agreement will succeed only in increasing illegal entries and human trafficking after the deadline on Wednesday.Advocates on both sides of the border expressed disappointment that Canada pushed for the agreement. "I feel that this brings back echoes of the worst in Canada's history," said Janet Dench, executive director of the Canadian Council for Refugees, referring to when Canada refused to open its doors to European Jews fleeing Nazi oppression.Beginning on Wednesday, immigrants who travel through the United States and seek asylum in Canada, at a point of entry on the border, will generally be sent back to the United States to apply for asylum.The same rules will apply to immigrants trying to enter the United States from Canada, but the flow in that direction is relatively small -- 200 asylum seekers a year, compared with 11,000 to 12,000 a year who seek protection in Canada after passing through the United States."Starting on Dec. 29, people who show up at a Canadian port of entry along the land border with the United States cannot claim refugee status anymore and will be refused admission to Canada," Mr. Gervais said. "They can claim refugee status in the United States if they wish."In nearby Fort Erie, Ontario, across from Buffalo, Canadian officials are getting 55 claims a day for refugee status, up from the usual 20. Officials here in Canada's Niagara region say 900 refugees have crossed the border so far this month, up from the average of 400, while about 900 more are waiting to get in from Buffalo. Those who have already reached the border by Wednesday will be processed after that deadline.But Patrick Giantonio, executive director of Vermont Refugee Assistance, a private, nonprofit group that aids immigrants, disagreed. "It will be more difficult for asylum seekers to obtain protection," he said. "It's more likely they'll be bounced back into the hands of their persecutors."Mr. Giantonio added, "There will be a significant rise in individuals entering Canada illegally to make asylum claims that they have been able to make legally at the border. And there will be new pressure on U.S. asylum officers and immigration courts."About a third of the people who apply for asylum in Canada pass through the United States first, according to officials in the two countries. Under the new rules, aliens will be allowed to seek asylum in either country but not both.The new rules will apply only at the border. Immigrants who reach the interior of Canada will still be able to pursue asylum claims there.Commenting on the accord, the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said: "The agreement may have the unintended effect of encouraging clandestine border crossings, which run counter to the interests of all parties, including individuals in need of protection. Because the agreement applies only to persons making claims at land ports of entry, those who manage to cross the border -- likely in an irregular manner -- and make a claim inland will not be affected."Immigration judges in the United States have expressed alarm that many immigrants turned away by Canada will seek relief in the United States, adding to an immense backlog of cases.If given a choice, refugees often prefer to pursue asylum claims in Canada, which they say is more likely to accept certain types of claims, particularly those from women who fear domestic violence or persecution because of their sex.Also, aliens seeking asylum in the United States generally must apply within one year of their arrival. Canada does not have such a deadline.In addition, as the Bush administration said in announcing the new policy last month, "Under Canadian law, asylum seekers are provided social benefits that they are not eligible for in the United States, including access to medical coverage, adult public education and public benefits."In a letter to United States immigration officials, three nonprofit groups -- Vermont Refugee Assistance, Freedom House in Detroit and Vive Inc. in Buffalo -- said, "We find it tragically ironic that this agreement, which was initiated in post-Sept. 11 haste as a quid pro quo to Canada in the context of increased border security, has serious potential to increase the trafficking of humans."The agreement makes an exception for asylum seekers who already have family members in the country where they want to go.