https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/17/us/politics/what-to-watch-a-crush-of-hearings-and-a-transfer-of-power.html
Democrats Criticize Betsy DeVos, Trump’s Choice for Education - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Senate,Price  Thomas E (1954- ),DeVos  Elizabeth (1958- ),Perry  Rick,Pruitt  Scott,Zinke  Ryan (1961- ),Trump  Donald J
Jan. 17, 2017
2061
WASHINGTON — Betsy DeVos, President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice to lead the Education Department, was sharply criticized by Democrats on Tuesday evening in what was shaping up to be a contentious confirmation hearing.■ Republicans countered Democrats with rich praise for Ms. DeVos.■ Representative Ryan Zinke, Republican of Montana, Mr. Trump’s choice for secretary of the Interior, had an easier time of it in his hearing on Tuesday.■ The main target of Democratic ire is likely to be Mr. Trump’s choice to head the Department of Health and Human Services, Representative Tom Price, Republican of Georgia. His hearing Wednesday morning will focus on his strong opposition to the Affordable Care Act.Ms. DeVos, a billionaire philanthropist, has attracted opposition from organizations supporting charter schools and from teachers’ unions.Her opening statement said that the public education system in the United States needed to move away from “a one-size-fits-all model of learning,” and toward one that would support parents who chose to send their children to private or religious schools, or to home school.“Too many parents are denied access to the full range of options,” she said. “Choices that many of us — here in this room — have exercised for our own children.”“Why, in 2017, are we still questioning parents’ ability to exercise educational choice for their children?” she asked.Ms. DeVos recalled her own education in a Christian school in Western Michigan, and her mother’s job as a public-school teacher. She described a visit she and her husband, an heir to the Amway fortune, made to a Christian school in her hometown, Grand Rapids, Mich., as a turning point in her career as an advocate for school choice.“We saw the struggles and sacrifices many of these families faced when trying to choose the best educational option for their children,” she said. “For me, this was not just an issue of public policy but of national injustice.”She added: “Here’s the sad reality. In the past 28 years, the need and demand for these other options have grown, unabated.”Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the ranking Democrat on the committee, said she was “extremely disappointed” that Ms. DeVos’s hearing was proceeding before she had completed an agreement with the independent Office of Government Ethics that outlined a plan to deal with potential conflicts of interest.Mr. Zinke portrayed himself as an eager steward of the nation’s public lands, treading a fine line between the importance of preservation and utilization as he testified before a Senate panel as Mr. Trump’s choice for interior secretary.Mr. Zinke professed his admiration not only for the naturalist John Muir, a champion of preservation, but also for Gifford Pinchot, the first chief of the United States Forest Service. Mr. Pinchot pushed for what he described as the planned use and renewal of natural resources.“It is also these lands that many communities, like the town I grew up in, rely on to harvest timber, mine and to provide our nation with energy,” he said in prepared remarks.He said one of his priorities leading the Interior Department would be addressing an estimated $12.5-billion backlog of maintenance and repairs in the national parks system.Mr. Zinke broke with Mr. Trump on the issue of climate change Tuesday, disagreeing with the president-elect’s assertion at one point that it is “a hoax.” Mr. Zinke, who once said that climate change was “not proven science,” said the climate was changing and that humans were having an impact on it.“I think the debate is what that influence is, what we can do about it,” Mr. Zinke said. “I don’t believe it’s a hoax,” he added.He expressed his support for the president-elect’s desire for energy independence, though, and he described his approach to developing energy resources on public lands as “all of the above.”Mr. Zinke also drew a clear line on whether the federal government should keep control of its land. “I’m absolutely against transfer and sale of public lands,” he said. “I can’t be more clear.”Perhaps this week’s most contentious confirmation hearing will Wednesday, when a Senate panel will take a look at Mr. Price, Mr. Trump’s selection for secretary of Health and Human Services.Just days after congressional Republicans voted to move forward with plans to repeal President Obama’s health care law, senators will question Mr. Price, one of the law’s top critics in Congress. Republicans hope he can be an aggressive force within the administration as they work to repeal and replace the health care law. Democrats, who cannot block the repeal effort, will most likely take the opportunity to highlight their view that repealing the law will leave millions without health insurance.Watch for Democrats to attack Mr. Price’s support for overhauling the Medicare system, an idea that would move away from its open-ended commitment to pay medical costs toward a plan where beneficiaries receive a fixed amount.