https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/21/us/politics/ted-cruz-donald-trump-mike-pence-rnc.html
Ted Cruz Stirs Convention Fury in Pointed Snub of Donald Trump  - The New York Times
Republican National Convention,Cruz  Ted,Trump  Donald J,Pence  Mike,Presidential Election of 2016,Vice Presidents and Vice Presidency (US),Republican Party
July 20, 2016
6759
CLEVELAND — The Republican convention erupted into tumult on Wednesday night as the bitter primary battle between Donald J. Trump and Senator Ted Cruz reignited unexpectedly, crushing hopes that the party could project unity.In the most electric moment of the convention, boos and jeers broke out as it became clear that Mr. Cruz — in a prime-time address from center stage — was not going to endorse Mr. Trump. It was a pointed snub on the eve of Mr. Trump’s formal acceptance speech.As hundreds of delegates chanted “Vote for Trump!” and “Say it!” Mr. Cruz tried to dismiss the outburst as “enthusiasm of the New York delegation” — only to have Mr. Trump himself suddenly appear in the back of the convention hall. Virtually every head in the room seemed to turn from Mr. Cruz to Mr. Trump, who was stone-faced and clearly angry as he egged on delegates by pumping his fist.Mr. Cruz was all but drowned out as he asked for God’s blessing on the country and left the stage, while security personnel escorted his wife, Heidi, out of the hall. One delegate yelled “Goldman Sachs!” at her — a reference to the company that has employed her, a job that Mr. Trump attacked during the primaries.A short while later, Mr. Cruz faced insults as he made his way down a corridor — one woman yelled “Traitor!” When he tried to enter the convention suite of the Las Vegas casino magnate Sheldon Adelson, he was turned away.The commotion on the night that Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, Mr. Trump’s running mate, later gave a well-received speech, was a jarring demonstration of just how divided Republicans remain and a stunning departure from modern political conventions. The uproar over Mr. Cruz’s refusal to endorse Mr. Trump recalled an earlier political era, such as when the moderate Republican Nelson Rockefeller was heckled for using his speech at the 1964 convention to criticize Barry Goldwater, the party’s nominee that year.“I’ve seen some crazy things,” said Brandon Bell, the chairman of the Rhode Island Republican Party, who was still stunned as he absorbed what had happened on the convention floor. “I don’t think this is going to play well.”Mr. Cruz, who has all but declared that he wants to run for president again in 2020, especially angered Republican leaders who had been counting on him to keep his pledge that he would support the eventual nominee, a vow that other leading Republican contenders also made last fall.Mr. Trump had invited Mr. Cruz to speak even though he had doubts that peace was possible after their brutal race, during which Mr. Trump repeatedly called him “Lyin’ Ted” and suggested Mr. Cruz’s father had a role in President Kennedy’s assassination.Mr. Trump called Mr. Cruz on Monday and asked for his endorsement, according to a senior aide to Mr. Cruz who requested anonymity to relay private conversations. Mr. Cruz indicated to Mr. Trump that he would not offer an endorsement, the aide said.Trump advisers said on Wednesday night that Mr. Trump had been unhappy with the text of Mr. Cruz’s speech but held out for the remote possibility that Mr. Cruz would make a last-minute endorsement.When none arrived, and with Mr. Cruz sounding like a nominee-in-waiting, Mr. Trump grew impatient with the stubbornness of his rival. Gov. Chris Christie, a close ally to Mr. Trump, could be seen shaking his head watching Mr. Cruz go on, just before Mr. Trump made his unplanned entrance into the hall.Convention organizers were furious at the length of Mr. Cruz’s speech. He was originally allotted 12 minutes, but planners made a late decision to allocate 20 minutes instead.Mr. Cruz wound up speaking for over 21 minutes, pushing parts of Mr. Pence’s speech well beyond prime time. Mr. Cruz’s aides said the speech ran long because it was interrupted for applause.“Awful” and “selfish,” is how Mr. Christie described Mr. Cruz to a CNN reporter at the end of the evening.Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter: “Wow. Ted Cruz got booed off the stage, didn’t honor the pledge!”Even after the hubbub subsided, allies of Mr. Trump kept hammering Mr. Cruz. Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, who spoke after the senator, quickly revised his remarks to taunt Mr. Cruz for not endorsing Mr. Trump.“To paraphrase Ted Cruz, if you want to preserve the Constitution, the only possible candidates this fall is the Trump-Pence Republican ticket,” Mr. Gingrich said.The rumpus on the floor, which broke out shortly before 10 p.m., captured a reality that Republicans had hoped to minimize: that significant factions of the party remain hostile to Mr. Trump, while his own base of supporters are fervent and unyielding.“What good are you if your word is not on your bond?” asked one delegate from Nevada, George Assad. “I was a big Cruz fan. No more.”The drama overshadowed the appearance of Mr. Pence, who was expected to be the highlight of the convention’s third night.Mr. Pence served as a character witness for Mr. Trump, crediting him with turning “a long-shot campaign into a movement.”“He’s a doer, not a talker,” Mr. Pence said. “He doesn’t tiptoe the thousand new rules of political correctness.’’After the speech, Mr. Trump appeared, walked across the stage and greeted Mr. Pence, pointing to him and inviting the audience to applaud. “What a great job,” Mr. Trump told him.Mr. Trump was especially eager to steer their convention back on course with fiery speeches and warnings about electing Hillary Clinton after days of confusion and recriminations over Melania Trump’s tarnished speech.The turmoil over Ms. Trump’s speech, which borrowed lines from Michelle Obama’s 2008 convention address, eclipsed the party gathering in a way not seen at a political convention since Dick Morris, Bill Clinton’s adviser, was revealed at the outset of Mr. Clinton’s 1996 convention to having had an extramarital affair and a foot fetish.Mr. Trump, in an effort to seize command of the convention, tried to create a presidential tableau as he arrived in Cleveland on Wednesday.After his Trump-branded jet landed midafternoon, Mr. Trump flew in a Trump helicopter to a grassy patch near the convention arena — a theatrical projection of status captured by cable news cameras. Then, to the theme music from “Air Force One” — a film about a gutsy president who kills a terrorist with his bare hands — Mr. Trump alighted from the chopper to give Mr. Pence a handshake and kiss his daughters. Few people turned out to watch as Mr. Trump spoke briefly to highlight Mr. Pence’s speech that night. Mr. Pence, whose political rollout last weekend was overshadowed by Mr. Trump, managed to say almost as many words as the nominee.“I’m convinced what begins in Cleveland will end in the White House,” Mr. Pence said.But the scene that will be remembered for years is the split screen image of Mr. Cruz, seemingly stunned on the stage as the boos grew, and a scowling Mr. Trump dramatically entering the arena to wrest back control of his convention.In a sign of Mr. Cruz’s reluctance to endorse Mr. Trump, his most generous statement — beyond congratulating him for winning the nomination — was a plea to Republicans and others to vote for like-minded candidates in November.“To those listening, please, don’t stay home in November,” Mr. Cruz said. “Stand and speak and vote your conscience, vote for candidates up and down the ticket who you trust to defend our freedom and to be faithful to the Constitution.”Mr. Cruz has used the week here as virtual renewing of his presidential ambitions, darting between parties, speeches and meals with the donors and activists he will need if he runs again. When he addressed friendly delegates at an open-bar reception on Wednesday, a “2020!” chant broke out. And, as if to send a signal that he knew what Mr. Cruz was up to, Mr. Trump’s 757 roared over the gathering while the senator was speaking.On Wednesday night, the bulk of Mr. Cruz’s speech was also an illustration of his ambitions, as the senator limited the hard-edge rhetoric that propelled him to Tea Party stardom in favor of a loftier address bemoaning “partisan rancor,” recounting the heroism of a police officer slain in Dallas and hailing his party’s historic commitment to civil rights.The wild evening was a stark reminder of the way ego and outsize personalities have turned a traditionally staid political party into an unpredictable and operatic production. Early in the evening, Laura Ingraham, the conservative talk show host, seemed to foreshadow the coming collision when she challenged Mr. Cruz — without using his name — to endorse Mr. Trump that night.“All you boys with your wounded egos,” she said, “you must honor your pledge to support Donald J. Trump. Tonight.”The crowd roared its approval.