https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/13/us/senate-votes-to-start-debate-on-keystone-bill.html
Senate to Debate Keystone XL, Setting Stage for More Energy Battles - The New York Times
Keystone Pipeline System,Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,United States Politics and Government,Law and Legislation,Debates (Political),Vetoes (US),Obama  Barack,McConnell  Mitch
Jan. 12, 2015
6419
WASHINGTON —  The Senate voted Monday to take up a bill that would force approval of the Keystone XL pipeline, opening a debate on energy and climate change that will preview other clashes to come between President Obama and the new Republican Congress. It will also set the stage for the energy and climate battles of the presidential election next year.But the bill’s fate appears certain: Republicans, with the help of some Democrats, are expected to easily push it through Congress, and Mr. Obama is expected to veto it.The floor debate, which is scheduled to play out in the next two to three weeks, will serve as a showcase for various energy and environmental issues and is expected to involve votes on the science of climate change and humanity’s role in causing it, as well as on a proposal to lift a 42-year-old ban on exporting crude oil.The debate will also provide potential presidential candidates with a platform for promoting their own energy policies. Senators are expected to debate amendments on dozens of other energy issues like subsidizing heating bills for poor people, increasing taxes on oil production, and promoting renewable energy.It has been eight years since the Senate held a similar debate before passage of an energy bill.“I know senators from both sides are hungry for a real Senate debate,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader. “We’ll have an open floor debate on jobs, the middle class, infrastructure and energy.”Arguments over energy issues have changed drastically since the passage of the 2007 law.At the time, lawmakers worried about increased dependence on imported oil, but the United States is now on track to become the world’s largest oil and gas producer. Energy companies, in turn, have campaigned aggressively to lift the ban on crude oil exports that was imposed after the crippling 1973 Arab oil embargo.At the same time, a growing number of scientific reports have concluded that climate changes caused by the burning of fossil fuels have begun to harm the global economy. Mr. Obama has proposed a series of Environmental Protection Agency regulations on power plants and cars in an effort to curb greenhouse gas pollution, but Republicans have said the rules would force employers to eliminate jobs.Both issues — how the United States responds to the oil boom and to climate change — will be top priorities for the next president.The Keystone fight, in particular, lawmakers from both parties said, is likely to be a Senate referendum on climate change. Democrats have criticized those Republicans who question that humans are causing global warming, which almost all scientists believe. The issue has divided Republicans, with conservatives openly questioning the science behind that conclusion and moderates trying to avoid it.Senator Bernard Sanders, the Vermont independent, will introduce a resolution declaring that climate change caused by humans is a major threat.“It’s not going to be forgotten by history,” said Mr. Sanders, who is considering a 2016 campaign for president as a progressive. “They’re going to be asking: Did you not hear what the scientific community all over the world is saying — that climate change is the most serious environmental crisis facing this planet?”Democrats are expected to attack Republicans who vote against the resolution as science deniers — an accusation that could resonate into 2016.A group of liberal Democrats who have made climate change their priority — including Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, Brian Schatz of Hawaii and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico — are also expected to propose climate change amendments during the Keystone debate. And Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who has openly spoken of the climate-change threat, said he might introduce a resolution of his own.On the Republican side, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who is frequently mentioned as a possible presidential candidate next year, is expected to offer amendments of his own that would lift the oil export ban and speed approval of export permits for liquid natural gas.“A booming new energy economy can also provide critical resources to our allies so they are no longer energy-dependent on petro-tyrants such as Russia’s Vladimir Putin,” Mr. Cruz said last year. “The only thing the federal government needs to do is get out of the way and let Americans do what they do best: dream, innovate and prosper.”Even if Mr. Cruz’s proposal does not make it into the final bill, Senator Lisa Murkowski, the Alaska Republican who is chairwoman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, is preparing a separate bill aimed at promoting domestic oil and gas exports.Democrats, led by Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, will counter with an amendment requiring that any oil shipped through the Keystone pipeline remain in the United States.There is some bipartisan agreement on energy issues. Senators Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, and Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, will introduce a Keystone amendment that would improve energy efficiency in buildings. The measure, though modest, has drawn strong support from both parties. That amendment would die with the president’s veto of the Keystone bill, but it could return as a stand-alone measure bill later this year.