http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/08/us/politics/an-expansive-setting-for-obamas-talks-with-chinas-leader.html
Expansive Setting for Obama’s Meeting With Xi - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Xi Jinping,Annenberg  Walter H,Annenberg  Leonore,United States International Relations,China,Sunnylands (Rancho Mirage  Calif)
June 7, 2013
1437
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — It was Leonore Annenberg’s wish that the sumptuous winter home that she and her billionaire husband, Walter H. Annenberg, built in the Southern California desert would become, after their deaths, “Camp David West” for American presidents — a place both to relax and to parley with world leaders, preferably those from Pacific powers.And both Annenbergs, associates say, wanted their Sunnylands estate to shed its reputation as a retreat only for Republican elites.Now, nearly 11 years after Mr. Annenberg’s death and four years after his wife’s, President Obama begins to realize the couple’s dream by welcoming President Xi Jinping of China at Sunnylands on Friday. By its unusual informality, the presidents’ two-day meeting is already being interpreted as a milestone in their nations’ often tense and generally stilted four-decade diplomatic history. Mr. Obama will sleep at the estate, presumably in the canary yellow master bedroom where speakers pipe in the songs of the birds outdoors; Chinese officials and their leader, reportedly fearful of eavesdropping bugs, have opted for a nearby hotel.“This meeting fits the Annenbergs’ conception to a T,” said George P. Shultz, who as a member of both the Nixon and Reagan cabinets often joined those presidents at Sunnylands, along with their spouses and celebrities like Bob Hope and Frank Sinatra.Yet as properties go, Sunnylands is no Camp David.Camp David, the wooded retreat of presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt, in the Maryland mountains near Washington, is plenty nice for those who favor rustic chic and cabins. Sunnylands, by contrast, is a 25,000-square-foot structure of postwar Modernist design near Palm Springs, with 22 guest bedrooms and a sprawling living room with walls of windows that look out to the surrounding San Jacinto Mountains. The house sits on 200 acres that include a nine-hole golf course, 11 artificial lakes, three guest cottages, a tennis court and landscaped grounds with sculptures and groves of olive trees.Inside, and certain to make the guests from Beijing feel more at home, are ancient Chinese porcelain, sculptures and cloisonné pieces. But there also are paintings by Picasso and sculptures by Rodin and Giacometti, among others. The home’s 52 Impressionist and post-Impressionist works, by Cezanne, Manet, Monet and more, are digitized copies of the real things; the originals are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art because of a billion-dollar bequest from the Annenbergs after Mr. Annenberg’s death.Sunnylands remains much as it was in past decades, Mr. Shultz said. “It’s a magical place, and a wonderful place to sit and talk,” he added.But he and Mr. Reagan were on their feet and golfing one year, he said, playing their traditional pre-party New Year’s Eve game, when the president asked Mr. Shultz, his secretary of state, if he had any good economic policy ideas. Mr. Shultz, who had been Treasury secretary to Mr. Nixon, passed along a tax proposal he had heard from a friend. That was the idea that led to the landmark 1986 law overhauling the tax code.The Annenbergs broke ground for Sunnylands 50 years ago, and it was three years under construction before the couple, who also had residences in Pennsylvania, New York, Washington and Sun Valley, Idaho, began spending the winter months at the desert oasis. When they were in residence, so were others: Dwight and Mamie Eisenhower enjoyed post-presidency getaways. Richard M. Nixon, who is still revered in China for opening relations between the two countries, was a frequent guest and escaped here after his resignation as president, writing in the Annenbergs’ guest book, “When you’re down, you find out who your real friends are.” Gerald and Betty Ford visited repeatedly, as did George and Barbara Bush.In 1975, Mr. Annenberg, who had been Mr. Nixon’s ambassador to Britain, wrote to Margaret Thatcher, who was then the opposition leader in the House of Commons, to arrange a meeting with Mr. Reagan at the latter’s request; it soon took place in London, just a few years before each would take power and forge a trans-Atlantic alliance. Mrs. Thatcher, the former prime minister, who died in April, visited Sunnylands a number of times, as has Queen Elizabeth.The first President Bush set the precedent for incumbent world leaders conferring at Sunnylands, 22 years before the estate would open for that purpose in 2012. In 1990 he held a state dinner for Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, and the two men had talks to avert a trade crisis.In 1988, a casually dressed Mr. Reagan signed the first free-trade pact with Canada in Mr. Annenberg’s office at Sunnylands, communicating by phone with the Canadian prime minister. According to Geoffrey Cowan, the president of the Annenberg Foundation Trust at Sunnylands, the office is now called “the president’s office,” and, he added, “It will be President Obama’s office.”Mr. Obama will be the eighth president to stay at the estate, and the third Democrat. Both Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton have been guests, if not such frequent visitors and Annenberg friends as the Republican presidents. Both Annenbergs “really liked the Clintons,” Mr. Cowan said, “and that I know from my own conversations with them.”A 21-minute video created for the trust, called “A Place Called Sunnylands,” is rich with footage of the estate’s Republican heritage. But it closes with Mr. Clinton, who expresses hope that Sunnylands will become a meeting place for world leaders in the 21st century.