https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/29/world/americas/lula-ex-president-of-brazil-lashes-out-at-judge-overseeing-corruption-inquiry.html
‘Lula,’ Ex-President of Brazil, Lashes Out at Judge Overseeing Corruption Inquiry - The New York Times
Brazil,Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Moro  Sergio (1972- ),Rousseff  Dilma,Appointments and Executive Changes,Corruption (Institutional),Money Laundering,Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras,Workers' Party (Brazil),Moro  Sergio
March 28, 2016
2506
SÃO PAULO, Brazil —  Brazil’s former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on Monday accused the judge overseeing the investigation into the country’s colossal graft scandal of trying to ruin him by releasing intercepts of his telephone conversations.“There’s an objective: trying to destroy the image of Lula,” Mr. da Silva said, referring to strategies employed by Sergio Moro, the judge whose release of the intercepts caused an uproar this month. In the profanity-laced calls, Mr. da Silva is heard discussing ways to constrain the work of investigators.“I hope that God places his hand on his head,” Mr. da Silva, 70, long one of Brazil’s most influential politicians, said of Judge Moro, who has emerged as a hero among anticorruption activists. “There’s going to come a day when someone’s going to have to apologize to me.”Mr. da Silva’s comments, in a wide-reaching news conference here with foreign journalists, reflected escalating political tensions as his handpicked successor, President Dilma Rousseff, battled to remain in office in the face of impeachment proceedings.The intercepts, obtained by federal agents in the inquiry into Mr. da Silva’s close ties to giant construction companies, offer a rare glimpse into how leading figures in the leftist Workers’ Party are scrambling to keep their government from collapsing.At the same time, Judge Moro, 43, has come under fire over his release of the intercepts, which include calls between Mr. da Silva and Ms. Rousseff during her presidency. Critics of the judge have assailed him for what they describe as a partisan attempt to bolster efforts to oust Ms. Rousseff.In one of the calls, Ms. Rousseff and Mr. da Silva briefly discussed the former president’s nomination as her chief of staff, a move that would have provided Mr. da Silva with broad legal protections as prosecutors in São Paulo State seek his arrest.Since the intercepts were released, justices on Brazil’s Supreme Federal Tribunal have suspended that nomination, citing concerns that Mr. da Silva’s nomination could obstruct Judge Moro’s investigation, which has already resulted in the imprisonment of construction magnates, oil executives and confidants of Mr. da Silva.Still, Mr. da Silva appeared sanguine Monday about his chances of assisting Ms. Rousseff, who insisted last week that she would not resign. Dressed in a crisp suit and tie and looking more robust than he had recently, he said he was prepared to serve as an unpaid adviser to the president in the area of “economic and social development.”Mr. da Silva also expressed indignation over the corruption inquiries that have placed him on the defensive, a stunning turnaround from just a few years ago, when he left office with soaring approval ratings after presiding over an economic boom.Federal prosecutors say five of the construction companies engulfed in the graft scandal surrounding Petrobras, the national oil company, paid him the equivalent of about $2.7 million for speeches since he left the presidency.Investigators are also looking into renovations paid for by construction companies of a country estate and a beachfront apartment, properties that they contend the former president has controlled. On Monday, Mr. da Silva again denied owning the properties, but state prosecutors in São Paulo have charged him with money laundering and misrepresentation of assets in connection to the apartment in the seaside city of Guarujá.Mr. da Silva remarked that such inquiries were made possible by the policies of his government to bolster the independence of the country’s judiciary. But he asserted that some investigators were overstepping their authority by seeking to oust Ms. Rousseff.“We know what’s happening with these targeted leaks against the Workers’ Party,” Mr. da Silva said, referring not just to the intercepts but also to revelations from plea deals that are filtered into the Brazilian news media.He said opponents of the government were trying to taint the entire party, formed by leftists in the 1980s in organized resistance to Brazil’s military dictatorship, comparing the process to the way “Mussolini criminalized the democrats of Italy.”Still, Mr. da Silva acknowledged that he and Ms. Rousseff had their work cut out for them in confronting Brazil’s worst economic crisis in decades. And he recognized that corruption had spread into the executive suites of Petrobras, arguably Brazil’s most powerful company.Contending that no government was immune to wrongdoing in its ranks, he compared Brazil’s political crisis to the scandal in the 1970s that forced the resignation of the West German chancellor Willy Brandt, after a Brandt aide was found to be an East German spy. “My tranquillity persists,” Mr. da Silva said, “in the thinking that those who made mistakes should pay the price for them.”