http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/12/nyregion/cuomo-works-to-mend-fences-with-liberals.html
Cuomo Works to Mend Fences With Liberals - The New York Times
Elections  Governors,Polls and Public Opinion,Governors (US),Cuomo  Andrew M,New York State,Working Families Party,Politics and Government
May 11, 2014
7480
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has won significant support from traditionally Republican constituencies, including business executives who like his tax cuts and Wall Street financiers delighted with his support of charter schools. But this courtship has come at a price: As he begins his bid for a second term, he is struggling to hold on to support from the left wing of his own party.Liberals’ misgivings about Mr. Cuomo, one of the nation’s most prominent Democratic governors, are quickly coming into focus as the Working Families Party, one of New York’s most effective political organizations in recent years, considers whether to endorse him.Leaders of the party, an alliance of labor unions and liberal activists, backed Mr. Cuomo in his bid for governor in 2010 and were a driving force behind Mayor Bill de Blasio’s political ascent.But they are now so frustrated with Mr. Cuomo that they are privately talking about whether to nominate their own candidate to run for governor this year, according to party officials.“He is too far to the right for us,” said David Schwartz, vice chairman of the Working Families Party of Westchester and Putnam Counties.Now, worried that a liberal challenger could siphon votes away from him in November, Mr. Cuomo is working to repair his relationship with the party.The split is akin to a family rift: Mr. Cuomo is heavily favored against his presumptive Republican opponent, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, so neither the governor’s camp nor the Working Families Party sees Mr. Cuomo’s re-election as imperiled by the dispute. Rather, endorsing someone other than Mr. Cuomo would be intended mainly to make the left’s discontent more widely known.It would be a rebuke for Mr. Cuomo, who is hoping to achieve an overwhelming margin of victory in the November general election, enhancing his stature as a potential presidential candidate and driving home his image as a Democrat who can work with Republicans to chart a middle course and break through legislative gridlock.It also would be risky for the Working Families Party: If its nominee for governor does not earn at least 50,000 votes in November, the party would lose its spot on the ballot in New York State, where candidates can appear on the ballot on multiple party lines. With Mr. Cuomo as its candidate in 2010, the party received about 155,000 votes.With that in mind, groups associated with the party have floated some high-profile names as potential standard-bearers in place of Mr. Cuomo, including Cynthia Nixon, the actress known for her role on “Sex and the City,” and a friend of Mr. de Blasio’s. (She said in an interview that she was not interested.)The frustration with Mr. Cuomo among left-leaning Democrats has been building for years. Although he proudly calls New York “the progressive capital of the nation,” the governor has been selective in choosing what progressive issues to champion, an approach that liberal activists and some Democratic lawmakers have found maddening.Mr. Cuomo has notched several major victories on progressive issues, including legalizing same-sex marriage and enacting stricter gun laws. He has also pushed to strengthen abortion rights in state law, and is seeking to allow the limited use of medical marijuana.But on fiscal issues, Mr. Cuomo has charted a course that the left views as pulling steadily to the right: He pressured state workers to accept a wage freeze, reduced pension benefits for newly hired employees and passed a cap on increases in local property taxes. And in the state budget approved in March, he exempted some multimillion-dollar estates from paying estate taxes, and reduced taxes on corporations.“He was a Democratic governor from a liberal progressive tradition," said State Senator Bill Perkins, a Democrat from Harlem. "I don’t know why he’s abandoning that tradition.”Mr. Cuomo remains popular with New York voters who identify themselves as liberals: Roughly 70 percent had a favorable opinion of him in Siena College polls conducted over the past three months. But a poll last month also offered evidence of some lingering dissatisfaction. Fifty-six percent of Democrats said they wanted Mr. Cuomo to be more of a liberal, as did 80 percent of self-described liberals. And given a hypothetical ballot in which Mr. Cuomo faced Mr. Astorino and a more liberal Working Families Party nominee, 24 percent of voters said they would back the unnamed liberal.Stepping up the pressure on Mr. Cuomo, leaders of the Working Families Party emailed their members recently and asked for their thoughts on whether to back the governor.Dan Cantor, the party’s executive director, said on Sunday that party leaders “don’t know how this is going to turn out.”“But the W.F.P. has insisted from its founding that the economy must work for everyone, not just the 1 percent,” he added. “So it’s gratifying to know that there are New Yorkers of all races and classes who feel the same way.”Mr. Cuomo’s re-election campaign on Sunday would say only that it was still considering which ballot lines he would run on.  But a spokesman for the governor, Matt Wing, rejected the suggestion that left-leaning Democrats were unhappy with him.“As the polls show, there is a big difference between those who claim to be spokespeople for the left and the actual left,” he said.Mr. Cuomo’s attempt at a rapprochement is playing out largely behind the scenes, as he tries to persuade the leaders of unions affiliated with the Working Families Party to urge the party’s leadership to stick with him.Time is short: The party will hold its convention on May 31.A reconciliation appears to hinge on one contentious issue: a proposal to enact a system for public financing of state political campaigns, which has been a top priority for government reform groups and liberal activists.The Working Families Party is pushing Mr. Cuomo to strike a deal with legislative leaders for a broader public financing system than the much-maligned pilot program that was recently approved.The governor is working to convince the party’s leaders and other activists that he shares their goal. In a private meeting with advocates of campaign finance reform, Mr. Cuomo said that when he is eulogized, he wants to be remembered for three accomplishments: legalizing same-sex marriage, tightening gun laws and passing a public-financing system, according to people with firsthand knowledge of the meeting. And he met with advocates on Wednesday to discuss how he believed a deal could be reached.But Mr. Cuomo also appears to have some apprehension about the back and forth with the Working Families Party. According to people who have spoken to the governor, but insisted on anonymity to avoid antagonizing him, he has expressed resentment at being issued an ultimatum over public financing by party leaders.The deliberations over endorsing Mr. Cuomo have also exposed a fault line within the party. Some of the unions behind it have fared well under Mr. Cuomo’s administration, like 1199 S.E.I.U. United Healthcare Workers East, whose members benefited when he championed a wage floor for home health workers.In the most extreme scenario, Mr. Cuomo could pressure the unions to pull their support from the Working Families Party should it run its own candidate.Kevin Finnegan, the political director for 1199 S.E.I.U., said he did not agree with Mr. Cuomo on everything, and that the leaders of the Working Families Party needed to be “realists.”“Our goal was to push Democrats to the left,” he said. “I think we have been successful in that. The governor is going to win, and why not use this opportunity to develop a better relationship with him?”But some party officials worry that supporting the governor could have other ramifications.“I think the problem for many of us,” said Mr. Schwartz, of the Westchester and Putnam chapter, “is if we put Andrew Cuomo on our line, maybe we have greater access to him or we get a few things done, but what have we done to the party? What have we said to the electorate about what we stand for?”