https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/us/politics/investigators-find-emails-hillary-clinton-said-were-erased.html
Investigators Find Emails Hillary Clinton Said Were Erased - The New York Times
E-Mail,Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,State Department,Federal Bureau of Investigation
Sept. 22, 2015
5175
WASHINGTON —  F.B.I. investigators have recovered work-related and personal emails that Hillary Rodham Clinton said had been deleted from the server that housed the personal account she used exclusively when she was secretary of state, according to two government officials.The F.B.I. is looking into how classified information was handled in connection with the account. It was not clear whether the entire trove of roughly 60,000 emails had been found on the server, but one official said it had not been very hard for the F.B.I. to recover the messages.The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to be identified discussing a continuing investigation. The recovery of the emails was first reported by Bloomberg News.Mrs. Clinton and her lawyer have said that the server’s contents were deleted last year after her aides determined which emails were personal and which were work-related and should be provided to the State Department. In March, a House committee asked Mrs. Clinton to give the server to a third party to determine whether she had turned over all of the work-related emails.Mrs. Clinton’s lawyer, David E. Kendall, said in response to the request that there was no reason to hand over the server because there was nothing on it. He said that after Mrs. Clinton’s aides had reviewed the emails, a setting on the server was changed so that only emails sent in the previous 60 days would be retained.But in August, Mrs. Clinton authorized her aides to hand the server to investigators. Computer forensic experts have said that if the change in the server setting was the only measure taken, it would be fairly easy for F.B.I. agents who specialize in recovering deleted information from computers to retrieve the messages.