http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/21/realestate/21cov.html
Time Warner Center Draws a Diverse Global Group - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,APOLLO REAL ESTATE ADVISORS,RELATED COS,SUNSHINE  LOUISE,MARTINEZ  DAVID,HOUSING,TIME WARNER CENTER (NYC),PRICES (FARES  FEES AND RATES),REAL ESTATE,BUILDINGS (STRUCTURES)
Nov. 21, 2004
3159
IN a city where real estate is both spectacle and obsession, the Time Warner Center has played a prominent role in New York's millennial epic. Emerging from years of struggle over the future of Columbus Circle, the project passed through the crucible of Sept. 11, 2001 (steel was going up and condominium sales were in their fourth week when the World Trade Center was leveled) and into a real estate boom of big-name architects (David Childs of Skidmore Owings & Merrill designed it), celebrity buyers (the pop star Ricky Martin took an apartment) and stratospheric prices.If nothing else, the two-pronged complex, like a giant tuning fork vibrating to the zeitgeist, has given the current boom its biggest number and the city its most expensive apartment ever: the 76th-story, full-floor condo that the Mexican-born financier David Martinez bought in the summer of 2003 for $42.25 million.A little over a year later, the 198 apartments at Time Warner are about 85 percent sold, according to Louise M. Sunshine, the chairwoman and chief executive of the Sunshine Group, which marketed and sold the condos for the developers, the Related Companies and Apollo Real Estate Advisors. Ms. Sunshine trademarked the term "five star living" as the mantra for the center, which includes stores, the corporate offices of Time Warner, the Mandarin Oriental Hotel and restaurants. Total apartment sales so far, she said, add up to $810 million.It would seem, then, a good time to try to answer the perpetual question of New York real estate watchers: Who is buying, and where did the money come from?A study of transactions at the Time Warner Center, based on deeds, mortgage documents and other papers filed with public agencies, and interviews with real estate professionals and condo buyers, paints a picture of a diverse and exceedingly wealthy cast of characters culled from the upper ranks of the global economy.Infinite permutations of possible lobby encounters or elevator rides spring to mind. Prince Turki bin Khalid of the Saudi royal family might chat with the Turkish construction magnate Ali R. Bozkurt, who has worked on major projects in Mecca and Medina and was held hostage by Iraqi forces during the invasion of Kuwait. Pamela and Richard Kramlich, collectors of avant-garde video art, might strike up a conversation with Gerard L. Cafesjian, a collector of the glass sculptures of Dale Chihuly. At least 10 doctors are involved in Time Warner transactions, as well as a hospital administrator, a pair of cosmetic dentists and entrepreneurs in the fields of insurance and drug plans, and New Yorkers might be forgiven if they fantasize about one particularly crowded elevator car stuck somewhere on a high floor.In other words, for all its global trappings and glitz, the Time Warner Center is still a New York apartment house, which means it is a place of stories, chance meetings and crisscrossing lives. Here are a few of them:South Building, One Central Park76th floor, full floor with terrace, $42.25 million. David Martinez is the managing partner of Fintech Advisory, a firm with offices in London and New York that specializes in buying and selling the debt of countries and corporations. For his record payment, Mr. Martinez acquired two units, filling the entire 76th floor and half the 77th. (Actually, the buildings have only 53 floors, according to the condominium's offering plan, but, reasoning that a more prosaic structure might squeeze 80 stories into the same 700 feet, the developer decided to number them from the top down, starting at 80.)Mr. Martinez knocked out the floor separating the two units to create a massive, south-facing living room with a 25-foot ceiling and panoramic windows. He took possession of the apartment in August 2003, but people who have seen the unit say it remains largely raw space. A person informed of some of the financier's plans said Mr. Martinez intends to install a large reflecting pool, some 15 feet across, in the center of the living room. Plans for a giant aquarium were scrapped because of complications in reinforcing the floor, the person said. Mr. Martinez and his architect, Peter Marino, did not return calls.74th floor, three bedrooms, $9.1 million. Gregory H. Olsen's apartment seems almost like a bargain next to the $20 million he has reportedly paid to go into space with a crew of Russian cosmonauts, perhaps next year. Mr. Olsen's company, Sensors Unlimited, based in Princeton, N.J., makes infrared sensors used by the military and by industry for things like detecting spoiled fruit. He sold the company for $700 million in 2000 at the height of the technology boom, then bought it back for close to $7 million two years later. Mr. Olsen, who lives in New Jersey, finished work on the apartment this month and says he will use it two or three nights a week. He said he is looking forward to having his grandchildren over for Thanksgiving. "It's a great view of the parade," he said.72nd floor, three bedrooms, $9.5 million. Using a company called Harbour-Land Enterprises, David Kwok Po Li, 65, agreed to buy this four-bedroom apartment four days before Sept. 11, 2001. Mr. Li is chief executive of the Bank of East Asia in Hong Kong and a director of Dow Jones, Campbell Soup, Hong Kong and China Gas and other corporations. Calls to Mr. Li's representative in New York were not returned.71st floor, three bedrooms, $8.2 million. Susan A. Hancock and Raymond W. Otis sold their computer marketing firm, the Hancock Information Group, in 2001 to a subsidiary of Barry Diller's IAC/InterActiveCorp for an undisclosed amount. The couple's primary residence is in Winter Park, Fla., and they used the Florida-based designer Sam Ewing to create an apartment that would accentuate their collection of modern art, which has an emphasis on Japanese artists like Takashi Murakami. Ms. Hancock is on the acquisition committee at the Whitney Museum of American Art. Mr. Otis said he likes his new apartment because it's not like home. "You walk out the front door and you're right in New York," he said. "It hits you right in the face."70th floor, 4 bedrooms, $9.1 million. Keith L. Reinhard is the chairman of DDB Worldwide, one of the world's largest advertising agencies. He is credited with coming up with the McDonald's slogan "You deserve a break today."69th floor, two apartments, $8.1 million. Prince Turki bin Khalid picked out these two units while in New York the summer before 9/11, although documents filed with the city show the contracts were not made final until a month after the terror attack. His lawyer, Nancy Dutton, said he did not consider pulling out of the transaction. The prince, a sports aficionado who works with the Saudi national soccer team, will keep the apartments and hopes to use them once American sentiment toward his country becomes more favorable, she said. In the meantime, one of the apartments is being used by friends as a pied-à-terre and the other is vacant. In at least one way, the details of the prince's purchase suggest an alternative to the popular perception of the Saudi royals as an undifferentiated clan with uniformly bottomless pockets. About two-thirds of the purchases at Time Warner were made in cash. The prince got a mortgage.66th floor, three bedrooms, $5.3 million. Time Warner's marketing team focused on art collectors and successfully sold several of them on the complex. The addition of Tobias Meyer and Mark Fletcher to the roster of condo owners could only have made their job easier. Mr. Meyer is director of Sotheby's contemporary art department worldwide. Mr. Fletcher is a consultant who works with collectors. They moved in August from a prewar building on the East Side. "We came from a very respectable apartment on Park Avenue and sort of shook off the respectable life," Mr. Fletcher said jokingly. Calling the view "totally addictive," he added, "You can stand in your kitchen and make your cappuccino in the morning and see the park."66th floor, two bedrooms, $2.3 million. Ali R. Bozkurt is the chairman of BMB, a Turkish firm that specializes in the construction of roads, airports, tunnels and power plants. Mr. Bozkurt also owns a stake in an American company with a license to drill for oil in Kazakhstan. In August 1990, Mr. Bozkurt was at a construction project in northern Kuwait when the Iraqi army invaded. In his self-published memoir, "When I Was Saddam's Hostage," Mr. Bozkurt recounts the eight-day ordeal of his captivity in brutal desert conditions at the hands of Iraqi soldiers. The experience, he wrote, made him see the world differently, and he has since worked to promote democracy. Mr. Bozkurt's broker, Michael Shvo, president of the Shvo Group, said his condo is being offered for rent for $9,800 a month.65th floor, four bedrooms, $6.7 million. It didn't take long for a pair of Time Warner tenants to land in court, although the dispute had nothing to do with the sort of neighborly spats typical of other New York buildings. The deed filed with the city shows that the Latin pop star Ricky Martin signed a contract for this condo in late February, not much more than a week after his lawyers were in state court in Manhattan filing a $2.5 million lawsuit against Angelo Medina, his longtime manager. Mr. Martin had opted not to renew Mr. Medina's contract the previous year, and the lawsuit charged the manager had not delivered on services for which he'd been paid in advance.But Mr. Medina was not only Mr. Martin's former manager, he was his future neighbor. Mr. Medina's condo, a two-bedroom, $3.7 million unit, is also on the 65th floor, but in the north tower. Mr. Medina's unit faces north and Mr. Martin's faces south.Mr. Medina responded to Mr. Martin's legal action in May, filing a $63 million lawsuit in Puerto Rico, alleging that the singer had broken a promise to let him continue representing him on the island. Peace was restored last month, however, when the two men agreed to settle their differences. Mr. Medina, who also owns a television sports channel and a professional basketball team in Puerto Rico, said he ran into Mr. Martin earlier this month in the lobby of his building, and they exchanged a quick hello. "It was nice," he said.64th floor, five bedrooms, $8.8 million. Verna R. Harrah worked as a cocktail waitress and a real estate agent before marrying her first husband, Bill Harrah, the Nevada casino magnate, in 1973. After his death in 1978, the casino business was sold for $300 million and Mrs. Harrah received a large portion of the proceeds. She went on to become a movie producer, scoring a hit with her first film in 1997, the reptilian thriller "Anaconda." The movie took in $136 million in worldwide ticket sales, according to the Web site boxofficeguru.com. A sequel, "Anacondas: The Hunt for the Blood Orchid," has taken in $42 million since its release in August, according to another Web site, the-numbers.com.56th floor, two-bedroom duplex, $4.2 million. Chester C. Davenport is the managing director of Georgetown Partners, a private investment firm based in Bethesda, Md. He is considered one of the wealthiest black entrepreneurs in the nation, with a net worth estimated in 1999 at $100 million. Mr. Davenport declined to discuss his plans for the apartment.52nd floor, two bedrooms, $2.1 million. John W. Kluge was once the richest man in America, parlaying the sale of television and cellphone companies into a huge fortune. Last year he stood at No. 17 on the Forbes list of the world's wealthiest people, with an estimated net worth of $10.5 billion. Edward A. Hopkins, an associate of Mr. Kluge, said the apartment was bought at Mr. Kluge's "direction," but declined to discuss his plans for the condo.North Building, Residences at Mandarin Oriental76th floor, five bedroom duplex, with terrace, $24 million. At 6,511 square feet, only the full-floor penthouses are larger than this duplex unit, which is under contract to Jack Silver, the president of SIAR Capital. Mr. Silver's firm runs a fund that invests in companies poised for growth. "We bought ourselves a one-of-a-kind apartment," said Mr. Silver, who expects to take possession of the condo next month. "The views from the north tower are much better," he said. "You see the entire park, you can see well into New Jersey, well into Nassau County and it's just extraordinary." Mr. Silver and his wife, Shirley, both grew up in New York. "I'm from Queens and she's from Brooklyn and we started with nothing," he said.76th floor, four bedrooms, with terrace, $15.7 million. Michael Hirtenstein, the chief executive of WestCom, is in contract to buy this apartment, which he said he chose because of the terrace and the perks of living over a hotel. "It's 32 seconds into the swimming pool," he said. "I've timed it." December will be a busy month for Mr. Hirtenstein, whose company provides bandwidth and telecommunications services to the financial industry. He said he expects to close a deal on Dec. 9 to sell an 80 percent stake in WestCom to J.P. Morgan Chase. Papers were filed with the Federal Trade Commission this month to clear the way for the sale. One week later he will close on the apartment.75th floor, six bedrooms, $15.6 million. At least 10 doctors were involved in purchases at the Time Warner Center. Topping the list is Dr. Joseph H. Levine, a cardiologist at St. Francis Hospital in Roslyn, N.Y., where he is the director of the Cardiac Arrhythmia and Pacemaker Center. In March, Dr. Levine and his wife, Karen T. Levine, formed a company called KJ Home Acquisition, which bought an apartment created by combining two units into a single 5,325 square foot condo, according to documents filed with the city and state.A lawyer for the couple, Stuart Gross, said that Mrs. Levine holds a majority interest in the company, and that other family members hold a stake as well. The Levines declined to discuss their plans for the apartment. Other doctors in the complex include dermatologists and fertility experts.75th floor, three bedrooms, $8.5 million. Nurzhan Subkhanberdin is the chairman of Kazkommertsbank, the largest private bank in Kazakhstan. The bank has reported assets of $4 billion. Mr. Subkhanberdin's lawyer, Scott Segal, said the banker plans to use the apartment during trips to New York.75th floor, two bedrooms, $2.9 million. This unit was purchased by Pacific American, an import-export company. Pacific American had offices on the 47th floor of the World Trade Center's north tower at the time of the terrorist attack. The firm's managing director, George F. Meng, told a reporter from The San Francisco Chronicle that after the first plane hit, he hunkered down in his office, waiting for rescuers and trying to keep the smoke out by sealing his door with paper towels and tape. Finally, after the south tower collapsed, he made his way down the stairs and got out of the building just before it came down. Reached at his new office at One Penn Plaza, Mr. Meng was reluctant to talk about his high-rise acquisition. "We're going to use it for the company's purposes," he said.74th floor, three bedrooms, $8.4 million. Veronica Atkins, the widow of Dr. Robert C. Atkins, reportedly sold her stake in his diet products company after his death last year. In a report in June, The Boston Globe estimated the doctor's estate at $600 million, with much of it expected to go toward financing diet research.73rd floor, three bedrooms, $8.7 million. Michael A. Spencer is chief executive of ICAP, a London-based bond trading firm. Mr. Spencer was No. 163 on a list of the wealthiest people in Britain published this year by The Mail on Sunday. The paper estimated his net worth at £253 million (the equivalent of about $470 million).71st floor, six bedrooms, $15.3 million. Gerard L. Cafesjian was executive vice president of West Publishing when it was sold to Thomson in 1996 for $3.4 billion. Mr. Cafesjian, who was born in Brooklyn, cashed out his partial ownership stake for an undisclosed amount. A collector of glass pieces by artists such as Dale Chihuly, he has given more than $50 million toward the creation of a contemporary art museum in Yerevan, Armenia.69th floor, two bedrooms, $3.8 million. Pablo Ardila, 35, took office earlier this year as governor of Cundinamarca, the Colombian province that includes the capital, Bogotá. Mr. Ardila and his parents, Jaime Ardila and Hellen Sierra Ardila, arranged for the purchase of the Time Warner apartment this summer through a company they control, Mr. Ardila said."My parents always wanted to have an apartment in New York," Mr. Ardila said by telephone from Bogotá. "It was some sort of wish and, well, my father is 85 and my mother is 71 and I kind of figured that should be something they should have." The older Mr. Ardila is the founder and owner of the Colombian tabloid El Espacio and a former governor of the province of Santander. The family also has real estate in Florida and farmland and cattle in Colombia, his son said. The older Mr. Ardila was kidnapped by guerrillas in 1993 and held for about a month before being released.68th floor, two bedrooms, $3.7 million. William Hall Wendel Jr. retired two years ago as chairman of Polaris Industries, a Minnesota company that manufactures snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles. He continues to hold a major share of stock in the company, which reported $1.6 billion in sales last year. A dedicated mountain climber, Mr. Wendel has climbed the world's seven highest peaks. He scaled the summit of Mount Everest in 1994. Mr. Wendel could not be reached.68th floor, a two bedroom unit for $3.9 million and a three bedroom unit for $4.7 million. These apartments were purchased by companies controlled by the Turkish sisters Sevil Sabanci Sabanci and Dilek Sabanci. The women are daughters of Sakip Sabanci, a Turkish industrialist who was considered the richest man in Turkey when he died in April at age 71. He was ranked last year at No. 123 on the Forbes list of the world's richest people, with an estimated $2.8 billion family fortune. The Sabancis did not respond to a request for an interview made through their lawyer.67th floor, two bedroom, $3.8 million. Alan B. Miller is chief executive of Universal Health Services, one of the nation's largest for-profit hospital operators. His compensation last year was $9,315,065, according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Miller is from Brooklyn and his wife, Jill, is from Queens. The couple live in Pennsylvania, but Mr. Miller said they see their new Manhattan pied-à-terre as a kind of homecoming.67th floor, two bedrooms, $3.9 million. Alexander M. Vik is chief executive of Xcelera, a firm based in the Cayman Islands that invests in and develops Internet-related companies. Xcelera was delisted from the American Stock Exchange last Monday because it was late in filing financial statements. The company announced the next day that its stock would begin over-the-counter trading and be quoted on the Pink Sheets, a clearinghouse for information on penny stocks. Xcelera started out several years ago as a fund specializing in Scandinavian stocks and later became an operating company running a hotel in the Canary Islands. It changed its spots again in 1999, with the announcement that it had invested in an Internet firm. Before the announcement, however, Mr. Vik's family was given options to buy one million shares of Xcelera stock at $3.25 each. The stock price subsequently soared, reaching $139.50 by the end of 1999.Taking stock splits into account, published reports in 2000 estimated the value of the Viks' option position at $415 million. The same stock was quoted at 33 cents a share on the Pink Sheets last week. Mr. Vik could not be reached for comment.66th floor, one bedroom, $1.5 million. Dennis Mangone, a senior vice president with the Corcoran Group, represented the buyers of eight apartments at the Time Warner Center, most notably Ricky Martin. He also bought one for himself.65th floor, two bedrooms, $2.6 million. Elizabeth L. Sample and Brenda S. Powers are two of the leading brokers at Brown Harris Stevens. They worked on at least three transactions in the towers.64th floor, two bedrooms, $3.8 million. C.Richard Kramlich and Pamela Kramlich. Mr. Kramlich is general partner at New Enterprise Associates, a venture capital firm that finances tech companies, and a director of the Chalone Wine Group and Zhone Technologies. The couple are known as leading collectors of video and new media art and Mrs. Kramlich is a director of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.