http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/us/politics/paul-ryans-gop-opponent-for-house-seen-as-long-shot-gets-a-boost-from-donald-trump.html
Paul Ryan’s Rival, a Long Shot, Tries to Gain an Edge From Donald Trump’s Praise - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Nehlen  Paul F III,Wisconsin,Trump  Donald J,Republican Party,Elections  House of Representatives
Aug. 4, 2016
6593
JANESVILLE, Wis. — Paul Nehlen has never spoken to Donald J. Trump. His bid to unseat Speaker Paul D. Ryan was not inspired by the Republican nominee. But when his campaign learned Monday night that Mr. Trump had just sent words praising Mr. Nehlen to his 10.6 million Twitter followers, they knew they had to run with it.“It’s kind of like a peaking thing — you don’t want it to happen too soon,” Mr. Nehlen’s younger brother, Randy, said of Mr. Trump’s remarks Wednesday night, as his brother worked his way through a bar near the shuttered General Motors plant here.If the movable nest of television cameras and political reporters who have descended on Mr. Nehlen in recent days is any indication, the timing has been just right. Almost overnight, Mr. Nehlen, 47, the director of special projects at a company that makes water-treatment products who moved to Wisconsin in 2014, has gone from political unknown to startled beneficiary of an intraparty feud.He remains an extreme long shot in the state’s primary on Tuesday. But with voter discontent with Republican leaders in Washington soaring and echoes of the 2014 primary defeat of the House majority leader, Eric Cantor, in the air, at least some voters are wondering whether Mr. Nehlen could make Mr. Ryan, once seen as a conservative reformer and elder statesman of the Tea Party movement, the next high-ranking Republican leader to fall.Mr. Nehlen welcomes the speculation. In an interview on Wednesday, he called Dave Brat, the economics professor who defeated Mr. Cantor, “an inspiration” and a hero who had helped inspire his own campaign.“He was a different David to a different Goliath,” Mr. Nehlen said.On the ground here in southeastern Wisconsin in a district dotted with factories and cornfields, there are few signs that the news media glow surrounding Mr. Nehlen has rubbed off on voters. As he crisscrossed the district on Wednesday, holding news conferences and at least one rally, there were often more members of the news media and his campaign staff on hand than actual voters. Public polling shows that Mr. Ryan is vastly more popular among Republican voters in his congressional district than Mr. Trump.“This is one of those campaigns that looks big on social media and in certain conservative media, but when you get down on the ground in Racine, in Kenosha and Janesville, it’s just not there,” said Charlie Sykes, a conservative radio host who holds sway among Republicans here. “The grass-roots Republican activists are not divided on Paul Ryan.”On Monday, Mr. Nehlen went so far as to say he would be open to deporting all Muslims from the country because, he alleged, they may hold Shariah law above the Constitution and are urged to lie by their religion. “I’m suggesting we have a discussion about it, that’s for sure,’’ he said on a Chicago radio show, adding: “We should be monitoring every mosque. We should be monitoring all social media.”Mr. Nehlen, who is far more conservative than many voters in Mr. Ryan’s district, has still managed to create headaches for the speaker, who has found himself fending off an attack from an opponent to whom he had given little thought, but who has captured the energy and resources of anti-establishment conservatives across the country.Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Nehlen has modeled himself as a politically uninitiated businessman, packaging populist attacks on Mr. Ryan in eye-catching turns of phrase and social media postings. Although he said in the interview that he supported Mr. Ryan in his 2014 re-election — and volunteered for the campaign — Mr. Nehlen said he had come to think the speaker had sold his district out in favor of donors and corporate lobbyists.Now, Mr. Nehlen has rolled out a bright yellow dump truck that urges voters to “Dump Paul Ryan,” and he calls the speaker an “extremist corporatist.” Mr. Nehlen’s first online advertisement, which opens with tracking shots of him riding a Harley Davidson, tattoos that wind down his arms (one is of a 1940s-style pinup meant to honor women who have fought the Islamic State) exposed, rails against trade agreements and inadequate border protection.“Donald Trump has courageously taken on the entrenched special interests who have sought to suppress the working people of this country,” he told reporters earlier Wednesday at a news conference just blocks from Mr. Ryan’s stately home here.Mr. Ryan, he added, “is loyal to one thing: the almighty dollar.”While Mr. Trump’s assertion that Mr. Nehlen is “running a very good campaign” has speedily intensified interest, his campaign for months has been an outlet for conservatives across the country to wage attacks on the Republican leadership.Mr. Nehlen has raised significant sums of money from outside Wisconsin. The makeup of his staff is similar; Politico has reported that it includes more than a half-dozen people who have worked for Mr. Trump’s campaign as well as veteran Tea Party operatives like Noel Fritsch and Dan Backer. Big-name endorsers like Sarah Palin and Ann Coulter will campaign here on Saturday.Mr. Ryan’s campaign remains confident that national interest is not translating to local support. The campaign’s spokesman, Zack Roday, wrote in a statement that Mr. Ryan’s “support comes from Wisconsinites. The same cannot be said of his opponent.”With the benefit of Mr. Cantor’s example, Mr. Ryan has left little to chance, broadcasting a series of polished television ads and campaigning across the district on weekends between his other responsibilities. On Thursday, he declined to pull back his endorsement of Mr. Trump — a decision that keeps him in the good graces of supporters of Mr. Trump — even though the Republican nominee has not endorsed him. On Friday, he was to take part in a blitz of local radio stations and a flurry of private constituent events across the district.Mr. Nehlen’s best hope on Tuesday, analysts and supporters said, would be a low voter turnout situation in which an influx of Democratic crossover voters could narrowly tip the election in his favor.“You don’t have to outspend the guy; you just have to catch him at a moment of vulnerability,” said Charles Franklin, a veteran analyst of Wisconsin politics. “It seems to me that Nehlen has made a considerable splash through his campaign, but it does not seem that he has quite the advantage that the Cantor situation provided for.”Mr. Ryan, 46, has been representing this area of southern Wisconsin since he was 28. He has returned here most weekends to spend time with his wife and three children and can often be seen around town. And perhaps most important, those watching the race closely say, he has managed to keep Janesville, his hometown since childhood, at the center of his political biography.And indeed, Mr. Ryan’s favorability rating among Republicans and Republican-leaning independents in the district has hovered above 80 percent in recent months, compared with just under 50 percent for Mr. Trump, according to a survey by the Marquette University Law School.Here in Mr. Ryan’s hometown, a potential upset is likewise being viewed skeptically. But then again, several locals were quick to add in conversations Wednesday, stranger things have happened.“I would be shocked if Paul Ryan lost,” said Andrew Broman, the editorial page editor of The Janesville Gazette, as he walked down South Main Street on Wednesday. But, he added: “I just don’t think people are 100 percent sure. There’s just this whole Trump factor.”