https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/us/politics/commander-in-chief-forum-highlights.html
Here’s What You Missed in the Presidential Forum - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016
Sept. 7, 2016
7759
Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump squared off from the same stage Wednesday evening — if not exactly face to face — in a televised forum on national security and veterans issues. The candidates appeared and took questions separately, with Matt Lauer of NBC as the moderator, in a broadcast from New York. The event came hours after Mr. Trump delivered a national security address in Philadelphia. Here were the highlights of Mr. Trump’s segment (or check out our live analysis):• Asked what experience has prepared him to be commander in chief, Mr. Trump began, “Well, I built a great company, I’ve been all over the world.” Pressed again, he said, “the main thing is, I have great judgment,” before arguing that he was, in fact, against the war in Iraq, citing an article from 2004, after the war began.• Mr. Trump, confronted with past comments that he knew more about the Islamic State than generals do, said that generals under President Obama and Mrs. Clinton “have not been successful.” “I think under the leadership of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, the generals have been reduced to rubble,” he said.• Mr. Trump said that because he has “a very substantial chance of winning,” he would not detail counterterrorism plans and “broadcast to the enemy exactly what my plan is.” He said that he might rely on “a combination of my plan and the generals’ plan” in formulating his approach.• Mr. Trump, whose campaign has been scrutinized for ties to Russia, said of President Vladimir V. Putin, “If he says great things about me, I’m going to say great things about him.” He cited Mr. Putin’s approval ratings. “I think when he calls me brilliant, I’ll take the compliment, O.K.?” Mr. Trump said, adding that such comments would not affect his position in negotiations. He said that an improved relationship with Russia would be beneficial because “Russia wants to defeat ISIS as badly as we do.”• Asked what kind of preparations he was doing to brush up on policy, Mr. Trump said he had been studying, but allowed, “I’m campaigning, I’m running a business, I’ve got a lot of hats right now.” He said he would be “100 percent” prepared by the time he took office, if elected.Here were the highlights of Mrs. Clinton’s segment:• Mrs. Clinton, taking the stage first, said that “steadiness, an absolute rock steadiness” was the most important quality in a commander in chief, in response to a question from Mr. Lauer. She has often taken pains on the campaign trail to depict Mr. Trump as too erratic to trust at the controls.• Pressed by Mr. Lauer on her use of a private email server while she was secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton repeated that “it should not have been done,” insisting that she had not threatened national security.• Asked about her vote as a senator to authorize the war in Iraq, Mrs. Clinton repeated that it was a mistake, then turned her attention to Mr. Trump, who has said he opposed the war. She cited an interview from the time in which Mr. Trump expressed support for the war. “My opponent was for the war in Iraq. He said he wasn’t,” Mrs. Clinton said. “You can go back and look at the record.”• Mrs. Clinton defended the nuclear agreement with Iran, saying she believed in a “distrust-but-verify” approach with the country. “That agreement put a lid on their nuclear weapons program and imposed intrusive inspections,” she said.• Mrs. Clinton said that defeating the Islamic State was her “highest counterterrorism goal,” but made clear her opposition to deploying combat troops as part of that effort. “We are not putting ground troops into Iraq ever again, and we are not putting ground troops into Syria,” she said. “We’re going to defeat ISIS without committing American ground troops.”