https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/27/world/middleeast/iran-elections.html
As Some Iranians Register Dislike at Polls, Others Do So by Staying Home - The New York Times
Iran,Voter Registration and Requirements,Legislatures and Parliaments,Assembly of Experts,Guardian Council (Iran),Khamenei  Ali
Feb. 26, 2016
2829
TEHRAN —  Iranians in middle-class areas of the capital stood in long lines to vote in national elections on Friday, with many saying they supported the few candidates seeking change who were allowed to run. But in less prosperous areas, there was much less enthusiasm, and turnout seemed lower.“At least if I vote for a reformist, I will reduce the number of hard-liners,” said Shahin Hemati, a 28-year-old dentist, expressing a widespread attitude in the more affluent areas. “If the hard-liners are voted in, this will be a nightmare for me.”In a great number of cases, however, the outcome of the voting was predetermined, as the candidates were vetted by the Guardian Council, a panel dominated by hard-liners. Thousands of candidates, most of them reformists, were disqualified, assuring they would remain in the minority and limiting President Hassan Rouhani’s ability to make promised changes to end the country’s isolation and to expand personal liberties.Iranians were voting for two separate bodies, Parliament and the Assembly of Experts, a clerical council that could elect the successor to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. He is 76 and has had some health problems, though he appears vigorous now.The semiofficial Fars news agency, quoting a source with knowledge of the situation, said that, by the afternoon, 17 million of Iran’s 55 million eligible voters had cast their votes, a number that was bound to rise much higher. The Interior Ministry announced first that the polls would stay open an extra two hours, until 8 p.m., to accommodate the crowds; later, in deference to the growing lines, it said it would add another hour.Ayatollah Khamenei voted early in the day and called upon all “who love Iran, the Islamic republic and people” to follow suit. A high turnout, he said, will “disappoint the enemies.”He appeared to be getting his wish in places, particularly in North Tehran, the most affluent section of town, where voters turned out in droves. People there tend to look at the parliamentary elections as a once-in-four-years opportunity to register their dislike for the hard-line guardians of the revolution who largely control the government.On social media, people in North Tehran shared pictures of themselves after voting, flashing victory signs and calling upon others to come out and vote. Families waiting in lines at school buildings and mosques could be overheard expressing their astonishment at the level of the turnout.State television focused on one popular polling station, Hosseiniye Ershad, a blue-tiled spectacle of Islamic architecture in North Tehran. Several well-known officials and actors could be seen waiting their turn in the lengthy lines, holding their identity cards.Many people came out to support Mr. Rouhani in his effort to break the stranglehold of the hard-liners and to begin to modernize the country. “I’m here to say yes to better relations with the world and the continuation of President Hassan Rouhani’s policies,” said one of them, Amir, 33, who like many others refused to give his surname, saying he did not want it to appear in a Western newspaper.“My vote is against those who have been in power now for over a decade; I want to give them a sign,” he added. “I don’t expect a miracle will happen. But doing nothing is not an option.”Another voter, Kasra, a 23-year-old student, said he was “shocked” by some names on the combined list of the reformists, including a former intelligence minister, Mohammad Reyshahri. “This man is no reformist,” he said.The student said he had debated whether to vote. “Now all my friends are voting, and I am joining them,” he said. “But I wish we had better options.”The disqualifications of the reformist candidates have gained a lot of attention, but the frustration of working-class voters with the economy is an equally important factor this year. Large parts of society are under pressure after years of sanctions and economic mismanagement. Despite the government’s efforts to rein in inflation, housing and transportation continue to be expensive, and the levels of disaffection are rising.“During the time of the shah, before the revolution, here in the south we had second-rate cars and second-rate schools,” said Hossein Soltani, a retired police officer who had come to a fruit and vegetable market in South Tehran. He said he did not see any difference now. “I do not vote because nobody has done anything for me.”That was a common sentiment among voters in the city’s poorer south side, many of whom decided to register their protest by staying home. Several customers interviewed at the market said they would not even think of voting, pointing at corruption and the poor state of the economy.“Uptown, they vote for reformists because they want to protest against the hard-liners,” said Saeed Taheri, who sells children’s clothes. “Here, people don’t vote because they feel left out.”At the Shahid Montazeri school near Shoosh Square in South Tehran, only a handful of voters filled in the 46 names that have to be written in for the two elections.In the school, children’s drawings decorated the walls. The images showed families waving flags saying “God is great,” accompanied by ideological slogans like, “In the spring of the revolution, we miss the martyrs.”Nader Karimi Joni, a journalist and analyst close to the reformist movement, said the reason for the different levels of turnout was simple. “The poor in the south have lost all hope for change,” he said. “But those slightly better off still expect change to come.”And there are still plenty of true believers, like Susanna Mohammadi, who is from the middle-class area of Geysha who was wearing a black chador. “I’m voting for those who stand tall against America and will protect our Islamic freedoms,” she said. “Unfortunately, the government of Mr. Rouhani is making a mess of the economy, so I’m voting conservative.”