https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/arts/music/weeknd-starboy-mania-review.html
‘Starboy’ Places the Weeknd on the Sunny Side of Debauchery - The New York Times
Pop and Rock Music,Tesfaye  Abel (Weeknd),Starboy (Album),Music
Nov. 28, 2016
5359
“Attention,” which comes near the end of “Starboy,” the new album by the Weeknd, traverses one of his most familiar subjects: psychological antagonism pegged to sexual dominance. Or maybe it’s sexual antagonism pegged to psychological dominance. Either way. “Only thing left is the sex now,” he sings with what sounds like resignation until a couple of lines later, when he adds, “Only see me on the TV or the bed now.” He’s too busy to be sorry.He tries to make up for it just afterward, assuring his partner, “You were more than a …,” followed by a certain unpublishable word with multiple meanings. But how the Weeknd sings that word — fluttery, gentle, with urgency and respect — encapsulates everything essential about his approach to pop. He is a singer who makes fireworks of lechery, sunbeams of regret. Down in the muck, the sweat, the stench, he is delivered.That the Weeknd, born Abel Tesfaye, would have an approach to pop at all was unthinkable even two years ago. On his earliest mixtapes, he was primal and emotionally removed, making narcotic R&B that snickered at the daylight. What gave that strategy added power was his singing: From the beginning, he had a transcendent, curious voice that verged on the prepubescent. Sweetness — perhaps inadvertent sweetness — has been part of his arsenal from the beginning.But then it became the main weapon. In the last two years, the Weeknd transformed from dark lord of debauchery and sin to bright lord of debauchery and sin. His subject matter was tempered slightly, but his sonic approach changed drastically. He looked to the Michael Jackson 1980s for inspiration: neon-bright arrangements, courtesy of the Swedish superproducer Max Martin and his crew. What his success — a No. 1 album, “Beauty Behind the Madness”; a pair of No. 1 songs on the Billboard Hot 100; and a handful of other hits — revealed was that delivering heavy breathing with a big smile paid dividends.That awareness permeates “Starboy” in ways large and small. On “Reminder,” he sings about it explicitly: “I just won a new award for a kids show/Talking ’bout a face numbing off a bag a blow/I’m like, ‘goddamn bitch, I am not a Teen Choice.’” But he sings it gingerly, with a minimum of malice.But the real lesson of “Beauty Behind the Madness” was to temper lascivious lyrics with ecstatic arrangements, and that tactic persists here, thanks to production from Mr. Martin, Doc McKinney, Cirkut, Cashmere Cat and the Weeknd himself, among others.“Starboy” suggests that the Weeknd’s focus on the 1980s is more than a temporary excursion, but his relationship with the sounds of that decade is also more complicated and less forthright here, revealing the sort of pop star the Weeknd wants to be — polyglot, and not hemmed in by traditional R&B frameworks, which were never of much use to him, anyhow.Some of the most exciting songs on “Starboy” are the least expected. The panting “False Alarm” serves as the highest-profile instance of dance-punk’s revival, and features some of the Weeknd’s most unhinged singing. The album closer, “I Feel It Coming,” one of a few collaborations with Daft Punk, avoids the title track’s throbbing approach. This one is tender and dreamy, an optimistic rejoinder to an album full of cold shoulders and arched eyebrows. Midway, on the back-to-back songs “Rockin’” and “Secrets,” he sings in almost a courtly manner.This knottier take on the 1980s — one that includes Jackson, but also David Bowie, maybe a little Talking Heads, and the more brooding end of quiet-storm R&B — might not have been available to the Weeknd had he not gone for full pop immersion the last time around. That was the radical makeover; this is the detail work. “A Lonely Night” is luscious, sugary, fleet pop-soul, and “Die for You” almost flirts with classic soul, with its sparkling, ambitious hook (which also recalls R. Kelly’s “Feelin’ on Yo Booty”).Given that, though, it is also less centered than its predecessor — it’s a long album with no steady mood. This is not the first transitional Weeknd album; “Kiss Land,” which preceded “Beauty Behind the Madness,” anticipated its pop explosion in scale but not in brightness or concision. It was, in essence, the skin that had to be molted before his full ascension to the mainstream. But brevity is almost too central here: Some songs (“Love to Lay,” “Nothing Without You”) have barely any verses at all, largely relying on pre-choruses and choruses. And sometimes the Weeknd sings as if he were rapping — those songs, like “Sidewalks,” are among his most cluttered.What’s most impressive, though, on this album is how the Weeknd, once an outsider, has begun to construct a world in his image. He collaborates with other travelers in the realm of melancholy skepticism: the blank-eyed Lana Del Rey, and the growling Future (though “Low Life,” their duet from earlier this year, remains their best work, and isn’t on this album). And he reaffirms how, if you can look past the glitter, there has always been a curdled heart at pop’s center.That’s reaffirmed in “Mania,” a short video piece released online last week that’s a sort of music video paste-up with a loose narrative thread. It is the sort of ancillary content that has become de rigueur in the post-“Lemonade” era. By and large, it doesn’t add narrative value, but it has one indelible moment. At the end, the Weeknd is singing his most joyful song, “I Feel It Coming,” but he’s doing so with blood dappled across his face, and dancing as if it were totally normal.