https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/16/world/americas/el-chapos-affection-for-actress-is-met-with-mockery-online.html
El Chapo’s Affection for Actress Is Met With Mockery Online - The New York Times
Social Media,Mexico,Guzman Loera  Joaquin,del Castillo  Kate (1972- )
Jan. 15, 2016
8295
MEXICO CITY — Affectionate cellphone messages left by the drug lord Joaquín Guzmán Loera for the actress Kate del Castillo have some in Mexico wondering if Mr. Guzmán, the former fugitive known as El Chapo, was interested in more than just a friendly interview with her.In a series of facetious posts on Twitter and other social media platforms, some commenters speculated on the intentions of Mr. Guzmán (believed to be in his late 50s or early 60s, and married) toward Ms. del Castillo (43, twice divorced).“No more friend zone,” read a sign in one spoof image of Mr. Guzmán posted online.Ms. del Castillo appears to reply: “I am not into you. Get over it!”Irreverent humor is a frequent riposte to news events in Mexico, and a popular way for people here to comment on the coverage of otherwise serious events.The messages between Mr. Guzmán and Ms. del Castillo, first reported by the newspaper Milenio, show that Mexico’s most wanted fugitive was obviously taken with one of its most popular actresses. He dashed off messages both formal and intimate, mostly paternal in tone rather than overtly romantic.But Mexicans tried to read between the lines, creating a bevy of memes, some lampooning the meeting between Mr. Guzmán and the actor Sean Penn that Ms. del Castillo helped arrange.The Twitter hashtag “NoSeanPenndejos” was meant as a play on words in Spanish at Mr. Penn’s expense: “Pendejo” is a vulgar pejorative. In response to his article for Rolling Stone magazine about his interview with Mr. Guzmán, Mr. Penn was criticized for his writing style, the arrangements he had made with a violent fugitive to get the interview, and his perceived naïveté.Mr. Guzmán, for his part, did not know who Mr. Penn was, according to reports of his text messages. He asked his lawyer in one leaked message, “What’s the name of this actor again?”BuzzFeed México published imagined Valentine’s Day greeting cards using phrases from Mr. Guzmán’s more fawning messages for Ms. Del Castillo.“I would care for you more than my own eyes,” one card reads, a saying that means someone would go to great lengths for another. “Have faith that you will be satisfied.”Last summer, Mr. Guzmán’s escape from a maximum-security prison, through a mile-long underground tunnel, also provided ample fodder for online parody. At that time, many people reposted an image from the animated Disney movie “Frozen” with Mr. Guzmán’s face pasted over the main character’s, declaring his freedom.One meme after his latest capture — when he avoided a raid on one of his many hide-outs, escaping through a sewer pipe only to be caught above ground after stealing a car — depicts Mr. Guzmán as another animated character from the television show “South Park.” He is wearing only underwear, covered in dirt, bruised and scared, standing near a police car that reads “Los Mochis”: the name of the city in his home state, Sinaloa, where he was captured.