http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/22/politics/bush-chooses-a-top-west-wing-aide-to-run-budget-office.html
Bush Chooses a Top West Wing Aide to Run Budget Office - The New York Times
Office of Management and Budget,Bolten  Josh
May 22, 2003
6863
WASHINGTON, May 22 — Joshua Bolten, who as deputy White House chief of staff played an important role in putting together the Bush tax plan, was nominated by President Bush today to be the administration's new budget chief."Josh Bolten is brilliant, he is tireless, he remains calm in any storm," the president said at a brief ceremony. "He is a man of complete integrity. No member of my staff has served with greater skill or earned greater respect amongst his colleagues than Josh Bolten. I'm honored that he's agreed to join my cabinet."Assuming he is confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Bolten, 48, will replace Mitchell E. Daniels as director of the Office of Management and Budget. Mr. Daniels recently resigned to return to Indiana, where he is expected to run for governor.Joshua Bolten may not be a household name, but it is well known in Washington political circles. In announcing the nomination, which was forecast today by The Washington Post , President Bush called Mr. Bolten "one of my closest and most trusted advisers."A former executive of Goldman Sachs , Mr. Bolten was the White House legislative affairs director for part of the administration of the first President Bush and served as a policy adviser for the 2000 campaign of the current president.One thing will change for Mr. Bolten in his new post: whereas he could be a quiet, if influential, West Wing adviser as deputy chief of staff, he will be very much in the spotlight as budget chief.The O.M.B. director is the president's spokesman in allocating funds to government agencies. And given Mr. Bush's commitment to lower taxes in an era of deficits, Mr. Bolten will be called upon to defend the White House's policies before lawmakers. Among people who know both Mr. Bolten and Mr. Daniels, Mr. Bolten is considered much less combative.The president, who made the announcement before flying to his Texas ranch for the holiday weekend, cited both Mr. Bolten's capital experience and philosophy in explaining his selection."Josh Bolten understands the workings of the federal government as well as anybody in this city," he said. "And most important, from his tenure as my deputy chief of staff for policy, Josh knows the philosophy and priorities of my administration."