https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/world/europe/france-manuel-valls-emmanuel-macron.html
Manuel Valls, Ex-Premier of France, Seeks to Run With Macron Movement - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Socialist Party (France),Hollande  Francois,Le Pen  Marine,Macron  Emmanuel (1977- ),Valls  Manuel,Paris (France)
May 9, 2017
7922
PARIS — In a sign of the political shake-up in France, former Prime Minister Manuel Valls on Tuesday declared his party, the Socialists, dead and announced that he was running in parliamentary elections with the centrist movement of President-elect Emmanuel Macron.But in another sign of a vastly transformed electoral landscape days after Mr. Macron’s victory over the far-right candidate Marine Le Pen, Mr. Macron’s En Marche! movement said it might not have room for Mr. Valls.“I must have missed his application,” Benjamin Griveaux, an En Marche spokesman, said ironically on Europe1 radio on Tuesday morning. “The procedure is the same for everyone, former prime minister included,” he said, before adding that Mr. Valls still had 24 hours to apply before applications closed.The confusion put En Marche leaders in a quandary over whether to show deference to an internationally known and once-powerful political figure, while asserting themselves as a new generation determined to scrap the sort of customs and deals that perpetuated the country’s elite and alienated many voters.Mr. Valls, who broke with the Socialists to support Mr. Macron in the election, said on RTL radio Tuesday morning that he would be a “candidate for the presidential majority,” and that he wished to run under the centrist party’s banner in the June elections.He said that while he would remain a member of the Socialists, that party was dead and “behind us,” and the priority now was providing Mr. Macron with “a large and coherent majority” in Parliament.“I think he has his chances,” Christophe Castaner, another spokesman for En Marche and a former Socialist lawmaker, said on Franceinfo radio, before adding that Mr. Valls would not be offered special treatment. “The republic of privileges is behind us,” Mr. Castaner said.Jean-Paul Delevoye, the head of the party’s nominating committee, told BFMTV that a candidate had already been selected to run in Mr. Valls’s district, in the Essonne department. “We will now have to see if that candidate remains or not,” Mr. Delevoye said.More than 15,000 people have applied to En Marche to run in the 577 voting districts. Applicants had to send a cover letter and a résumé through an online platform.The episode highlighted the challenge facing Mr. Macron — namely, cobbling a majority in Parliament.Although the president-elect has expressed confidence that he will gain the 289 seats needed to choose a prime minister and implement his policies without having to negotiate with the other parties, polls show he may fall short.Richard Ferrand, the secretary general of Mr. Macron’s movement, said at a news conference on Monday that the names of the party’s candidates would be announced on Thursday.Mr. Valls’s statement did not go over well with some of his colleagues, and some questioned whether he could remain in the Socialist Party if he wound up sitting with Mr. Macron’s organization in Parliament. “I’m a reformist and a progressive, but also a Socialist attached to his party and its values,” Luc Carvounas, a lawmaker, said on Twitter. “No, Manuel Valls, I won’t follow you this time.”For the first time since 1958, none of the mainstream parties qualified for the second round of the presidential election.The Socialists have been reeling after their candidate, Benoît Hamon, received only 6.4 percent of the vote in the election’s first round. Mr. Hamon became the party’s candidate earlier this year by defeating Mr. Valls in a stunning upset.On Tuesday, the Socialists held internal talks to develop a new platform.And many within Ms. Le Pen’s National Front were questioning its nationalist, anti-European Union platform after her defeat. Critics included her niece Marion Maréchal-Le Pen.Ms. Maréchal-Le Pen, who represents the southern department of Var in Parliament, made a surprise announcement on Friday evening when she said she would not stand for re-election in June.Vaucluse Matin-Le Dauphiné Libéré, a regional newspaper, published excerpts from a letter in which Ms. Maréchal-Le Pen said “personal and political reasons” had motivated her decision, including the will to devote more time to her daughter.“We have to prove to the French people that there are elected officials free and selfless, who refuse to cling to a status and their financial compensations whatever the cost,” Ms. Maréchal-Le Pen wrote. “I’m not giving up on the political fight for good.”