https://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/20/world/middleeast/syria.html
On a Bleak Holiday, Assad Makes a Display of Piety - The New York Times
Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Syria,Assad  Bashar al-
Aug. 19, 2012
9201
DAMASCUS, Syria — President Bashar al-Assad of Syria appeared Sunday at a small mosque in Damascus, with state television showing him completing his prayers for an important Muslim holiday alongside some, but not all, members of his inner circle.It was only the second time that President Assad has been shown on television since a July 18 bombing that killed Syria’s defense minister and three other senior officials.His show of piety seemed to be an attempt at normalcy during Id al-Fitr, a three-day holiday after Ramadan that is usually characterized by social visits and feasting, but it also renewed doubts about the strength and confidence of his government.Mr. Assad normally prays at the Umayyad mosque, the biggest and oldest in Damascus, but on Sunday he chose a much smaller, safer location: the Rihab al-Hamad mosque, which is next to the presidential palace.He also did not appear with all of the government’s senior officials. Though several ministers were with Mr. Assad, Vice President Farouk al-Sharaa was not among them, fueling the speculation that he had been thinking about deserting the government, especially after the recent defection of a cousin.Some rebel fighters have said that Mr. Sharaa has fled to Jordan, but the vice president’s office issued a statement on Saturday saying that he “did not think, at any moment, of leaving the country.” But he has not appeared on Syrian television for at least a week.Other absent officials included Abullah al-Ahmar, the assistant secretary general of the Baath Party, which suggested to some Syrians that either he had fallen out of favor or that President Assad had decided to keep his senior officials separated in case of a large-scale attack.This year’s Id al-Fitr has been constricted by the 17-month war, which shows no sign of ending. Normally the three-day holiday begins with shopping for clothes and sweets to bring to family and friends. The streets of Damascus are typically clogged with people, smiling, laughing, beeping their horns and arguing over parking.But many refugees are now too poor to shop, living in gardens and packed into apartments. More mosques were closed in neighborhoods filled with shrapnel-pocked buildings. Soldiers in pickup trucks moved through streets that were largely empty.Across the country, thousands of Syrians staged prayers and held antigovernment protests on Sunday. At a graveyard in Qaboun, an opposition stronghold on the northeast fringe of Damascus, a dozen men mourned sons and brothers who had been killed. Abu Mohammad, 50, was reading from the Koran and crying.“How can we find a space for joy and happiness?” he asked. “We are burying our dead people every day.”Farther south, in Alhajar Aswad, dozens of Syrian families were hiding in a school, trying to avoid the aerial bombing attacks of the last several days. They said that the rebels had controlled the district until last week, when government forces started trying to regain the area with tanks, artillery shelling and helicopter fire.Abu Khalid, 35, his wife and two children moved into a classroom a few days ago. “I don’t know what to say or how to express my feelings,” he said. “I left my house, and I don’t know what happened to it. I don’t care about the Id; every day is the same. We are alive, but expect to be killed in any moment.”He said he was particularly angry about the use of airstrikes. “No one can possibly believe this is done to kill ‘armed fighters,’ ” he said.In the Yarmouk district, which is Syria’s largest Palestinian neighborhood, residents described a holiday filled with fear and devoid of the typical pleasures. Nearby is the Tadamon neighborhood, where the fighting has been particularly intense in recent weeks.“Every Id, I usually buy fruits, sweets, chocolates, and I make Palestinian biscuits,” said Abu Amare, 45. “But this Id, I just bought a half kilo of coffee. That’s all I have to present.”Lack and loss, he and others said, had come to replace abundance and happiness. “It is shameful,” Abu Amare said, “to celebrate while our neighbors are dying.”