https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/nyregion/after-times-square-crash-going-the-extra-mile-to-help-a-victims-family.html
After Times Square Crash, Going the Extra Mile to Help a Victim’s Family - The New York Times
Times Square and 42nd Street (Manhattan  NY),Drunken and Reckless Driving,Bellevue Hospital Center,Rojas  Richard (1990- ),Police,Dunellen (NJ),Williams  Jessica (Times Square Crash Victim)
June 20, 2017
5960
Bewildered, Elaine Williams and a friend stood outside Penn Station in Manhattan, big city chaos zagging, confusion zigging, after an hourlong train journey from their small town in New Jersey. They still had to get to Ms. Williams’s daughter, Jessica. She lay crosstown in a hospital.Hail a taxi? People seemed to just stick their hands in the air. So they tried. Cabs swept past. They started walking. A police van was parked on 34th Street.Ms. Williams tapped on the glass.“Excuse me, do you know how I can get to Bellevue?” she asked.“Why do you want to go to Bellevue?” asked one of the officers, Sgt. Ryan DeRocco.“My daughter was involved in the Times Square car accident,” she replied.“Hop in,” he said.That was May 18, the day a man drove his car onto sidewalks in Times Square, plowing into pedestrians, killing one young woman and critically injuring, among others, Jessica Williams, 19, a senior at Dunellen High School in New Jersey.For one family, what has happened since has been a surge of life, beginning with a groundbreaking medical procedure that saved Jessica, a kind of internal tourniquet that trauma surgeons at Bellevue had never used before. An account of that intervention was reported in The New York Times this week by Denise Grady.Another chapter in the Williams family saga began with the words, “Hop in,” and Sergeant DeRocco’s van racing across town.Jessica had come into the city that morning with seven friends for Senior Skip Day — an unofficial holiday declared annually by the graduating class in Dunellen. Many headed to the Jersey Shore, but Jessica and her friends were not interested in partying. Instead, they wanted to visit the Central Park Zoo and have lunch.“Basically, my first time in the city,” Jessica said this week.“She went when she was little, but she doesn’t remember it,” Ms. Williams said. “We said, ‘She’s a good kid, let her go, have a good time.’”Minutes after the group reached Midtown, a man drove wildly through Times Square. A mother of one of Jessica’s classmates called Ms. Williams at work in Edison, N.J. “She said, ‘There’s been an accident in New York, and Jessica was hit, but they said she’s O.K.,’” Ms. Williams recalled this week. The two mothers headed for New York, about 40 miles away.Jessica was not O.K., as Ms. Williams would discover when she arrived on the east side at NYC Health & Hospitals/Bellevue. Her daughter was closer to death than life. She had catastrophic injuries to her abdomen and pelvis. Blood was pouring into body cavities from scores of torn blood vessels. Using a tool that had arrived in the hospital only a few days earlier, surgeons stanched the flow, a risky tactic that bought a few minutes to begin stitching her together.When she reached the hospital, Ms. Williams knew none of this.“I’m asking, ‘Is she O.K.?’” Ms. Williams said. “They say, ‘You need to come with us.’ ‘Is she alive?’ ‘You need to come with us.’”A trauma doctor described Jessica’s injuries. “I said, ‘Is she going to live?’ She’s in surgery, and that’s all they can tell me, but it’s really bad,” Ms. Williams said.The mother who accompanied her to New York shepherded the friends back to Dunellen. Jessica’s father, Wally, who has multiple sclerosis, was home. Checking in later that day, Sergeant DeRocco noticed that Ms. Williams was on her own. He arranged for two officers to stay the night with her at the hospital.“Elaine was adamant that it was unnecessary, that we should go,” one of the officers, Diana Schutz, said.Ms. Williams said: “They went to make a Rite Aid run, and said, ‘You need anything?’ I said no.”Realizing that Ms. Williams had not eaten all day, Sergeant DeRocco had given the officers money. Officer Schutz returned with a turkey sandwich, some cookies, shampoo and deodorant.Later, Ms. Williams sat in the dark and heard her daughter’s life rendered as whooshing pumps, beeping electronics. “Officer Schutz comes up behind. She says, ‘Are you O.K.?’ I said, ‘Yes, I’m fine,’” Ms. Williams said. “She said, ‘No you’re not. Come on.’”A squeeze on the shoulders. Ms. Williams sobbed.Jessica’s grandparents and other family members arrived from out of town, and the police arranged lifts to the hospital for them. Jessica is now in a rehabilitation hospital in New York, her pelvis and spine attached by a metal rod.Sergeant DeRocco, Officer Schutz and Ms. Williams text regularly. The prom that Jessica missed will be celebrated in time, Ms. Williams promised, with police officers, nurses, doctors and medical staff among the guests.Back in Dunellen, Ms. Williams said, “The whole entire town has been feeding my family for a month.”Hearing this, Jessica groaned. “How is this possible?” she asked. “Everyone is getting good food, and I’m eating hospital food.”On Wednesday evening, as the Dunellen class of 2017 graduates, Jessica will be in her hospital bed. She plans to drape a graduation gown over her hospital garb. Her mother, who has spent nearly every night in a chair next to Jessica’s bed, will receive her daughter’s diploma, wearing Jessica’s cap and tassel.“She wants me to thank people,” Ms. Williams said. “I’m going to try.”