https://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/25/books/review/25erlanger.html
'Hamas,' by Matthew Levitt - The New York Times Book Review - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Levitt  Matthew,Hamas,Palestinians,Terrorism,Islam,Palestinian Authority,Israel,West Bank,Gaza Strip,Hamas: Politics  Charity  and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad (Book)
June 25, 2006
8688
HAMAS is hot. A Palestinian branch of the Egyptian-based Muslim Brotherhood, best known in the West for blowing up Israeli civilians, Hamas won January's legislative elections in the West Bank and Gaza. It overturned the majority Fatah party, and currently runs the Palestinian Authority — an astounding democratic and regional victory for radical Islam.It had long been American and Israeli policy to get the Palestinian Authority to disarm militant and terrorist groups like Hamas. But Washington insisted the elections be held, and now Hamas is not likely to disarm itself.That presents an extraordinary policy dilemma for the United States and Israel, which "Hamas: Politics, Charity, and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad" does little to explain, let alone resolve. Matthew Levitt, now a deputy assistant secretary for intelligence and analysis at the United States Treasury Department, has other matters on his mind. His main theme is that Hamas is a terrorist organization that uses its extensive charitable and educational work to promote its foremost aim: driving Israel into the sea.Making good use of Treasury and F.B.I. analyses of Hamas and its fund-raising efforts in the United States and abroad, Levitt says he wants to destroy "the myth" that Hamas has separate military and political wings. He notes, as do Hamas leaders themselves, that there is one Hamas, and that it has a single leadership.Further, Levitt asserts that Hamas's charitable work — including clinics, hospitals and religious centers — is intended to recruit new soldiers to its jihad, or holy war, against Israel, which it steadfastly refuses to recognize. He calls Hamas-sponsored mosques, schools, orphanages and sports leagues "integral parts of an overarching apparatus of terror."What Levitt does not much discuss, however, is that the Muslim Brotherhood was founded in Egypt primarily to Islamicize the societies in which it worked, and that Hamas's essential goal remains the creation of an Islamic society in Palestine. The war against Israel is actually secondary.Washington has been relatively successful in cutting off charitable support from the United States to Hamas after it was classified as a terrorist organization. Levitt wants the rest of the world, especially the European Union and Saudi Arabia, to do the same. He argues — sensibly — that much of the money Hamas raises for charity is used to sponsor terrorism. (According to Israeli intelligence estimates cited by Levitt, some 15 to 20 percent of Hamas's budget goes for this purpose.)In a strange conclusion, Levitt argues that the world should give more aid "to be delivered by the Palestinian government as such, not by Hamas as an independent entity." This may have been a decent idea when Hamas was out of power, but now that Hamas is actually running the Palestinian Authority, it sounds bizarre.Proposals like this one demonstrate that this book is part of a special genre — a volume written in the middle of a continuing story. It appears to have been quickly massaged to take some account of major events that occurred after the manuscript was turned in.But Levitt's argument has other difficulties as well. He largely ignores Hamas's religious proselytizing. He does little to explain why Hamas became the only political alternative to Fatah. He appears to have conducted very few interviews with Palestinians or even to have examined Palestinian attitudes through opinion polls. This is a book written by an expert in financial counterterrorism, and it depends almost entirely on American and Israeli sources, including Palestinian documents captured by the Israelis.Most damaging of all, Levitt does not discuss (and never even seems to entertain) the premise that Palestinians have a right to resist a 40-year Israeli occupation and partial annexation of their land. Part of Hamas's popularity among Palestinians stems from its commitment to the resistance. The Jewish settlements on the West Bank, the separation barrier the government is constructing, restrictions on movement by Palestinians, the failure of the Israelis to support those in Fatah committed to nonviolence, like President Mahmoud Abbas, do not enter Levitt's analytical universe.Levitt researched and wrote this book while working at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, and Yale University Press is publishing it in cooperation with that organization. The institute has expert scholars, but is considered friendly to Israel. Similarly, to judge from his acknowledgements and his notes, Levitt depends heavily on analyses from the Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center of the Center for Special Studies — an Israeli nongovernmental organization created "in memory of the fallen of the Israeli intelligence community" and staffed by its former employees. (When I asked, a spokesman for the center told me that it receives some Israeli government financing.)None of this would matter if Levitt used the center's analyses critically, but he doesn't appear to. As a result, there will be readers of this book who will see it as fronting for the Israeli intelligence establishment and its views.And there's yet another problem readers may have with "Hamas." Levitt is not a natural writer; his book is padded and mind-numbingly repetitious. There are multiple references to the same meetings, organizations, charities and documents, always introduced as if for the first time. Levitt, but certainly his editor, should have been paying more attention.Those who persist, however, will have their rewards. This book contains useful information about the background of Hamas and how it has bankrolled itself, portraits of key leaders and interesting excerpts from captured documents and United States government files, including some wiretap transcripts introduced as evidence in court cases. Still, it's safe to say that "Hamas" won't be the last word on the subject.