http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/23/us/politics/23gates.html
Obama Criticizes Arrest of Harvard Professor - The New York Times
Blacks,Police,Gates  Henry Louis Jr,Obama  Barack,Race,Cambridge (Mass)
July 22, 2009
4839
WASHINGTON — President Obama bluntly accused the police of acting “stupidly” in arresting the Harvard scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr. last week after an officer had established that Mr. Gates had not broken into his own home in Cambridge, Mass.Mr. Obama stopped short of accusing the police department of racial profiling, as Mr. Gates has done.But at a prime-time White House news conference that was otherwise largely devoted to health care, Mr. Obama weighed in on the Gates case and suggested that the police should never have arrested him. He added that African-Americans and Hispanics in the United States have long been familiar with racial profiling by law enforcement.“There’s a long history in this country of African-Americans being stopped disproportionately by the police,” Mr. Obama said. “It’s a sign of how race remains a factor in this society.”For Mr. Obama, who has rarely talked about race, this was an unusual instance of openly addressing an issue of deep concern to African-Americans.The Gates arrest came up in the final question of the hourlong news conference in which Mr. Obama largely stuck to familiar talking points about why the country needs to overhaul its health care system right now. Lynn Sweet of The Chicago Sun-Times asked him about the case  and what it said about race relations in America.Mr. Obama paused, then said, “Well, I should say at the outset that Skip Gates is a friend, so I may be a little biased here.”Then he made his only joke of the evening, as he speculated about what would happen if he were seen trying to force the door of his own home? “I guess this is my house now,” he said, “so it probably wouldn’t happen.” Then, after a beat, he added, “Let’s say my old house in Chicago. Here, I’d get shot.”The president then became  serious, taking up a chronology of the events last week after the police received a report of a possible break-in at the home of Mr. Gates, a leading authority on African-American history.“The police are doing what they should,” he said. “There’s a call. They go investigate. What happens?“My understanding is that Professor Gates then shows his I.D. to show that this is his house, and at that point he gets arrested for disorderly conduct.”.“I don’t know, not having been there and not seeing all the facts, what role race played in that,” Mr. Obama continued. “But I think it’s fair to say, No. 1, any of us would be pretty angry; No. 2, that the Cambridge police acted stupidly in arresting somebody when there was already proof that they were in their own home; and No. 3, what I think we know separate and apart from this incident is there is a long history in this country of African-Americans and Latinos being stopped by police disproportionately. That’s just a fact.”The Cambridge police dropped disorderly conduct charges against Professor Gates on Tuesday, but he says he still wants a personal apology. Professor Gates has said he thinks  it was because he is black that the officer, Sgt. James Crowley, had not at first believed he lived in the upscale home.Many of Professor Gates’s friends say they believe he may still  file charges against the Cambridge Police Department.On Wednesday the union representing Sergeant Crowley said it was standing behind the officer. The union, the Cambridge Police Superior Officers Association, said in a statement that Sergeant Crowley was a “highly respected veteran supervisor” who had its “full and unqualified support.”Sergeant Crowley told The Associated Press that he had followed proper procedures and would not apologize.The union’s statement said, “His actions at the scene of this matter were consistent with his training, with the informed policies and practices of the department, and with applicable legal standards.” The police department did not respond to requests for comment late last night.