http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/20/us/politics/returning-home-to-console-lindsey-graham-joins-the-mourning.html
Returning Home to Console, Lindsey Graham Joins the Mourning - The New York Times
Graham  Lindsey,South Carolina,Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Presidential Election of 2016,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Gun Control,Blacks,Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church (Charleston  SC),Roof  Dylann Storm,Hate Crimes,Charleston (SC)
June 19, 2015
5180
CHARLESTON, S.C. —  Senator Lindsey Graham was in the passenger seat on Friday, preparing to make what would be the first of many difficult phone calls in the coming days.Mr. Graham, a South Carolina Republican and 2016 presidential hopeful, was running down a list, calling the families of the nine people who were killed Wednesday night at a historic black church.First on his list: John Pinckney, the father of the church’s slain pastor, the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, a state senator whom Mr. Graham knew.“I just wanted to say, well, I feel terrible, but nobody can feel it like you do,” Mr. Graham said, clearing his throat. “Your son — every time he walked into the room, I’d smile because I knew I was going to get something nice said, and a request to help someone other than himself.”“You raised a fine man,” the senator continued.Mr. Graham is a long-shot candidate for his party’s presidential nomination. But one of the roles of the nation’s leader, as President Obama knows too well, is consoler-in-chief. And so, after learning of the shooting while he was at a Times Square hotel, Mr. Graham canceled his campaign events and returned home to do what he could to help.“It’s hard for people, particularly in the South, to imagine somebody could go into a church, stay for Bible study, talk to people for an hour, look them in the eye, and then stand up and start shooting,” Mr. Graham said.“Even the crazy people, they don’t go into church,” he said.Mr. Graham visited the church Thursday evening, quietly making his way there with a bouquet of lilies, bowing his head, and offering a short prayer. “For comfort and healing and understanding to those who have suffered in a way that most of us can never imagine,” he said.He spent Friday morning shuttling around town for television interviews, making himself a presence on screens throughout the city. Later, his aides sent him a list of the victims’ families for him to call. And Friday evening, he arrived at a prayer vigil here, greeting residents who had come to mourn with handshakes and hugs.In the process, he also grappled with the racial history of his state, which in many ways he himself embodies. He did not have an African-American classmate until middle school, and said he did not experience full integration until high school.The importance of the end of segregation, he said, could not be overstated: “It’s not just for a black family to go to a better school,” he said. “It’s for white kids at an early age to understand that merit and leadership are not unique to one group.”And in an e-book he recently released, he recalled growing up underfoot at his parents’ bar, which sold beer to anyone of legal age but for many years expected black patrons to drink it off premises. “That eventually changed, but not until the early seventies, much later than it should have,” he wrote.He said he thinks he has earned some credibility among South Carolina’s black communities by being open to working with Democrats, and supporting some of Mr. Obama’s nominees, like Loretta E. Lynch, a black woman, who is now attorney general. Yet during his Senate re-election campaign last year, he won just 6 percent of the state’s black vote.On Thursday, Mr. Graham set off a social media firestorm when he said during an interview on “The View” that 21-year-old Dylann Roof, the accused gunman, had been targeting Christians, rather than black Americans.But on Friday morning, he clarified when asked, saying he believed it was a racially motivated hate crime. “The only reason these people are dead is because they’re black,” he said.Later, Mr. Graham described Mr. Roof as “a racial jihadist.”He also fielded questions about the Confederate flag, demurring when asked if he believed it should continue to fly on the grounds of the State Capitol. He was fine revisiting the issue, he said, but it was a decision for the State Legislature.Pressed as to whether he viewed the flag as a symbol of hate and racial intolerance, as many do, Mr. Graham referred to Mr. Roof and said, “When I see it on that guy’s car, I do.”On the question of gun control, he said he welcomed a debate on background checks for guns, but that the current background check system was broken.“We’ll talk about guns, we’ll talk about the flag, we’ll talk about anything you want to talk about, but we’re going to bury these people with dignity, we’re going to honor their memory,” Mr. Graham told one television reporter.But throughout it all, Mr. Graham could not seem to shake the question: How could someone enter a church, attend a Bible study, an then open fire, killing nine people?He kept coming back to it — when former Senator Saxby Chambliss called him to offer condolences and when he set out Friday morning, the temperature sliding past 80 degrees before the sun was even ripe in the sky.The night before, over dinner — his usual fried green tomatoes and fried chicken livers at Magnolias— Mr. Graham wondered again and again, what it must have been like to learn that your loved one had gone off to Bible study and was not coming home.“I don’t know why I’m fixated on it, but I just keep thinking about what it must be like, to pick up the phone and hear your loved one was killed at church,” he said.