https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/upshot/markets-sent-a-strong-signal-on-trump-then-changed-their-minds.html
Markets Sent a Strong Signal on Trump ... Then Changed Their Minds - The New York Times
Stocks and Bonds,Presidential Election of 2016,Standard & Poor's 500-Stock Index,Trump  Donald J,United States Economy
Nov. 18, 2016
3816
The stock market’s turbulent response to the election of Donald J. Trump — first down, then up — presents an interesting quandary: Was the election result good or bad for investors?Right now, it appears that they have made peace with the prospect of a Trump presidency. The S.&P. 500 — a broad-based index of stocks — closed last week 1.5 percent higher than its election-eve level. But this is a striking reversal from the initial judgment. Throughout the campaign, stocks rose whenever campaign developments made it less likely that Mr. Trump would be elected.Consider the four events that shifted the race most dramatically. Stocks rose sharply after the first presidential debate, one that most people thought Mr. Trump lost. Stocks rose again after the release of the video of Mr. Trump’s sexually explicit boasts. When the F.B.I. announced that it was looking into a new cache of Hillary Clinton’s emails, Mr. Trump’s electoral stock rose, but American stocks fell. And when the F.B.I. clarified that there nothing new in these emails, stocks rose on the increased prospect of a Trump loss.Each of these market responses suggests that investors believed that stocks would be worth much less under President Trump. I documented this pattern in a pre-election column, and also in a research paper in which Eric Zitzewitz, a Dartmouth economist, and I studied these data more carefully. We concluded that the market was acting as if it were pricing in a substantial “Trump discount” — perhaps as large as 12 percent.If this was right, then a surprise Trump win should have led stocks to fall, and fall sharply. Just how sharply depends how much markets had already priced in the possibility of a Trump win, and our best guess was that it would lead stocks to fall by 8 to 10 percent.Markets followed that script — at least at first. As the votes were tallied through the evening, it became clear that Mr. Trump was on track to win the election. By midnight, The Upshot’s live forecast gave him a better than 95 percent chance of winning, as did traders in political prediction markets.As predicted, traders in overnight markets responded savagely, and stocks plummeted. When the decline in S.&P. 500 futures hit 5 percent, it triggered the circuit breakers at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Foreign stock indexes were also cratering. While markets had yet to fall by as much as we had predicted, they appeared to be on their way.But then an unexpected second act began. The futures market reopened, and traders — who by now had had some time to digest the reality of a Trump presidency — reversed course. Over the next four hours, stock futures recovered around two-thirds of their earlier losses. By the time major markets in the United States opened the next morning for regular trading, stocks were almost back to pre-election levels. Stocks rose again on each of the following two days.What explains this roller-coaster?Some commentators have suggested that markets rallied in response to Mr. Trump’s relatively conventional victory speech. His emphasis on infrastructure spending, in particular, might have boosted near-term growth expectations. But the speech began just before 3 a.m., three hours after the market turnaround. The speech was simply a rehashing of Mr. Trump’s previously announced policies. A major infrastructure push might be good for stocks, but it’s hard to believe that what was said at 3 a.m. changed the odds of its implementation. Moreover, the size of the stimulus — which would most likely be partly countered by a Fed tightening — is not large enough to explain a major market movement.Another possibility is that markets were responding to news that Republicans looked likely to hold the House and Senate. But according to The Upshot’s live forecast, that was clearly a sure thing by 10 p.m., while the market turnaround occurred hours later.Others have suggested that the market rallied because the election reduced uncertainty, and markets hate uncertainty. But this is a case where our casual intuitions can be misleading. The election did resolve one uncertainty, but in a way that increased overall uncertainty. The markets went from facing the mere possibility that the riskier candidate would be elected, to the certainty that he would be. That is, risk and uncertainty rose, which typically leads stock prices to fall.Perhaps markets were responding to some other source of good news about the economy? I’ve scoured news feeds from election night for other events that might have moved markets, and can’t find anything.When conventional explanations fail, it’s time to look for something more unorthodox.Mr. Zitzewitz thinks what happened is analogous to polling error. Overnight futures markets are populated by a relatively small number of traders who are attempting to predict how the broader market will respond the next day. Just as polling errors arise when pollsters survey more Democrats or Republicans than there are in the broader population, overnight markets can send faulty signals when they reflect more bears or bulls than the broader market.In his telling, the market turnaround really gathered steam when the European financial markets opened for regular trading at around 2 a.m. (Eastern time). And it continued with greater force as more of the world’s traders awoke to discover that Mr. Trump had won and stocks were cheap.It’s a story suggesting that it’s worth listening to the signals from overnight markets, because they get it right on average. But it also suggests interpreting signals with greater caution than we showed, because they’re an imperfect gauge of broader market sentiment.My own view is that last week’s stock market gyrations reflect a more fundamental market failure.Call it a failure of imagination. Investors simply failed to imagine how they might feel when they woke up to President-elect Trump.Psychologists have documented what they call a focusing illusion. Daniel Kahneman, the behavioral economist who studies the psychology of decision-making, has described it as the idea that “nothing in life is as important as you think it is, while you are thinking about it.”In one classic experiment, subjects who were asked whether people would be happier in California than the Midwest focused on the salient differences — the winter weather — which led them to conclude — wrongly! — that Californians were happier. Perhaps investors made a similar mistake when comparing life in Trumpland with life in Clintonia, focusing on salient differences such as the temperament of each leader, while ignoring the raft of other factors that would shape their portfolios.Perhaps the reality of waking up to a new president broke this narrow focus, leading investors to look beyond their narrow concerns, to their broader confidence in the strength of American political institutions. Or perhaps, as Bridgewater Associates argued in a note to clients, investors shifted from focusing on “the Man” to “the Man’s policies.” Indeed, my colleague Neil Irwin has noted that some of Mr. Trump’s policies — including huge corporate tax cuts — are catnip for investors. It’s striking that investors didn’t focus on this until after the election.Savvy investors are meant to be forward-looking and hungry for profits. There were huge potential profits — the opportunity to buy stocks when they were cheap — available for any investor who had the forethought on election eve to imagine that their colleagues would wake up and interpret what they already knew about Mr. Trump in a more broader or optimistic light.This failure to fully imagine the implications of the new world is not rational, but it’s very human. I know that my thoughts in the days after Mr. Trump’s win are different than those that dominated my election-eve conversations.What should I make of our forecast that stocks would fall if Mr. Trump were elected? One answer is that we were right, and that — at least until midnight — markets did fall sharply. A more humble answer is that we got this call totally wrong. It’s not that we mis-measured what markets were telling us — I’m confident we got that part right. It’s that markets can change their minds, and we still lack a method for predicting that.