http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/05/us/after-21-months-bush-lifts-tariff-on-steel-imports.html
AFTER 21 MONTHS, BUSH LIFTS TARIFF ON STEEL IMPORTS - The New York Times
EUROPE,WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION,EUROPEAN UNION,BUSH  GEORGE W,INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET,ELECTION ISSUES,PROTECTIONISM (TRADE),STEEL AND IRON,CUSTOMS (TARIFF),PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2004
Dec. 5, 2003
1053
Citing an improving economy and cost-cutting efforts by domestic steel makers, President Bush lifted tariffs on imported steel on Thursday, averting a trade war with Europe but risking a political backlash in some industrial states heading into the 2004 election.Twenty-one months after imposing the tariffs and saying they would remain in place for as long as three years to help the struggling industry, Mr. Bush said he would rescind them as of midnight on Thursday. The announcement of his decision immediately led the European Union to drop its plan to retaliate with tariffs on a variety of American exports from states vital to Mr. Bush's political fortunes, including Florida and Michigan.Despite hopes within the industry that the tariffs would be lifted gradually or that steel companies would receive additional government help in offsetting the costs of union health and pension benefits, Mr. Bush announced no new steps to aid or protect steel makers and their workers.The president said he would continue a program to monitor steel imports to detect any destabilizing surges of cheap foreign steel. The United States would also continue pressing other nations to stop subsidizing their own inefficient steel producers, he said.In a written statement explaining the shift, Mr. Bush did not mention the threat from Europe or the ruling against the United States on the permissibility of the tariffs by the World Trade Organization, the international body that sets trade rules.But the raw political fact remains that the World Trade Organization made the price of protecting the steel industry too high.''Defiance had real costs,'' one of Mr. Bush's senior aides said. ''It was going to cost us exports and export jobs.'' [News analysis, Page A28.]The president instead cast the decision as driven by improvements in the outlook for domestic steel producers since he imposed the tariffs in March 2002.In his written statement, Mr. Bush said steel makers were benefiting from the economic recovery, new labor agreements, stable prices, increased efficiency and the assumption by the government of some of the industry's pension obligations.''I took action to give the industry a chance to adjust to the surge in foreign imports and to give relief to the workers and communities that depend on steel for their jobs and livelihoods,'' Mr. Bush said in the statement. ''The safeguard measures have now achieved their purpose, and as a result of changed economic circumstances, it is time to lift them.''But Pascal Lamy, the top European trade official, immediately took credit for Mr. Bush's decision, telling a news conference in Brussels, ''I am pleased to announce that all our efforts have worked.''Mr. Lamy said Europe would drop its threat of $2.2 billion in sanctions in the form of additional tariffs on American products and would also eliminate countertariffs it had already imposed on American steel.The president's decision to abandon the tariffs was welcomed by advocates of unfettered trade and by representatives of states and industries that were paying the price for the trade protection in the form of higher steel prices.''Too many Iowa manufacturers faced increased production costs because of these tariffs,'' Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said in a statement supporting Mr. Bush's decision.Thomas J. Usher, chairman and chief executive of the largest American steel company, the United States Steel Corporation, who had lobbied hard to keep the tariffs in place for the full three years, softened his position after Mr. Bush's announcement. Mr. Usher, a major fund-raiser for Mr. Bush's re-election campaign, said that while he was disappointed with the decision, he appreciated the president's promise to track steel imports closely.Mr. Usher's decision not to attack the White House over the shift opened a crack in what had been a united front between the steel companies and steel workers.Much of the increased efficiency among steel makers came about through new labor concessions intended to keep the industry afloat, analysts said. The White House's decision led organized labor to renew its argument that Mr. Bush is out of touch with the needs of working people, especially in industrial states that have been hit hard by losses of manufacturing jobs and where the economic recovery has been slow to take hold.Leo W. Gerard, president of the United Steel Workers of America union, denounced Mr. Bush's decision. It was ''a dark day for manufacturing,'' Mr. Gerard said, and a warning of what could happen to the automobile, textile, computer and other industries.''I think the implications are going to be profound,'' he said.Elected officials from steel-producing regions and several of the Democratic presidential candidates denounced the decision as a betrayal of a promise by the president to the industry's employees. They said that while there were hopeful signs for the industry, much more needed to be done to assure its survival and that leaving the tariffs in place for the full three years would have provided necessary breathing room to make further progress.''The president's action today demonstrates a callous disregard for the workers and the communities whose jobs and livelihoods have been decimated by unfair competition,'' Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the Missouri Democrat who is running for his party's presidential nomination, said in a statement. ''America needs a president who will not back down to foreign pressure when American jobs are on the line and when an industry vital to our nation's economy and security hangs in the balance.''Administration officials said Mr. Bush, by providing steel companies with more than a year and a half in which to whip themselves into shape after teetering on the brink of extinction, had thrown a lifeline to the industry.''You've got about 150,000 steel workers in this country, and they can thank this president for having a chance to compete in the future,'' said Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative.Asked at a news briefing whether the World Trade Organization ruling and the threat of a trade war had influenced Mr. Bush, Mr. Zoellick said that the president's decision had been made ''independent of that,'' but that it was ''good that we now don't have retaliation.''Whatever effect Mr. Bush's decision has on his re-election campaign in states like Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia, it provided him with at least one political victory. By showing that he was willing to use trade barriers to help an industry hurt by global competition, it helped persuade Congress last year to give Mr. Bush the authority to negotiate trade agreements with little interference from Congress, a power that President Bill Clinton had sought for years but failed to get.''The best that could be said about the steel policy is it got trade promotion authority and after that it was all downhill,'' said Gary Hufbauer, a senior fellow at the Institute of International Economics.