http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/21/us/politics/21crowd.html
From a Festive Crowd Come Chants and Tears - The New York Times
Inaugurations,Obama  Barack,Washington (DC)
Jan. 20, 2009
6440
WASHINGTON — From overhead and on television, the inaugural throng on Tuesday resembled a singular human blanket sprawling over miles. Up close, what was striking were the tears, visible up and down the Mall and the parade route, dripping from the eyes of adults, children, at all points of the day.Unlike election night, Inauguration Day is a fait accompli, not meant for uncertainty or surprise. And yet so many in the crowd spoke of their own recognition of shock, an identifiable moment in which Barack Obama’s presidency suddenly became real.When did it become real?“When I first heard his voice on a loudspeaker,” said Tiajuana Lee, a 42-year-old schoolteacher who traveled here with her family from Kentwood, La., and watched the parade on Pennsylvania Avenue. “There was something very private and almost personal about being here and then hearing that voice.”For James Peters of San Antonio, the moment was at noon, when Mr. Obama, by law, assumed the office — a scene he watched on the television of the basement coffee shop at a Courtyard by Marriott hotel about a mile from the Capitol.For Nina-Marie Nunez, 22, who traveled from Miami, the realization struck much earlier: the moment she woke up on Tuesday.“I saw the text messages, the phone calls from my friends,” said Ms. Nunez, on a Metro subway car just before arriving at the parade route. “It just started immediately, like we all had the recognition at the same time — that ‘This is the day.’ ”On the streets of Washington, the human blanket revealed itself to be more of a quilt of intimate subcultures. “Amen” choruses broke out around barroom televisions while the new president spoke. “Obama” chants erupted on corners and uniformed black schoolchildren sang “God Bless America” en route to the parade, or as close to the parade as they could get.People often referred to Mr. Obama as “he” or “him,” as if the identity of the man was so understood that it made uttering his name unnecessary.The crowd seemed increasingly quiet, even subdued in places, as it moved closer to the Capitol stage. It started out loud from a distance — packs of suburban teenagers responsively chanting “Barack” and “Obama” on a Metro subway car at 6 a.m. (more joyous than obnoxious, but most assuredly loud). Then the crowd hushed as it approached Pennsylvania Avenue, the Mall and the Capitol, or maybe people were just cold.Tracy Tolbert held the hand of her niece Osha tightly as they headed to the Mall from their tour bus that had brought them from Lansing, Mich. Ms. Tolbert spoke of a new kind of kind of unity Mr. Obama would bring to the country, tearing down racial barriers that had defined the notion of diversity strictly in terms of black and white.“I don’t think this is a one-year thing or a two-year thing,” she said. “This is an all-the-way thing.”Seven-year-old Bryana Dorsey of Durham, N.C., got hooked on Mr. Obama’s presidential campaign last summer, and when he won, Bryana begged her parents to take the family to Washington for the inauguration.So by 4:30 a.m. on Tuesday, she and her 2-year-old sister, Bailee, along with her parents — Renaldo, 39, a contract manager, and Debra, a health insurance analyst — had staked out a patch on the Mall.“This gives young African-Americans the belief they can do anything they want,” said Mr. Dorsey, nestling a swaddled Bailee inside his down jacket as Bryana napped at his feet. “Coming after Martin Luther King’s birthday, this doesn’t completely fulfill the dream, but it is one giant step toward that.”Jordan Broadway, a high school student from Lanham, Md., waiting in line at a security checkpoint on the parade route, compared this experience to what his father must have experienced when he saw the first astronauts land on the moon, only better. “Because I’m here,” he said, “and my dad wasn’t actually on the moon.”And Famious Stephenson, a chemical engineer from Los Angeles, laid down his own historic marker, saying, “In our lifetimes, this will be our version of the ‘I Have a Dream’ speech and Woodstock, all in one.”After two years of a presidential run, Mr. Obama’s milestone events — like his speech at the Democratic National Convention in Denver and his election-night rally at Grant Park in Chicago — have acquired telltale characteristics. They are large, multiracial and, for the most part, orderly extravaganzas with Obama-branded paraphernalia being hawked everywhere.There was a woman selling handmade Obama earrings ($26 a pair on the Mall), an Abraham Lincoln look-alike on stilts selling “Yes We Did” buttons ($5), a woman selling Hillary Rodham Clinton T-shirts bearing the message, “Madame Secretary, 2016,” among others.Abdul Jihad, 64, was selling Obama buttons and shivering as passers-by headed to the Capitol a few blocks away.“They said it was going to be a cold day in hell before we had a black president,” he said, blowing into his cupped hands. “Well, here it is. Best day of my life, though. I don’t even feel it, I’m so happy.”Then he resumed chanting his sales pitch. “Come on people, buy your buttons,” he said. “The new president needs help. I’m just doing my best to help the economy.”