https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/22/us/politics/paul-ryan-house-speaker-freedom-caucus.html
Paul Ryan Wins Backing of Majority in Freedom Caucus for House Speaker - The New York Times
Ryan  Paul D Jr,United States,United States Politics and Government,House of Representatives,House Freedom Caucus,Republican Party,Congress
Oct. 21, 2015
3832
A strong majority of anti-establishment conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus voted on Wednesday night to support Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin for House speaker, assuring that he will have the votes to secure the post next week and averting a leadership crisis for Republicans.Mr. Ryan indicated that he was prepared to seize the gavel and try to bring unity to his party, which has been riven over how House leaders exert authority over members. That fight had become so bitter that it forced the resignation of Speaker John A. Boehner and derailed the candidacy of the majority leader, Representative Kevin McCarthy, to replace him.“I’m grateful for the support of a supermajority of the House Freedom Caucus,” Mr. Ryan said in a statement, referring to the two-thirds vote he received.The apparent coalescing of support behind Mr. Ryan, 45, comes at a critical moment for Congress, with votes expected to begin as soon as next week over raising the government’s borrowing authority, the first of several pressing fiscal matters.While the vote fell short of the four-fifths majority required for the Freedom Caucus to deliver its official endorsement, lawmakers said it did deliver the party unity that Mr. Ryan had set as a condition for accepting the position.In a statement, the Freedom Caucus said its members had disagreed with one another about other conditions Mr. Ryan had set for serving as speaker. “While no consensus exists among members of the House Freedom Caucus regarding Chairman Ryan’s preconditions for serving,” the group said in its statement, “we believe that these issues can be resolved within our conference in due time.”The group added, “We all know that Washington needs to change the way it does business, and we look forward to working with Paul and all our colleagues to enact process reforms that empower individual representatives and restore respect to our institution.”Two other party factions are expected to formally give their support by Friday, meaning that Mr. Ryan will be selected as the Republican nominee next Wednesday and officially affirmed as speaker in a floor vote the next day.One hard-liner, Representative Raúl Labrador of Idaho, said that roughly two-thirds of the Freedom Caucus had pledged to vote for Mr. Ryan for speaker, and he called the outcome an “offer of support.”Mr. Labrador, however, also warned that the group’s backing was far from unconditional.“We want to make sure he understands that this is not about crowning a king,” he said. “It’s about working together.”Emerging from the meeting, another member of the Freedom Caucus, Representative Justin Amash of Michigan, said of the vote, “It’s sufficient for him to become the next speaker, in my opinion.”Mr. Ryan, a fiscal policy expert who has insisted that he never wanted the speaker’s gavel, is chairman of the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee, which he has long said is his dream job.The vote by the Freedom Caucus seemed to effectively end a leadership crisis that has thrown the House into disarray over the last few weeks.The unexpected resignation announcement by Mr. Boehner late last month was followed by Mr. McCarthy of California abandoning his own bid for the position in the face of conservative opposition.After that, Mr. Boehner had other party leaders plead with Mr. Ryan to reconsider his position.Mr. Ryan said on Tuesday night that he would reluctantly accept the speakership, but only if his Republican colleagues united behind him and agreed to several demands.These included changes to a procedure for removing the speaker from office that would deprive rebel lawmakers of a potent weapon.Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, began that procedure, a motion “to vacate the chair,” against Mr. Boehner in July. Mr. Meadows could have forced a vote within two days, but stopped short of doing so.A spokesman for Mr. Ryan said he did not believe any speaker could serve successfully without a change in that procedure.“He believes there needs to be a change to the process for a motion to vacate the chair,” the spokesman, Brendan Buck, wrote in a briefing paper for reporters.“No matter who is speaker, they cannot be successful with this weapon pointed at them all the time.”Earlier on Wednesday, a number of Freedom Caucus members expressed resistance to Mr. Ryan’s demands, particularly the one regarding the motion to vacate the chair. And some members said they were worried that Mr. Ryan did not really want the job.“If you listen to Paul, what you hear is ‘I don’t want the job,’ ” said Representative Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, a founder of the Freedom Caucus. “He went from ‘I don’t want it and I won’t take it’ to ‘I don’t want it, but I might take it under certain terms and conditions.’ The preface to both of those statements is still ‘I don’t want it.’ ”That opposition softened significantly Wednesday night as members began to say they would support Mr. Ryan. Representative Marlin Stutzman, Republican of Indiana, issued a statement Wednesday evening saying that Mr. Ryan’s record on fiscal issues had won his vote.“Since coming into office in 2010, my single biggest focus has been on our annual deficits and our long-term debt,” Mr. Stutzman said in the statement. “In my observation, no one is more qualified to tackle these issues than Chairman Ryan.”He added, “There is no doubt that Paul Ryan is the person best positioned to lead our party.”By thrusting the decision into the hands of his colleagues, Mr. Ryan seemed to make a calculated gamble that the Freedom Caucus would not want to be seen as derailing his candidacy and prolonging the leadership crisis among House Republicans. But there was also a risk in pushing too hard against a group whose members have shown a willingness to shut down the government or even default on federal debt obligations while standing on their beliefs.The Freedom Caucus previously endorsed Representative Daniel Webster, a little-known Florida lawmaker who has promised to completely change the way the House does business, giving more power to committees and the rank and file. Mr. Webster has virtually no chance of winning, but said on Wednesday that he was still a candidate.Mr. Ryan had set a Friday deadline for three key groups — the relatively centrist Tuesday Group, the mainstream conservative Republican Study Committee and the Freedom Caucus — to endorse him and agree to his demands. Only the Freedom Caucus had expressed any doubt about supporting him.While it takes only 148 of 247 Republicans to win next Wednesday’s vote, it requires 218 votes on the floor to win the speakership. By tradition, Democrats will vote for their leader, Nancy Pelosi.Mr. Ryan’s announcement that he was willing to serve came as a relief to many of his colleagues, who wondered if anyone would step up and take the job under the current circumstances.“There’s only one guy, I think, who can unite us,” said Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma, who counts Mr. Ryan’s in-laws as constituents and has known the family for years.“There’s one guy with national stature. I think Paul Ryan is the best guy to put 218 votes-plus up on the board.”