https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/04/nyregion/lirr-derailment-atlantic-terminal-brooklyn.html
L.I.R.R. Crash in Brooklyn Injures More Than 100 - The New York Times
Railroad Accidents and Safety,Long Island Rail Road Co,Brooklyn (NYC),Metropolitan Transportation Authority
Jan. 4, 2017
7668
Every workday for the past eight years, Audrey Foster has taken the same Long Island Rail Road train from her home on Long Island to Atlantic Terminal in Brooklyn, a busy hub serving suburban and New York City commuters.But Ms. Foster, 52, noticed something unnerving as she rolled into the station at about 8 a.m. on Wednesday.“The train just didn’t stop,” she said.Instead, it rammed into a bumping block, with the front striking a room beyond the track and the first two cars derailing, injuring more than 100 people, according to officials. Still, they said, the accident could have been far worse.“We were fortunate,” Daniel Donaghue, a deputy assistant fire chief, told reporters. A broken leg sustained by one woman appeared to be the most severe injury caused by the crash, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said.The derailment, which disrupted the morning commute for thousands of riders, was reminiscent of a deadly crash in September in which a New Jersey Transit train plowed through a bumper at the end of a track at Hoboken Terminal, killing a woman and injuring more than 100 people.Passengers involved in the Brooklyn episode and those in the station at the time described the terrifying moment of impact and the disorienting scene that followed.“All of a sudden it was just like ‘boom!’” said Wendy Gerzog, 57, who was traveling to work in Lower Manhattan from Lawrence, N.Y.Steben Medina, 47, was having coffee at Atlantic Terminal when he heard the crash and then a series of screams.“The entire structure started shaking,” he said. “I thought a bomb had gone off or something.”Inside the train, which was carrying 600 to 700 people from Far Rockaway in Queens, passengers who had begun to stand in the aisles while waiting to get off were sent tumbling by the jolt. One rail of Track No. 6, on which the train was traveling, had sliced through the floor of a car, officials said.“People just went flying,” said Donette Smith, 55, who was sitting in the train’s second car.Ms. Gerzog, who was on the first car and whose arm was injured, sat in a waiting room at Brooklyn Hospital Center hours after the crash, her left arm in a sling. “I was on the bottom of the pile,” she said.When the train came to rest, she said her car was tilted at upward angle. “We couldn’t get off because the train was all raised up by the door, up from the platform,” she said.She said she sat inside the damaged car and waited for emergency medical workers to take her out.Many passengers described the station filling with smoke after the crash. Most were able to walk off the train, though others were taken away in stretchers and wheelchairs. Some wore neck braces and others were bleeding, passengers said. A few limped or clutched at their arms as they tried to get their bearings after the crash.“The impact was bad,” said Tracie Brown, 44, a passenger who was treated for neck and back injuries at Brooklyn Hospital Center. “But the worst part was the panic of not knowing what happened.”Officials said that 106 people had been taken to hospitals, including Brooklyn Hospital Center, Kings County Hospital Center and NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital. Ms. Foster, who had an aching back, was among those treated at Brooklyn Hospital Center.“I just thank God there were no fatalities,” she said.Thomas F. Prendergast, the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees the Long Island Rail Road, said officials did not know why the train failed to stop where it was supposed to.There were plans to interview the train’s operator, who was responsible for stopping the train at the station — there is no other way for it to stop. Mr. Prendergast said he did not know whether the train was equipped with cameras.The Federal Railroad Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board said they had sent investigators to the scene.Mr. Cuomo visited the crash site on Wednesday. “What happened with the operator, we don’t know,” he said. “Obviously, there’ll be an investigation: what happened, why the operator didn’t stop the train before it struck the bumping block.”The governor noted some similarities to the Hoboken crash, but said that had been much worse. “That train was coming in much faster, did much more damage, hurt many more people,” he said.The Long Island Rail Road is the nation’s busiest commuter railroad, with about 300,000 weekday passengers on lines that stretch from Long Island’s eastern tip to Manhattan. Atlantic Terminal is Brooklyn’s busiest transit hub, a nexus for nine subway lines in addition to the suburban trains.The railroad’s last fatal crash was in 1950, when two  trains collided in Queens on the night before Thanksgiving, killing 79 people. Metro-North Railroad, which is the country’s second-busiest railroad and is also operated by the authority, has had two fatal crashes in recent years.In the Hoboken accident, federal officials determined that the train had accelerated suddenly as it pulled into the station during the morning rush. The engineer told investigators that he woke up on the engine floor with little memory of what had happened. His lawyer later said that the engineer had severe sleep apnea that had not been diagnosed.Officials did not say how fast the Long Island Rail Road train was going when it crashed, though passengers who ride the line on a regular basis said it felt as if it was moving at its normal speed.One passenger, Aaron Neufeld, said he did not think anything was amiss as the train neared Atlantic Terminal.“It seemed like a typical approach to me,” Mr. Neufeld, 26, a paralegal from North Woodmere, said. “People were standing and walking toward the doors just like usual.”He said he had been sent across the car in the chaotic jumble caused by the crash, his head snapping forward, then back. He described “a kind of eerie quiet” as people composed themselves before rushing out of the train.He said friends had warned him to be careful where he sat after the Hoboken crash. Now, he said, he would be sure to sit in the last car.“You don’t expect something like this to happen at all,” he said, “until it happens to you.”