http://www.nytimes.com/1997/05/06/world/terror-suspect-freed-by-us-flies-to-jordan.html
Terror Suspect Freed by U.S.; Flies to Jordan - The New York Times
ISRAEL,JORDAN,HAMAS,ABU MARZOOK  MOUSA MOHAMMED,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,DEPORTATION,IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES,TERRORISM
May 6, 1997
8696
Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, the political leader of the Hamas movement jailed in Manhattan for 22 months on suspicion of terrorism, was deported yesterday and flown to Jordan aboard a United States military jet.His release ended what had become an embarrassing case for both the United States and Israel. Both nations had sought to keep him in jail, but did not come up with persuasive evidence of his complicity in a series of violent attacks by Hamas.In an unusual agreement, Mr. Abu Marzook relinquished his permanent residence status in the United States and said he would not contest the terrorism accusations that had prompted his initial detention. In exchange, the United States released him from solitary confinement and allowed him to go to Jordan.Mr. Abu Marzook was detained in July 1995 at Kennedy Airport because his name was on an American ''watch list'' of people suspected of terrorist activities. He was never linked to any specific terrorist act, and he insisted that his fund-raising activities were separate from Hamas attacks.His release came after complicated negotiations between his lawyers and the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service over how the allegations would be handled.Under the agreement signed April 25, both sides agreed to withhold comment until he arrived in Jordan, which announced last week that it would accept him.As soon as the plane landed, Mr. Abu Marzook's lawyers and American officials offered sharply differing assessments of the deal.''He refused to admit to the charges because they are false and baseless,'' said Michael Kennedy, the lawyer for Mr. Abu Marzook. ''He remains the head of the political Hamas, will continue to exercise that leadership role, and I think that is going to help the peace process.''The United States, on the other hand, said it believed that by pleading no contest to the terrorism charges, Mr. Abu Marzook had not cleared his name. ''The United States Government considered him deportable for engaging in terrorist activities,'' said Russell A. Bergeron, Jr., the I.N.S. spokesman.The deal to release Mr. Abu Marzook was the same one he himself had offered after the American authorities detained him in 1995.Soon after his detention, Israel requested his extradition, saying it wanted to try him on charges of helping raise money and mastermind a series of bloody attacks for which responsibility was claimed by the military wing of Hamas.Mr. Abu Marzook maintained that he had no connection with violence and that the money he raised supported projects like clinics.Israel dropped the extradition request last month, saying a trial would disturb the already beleaguered peace talks and open Israel to further attacks. But Mr. Abu Marzook's lawyers maintained that Israel did not have enough evidence for a trial, and had acted out of fear that it would lose a high-profile case.Officials at the Justice Department declined to discuss the quality or quantity of evidence in the case.  ''The deportation was taken after a review of options,'' a Justice Department spokesman said last night.But senior American officials have been expressing annoyance with Israel for saying for nearly two years that it would pursue the case and then suddenly dropping it.In January, Mr. Abu Marzook stunned Israel and the United States by saying he would no longer fight extradition and would be willing to face trial.When Israel decided not to try him, the search was on for a country that would accept him. The United States, which in early 1995 had pressed the Jordanians to expel him, reversed itself and urged Jordan to take him back. Israeli officials said they welcomed the decision by King Hussein to take him.Immigration Service officials said Mr. Abu Marzook was taken from the Manhattan Correction Center at about 10 P.M. on Sunday and escorted onto a military jet early on Monday for the 11-hour flight to Amman, the Jordanian capital.Once in Amman, one of the first things Mr. Abu Marzook did was telephone his wife in Falls Church, Va., using a cellular phone. His wife, Nadia el-Ashi, said that he had expressed surprise that he had flown the whole way in his orange prison jumpsuit and that he could not wait to get out of it.''He was innocent from the very first moment,'' said Mrs. Ashi, who lives with the couple's six children in Virginia. Four of them are American  citizens by birth, while the other two and Mrs. Ashi are all legal residents. Mr. Abu Marzook, a 46-old-businessman, had been a legal resident of the United States since 1982.Mr. Abu Marzook released a three-page statement through his lawyers expressing some bitterness at the way the judicial system treated him, saying it stemmed from an American prejudice against Muslims and Palestinians.