http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/28/world/after-the-war-riyadh-a-saudi-editor-who-offended-clerics-is-ousted-from-his-post.html
AFTER THE WAR: RIYADH; A Saudi Editor Who Offended Clerics Is Ousted From His Post - The New York Times
RIYADH (SAUDI ARABIA),SAUDI ARABIA,WATAN  AL,KASHOGGI  JAMAL A,SUSPENSIONS  DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS,NEWSPAPERS,BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES,FREEDOM OF THE PRESS,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,ISLAM,CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS,TERRORISM,NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA,COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET
May 28, 2003
9040
In the first sign that it has already wearied of the public debate over the possible roots of extremist thought in Saudi Arabia, the government ordered the removal today of the the editor in chief of Al Watan, the daily newspaper which had been most outspoken on the subject.The editor, Jamal A. Khashoggi, one of the country's leading experts on political Islam, declined to comment on his firing. There was also no government announcement, but an official of the Ministry of Information official confirmed it without elaborating on the reasons.The news quickly electrified participants in the virulent debate that has erupted since coordinated suicide bombing attacks on May 12 killed 25 people at three housing compounds.Those who believe that religious institutions propagate extremist ideas were dismayed by Mr. Khashoggi's dismissal, while members of the religious establishment felt vindicated.The paper, partly owned by prominent descendants of the late King Faisal, had opened its pages to those who wished to examine the prevalence here of Islamic militancy, which ranges from shunning Westerners in its most benign form to violent attacks against them.Mr. Khashoggi himself set the tone in a column written just hours after the bombs exploded. ''Those who committed yesterday's crime, which will have a painful impact on the peaceful nature of our nation, are not only the suicide bombers,'' he wrote, ''but also everyone who instigated or justified the attacks, everyone who called them mujahedeen, even everyone who ignored this irregular direction in our religion and nature, or tried to find excuses for it.''The paper has been one of the leading voices calling for openness and reform in the kingdom. After the attacks, Al Watan columnists discussed a plethora of highly sensitive issues, including questioning the central role of the religious police in Saudi society and whether the country gave too much credence to the writings of Ibn Taimaya, a Muslim thinker of the early 14th century.Ibn Taimaya argued that that religious scholars could assume the task of declaring holy war if their rulers failed to. He is considered a main inspiration for the conservative Wahhabi brand of Islam prevalent in the kingdom.The paper also opened an unprecedented petition on its Web site addressed to the country's rulers, asking them to take action to curb extremist religious discourse.Conservative Muslims were particularly incensed by Al Watan's cartoons. One showed a man in the garb adopted by some militant Muslims -- a short, calf-length robe of the kind the Prophet Muhammad is believed to have worn, and a straggly beard. The man was depicted as a suicide bomber, except the sticks of dynamite around his waist were labeled ''fatwas,'' or religious decrees.The debate over Al Watan had grown so heated, in fact, that a senior Muslim cleric who sits on the country's official fatwa council issued a religious fiat earlier this week declaring it a sin to buy the paper.Critics of Al Watan said Mr. Khashoggi went too far in using the paper to paint the clergy as bearing responsibility for extremism.''He has been exceeding red lines drawn not only by the government, but by the social heritage of this society,'' said Mohsen Awajy, a lawyer active in conservative Islamic causes.A group of about seven senior clerics went to Crown Prince Abdullah, the country's de facto ruler, late last week to complain about news coverage of the bombing and about Al Watan in particular, Mr. Awajy said.Although newspapers here are privately owned, editors and reporters serve at the whim of the ruling family.The press falls under the direction of Prince Nayef, the interior minister, who has made no secret of his displeasure over criticism of the religious establishment. At his first news conference after the attacks, he was asked by a Saudi journalist whether there was any thought being giving to reshaping the religious police. The prince denied this, and then rebuked the journalist, saying: ''As a Saudi, you should be ashamed to be asking this question.''Editors from other newspapers who attended a private meeting with him later said he was even angrier, shouting at them that he did not want to see any more articles criticizing Wahhabism or Ibn Taimaya.No one at Al Watan, which means ''The Homeland'' in Arabic, could be reached for comment. The chairman of the board of directors, Prince Bandar bin Khalid, a grandson of King Faisal and the son of Prince Khalid, the governor of Asir Province, where the paper is based, was traveling outside Saudi Arabia and could not be contacted. The paper's general manager did not respond to several telephone messages.But members of the staff who were excited that their paper had been so central to the debate over extremism were deflated by the firing of Mr. Khashoggi, who was educated at Indiana State University and spent almost eight years covering Osama bin Laden and extremist Islamic movements for Al Hayat, an Arabic newspaper in London. He was appointed editor in chief in March.''How can this happen now, at this time?'' asked one writer at Al Watan. ''They are doing what the radicals want. A lot of journalists are asking what is going to change in Saudi Arabia. If they fired Jamal Khashoggi, nothing is going to change.''