http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/13/business/mutfund/taking-the-long-view-paid-off-in-the-short-term-too.html
Taking the Long View Paid Off in the Short Term, Too - The New York Times
Stocks and Bonds,Mutual Funds,Hotchkis & Wiley,Matthew 25 Fund Inc,Oakmark Funds
Jan. 13, 2017
3650
Patience paid dividends for three of the top-performing mutual funds of the fourth quarter.The managers of the trio — the Matthew 25 fund, the Hotchkis & Wiley Small Cap Value fund and the Oakmark Global fund — cling to investments longer than competitors. Their turnover ratios — the percentage of holdings they replace each year — are lower than average. The typical actively managed stock fund tracked by Morningstar sloughs nearly 65 percent of its portfolio annually. Not one of these three hits that rate.Mark Mulholland of Matthew 25 is unusually persevering even in dogged company. He sells only about a fifth of his fund’s portfolio annually, and he says that one stock — Berkshire Hathaway — has been among his holdings for the 21 years he has run the fund.Like Warren E. Buffett, the billionaire investor who leads Berkshire, Mr. Mullholland started out as a hard-core value hound; he sought stocks that were selling for far less than his estimate of their worth. But, he said, he concluded early on that the best companies also had the potential to grow in the long term and that an investor often had to pay more for them.“You make money by buying the exceptional — an exceptional business, exceptional management or an exceptional price,” he said. These days, Mr. Mulholland calls himself a “price-conscious” purchaser of both value and growth stocks.Consider Goldman Sachs Group, which was recently the fund’s top holding. Its shares, like those of many companies, had lagged in some years since the financial crisis. But Mr. Mulholland said he saw an exceptional business — “the premier financial brand in the world.” When he bought in, the stock was trading at what he deemed a discount. It returned nearly 50 percent in the fourth quarter.Mr. Mulholland likes to stick with winners and will let them swell into a sizable stake. Goldman recently accounted for 9 percent of his fund’s assets, and several years ago Apple was nearly 18 percent. It’s now also about 9 percent.He runs the fund out of a small office in suburban Philadelphia, and he and his wife are its biggest shareholders, he said. “I invest for myself and whoever wants to ride along with me.”Matthew 25, with an expense ratio of 1.06 percent, returned 19.3 percent in the fourth quarter, compared with 3.8 percent for the S.&P. 500.James B. Miles and David E. Green of the Hotchkis & Wiley Small Cap Value fund also have reaped returns lately from financial companies. Two recent winners were SLM Corporation — the student lender better known as Sallie Mae — and KeyCorp, an Ohio bank holding company.Mr. Miles said he and Mr. Green had learned, in 20 years of running the fund together, that many investors will take “whatever current earnings are, good or bad, and extrapolate them to an unreasonable level.” Thus good news can lead to irrational exuberance, and bad news to unjustified avoidance. “If the market says this company is underperforming and will underperform forever, that’s often an opportunity,” he said.That kind of thinking had prevailed, Mr. Miles said, with financial companies, which, as a group, accounted for about a third of the fund’s assets on Nov. 30. “Banks haven’t been given much hope since the financial crisis, and their earnings haven’t been spectacular. So they’ve been inexpensive, relative to the market,” he said. “But they’ve been improving their capital position — they’re fundamentally less risky. And with the new administration coming in, there’s potential that some of the regulatory regime will relax. That would allow them to generate greater returns on capital, which would improve earnings.”Expectations that President-elect Donald J. Trump will bring different policy priorities to Washington may have also given a lift to private prison companies, Mr. Miles said. The GEO Group, a prison operator based in Florida, was another recent winner for the fund and is a top holding.“The private prison industry is the low-cost source of supply,” Mr. Miles said. “If there’s more immigration enforcement, you’d think there’s going to be additional demand.”The managers of the Hotchkis & Wiley fund neither favor nor shun any particular sector or industry. They will consider any small-cap company that has a strong balance sheet and “importance to its customers’ success or the broader economy,” Mr. Miles said. The fund returned 17.9 percent in the fourth quarter. Its A shares carry an expense ratio of 1.29 percent.Tony P. Coniaris, a portfolio co-manager at Oakmark, sleuths for value investments, too, but his fund’s mandate is broader than that of the Hotchkis & Wiley offering. It can own stocks of any size, and its recent top holdings included such whales as Bank of America, General Motors and Google’s holding company, Alphabet.Mr. Coniaris said that three tenets unify the investment approach of all the funds in the Oakmark lineup. They invest in shares trading at discounts to the fund managers’ estimates of their intrinsic value. The stocks’ issuers must show “a clear path to growing per-share value over time,” he said. And their management teams must “think and act like owners.”He added that, when valuing stocks, Oakmark doesn’t just seek statistical cheapness, such as a low price-earnings multiple. Its fund managers and analysts dig deeper. That can lead them to picks like Alphabet, which may seem unusual for a value hunter.When valuing the stock, the Oakmark team members made several adjustments, Mr. Coniaris said. They subtracted the company’s big hoard of cash. They also factored out its money-losing “moonshot investments,” like its effort to develop a driverless car. And they estimated that the market had misunderstood the value of YouTube, the company’s video-streaming service.“If YouTube were to monetize its viewership like a cable company, it could be worth roughly $300 a share,” Mr. Coniaris said. Alphabet has lately traded above $800.“The way we see it is, if you back out all that stuff, you’re getting the core search business at a big discount.”Mr. Coniaris’s fund, with an expense ratio of 1.17 percent, returned 7.6 percent for the quarter. The fund’s sibling, Oakmark Global Select, also thrived in the quarter, returning 7.4 percent. The duo’s holdings overlap, but Global Select is more concentrated, with only 20 holdings, while Global has 35.