http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/29/arts/29king.html
Words  That Shaped a  Vision  of  Equality:  King's Papers - The New York Times
King  Martin Luther Jr,Archives and Records,Sotheby's Holdings Incorporated,Auctions
June 29, 2006
1257
The words are carefully written in pencil on top of a page torn from spiral notebooks: "Loving Your Enemies." They are scribbled hastily on a torn, creased sheet, cutting across its ruled lines: "We come to the seat of government." They are squeezed into the yellowed margins of annotated books: "Religion must work here." They are written on a frayed slip of paper, folded as if long-carried in a wallet: "Gandhi speaks for us."And they appear in red ink boldly printed across a telegram invitation from the White House to witness the signing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965: "Important!!"They are in college exam booklets, on stationery from the Waldorf-Astoria, on mimeographed handouts, on files of alphabetized index cards  titled Abelard, Agape, Agnosticism and America. And they are sometimes reused, evolving from a quickly penned phrase on the back of a typescript  —  "Today the whirlwinds of revolt are shaking our nation"  —  into something more resonant: "The whirlwinds of revolt will continue to shake the foundations of our nation until the bright day of justice emerges."Such are the words of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., found in his sermons, letters, speeches and notes. And seeing so many of them together  — displayed over 20,000 square feet at Sotheby's in New York —  makes it possible to come in intimate contact with an extraordinary mind that shaped the civil rights movement and gave new texture to the American dream. These writings  — selected from a 7,000-page cache of Dr. King's papers — create a chronicle of his life from 1946 until his assassination in 1968.I don't know of another exhibition that has had this kind of serious, unsentimental, documentary force. It is not a museum show designed to tell a story or make a point. It is a collection of personal papers that were originally going to be auctioned tomorrow for what Sotheby's estimated would be $15 million to $30 million.Then, last week, Morehouse College in Atlanta, Dr. King's alma mater, acquired the collection for an undisclosed sum. The auction was canceled. The exhibition remained open to the public, but it will close at 1 p.m. today, leaving just the morning hours to see this display intact before it is dismantled and the documents leave for their  new home.They should be patiently and carefully read. Dr. King's Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech is worked through in multiple drafts, each slightly different in tone and pace. Multiple letters from  Richard M. Nixon, vice president at the time,  firmly support Dr. King's enterprise with more fervor than might have been guessed. There are also less sympathetic letters, including one from the cartoonist Al Capp, suggesting that Dr. King "bend at least some of your efforts to cleaning up your own mess."There are also school transcripts, including —  shockingly for one of the great speakers of the 20th century  —  a grade of C earned in Public Speaking 1 at Crozer Theological Seminary in Pennsylvania in 1949.Elizabeth Muller, who worked on the collection for Sotheby's,  said the project took nine years, and involved combing the house of Dr. King's widow, Coretta Scott King,  for scraps of paper, finding, most notably, Dr. King's "sermon box" with nearly 100 sermons in his hand, most from the 1950's. Each took about 15 hours to prepare; they provide the intellectual and rhetorical repertory  —  a set of ideas, phrases and allusions  —  that shaped his civil rights vision. The sermons have a remarkable sobriety,  a kind of realistic skepticism,  about human character.In one outline Dr. King writes,  "Life is a continual story of shattered dreams." In another he notes, "We are continuously confronted with circumstances which we did not have the freedom to choose, but" with "which we are forced to deal." He calls evil a "stark, grim and colossal reality." And he cites a need for "accepting responsibility for your actions."But these sermons are also suffused with an unremitting advocacy for the powers of love.There are display cases of books and papers dealing with Gandhi, and it was his approach to nonviolent protest, of course, that embodied for Dr. King both realism and faith. Neither can be done without."The law cannot make a man love me  —  religion and education must do that," Dr. King writes in a 1956 speech, "but it can keep him from lynching me."His approach was an almost religious exercise: protest without rancor, bear punishment without resentment and have faith that change would come  — this at a time when laws forbade interracial dancing and state troopers eagerly attacked peaceful marchers. "We must respond," Dr. King wrote in 1956 when he was organizing the Montgomery bus boycott, "with an understanding of those who have oppressed us."The religious character of Dr. King's civil rights efforts is well known of course, but the extent of his religious writing emphasizes how central it was. It also helps illuminate that great divide of the mid-60's, when the civil rights movement started to splinter.When the movement was focused on the South, on legislated denigration and hatred, Dr. King's religious model was powerful: we are all of us flawed, all of us struggling, but by demonstrating our faith and conviction, we will be able to change the world, we will have our shared humanity recognized. And fitfully, and over time, it was.But in the Northern cities, where, after 1950,  more than a million and a half blacks had moved in just a little more than  15 years, Dr. King's religious model was less resonant. Here the legal structure did not, for the most part, institutionalize racism.Yet poverty and social racism were commonplace, as were anger and resentment. There were also pathologies developing within the black communities like those perceived by the Moynihan Report about the black family. How are images of Israelite redemption and Christian love to deal with complex issues of economics and culture, vocational training and social programs?Dr. King was actually pelted with eggs by blacks in Chicago. He didn't seem to "get it." The growth of the Nation of Islam and the development of Black Power  tapped into a very different religious model. It could resemble vulgar Marxism. Race was spoken about as if it resembled notions of class. A revolution was required. It was not simply a matter of outlawing discrimination; it was a matter of requiring that its effects be remedied and the white power structure dismantled.As these papers demonstrate, Dr. King's rhetoric too began to change. He began to think of poverty as a civil rights issue. Some of his colleagues began to worry over his linking the rights movement to his opposition to the Vietnam War. But in his famous speech at Riverside Church in Manhattan in 1967, displayed here, he said, "We were taking the black young men who had been crippled by our society and sending them 8,000 miles away to guarantee liberties in Southeast Asia which they had not found in southwest Georgia and East Harlem."He looks around the world, he proclaimed, and sees a "pattern of suppression" in American policy, aiming to protect the "immense profits" the nation earns from "overseas investment."What a different way of thinking these statements reflect, how much less clearly the remedies are defined, and how far the implied vision of redemption is from Dr. King's dream of his children being judged by the content of their character, not the color of their skin. This makes his earlier self seem of another era. The later Dr. King seems more like our contemporaries. Such views, now familiar, risk making the idea of civil rights so broad as to absorb all forms of perceived injustice.But soon afterward, with his murder, everything came to an end. Would Dr. King's thinking have changed if he had lived past those apocalyptic years? His personal papers, with their evidence of his persistent questioning, leave the possibility open. It is one of the many tragedies of  that troubled time that we will never know.