http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/nyregion/ahmad-rahimi-pleads-not-guilty-in-manhattan-bombing.html
Ahmad Rahimi Pleads Not Guilty in Manhattan Bombing - The New York Times
Chelsea  Manhattan Bombing (2016),Terrorism,Rahimi  Ahmad Khan
Nov. 17, 2016
5502
Ahmad Khan Rahimi, the New Jersey man accused of setting off a bomb in Manhattan on Sept. 17 that injured more than 30 people, pleaded not guilty on Thursday to federal charges stemming from that attack and a failed attempt to explode a bomb nearby.The charges were contained in an eight-count indictment that was returned on Wednesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.The bomb that caused the injuries had been left under a trash bin on West 23rd Street in the Chelsea neighborhood. The unexploded bomb was found on West 27th Street.The indictment covers both episodes, charging Mr. Rahimi, 28, with the use of a weapon of mass destruction and the attempted use of such a weapon. Both counts carry a maximum sentence of life in prison.If Mr. Rahimi is convicted of two other counts in the indictment, both of which charge use of a destructive device in furtherance of a crime of violence, he will face a mandatory life sentence, according to the office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.In court on Thursday, Mr. Rahimi’s lawyer, Peggy Cross-Goldenberg, told Judge Richard M. Berman that her client would enter a not guilty plea. When the judge asked Mr. Rahimi if that were so, he replied, “Yes, sir.”A prosecutor, Nicholas J. Lewin, told Judge Berman that discovery materials in the case included two Federal Bureau of Investigation reports of statements by Mr. Rahimi to law enforcement that were “made across multiple days after his arrest.”It is not known what information he provided to the authorities, but Mr. Lewin’s statement suggested that Mr. Rahimi spoke to them more than once. The New York Times reported last week that while Mr. Rahimi was hospitalized in Newark after his arrest, the F.B.I. used the so-called public safety exception to question him before he was represented by a lawyer.Under the exception, agents may conduct questioning without advising a suspect of his rights. An F.B.I. agent also questioned Mr. Rahimi briefly in the ambulance that took him to the hospital after he was shot several times during his capture on Sept. 19.Mr. Lewin said the government would also be providing the defense with clips taken on closed-circuit television cameras that depict Mr. Rahimi’s movements on the day of the bombings, including one that shows him carrying and planting the bombs.Ms. Cross-Goldenberg, a federal public defender, had no comment after the hearing.Mr. Rahimi, a naturalized American citizen from Afghanistan, was brought to Manhattan last week from New Jersey State Prison in Trenton, where he had been held in a medical unit after recovering from gunshot wounds at University Hospital in Newark. Last month, he was arraigned from his hospital bed via a video conference on New Jersey state charges related to the attempted murder of police officers; he has pleaded not guilty in that case.“It’s clear that Rahimi’s goal was to bring fear and destruction to innocent people,” William F. Sweeney, chief of the F.B.I.’s New York office, said in a statement on Thursday.In the federal case in Manhattan, Judge Berman did not set a trial date for Mr. Rahimi, whose surname has also been spelled Rahami in government documents. Mr. Lewin suggested a trial could be held in late winter or early spring.The federal indictment does not mention activities Mr. Rahimi has been accused of in New Jersey.Earlier on Sept. 17, a bomb placed in a trash can exploded before a charity race in Seaside Park, N.J.; no one was injured in that attack. The next day, multiple explosive devices were found in a backpack near the entrance to the New Jersey Transit station in Elizabeth. An F.B.I. laboratory analysis of fingerprints recovered from materials in the backpack showed a match with Mr. Rahimi’s, the authorities have said.