https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/24/nyregion/push-to-lift-hourly-pay-is-now-serious-business.html
Push to Lift Minimum Wage Is Now Serious Business - The New York Times
Minimum Wage,Presidential Election of 2016,New York City,Fast Food Industry,Sanders  Bernard,O'Malley  Martin J,Cuomo  Andrew M,New York State
July 23, 2015
7456
It started in New York City as what seemed a quixotic drive confined to fast-food workers. But the movement to raise the hourly minimum wage took root in other parts of the country, and is emerging as a significant, and divisive, element in the presidential campaign.Just this week, workers in Los Angeles County and Washington, D.C.; employees of fast-food chains in New York State; and members of the University of California staff all learned that they may soon be earning at least $15 an hour, more than double the federal minimum wage of $7.25. Several other cities — including Chicago, Kansas City, Mo., Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle — have already raised the lowest legal wages paid to workers in those places.Now, the minimum wage has carved out a major presence in the presidential election. Republicans and many business owners are dead set against it, but the issue has taken a central spot in the stump speeches and public pronouncements of Democratic candidates, for whom giving the middle class a “fair shot” has become a mantra.One of those candidates, Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, introduced a bill on Wednesday that would raise the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour. Mr. Sanders, more than any other contender for the Democratic nomination, has highlighted the subject repeatedly during his campaign, and he did so again at a rally in Washington on Wednesday where he discussed the bill.Former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland has also voiced support for a $15 federal minimum wage. Another Democrat in the race, Hillary Rodham Clinton, however, has not. Mrs. Clinton has supported raising the minimum wage, and she told fast-food workers in Detroit last month, “I want to be your champion.” But she stopped short of endorsing a $15 hourly minimum, and she has come under attack from the left wing of her party for not doing so.Led by some large labor unions, the movement to make $15 the floor for hourly wages has revealed how deeply divided Americans are on the issue. It has also raised the prospect of much wider variations in how people are compensated for the same basic work in different parts of the country. And it has infuriated companies large and small, which say it compels hard choices between raising prices and firing workers.Owners of restaurants and other businesses argue that a steep rise in the cost of low-skilled labor would hurt many of the workers a higher minimum wage was supposed to help by forcing cuts in their hours or the elimination of their jobs altogether.David Sulz, a partner in four Burger King franchises in the New York City suburbs, said he was “scared” by the potential ramifications of the pending minimum-wage increase.“There’s a limit to how much somebody will pay for a hamburger,” Mr. Sulz said. “I think the end result is that I’m going to wind up cutting employees. I’ll automate as much as I can. I’ll get new technology that’s out there, and that’s going to replace a lot of people.”Mr. Sulz estimated that the increase in New York could push the labor portion of his costs to 40 percent, from about 30 percent now. He said it was unfair of New York’s governor, Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, to bypass the wishes of the State Legislature and single out his industry.“I feel like we’re being picked on, like I’m doing something wrong because I happen to run a fast-food restaurant,” Mr. Sulz said. “But what have I done? I run a business and provide jobs and I support my community. I’m at my wit’s end and a little depressed about the whole thing.”Ruth Milkman, a labor historian and distinguished professor at the City University of New York Graduate Center in Manhattan, traced the roots of the push to increase the minimum wage to the Occupy Wall Street movement that pulled hordes of protesters into the streets of New York City four years ago. “The reason this is getting traction now is that there’s a lot of concern in the broader population about growing inequality,” she said.“There’s no possibility of doing this in Congress, so they’ve said, ‘Let’s take this to the blue states,’ ” she added. “It’s no accident that it’s happening in New York and California and Washington State.”Labor leaders argue that large increases are needed at the bottom of the pay scale to lift workers out of poverty, especially in cities where living costs are high. Kendall Fells, organizing director of the “Fight for 15” campaign the Service Employees International Union’s “Fight for 15” campaign, said it was unclear where the next increase would come, but he cited Atlanta, Las Vegas and Tampa, Fla., as places where progress had been made.After seeing what came of a modest strike by fast-food employees in New York City two and a half years ago, Mr. Fells said, workers elsewhere “are going to turn around in their cities and start demanding 15.”Mr. Cuomo is among the Democratic leaders who have linked arms with workers pressing for $15 an hour. Republican politicians have generally taken the opposite stance. Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, who is running for president, has even called the minimum wage one of the Democrats’ “lame ideas.”Mr. Cuomo circumvented Republican opposition in the Legislature by appointing a wage board to determine whether workers in the fast-food industry should earn more than they currently do. On Wednesday, the three-member board recommended raising the minimum wage for those workers to $15 in steps over the next few years.Labor organizers have said several other states have provisions allowing for the appointment of similar wage boards. New Jersey, whose governor, Chris Christie, is vying for the Republican presidential nomination, is one.Mr. Cuomo said in an interview on Thursday that it was not unfair to apply the increase to fast-food workers because the industry was one of the “grossest examples” of not paying employees fairly. He said McDonald’s, as a corporation, made billions of dollars in profits while its workers in the state collect $700 million in public benefits annually.He hinted that he would press harder in the coming year for an across-the-board increase in the state’s minimum wage, which is $8.75 an hour.Mr. Cuomo said fast-food restaurants did not have the option of moving, so must find ways to adjust to the higher local wages.Chipotle, which owns more than 1,800 stores, has felt the impact of higher wages in cities like San Francisco and Washington. Chris Arnold, a spokesman for the company, said Chipotle had raised prices to offset higher wages in San Francisco, “but that was not the only reason.”In San Francisco, he said, the sum that rent takes out of revenue is almost twice as large as for the average Chipotle. So when wages in San Francisco increased 14 percent this year from 2014, Chipotle raised prices in its 10 stores there by 10 percent.But in Washington, where the minimum wage also rose this year, Chipotle did not increase its prices. “Labor is just one of a number of costs of doing business, and all those costs need to be balanced,” Mr. Arnold said. “So the impacts of changes like this can vary.”In Seattle, where the minimum wage is to rise to $15 an hour over the next few years, David Jones said he had felt no negative effects so far at the three Subway sandwich shops and six Blazing Onion restaurants he owns in the area. But he said he was concerned about what would happen next year when Seattle’s minimum wage will be higher for franchises and bigger businesses than it is for smaller ones.“My wife and I have promised that we’re not going to cut our employee hours; we’re going to focus on service,” he said. But he said he expected many of his fellow owners to reduce hours and raise prices “because they will be desperate.”Mr. Jones said he was trying to work with other franchise owners in Seattle to help them figure out how to manage costs. “Next year is the big test,” he said.