https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/mike-pence-vice-president.html
Mike Pence Emerging as a Commanding Figure in Trump Administration - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Pence  Mike,Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Vice Presidents and Vice Presidency (US)
Nov. 11, 2016
7018
WASHINGTON — Vice President-elect Mike Pence made his name as a relentless conservative critic of the federal government. Soon he will essentially be running it.Given the dearth of hands-on Washington experience in the inner circle of President-elect Donald J. Trump, Mr. Pence, a former Republican congressman, is emerging as a commanding figure in the administration taking shape as well as the chief conduit between Capitol Hill and the White House.“My guess is he will be one of the most involved, day-to-day, managerial vice presidents in the history of the republic,” said Representative Jeb Hensarling, a senior Republican from Texas and a close ally from Mr. Pence’s days on Capitol Hill.The announcement on Friday that Mr. Pence, who served 12 years in the House after his election in 2000, would be taking over management of the transition from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey was just more reassurance for top congressional Republicans who intend to rely heavily on him as their point man at the Trump White House. His selection as Mr. Trump’s running mate this summer calmed congressional Republicans jittery about the Trump candidacy.Comparisons with Dick Cheney, considered a uniquely powerful No. 2 when he served with President George W. Bush, are already being made.Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, said he had encouraged Mr. Pence to attend weekly party lunches in the Capitol just as Mr. Cheney did.“We all really like Mike Pence,” Mr. McConnell said. “If you’ve asked any of us who’ve served with him, everybody likes him.”To Washington Republicans, Mr. Pence is one of them, someone who can speak the argot of Congress and knows a C.R. (continuing resolution) from a C.B.O. score (Congressional Budget Office cost estimate).“Trump had the vision and the passion and he understood about the forgotten man and woman,” Mr. Hensarling said. “Mike is a guy who can take that vision and passion and turn it into policy and then turn that policy into legislative language and then turn that language into bills that can reach the president’s desk.”Mr. Pence also called Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, this week, but the two former congressional colleagues did little beyond exchange pleasantries and agree to meet in the future.To Democrats, it is more than a little worrisome that Mr. Pence, a strong Christian conservative on social as well as fiscal issues, will be playing such a central role in the new administration.“Mike Pence is one of the most ideologically rigid individuals I’ve served with,” said Representative Steve Israel, a senior Democrat from New York, who is retiring. “Trump is putting the extreme right wing at the center of gravity in his administration, and that should be worrying to mainstream voters.”Mr. Pence came to Congress as a rebel willing to challenge the priorities of his own party’s leadership. He was part of the leading edge of Tea Party-style Republicans eager to shake up Washington, but landed in the party leadership before leaving to run for governor of Indiana, a post that has provided him with government executive experience that could also prove valuable in his new role.In the House, he was among the leaders of the effort to ban earmarks — spending sought by lawmakers for their home districts, popular at the time — and he was a strong advocate for cutting government spending over all. He opposed the expansion of Medicare to include prescription drug coverage — then a major priority of his party and the Bush White House. He led the Republican Study Committee, then the most conservative House Republicans, and was beaten badly in his first leadership race — a campaign that Mr. Hensarling notes he managed — before being elected to the No. 3 post of Republican Conference chairman in 2008.As governor, Mr. Pence also instituted aspects of the Affordable Care Act in his state and accepted federal money to do so — a departure from how many other Republican governors responded to the new law. That experience could give him added expertise as the Republican Congress moves to dismantle the health program that is a signature of the Obama era and a top target of Mr. Trump’s.Mr. Pence could also serve as a handy buffer between Mr. Trump and Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who clashed with Mr. Trump during the campaign but in recent weeks has sought to minimize any differences. In remarks after the election, Mr. Ryan has gone out of his way to note his close relationship and frequent contact with Mr. Pence.“Mike Pence is a good man, a principled conservative, and he will make a great vice president,” Mr. Ryan told reporters this week.Delegating significant authority to Mr. Pence jibes with Mr. Trump’s image as more of a chairman-of-the-board figure who leaves the details to others — and in Washington, there are a lot of details.But Mr. Pence’s friends do not expect to him to push his role beyond what is expected, and they say he remains very deferential to Mr. Trump.“Mike knows he was elected vice president, not president,” Mr. Hensarling said. “He knows who the boss is. Trump’s the boss.”But in Washington, Mr. Pence is quickly coming to be seen as a highly empowered No. 2.