https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/12/arts/music/ornette-coleman-greatest-hits.html
Ornette Coleman’s Greatest Hits - The New York Times
Jazz,Coleman  Ornette,Music
June 11, 2015
8636
Ornette Coleman’s varied and provocative recordings reflect many bands and changes of sound, from post-bebop to symphonic music to an original version of funk. Here is a brief selection of high points, a dozen tracks from his late-1950s beginnings to 2007, including some of the most durable and influential jazz of the 20th century.Listen to our Spotify playlist of Mr. Coleman’s music here.“When Will the Blues Leave?” From “Something Else!!!! The Music of Ornette Coleman,” recorded in 1958 for Contemporary Records in Los Angeles with an early version of Mr. Coleman’s band, including the trumpeter Don Cherry, the pianist Walter Norris, the bassist Charlie Haden and the drummer Billy Higgins — just before he subtracted the piano from his group sound.“Turnaround” From “Tomorrow Is the Question!,” an original blues that stayed in Mr. Coleman’s live repertory to the end.“Lonely Woman” This ballad is Mr. Coleman’s most famous composition, from “The Shape of Jazz to Come,” recorded in 1959. It was Mr. Coleman’s first album for Atlantic Records, and it included the other members of his working quartet: Mr. Cherry, Mr. Haden and Mr. Higgins.“Ramblin’ ” An untraditional kind of blues, from “Change of the Century,” recorded in late 1959.“Embraceable You” A rare example of Mr. Coleman recording music written by anyone else: a version by his quartet in 1960 (with Ed Blackwell replacing Mr. Higgins on drums) of the George and Ira Gershwin standard.“Free Jazz” If you understand the word “free” as a kind of absolute condition, this music, recorded in 1960, isn’t quite that. It finds its regular rhythm and uses some predetermined material. But it was a double-quartet, album-length, mostly improvised landmark.“Broadway Blues” From “New York Is Now,” in 1968, with the addition of the saxophonist Dewey Redman to Mr. Coleman’s musical circle.“What Reason Could I Give” From “Science Fiction,” 1970, a ballad to rival “Lonely Woman,” including the singer Asha Puthli.“All of My Life” From “Skies of America,” his symphonic work recorded in 1972.“Theme From a Symphony (Variation One)” A new sound for a new era recorded with Mr. Coleman’s new electric band, Prime Time, and released on the album “Dancing in Your Head” in 1977.“Word From Bird” From “Song X,” recorded with the guitarist Pat Metheny in 1985.“Sleep Talking” From “Sound Grammar,” the album that won a Pulitzer Prize in 2007, with his late-period group quartet, including the bassists Greg Cohen and Tony Falanga as well as Denardo Coleman on drums.