https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/12/opinion/obama-still-believes-in-unlimited-war-isis.html
Congress, Don’t Be Fooled; Obama Still Believes in Unlimited War - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),United States Politics and Government,House of Representatives,Senate,Terrorism,United States Defense and Military Forces
Feb. 11, 2015
5901
PRESIDENT OBAMA is going before Congress to request authorization for the limited use of military force in a battle of up to three years against the Islamic State. On the surface, this looks like a welcome recognition of Congress’s ultimate authority in matters of war and peace. But unless the resolution put forward by the White House is amended, it will have the opposite effect. Congressional support will amount to the ringing endorsement of unlimited presidential war making.Whatever else they decide, the House and Senate should revise the White House initiative to guarantee that it won’t have this tragic result. First do no harm; before proceeding with a debate over the limits of our continuing military engagement, Congress should make it impossible for future presidents to evade its final decision.The problem is the double-barreled position advanced by Mr. Obama. He asserts that he already has sufficient congressional authority for an open-ended war with the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS. He bases this claim on an expansive reading of Congress’s 2001 resolution authorizing President George W. Bush to make war on Al Qaeda after the 9/11 attacks. As long as this resolution remains on the books, Mr. Obama claims, he can continue fighting, even if Congress never agrees to a new resolution.For political cover, Mr. Obama now wants Congress to grant him new authority, and yet he opposes repeal of the 2001 authorization in exchange for that new authority. Although he has pledged to refine, and ultimately repeal, the old resolution, he has failed to follow through on similar commitments in the past. If Congress contents itself with another empty promise, it is highly likely that the old act will remain on the books when the new resolution runs out in 2018. This will allow Mr. Obama’s successor to reassert his current position and continue fighting on the basis of the authority he inherited from the Bush era.In short, “Heads I win; tails you lose.” Whether or not Congress passes Obama’s new resolution, the next president can continue making war indefinitely.By 2018, the 2001 authorization will be 17 years old. But Congress’s refusal to repudiate it in 2014 will give it new legal vitality. After all, Mr. Obama isn’t hiding his claim that the old resolution suffices for the new battle — if Congress doesn’t repeal it, the next president’s lawyers will predictably assert that lawmakers were persuaded by Mr. Obama’s expansive claims.This is especially true since Mr. Obama’s current proposal endorses the very formula his lawyers used to transform the 2001 resolution into an open-ended grant of power. To see this point, it’s important to recall a bit of history. When Mr. Bush went to Congress in 2001, he initially demanded authority to make war “to deter and pre-empt any future acts of terrorism or aggression against the United States.” But Congress refused to grant him this carte blanche, restricting his war-making authority to groups and countries “associated” with the 9/11 attacks.Nevertheless, both the Bush and Obama administrations have used the wiggle word “associated” to transform the resolution’s limited grant into the wide-ranging war-making authority that Congress explicitly denied the president in 2001. White House lawyers have accomplished this power grab by claiming that a host of groups are somehow “associated” with Al Qaeda by virtue of increasingly distant connections to the surviving remnants of Osama bin Laden’s organization.Despite this unhappy history, Mr. Obama’s current proposal explicitly endorses this power-grabbing formula. Not only does his proposal fail to limit the battlefield to Iraq and Syria, but it also authorizes him to take the fight beyond the Islamic State to battle any “associated persons or forces,” including “any closely related successor entity.”If Congress goes along, the next administration will claim that lawmakers have implicitly accepted the more expansive use of the formula as it was developed under the 2001 act. The White House will then use it to start new wars by asserting ever-more-remote “associations” between new terrorist groups and the old Al Qaeda.These are legalistic points. They can easily get lost in headline debates between hawks and doves on whether Mr. Obama should be allowed to put American boots on the ground if he thinks it’s necessary to defeat the Islamic State.People who take the Constitution seriously, on both sides of the aisle, must not allow this to happen. They should insist on the repeal of the 2001 resolution and an explicit repudiation of the “associated forces” doctrine. Only then will the next president be required to return to Congress to gain its consent if he or she wants to continue the war past the 2018 deadline. If it fails to take a stand now, its sham debate will generate another destructive cycle of distrust that will further alienate Americans from their representatives.