https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/01/world/europe/judge-opens-london-inquiry-into-death-of-ex-kgb-officer.html
Alexander Litvinenko’s Death Examined as Ties Fray Between Russia and West - The New York Times
Litvinenko  Alexander V,Russia,Poisoning and Poisons,Great Britain,Malaysia Airlines Flight 17,KGB,Litvinenko  Marina,Murders and Attempted Murders,London (England)
July 31, 2014
1650
LONDON —  At a time of icy relations between Britain and Russia, a senior judge in London on Thursday opened a high-profile public inquiry into the poisoning death of the former K.G.B. officer Alexander V. Litvinenko, saying that allegations of Moscow’s involvement would be “of central importance.”Mr. Litvinenko, a fierce critic of President Vladimir V. Putin, died in November 2006 at age 43 after ingesting polonium 210, a rare radioactive isotope that investigators later found in high concentrations in a teapot at a central London hotel where he had met with Russian associates.For all the attention surrounding the formal opening of the inquiry, it will not hear from witnesses until January, after a further procedural session in September. Some of the hearings will be closed, moreover, because of national security considerations, and some of the findings will remain secret.The British government has said it is a coincidence that the inquiry, conducted by Judge Robert Owen, has been allowed to proceed as tensions between Russia and the West have risen to their highest since the Cold War. Until last week, the British authorities, seeking improved trade and diplomatic ties with Moscow, had resisted attempts to open an inquiry into Mr. Litvinenko’s death.As the Ukraine crisis deepened, particularly since the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 two weeks ago, Prime Minister David Cameron has sought to position himself at the forefront of European efforts to impose an array of sanctions on Russia.Judge Owen said on Thursday that it was “inevitable” that at least part of his final report would remain secret.“I make it clear now that I intend to make public my final conclusions on the issue of Russian state responsibility together with as much as possible of my reasoning in that regard,” he said.Marina Litvinenko, Mr. Litvinenko’s widow, who has campaigned for years for an investigation and has blamed the Kremlin for her husband’s death, repeated her praise for the inquiry on Thursday.“Everybody all around the world will know the truth,” she said.The British authorities have sought the extradition of Andrei K. Lugovoi, another former K.G.B officer, to answer murder charges. Mr. Lugovoi, now a member of the Russian Parliament, has denied the charges. Russia has refused to extradite him on the grounds that its Constitution forbids such action against Russian citizens.Russia has criticized the British inquiry and said it would not recognize findings based on secret evidence.