https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/insider/jason-polan-sketches-a-city-in-perpetual-motion.html
Jason Polan Sketches a City in Perpetual Motion - The New York Times
Blogs and Blogging (Internet),SoHo (Manhattan  NY),Keaton  Diane,New York City
July 14, 2017
137
One recent sunny Thursday afternoon in SoHo, the artist Jason Polan sat on the scaffolding-shaded steps of an upscale health club to continue his quest to sketch the entire population of New York. Noticing a young woman in a billowy black blouse talking on her cellphone a few feet away, Mr. Polan loosed a heavy-point black Uni Ball onto a small drawing pad in long, nimble strokes.Although this particular sketch was destined for his blog, many have appeared in The Times, where Mr. Polan has been a contributor since 2008. His latest project is a series depicting the many ways to read a newspaper and appears on Page A3 daily. Today’s illustration is No. 131.His blog, which occasionally intersects with The Times, is an open-ended collection that he calls “Every Person in New York.” For nearly 10 years Mr. Polan has commemorated stray moments within the routines of the city’s millions of inhabitants, an undertaking he began in 2008 to improve his drawing skills and to create “a project that included everyone.”It has taught him, among other things, how to better read the city’s unyielding flow. “I’ve gotten pretty good at being able to predict when people are going to move, and speeding up my drawing process, but she’s hanging for a while,” he said of the woman he was sketching, shifting his pen’s attention to his subject’s light-brown toy poodle.Intuiting a departure time is crucial for Mr. Polan, who has a strict policy of sketching only in real time. “I don’t want there to be opinion added to it,” he said.His drawings exude, in unbroken but flexible lines, the momentum of a Manhattan streetscape with only brief moments of stillness. Those pauses can last minutes or over an hour, enough time for fully textured, impressionistic portraits. But more often Mr. Polan’s drawings are of scenes that pass in seconds: a father ordering hot dogs for his stubborn children, or Diane Keaton trying to hail a cab.Because self-aware subjects can ruin a drawing, Mr. Polan tries to avoid standing out. He has an average height and build, and his sketching uniform is a T-shirt, jeans, sneakers and black wire-frame glasses, sometimes with a solid-color baseball hat. If people notice he is drawing them, “I’ll either immediately stop, because I don’t want them to feel weird, or I’ll give them the drawing so that they know I really just wanted to draw them,” he said. “I’m pretty shy.”Just as Mr. Polan returned to the young woman for some detailing, she strolled away, the dog prancing ahead. “The dog looks crazy!” he laughed as he finally looked down at his rendering — a pile of wiggly-looking blobs with multiple sets of ears. This was the 50,000th or so New Yorker Mr. Polan had drawn, and if it had been earlier in his career, he said, he would have allowed himself to go back in and color her shirt black. “But not anymore,” he said. “When my drawings are missing a hand or something, it’s because people walk away. I think it’s cheating for me to add things I’m not looking at.”He scanned SoHo’s sidewalks for his next subject — a search that took several minutes because the corner of Crosby and Prince Streets has no stoplight to force passers-by to pause.Mr. Polan prefers to depict the mundane experiences that tie us all together, like waiting at a stoplight, rather than the exceptions, like an outré outfit. “I want things to be smart, but I think sometimes that if things are too clever it’s like, All right, enough already!” he said. “There’s a balance I’m trying to get to. I don’t know how successful I am, but I’m trying to get better at that.”He has plenty of practice ahead: Part of why he undertook “Every Person” is that it’s a catalog he can never, and doesn’t want to, complete.He finally spotted a woman perched outside an empty storefront across the street, with shopping bags piled on her lap up to her chin. But just after his hand began to skate across the pad, the woman got up. On paper she was a vague outline of heaped bags with a head-shaped lump on top, but Mr. Polan nonetheless lifted his pen. “That’s it,” he sighed. “She’s gone.”