https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/insider/adam-ferguson-australian-outback.html
A Photographic Odyssey in the Australian Outback - The New York Times
Australia,Photography,Aborigines,Rural Areas
July 13, 2017
2471
Adam Ferguson, an Australian photographer, has covered geopolitical issues the world over, from India and Greece to Afghanistan and, more recently, Niger. Earlier this year he returned to his home country and embarked on a three-month, 12,000-mile odyssey across Australia’s vast interior. His resulting report, “Through the Outback,” explores the land and its people — and the complicated, evolving relationship that binds them. I find the international perception of Australia to be quite limited, especially that of the outback. The way it’s portrayed in pop culture — it’s so often a caricature, a parody. This assignment was an opportunity, after a decade spent mostly abroad, to go back to my homeland, to my own country, and to try to dispute some of those popular perceptions.In some ways, the outback isn’t Australian anymore. It’s become a kind of myth. And the point of the trip, for me, was to inquire what that myth has now become.When you’re on assignment, there’s a constant pressure to produce — to make a photograph or a set of photographs every day. And so often, as a photographer, I’m trying very avidly to orchestrate a specific path to be productive.When I started this trip, I was working with a producer in Sydney, and she was helping me set up shoots in advance — visits to specific cattle musters, mining operations. The photos were good, but I didn’t feel like they were good enough. They felt contrived.I also started off traveling in a camper van, which seemed like a good idea at the outset but ended up feeling very isolating. At the end of each day, I’d leave the scene and return to the caravan park; I didn’t feel like I was fully accessing many of the communities.Eventually I ditched the camper van and rented a four-by-four instead. I started visiting country pubs and staying in roadhouses, or with people I met who’d offered to host me.The best things are always discovered, not set up. And in the end, I surrendered to the journey rather than trying to set it up in advance and tick the boxes.Absolutely. The story became so broad — and the distances were so massive — that there were days, sometimes three or four days in a row, where I didn’t make a single strong picture. There were days when very little happened. And those days were incredibly disheartening, and very unnerving for my sense of productivity, for my professional morale.Ultimately, though, surrendering to the journey provided for a much more authentic way to experience the country and the people. Rather than beginning with a set of preconceptions, I let the journey give birth to the story.I didn’t want to go out there and make cliché pictures of, say, a cowboy riding off into the sunset, or make pretty pictures of abandoned colonial mining towns. I wanted my pictures to break down stereotypes. But a lot of the situations I found myself in very much reinforced the kind of common images of Australia that everyone has seen before. So it was a challenge to find myself in familiar situations — scenes that, on the surface, looked like something from the movies — and try to find moments within them that alluded to something less familiar.Capturing Aboriginal Australia was probably the hardest part for me. I’m a white Australian, a descendent of the British colonial experience. And my experience doesn’t overlap much with the Indigenous experience in Australia.I was an outsider in the Aboriginal communities, an absolute outsider. And I kept having to invest more and more time to access that world.The big takeaway? Rural Australia is ultimately a place in decline.I think Australians, in general, look very fondly at our bush culture. But the reality is that the rural culture, the rural traditions, are slowly being eroded by globalization.Australia isn’t unique in that regard. It’s the same story the world round. But I think it’s more pronounced in Australia because the population in many places is so sparse.I struggled for a while afterward. In some ways I’m still struggling.I spent three months in very vast spaces, where it’s incredibly quiet — where, come nighttime, it felt like I could reach up and touch the Milky Way.The trip was cut short by a few days when my grandmother died. I went to her funeral, in western New South Wales, then flew straight back to New York.Back in the city, amid the hustle and bustle and the ambient noise of the sirens, I found myself flustered, overwhelmed. It was hard to tolerate the light, the noise, the people.Now, I catch myself thinking: Should I be back out there? Should I continue working on this and turn it into a larger photographic project, or a book?I’ve made plans to go back and shoot for another couple months. Hopefully the story will continue to develop into something larger than what we’ve captured here.Clearly, though, something got me out there. The bush, it definitely got me.