http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/nyregion/michael-grimm-defeats-domenic-recchia-in-new-yorks-11th-congressional-district.html
Michael Grimm Overcomes Democrats’ Campaign to Capture His Congressional Seat - The New York Times
New York State,Grimm  Michael G,Recchia  Domenic M Jr,New York City,Politics and Government,Frauds and Swindling,Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  House of Representatives
Nov. 4, 2014
5966
Staten Islanders have picked their poison.In New York’s most noxious race, voters in the 11th Congressional District re-elected Representative Michael G. Grimm of Staten Island, a two-term Republican under federal indictment on fraud charges, over the Democrat, Domenic M. Recchia Jr.“They hit me with everything they had, everything you can imagine, but we’re here tonight, victorious,” Mr. Grimm, a former agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation who is perhaps best known for threatening to throw a television reporter off a Capitol Hill balcony, said at his election night party at a hotel on Staten Island. “We didn’t waver baby! We didn’t waver! Not once.”Democrats had once seemed well positioned to pick up the seat, which includes Staten Island and a sliver of southern Brooklyn, but Mr. Recchia, a former City Council member from Brooklyn, ended up as a bumbling emblem of a disastrous midterm election for the party. As of late Tuesday evening, it seemed as if the Republican wave had come crashing through New York Harbor.Until the closing days of the race, when polls showed Mr. Grimm pulling away and editorial boards delivered almost apologetic endorsements of the Republican, the contest seemed within the Democrats’ grasp. Mr. Recchia had pounded his opponent’s ethics, and national Democrats echoed that message with money and television commercials. (The 20-count federal indictment against Mr. Grimm stems from his ownership of a Manhattan health food restaurant before he entered Congress.)By contrast, Mr. Grimm ran without the aid of his party, which had all but abandoned him. He had maintained a loyal Republican base on Staten Island, the city’s conservative redoubt, among those who remembered his service during Hurricane Sandy and appreciated his taut, tough-guy veneer.Mr. Grimm, who remains the only Republican in the city’s congressional delegation, was helped by Mr. Recchia’s inarticulate performances in news conferences, debates and editorial board meetings, which were dismal enough to raise the question of his basic competence up to the level of Mr. Grimm’s alleged criminality. And as in much of the country and state, antipathy toward President Obama also aided the Republican.That frustration with the president extended to upstate New York, where Representative Louise M. Slaughter, 85, a Democrat who was seeking her 15th term in Congress, led by only a few hundred votes late on Tuesday night over Mark Assini, a poorly financed Republican and town supervisor.The same dissatisfaction not only endangered venerable Democrats like Ms. Slaughter, it also helped usher in new Republican blood. Elise M. Stefanik, a Republican schooled at Harvard, in the administration of President George W. Bush and in Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential campaign, campaigned as a cow-milking local resident in her effort to win the 21st District seat being vacated by Representative Bill Owens, a Democrat. Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and Mr. Romney’s vice-presidential running mate, and the House speaker, John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, appeared upstate at fund-raisers for Ms. Stefanik, who, at 30 is the youngest woman ever elected to Congress and is considered a future star for the party.As successful a candidate as Ms. Stefanik proved to be, some high-ranking Democratic officials privately expressed frustration with Representative Steve Israel of Long Island, the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, for recruiting her opponent, Aaron Woolf, a political newcomer best known for directing an award-winning documentary called “King Corn,” writing a Phish song, spending a lot of time on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and opening Urban Rustic, a grocery store in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.In the First District, which includes the Hamptons and less affluent Long Island towns, Lee Zeldin a well-financed and baby-faced Iraq war veteran, became the Republicans’ lone Jewish representative by beating the Democratic incumbent, Representative Tim Bishop, in a rematch of their 2008 race. The contest was dominated by anti-Obama animus and anger over illegal immigration, as many of the migrant children who crossed the border from Central America ended up on Long Island.The upstate 24th District was another closely fought race, but late appearances by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and former President Bill Clinton could not save the seat of Representative Dan Maffei, a Democrat from Syracuse, who lost to John Katko, a former federal prosecutor and political novice.In District 19, which rolls from the Catskills to apple orchards bordering Vermont, Representative Chris Gibson easily defeated his Democratic challenger, Sean Eldridge, the husband of Chris Hughes, a Facebook co-founder who owns The New Republic. Mr. Gibson characterized Mr. Eldridge as a moneyed carpetbagger who went house — and congressional-seat — hunting.In the 18th District, Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, a former Clinton administration official and the state’s first openly gay congressman, led by about one percentage point over his opponent, Nan Hayworth, from whom Mr. Maloney had taken the seat in 2012. She had emphasized the decision of Mr. Maloney, who sits on the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee’s aviation subcommittee, to allow the apparently illegal use of an aerial drone to film his wedding party, which included Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader. “That thing is going to kill somebody,” Huma Abedin, an aide to Hillary Rodham Clinton, said at the party.Outside of New York, Senator Cory A. Booker of New Jersey cruised to re-election, but other Democrats endured more tension. In that state’s Fifth Congressional District, the Republican incumbent Scott Garrett swept aside a young Democrat, Roy Cho, while in the Third District, the Republican Tom MacArthur defeated the Democrat Aimee Belgard to replace retiring Representative Jon Runyan, a Republican.In Connecticut, two wealthy candidates battled in the state’s Fifth Congressional District, where Representative Elizabeth Esty, a Democrat, managed to hold off her Republican challenger, Mark Greenberg, by distancing herself from Mr. Obama and characterizing her opponent as an out-of-touch millionaire.But it was the Staten Island race that captivated many New Yorkers, if only for its toxic brew of viciousness and inanity.At the beginning of the race, as Mr. Recchia, who lives in the Gravesend section of Brooklyn, appeared to be making inroads, Democrats gloated about landing Mr. Recchia as their candidate, saying that his Italian-American heritage and grease-lightning bearing played perfectly with Staten Island voters. By the end of the race, Democratic officials were lamenting privately that they had unsuccessfully approached at least two other candidates before Mr. Recchia.During his concession speech, Mr. Recchia pointed out that Abraham Lincoln lost several races before becoming president, saying the pain of losing an election was akin to “a little boy who stubbed his toe in the dark.” Mr. Recchia said he had stubbed his toe.As much attention as the race garnered, Mr. Grimm, who on Tuesday night said “let’s put Michael Grimm aside for a second” as he talked about the greatness of the American dream, might wind up stepping aside. He has promised to resign if convicted, creating the possibility of a special election in 2015, but refused to let that sour his party, saying his win was a “referendum on Obama’s Justice Department.”“Everybody is kind of counting on Grimm getting convicted and then maybe there will be a special election,” Robert Kilroy, a retired Staten Island postal worker, said after leaving his polling site on Tuesday morning. “And maybe we’ll have better choices.”