https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/books/review/splotch-gianna-marino-goldfish-ghost-lemony-snicket-pets.html
What Not to Tell the Kids When the Goldfish Dies, and Other Lessons From Pet Picture Books - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Splotch (Book),Marino  Gianna,Goldfish Ghost (Book),Snicket  Lemony,Brown  Lisa (1972- ),Hey  Boy (Book),Strouse  Benjamin (Author),Phelan  Jennifer (Author),Colette's Lost Pet (Book),Arsenault  Isabelle
June 16, 2017
4610
SPLOTCH Written and illustrated by Gianna Marino40 pp. Viking. $17.99.(Picture book; ages 4 to 8)GOLDFISH GHOST By Lemony Snicket Illustrated by Lisa Brown 40 pp. A Neal Porter Book/Roaring Brook Press. $17.99.(Picture book; ages 4 to 8)HEY, BOY By Benjamin Strouse Illustrated by Jennifer Phelan 48 pp. Margaret K. McElderry Books. $15.99. (Picture book; ages 4 to 8) COLETTE’S LOST PET Written and illustrated by Isabelle Arsenault 48 pp. Random House. $17.99(Picture book; ages 4 to 8)I admire picture books that address challenging themes. Four new pet stories take on the big ones: loss, and even mortality. Though not all the pets in these books pass away — one is unjustly separated from its young owner, and another apparently goes missing without, it turns out, ever existing — all of the stories dip a pinkie toe into the emotional pool of loss without being morose or preachy. It’s not easy territory, but we have skillful book creators to help our younger kids explore it with imagination, humor and hope.“Splotch,” by Gianna Marino (“Night Animals”), is about a dead goldfish, a botched cover-up and the futility of trying to protect loved ones from hard truths. In an attempt to shelter her son from the trauma of finding his pet goldfish belly-up, Mom flushes the corpse down the toilet while the boy is at school. The boy reacts by declaring that Splotch has run away, so the next day, sneaky Mom replaces the fish with a new one and announces that Splotch has returned. The boy smells a rat when he notices a discrepancy between the new fish’s markings and Splotch’s splotch, but he goes along with Mom’s ruse to let her feel she’s being a protective mother.Marino has created an interesting game of “Who’s kidding whom?” between parent and child, a situation more common than most parents might think. As a story that hinges on visual discernment, “Splotch” is appropriately light on text and strong on visual storytelling. The illustrations are flat and telegraphic, with exaggerated facial expressions to convey the characters’ shifting moods and motives. Don’t miss the back endpapers, which suggest an alternative, sunnier fate for Splotch and all the other fish we flush.The goldfish in “Goldfish Ghost,” by Lemony Snicket and Lisa Brown, is definitely deceased. This purgatory story would be macabre if not for its matter-of-fact approach to death and its charming illustrations. Goldfish Ghost, white and floating upside down over his bowl, is dead right off the bat, so there’s no drama around the loss. But there is a problem: Goldfish Ghost is lonely. Searching for companionship, he floats (still inverted) through a colorful seaside village, but the screeching seagulls, busy fishermen and tchotchke-toting tourists pay him no mind. With the exception of a few hidden ghost characters and a mass of sea creature ghosts (not his type), he’s a fish out of water. That night, the moon beckons him to an abandoned lighthouse where the long-dead but warmhearted lighthouse keeper gives him a home in the best fishbowl ever: a huge, defunct Fresnel lens.It’s a graceful reminder that no matter our state of being, we all need kindness, companionship and a place to call home. The creators wisely stuck with a familiar picture book aesthetic and engaging illustrations, making what could be a scary story about death downright friendly. Especially appropriate for children experiencing loss, “Goldfish Ghost” deals with the question about life after life that’s been asked for centuries. If the answer it suggests is at all accurate, then, lucky us.“Hey, Boy,” a debut picture book by Benjamin Strouse and Jennifer Phelan, is the story of a young man’s life and a dog that weaves in and out of it. A boy, with the help of some strategically dropped kibbles, meets and takes in a dog. Mom decides the boy is too young to handle a pet and takes it to the pound (why does Mom always have to be the bad cop?), where it’s adopted by an older couple. Inspired by energetic visits with the dog, the boy is determined to grow up quickly so they can reunite permanently. As the boy matures and goes off to college, he never forgets the dog, but his visits are less frequent. Eventually, the couple — now too old to care for the dog — ask the boy to adopt him, which he happily does. Boy and dog are finally reunited, and the boy modifies their adventures to accommodate the dog’s now diminished abilities, so the messages of patience, love and loyalty continue to the end. Aesthetically, the book feels retro yet fresh, with a canvas-textured cover, letterpress-inspired type and block-print-style illustrations. Like a new old friend, it’s sure to be a book worth revisiting.In “Colette’s Lost Pet” by Isabelle Arsenault (“Cloth Lullaby”; “Jane, the Fox and Me”), Colette has no pet — lost, dead or otherwise — but she sure has an imagination. This graphic- novel-style picture book celebrates the communal instincts of children and the healing power of storytelling. It opens as Colette, new to the neighborhood, is dealt a double whammy by one of her parents: (1) No, you cannot have a pet, and (2) Go explore your new neighborhood. When timid Colette meets some friendly children who ask the usual new-kid questions, she masks her shyness with a fib about a lost pet parakeet, prompting more questions and offers to help find her bird. The search party takes off, enlisting helpers along the way while Colette’s imagination fills in details about the missing pet: It’s blue and yellow. Its name is Marie-Antoinette. It purrs. No, wait, it talks a little, but only in French. As Colette’s crew grows, so does the parakeet. “She’s gained some weight lately … so I had to get a bigger cage, and then a bigger house,” she explains.Before being called home for dinner, Colette finishes up with a whopper about riding Marie-Antoinette around the world. This inspires the other kids to put their own spin on Colette’s story, offering that the bird might draw pictures, play soccer or even tap dance. They know Colette made up the whole thing, and they want to play along.Where adults might see deception, kids see collaborative storytelling. It’s all made more magical with illustrations that combine a Matisse-like celebration of nature with the playfulness of Chagall. Although the book’s smallish size (7½ by 9½ inches) cramps the story a bit, it’s huge in spirit. Arsenault continues to teach us about children while advancing the art of books created for them.