http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/29/world/asia/amid-1mdb-scandal-najib-razak-dismisses-deputy-prime-minister-and-attorney-general.html
Malaysia’s Premier Dismisses Deputy and Attorney General Amid Scandal - The New York Times
1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB),Najib Razak,Malaysia,Corruption (Institutional),Appointments and Executive Changes,Muhyiddin Yassin,Abdul Gani Patail
July 28, 2015
9820
HONG KONG — Malaysia’s prime minister, Najib Razak, dismissed his deputy prime minister and the attorney general on Tuesday amid a scandal involving a government-owned development fund that has roiled the country’s top levels of political power.The moves came two days after Deputy Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin, in a speech, called on Mr. Najib to answer questions about the heavily indebted fund, 1Malaysia Development Berhad, also known as 1MDB. Mr. Najib appeared to suggest on Tuesday that his decision to remove Mr. Muhyiddin from office was related to the speech.“Members of the cabinet should not air their differences in an open forum that can affect public opinion against the government and Malaysia,” Mr. Najib said in a televised statement announcing the removal of Mr. Muhyiddin and four other members of the cabinet.Mr. Najib added that he “must have a solid and unified team moving in the same direction.”In a statement posted on Facebook, Mr. Muhyiddin said that he accepted his removal and supported the leadership of the prime minister, and acknowledged that he had been dismissed because of his position on the 1MDB investigation.The removal of Attorney General Abdul Gani Patail, which was announced by the state-run Bernama news service, led to speculation that it was also connected to the investigation into possible corruption at the development fund.The attorney general is one of four officials leading the investigation, along with the inspector general of Malaysia’s police, the head of the country’s anticorruption commission and the governor of Malaysia’s central bank.Bernama reported that Mr. Abdul Gani had been removed for health reasons. He declined to elaborate in interviews with Malaysian news organizations.The Wall Street Journal and the Sarawak Report, a website based in Britain, have reported that investigators have documents indicating that nearly $700 million was transferred into bank accounts believed to be controlled by Mr. Najib.The prime minister and the development fund have denied wrongdoing. Mr. Najib has called the allegations a plot by political opponents who want to undermine him.Some reshuffling of cabinet members was expected as Mr. Najib approached the midpoint of his term after the 2013 election, said Tan Seng Keat, research manager at the Merdeka Center, a Malaysian political analysis institute. The next general election is expected in late 2017 or early 2018.“I think he’s trying to consolidate his power base,” Mr. Tan said. “Yes, he’s facing a challenge, but I don’t think he’s in trouble yet.”Mr. Muhyiddin will be replaced by Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, the home affairs minister. Mr. Abdul Gani is to be replaced by Mohamed Apandi Ali, a former federal court judge, Bernama reported.