https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/opinion/speaker-john-boehner-quits-the-arena.html
Speaker John Boehner Quits the Arena - The New York Times
Editorials,Boehner  John A,Presidential Election of 2016,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Cantor  Eric,Shutdowns (Institutional),United States Politics and Government,United States,Congress
Sept. 25, 2015
3847
Speaker John Boehner’s shocking decision to resign from Congress is a sorry measure of how far right-wing extremism has immobilized the Republican Party and undermined the process of healthy government.In abruptly quitting the arena, Mr. Boehner may have headed off the latest threat of a government shutdown. But he did so by yielding to the attack on his leadership that is being waged by some of the same Tea Party zealots and conservative naysayers who supported his ascent to speaker nearly five years ago.Though he is deeply conservative himself, he has been tormented ever since by right-wing malcontents who have condemned any hint of the sort of political accommodation needed for legislation.Mr. Boehner said that putting members through “prolonged leadership turmoil would do irreparable damage to the institution,” so he is yielding the gavel and quitting the House of Representatives after 25 years on Oct. 30.Whomever the Republicans choose as the next speaker will have to show even greater obeisance to the right than Mr. Boehner did.Mr. Boehner reportedly thought he could survive a leadership challenge only by accepting Democratic support. A party stalwart, he quit instead, obviously mindful of the fate of Eric Cantor, his protégé and the former House majority leader, who was turned out of office last year in a right-wing primary challenge that sent shock waves through party ranks.Mr. Boehner sparked fury from his right flank in his unsuccessful attempt to work out a budget compromise with President Obama. His leadership was marked by endless votes against Obamacare, even as the program became a national success. The 2013 shutdown of government, engineered by conservative Republicans, was a low point in what seems to have become an increasingly impossible job.The latest challenge — a threatened government shutdown over demands by conservatives that Planned Parenthood be defunded — is exactly the kind of absurd and dangerous move that the right wing has made its signature tactic. It appears that Mr. Boehner, like most of the nation, finally decided he had had enough.With Mr. Boehner’s decision to retreat and the right wing claiming victory over his ouster, some Republicans seem to think the right wing might drop the Planned Parenthood fight and approve a budget extension bill this month in order to concentrate on the looming leadership fight. This, of course, would be the height of hypocrisy since far-right Republicans have been howling that defunding Planned Parenthood is a matter of life and death.Now it seems they might welcome a way out of the cliff-hanging scenario they created, since opinion polls indicate that voters would blame the Republicans for any government shutdown.If nothing else, this intramural brawl makes it ever clearer that congressional Republicans are incapable of governing themselves, much less the nation.The current Republican candidates for president might find an object lesson here. Mr. Boehner, far from a moderate in any normal sense of the word, departs as a figure thrown out by party zealots enthralled by a woeful Ronald Reagan dictum: “Government is not the solution to our problems; government is the problem.”