https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/09/upshot/retiring-early-you-should-probably-wait-for-a-health-reform-verdict.html
Obamacare Uncertainty: Readers Speak Out on Early Retirement - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Retirement,Labor and Jobs,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Elderly
March 9, 2017
4200
When readers ask how possible changes to the health care law will affect their lives, I have one piece of concrete advice: If you’re thinking about retiring early, wait. Most of our readers agree.My colleague Austin Frakt wrote an article last week about the role the Affordable Care Act has played for early retirees and other people interested in embarking on lives and careers untethered to full-time employment. Obamacare’s health insurance markets have their shortcomings, but they do guarantee that people can buy comprehensive coverage for themselves and their families, and can qualify for tax assistance if their income is below a certain threshold.It’s possible that Republican reforms will leave those people similarly protected. But older people are likely to struggle the most in a less regulated insurance system. Their coverage is likely to be more expensive and may cover fewer of the services they need. Final details are probably worth knowing before making a major life change.Before Obamacare, there was compelling evidence that people were reluctant to retire, switch jobs, cut back on hours or start a new business because they were worried about health insurance. (Mr. Frakt’s article summarizes some of the biggest studies. My favorite: Researchers saw a spike of entrepreneurship among people the month after they turned 65 and qualified for Medicare.)Experts, including the economists at the Congressional Budget Office, expected that Obamacare would ease those frictions, called “job lock” by experts. There is little good research on how many people have changed their work lives because of the health law’s guarantees, but Mr. Frakt’s article prompted a flood of comments from Times readers who had either given up their corporate insurance or were hoping to do so soon. Here’s what they told us:I retired a couple of years ago at 57 after the Supreme Court ruling affirmed the A.C.A. would be around for a while. Since I have a pre-existing condition (T-1 diabetic since a teen), the A.C.A. was going to be my bridge to Medicare.Going back to work full time just for the health care isn’t really an option, as I’ve moved on and away from the company I worked at for 35 years.I just want to be able to purchase insurance at a reasonable price.Retired, MinnesotaAt 58, I’m on track to retire with 95 to 100 percent of my income, thanks in part to having a small pension. Was looking at age 62. Health care for me and my husband is through my employer.But my husband is 56. He’s been working for a small company with no benefits. Paid by a 1099, he pays self-employment Social Security and Medicare tax.Our income, about $92K a year, is too high for any aid, and too small not to be concerned about costs. But we thought we’d still be O.K.With the passage of the A.C.A., we planned to purchase insurance to cover the gap until we were each old enough for Medicare. We’re your typical mid-50s Americans — we have pre-existing conditions (high blood pressure and cholesterol).I’m a hardworking, taxpaying American. I’ve saved, and tried to do the right thing. But now, I have to think long and hard about walking away from employer-provided health care.The future has completely changed.D. DeMarco, BaltimoreMy boyfriend retired at age 50 following a corporate buyout. He planned well financially and could afford to retire at that age. He retired at that time because he knew he could buy insurance through the A.C.A. once his Cobra expired. His Cobra expires in November.We will probably have to get married so he can get my employer-provided health insurance. Marriage — the green card equivalent of health insurance for the uninsured.Cora Morgan, DetroitDon’t forget marital status. I know people in horrible, acrimonious marriages who nevertheless are able to supply health insurance — even retiree health insurance, full ride, including Rx — to one another. But if, say, my sister becomes unemployed, I can’t add her to my plan. If I want to help a dear friend who’s freelancing, I can’t add him to my plan (though I suppose we could enter a marriage of convenience.)KosherDillI retired at 62. I stayed on my company’s Cobra plan for 18 months, paying $500 a month out of pocket. This left me a year and a half shy of Medicare eligibility at 65. I had to pay $2,000 a month for health insurance for my wife and myself for this period. This took away $40,000 from our retirement savings. Now I’m paying $280 a month on Medicare.My advice: Don’t retire before 63.5 so you can stay on your company Cobra plan until you’re eligible for Medicare.OWG4, Framingham, Mass.My wife and I, age 61 and 60 (both self-employed lawyers, no kids), spend $1,600 per month for “silver” plans with a $7,000 maximum deductible/co-pay each. No government subsidy, obviously. Fortunately, we can afford it.Unless you are prepared to dig into your pocket to the tune of about $9,500 per person and per year for individually priced health insurance premiums until you get Medicare at age 65, don’t retire early. Stay safe and “job-locked” a few more years. You aren’t the only ones.Duane Coyle, WichitaWe have been planning for this since the A.C.A. was implemented. I would get coverage via an A.C.A. exchange and be able to retire at 61, when my husband is 65 and eligible for Medicare. We can do that without Social Security only if there is an affordable option available. Not to mention that it is beneficial to “younger” people for us “older” people, at the top of the pay scale, to retire and make way for them. I know I benefited along the way from that same thing.Mrsc, Boca Raton, Fla.I was hoping to leave my desk job in a few years, at 57, so I could start a small, home-based business doing something I really enjoy while I am still young enough to pursue it. It won’t pay nearly as much as I earn in my current 9-5 job, but I’m O.K. with this change; after 30-plus years, I’m burned out. I’ve done everything I could to facilitate this change, save aggressively (much more than 10-15 percent of my income) and pay off my mortgage. I don’t expect it to be free, but if I can’t get somewhat affordable health insurance, my dream will likely die. I am very angry about this.Junctionite, SeattleWithout having to worry about health care for self and family, more people would be willing to start businesses, change dead-end jobs and be more mobile. It would transform the American workplace for the better and jump-start entrepreneurship in this country. Republicans should be all over a national health care plan that is all in, nobody out, with private hospitals, doctors and pharmacies providing the services.TommyBoy, BaltimoreI will never understand why Republicans, who are supposedly the party of entrepreneurship, would not want a robust health plan. With a public health plan, people can start new businesses, take risks. But if you have to have health care for your family, you take no chances.Paula, New YorkI’m sorry. Why should the taxpayers (through income-based subsidies) cover the cost of those who want to retire early?Retiring early is the exception. If you can retire early and support yourself, great. If you can’t unless you receive subsidies from the A.C.A., then don’t.Dennis, CT