https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/us/politics/canada-leader-justin-tredeau-obama-visit.html
Justin Trudeau, Canadian Prime Minister, Making Rare Official Visit - The New York Times
Global Warming,Trudeau  Justin,Obama  Barack,Washington (DC),United States International Relations,United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
March 10, 2016
4730
WASHINGTON — Justin Trudeau, the prime minister of Canada, is to meet with President Obama on Thursday for the first official visit by a Canadian leader in 19 years, a diplomatic honor made possible in part by new pledges of cooperation on combating climate change.Mr. Obama and Mr. Trudeau are expected to announce new commitments to reduce planet-warming emissions of methane, a chemical contained in natural gas that is about 25 times as potent as carbon dioxide, and which can leak from drilling wells and pipelines.That announcement will come during a day of ceremony that will conclude with a state dinner in the East Room of the White House. On the menu is Alaskan halibut “casseroles,” roasted apricot galette, baby lamb chops with Yukon Gold potato dauphinoise and a maple pecan cake with cocoa nib wafer and butterscotch swirl ice cream.The arrival of Mr. Trudeau and his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, has prompted comparisons to a similar visit in 1977 by Pierre Trudeau, a former prime minister and the current leader’s father. That visit made headlines when Margaret Trudeau, the prime minister’s wife, wore a short dress that fell just below the knee to the White House state dinner.While Canada and the United States have long been close allies, Mr. Obama’s efforts to confront global warming had become a major point of contention with Mr. Trudeau’s predecessor, Stephen Harper, who sought to aggressively expand Canada’s oil industry.As Mr. Obama became more determined to leave behind a lasting environmental legacy, he delayed and eventually rejected construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, which would have transported nearly a million barrels a day of heavily polluting oil from Alberta to refineries on the Gulf Coast.Mr. Obama’s rejection of the pipeline severely strained relations with Mr. Harper.But Mr. Trudeau’s election last year marked a shift in policy that was welcomed by the White House. Mr. Trudeau did not criticize Mr. Obama’s rejection of the pipeline, and has pledged to pursue an ambitious environmental agenda intended to coordinate with Mr. Obama’s policies.In December, Canadian officials helped to push through a historic global climate agreement in Paris.“The climate relationship with Canada really just ramped up dramatically quickly,” Todd Stern, Mr. Obama’s special envoy for climate change, told reporters ahead of Mr. Trudeau’s arrival.Mr. Obama and Mr. Trudeau will meet privately on Thursday to discuss military cooperation, efforts to combat terrorism, improvements in trade and environmental concerns.Among the issues the two leaders will seek to resolve is a dispute over several decades about softwood lumber. American officials say lumber from Canada is unfairly subsidized by the government there, an assertion that Canadian officials reject.“That’s a longstanding and complicated issue, but we do welcome the Trudeau’s government interest in discussing a new arrangement for softwood lumber, and we’re open to exploring all options with Canada to address this important trade issue,” said Mark Feierstein, the senior director for the Western Hemisphere at the National Security Council.But the most anticipated topic is the environment.“Prime Minister Trudeau is already showing serious, concrete commitment to accelerating progress on climate,” Mr. Stern said. “The commitment of both leaders to addressing this global challenge is clear. And I suspect under their leadership, North America will make significant progress this year and next.”The Obama administration wants to cut methane emissions from the oil and gas sector by 40 percent to 45 percent from 2012 levels by 2025. The Interior Department has proposed a number of regulations on methane leaks, but has yet to write a regulation governing such leaks from current oil and gas drilling on public land.