https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/world/europe/marine-le-pen-emmanuel-macron.html
Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron: Where France’s Candidates Stand - The New York Times
France,Macron  Emmanuel (1977- ),Le Pen  Marine,Elections,Terrorism,Immigration and Emigration,Politics and Government,vis-dispatch
May 4, 2017
7984
PARIS — Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen represent sharply contrasting visions for the future of France — and of Europe — showcased in a bruising debate on Wednesday ahead of the final round of the country’s presidential election on Sunday.Ms. Le Pen, the far-right  candidate of the National Front, is campaigning on a bellicose security platform, emphasizing her anti-immigration, anti-European Union, anti-globalization bona fides. Mr. Macron, a former economy minister and investment banker, is pro-business, in favor of free trade and open to reinforcing economic and security ties with Europe.Here is a breakdown of the candidates’ divergent views on major issues.“The European Union is going to die, because the people don’t want it anymore.” — Ms. Le PenMs. Le Pen has pledged to hold a national referendum on taking France out of the bloc — a so-called Frexit, which is widely seen as a trigger to the breakup of the European Union. She also wants France to abandon the euro, which she called “the currency of bankers,” and bring back a national currency — an idea that has rattled business leaders and financial markets. She has declared her intention to begin negotiations with Brussels to overhaul European institutions as soon as she is elected, and said she would pull France out of European trade agreements that, in her view, harm its interests.“We won’t make our influence greater without making Europe a stand-alone global power.” — Mr. MacronMr. Macron says any withdrawal from the bloc would be a disaster from which France — and Europe — might never recover. He ridiculed Ms. Le Pen in Wednesday’s debate for failing to understand how leaving the euro would harm French businesses and the economy. “So a small-business owner will buy its products in euro but pay its employees with the franc?” he said. “This doesn’t make sense.” He wants more cooperation with the European Union on fiscal, trade and social legislation, and he has called for a dedicated budget for the eurozone.“We are in the world; France is not a closed country.” — Mr. MacronAs other European countries recover from the financial crisis, France’s economy has remained stagnant, with unemployment stuck around 10 percent for four years.Mr. Macron says he will jump-start stagnant growth with a business-friendly labor and tax overhaul that would make it easier for companies to hire and fire workers. He has vowed to cut taxes for workers and corporations and to invest 50 billion euros, or about $55 billion, in training, the environment, agriculture and infrastructure, while cutting €60 billion in public spending.“Rampant globalization leads to mass unemployment. We want to rearm in the face of globalization.” — Ms. Le PenMs. Le Pen accused her opponent of supporting “uncontrolled globalization” and has said the types of deregulatory policies that Mr. Macron embraces will only make the position of workers more precarious. She calls for “intelligent protectionism” and backs nationalistic economic policies, such as favoring French businesses for public contracts. She would cut taxes for small businesses and put a 35 percent tax on products made by French companies abroad, while raising taxes on foreign workers to try to ensure “priority hiring of French people.”“Massive immigration is an oppression. It isn’t a chance for France; it’s a tragedy.” — Ms. Le PenMs. Le Pen has seized on recent terrorist attacks and the influx of refugees into Europe to make immigration one of the hot-button issues of the campaign. She says she will restore national border controls and pull France from Schengen, an agreement that allows citizens of European countries to move freely among nations who have signed the pact. Legal immigration would be capped at 10,000 people a year, and refugees could apply for asylum only from outside France.“The French people shouldn’t be worried about immigration. From an economic, cultural and social point of view, immigration is a chance.” — Mr. MacronMr. Macron says he will make France more attractive to skilled immigrants by shortening the visa application process, promoting “talent” visas and financing programs to help immigrants become more fluent in French. He would strengthen border security by hiring 5,000 more border guards, and he would speed the process for asylum requests so that those who are denied could not linger in the country.“We have to eradicate the ideology of Islamism in France.” — Ms. Le PenTackling what Ms. Le Pen calls Islamic fundamentalism is a central axis of her campaign, and she said in their debate that Mr. Macron was “complaisant” about the threat posed by Islamic extremists “because they support you.” She has said she plans to dismantle organizations suspected of falling under extremist influence, deport foreigners suspected of having ties with Islamist extremist groups, and strip binational extremists of citizenship. To maintain security, she says she will add 50,000 military posts and 15,000 police jobs, and increase prison capacity by 40,000.“The fight against terrorism is the priority for the coming years.” — Mr. MacronMr. Macron wants to strengthen counterterrorism activity at the European level and reinforce French security and intelligence services. “You’ve got to be much more surgical than Ms. Le Pen,” he said during their debate on Wednesday, noting that as a member of the European Parliament, she voted repeatedly against antiterrorism measures.He hopes to recruit 10,000 additional police officers in France and increase prison capacity by 15,000. Cybersecurity and cyberdefense would be a national priority. He also favors creating a European defense fund and a European security council to help combat terrorism. And he would maintain a state of emergency put in place after the Paris terrorist attacks of November 2015.