http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/09/us/the-2000-elections-man-in-the-news-a-contradictory-tycoon-jon-stevens-corzine.html
THE 2000 ELECTIONS: MAN IN THE NEWS; A Contradictory Tycoon -- Jon Stevens Corzine - The New York Times
NEW JERSEY,SENATE,FRANKS  ROBERT D,CORZINE  JON S,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,ELECTIONS
Nov. 9, 2000
6858
He is a former college Young Republican who won election to the United States Senate by proposing the most liberal platform of any major Senate candidate this year.He owns a resort in Telluride, Colo., a mansion in the Hamptons, an apartment on Park Avenue and a 2,300-acre mesa in Colorado, but insists that his favorite vacation spot is the backyard of his home in Summit, N.J.He spent more money introducing himself to voters than any other statewide candidate in history, but most voters still have only the vaguest idea of what makes him tick.On Tuesday, Jon Stevens Corzine finished an improbable run that took him from being the ousted co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Company to the United States Senate when he defeated Representative Bob Franks, a Republican. But even those who know him say he has always been a master of coaxing more information out of others than he reveals about himself.''Jon is truly a great listener; when you're talking to him he looks straight into your eyes, and it's like you're the only person in the world,'' said Janet Hansen, who worked as a securities saleswoman and money manager for Mr. Corzine at Goldman. ''And when you finish talking, he goes off and makes his decision, and you realize that he never tipped his cards and told you what his opinion was.''Many people are aware of the vague outlines of his biography: he was born on Jan. 1, 1947, in a small Illinois town with more cows than people, and he worked construction jobs to pay for college. He rose from a being a trader at Goldman Sachs to become its co-chairman, and amassed a $400 million fortune while guiding the firm to one of its most controversial moves, its decision to go public in 1999.What is less well known about Mr. Corzine is that he comes from a family of politically active Republicans and, according to a high school friend, joked about running for president. He is such an avid New Jersey Devils fan that he seriously considered buying the franchise last year.And while he helped build the bond trading department of Goldman Sachs into a wildly profitable arm of the company, he was admittedly careless as an administrator and was forced out of the firm because several senior partners were angered that he made major decisions without consulting them.''He was a mixed bag at Goldman Sachs,'' said one former partner, who asked not to be identified. ''He was brilliant as a trader and very well liked by subordinates. But his peers at the top of the company felt he acted too autocratically.''Despite the kind of financial success that most New Jersey voters can barely fathom, Mr. Corzine's most effective tool as a campaigner was his warmth and humble demeanor. When Mr. Corzine entered the race 19 months ago, many New Jersey Democrats braced themselves to meet the stereotype of the Wall Street tycoon, someone with a boundless ego and little empathy for the struggles of middle-class voters. Instead, Mr. Corzine disarmed them with his unfailing politeness.He focused his campaign message on social issues, calling for an array of spending programs on health care, education and long-term care. His opponents -- in the primary it was Jim Florio, a Democrat and the former governor, and in the general election it was Mr. Franks -- tried to make Mr. Corzine's record-breaking spending the dominant campaign issue. Mr. Corzine's handlers also limited his public exposure after he made a joke that offended some Italian-American voters and after gaffes regarding his charitable contributions and record as a voter.That strategy allowed the campaign more control over Mr. Corzine's public image, but it also raised a bewildering question in the minds of even his staunchest Democratic supporters: how is it that a guy so down to earth, and who ran such an uneven campaign, managed to rise to the top of Wall Street in the first place?''There's a very confusing public persona, and not one we've gotten to know during this very expensive campaign,'' said David Rebovich, a political science professor at Rider University. ''He's not some cutthroat tycoon like J. R. Ewing. He's not the ultrasmooth, cerebral C.E.O. like Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary. Corzine comes across as sometimes slightly befuddled and slightly disheveled rather than a high-energy business leader. So people are left to wonder, how did he pull it off on Wall Street? And how effective would he be in the Senate?''Mr. Corzine's closest advisers say that the question answers itself. In  addition to his willingness to take risks and a gift for analyzing businesses, Mr. Corzine succeeded because he managed to be intensely driven without appearing off-putting.''Jon combines a few things that are difficult for people,'' said Orin  Kramer, an investor and Democratic Party fund-raiser who persuaded  Mr. Corzine to run after Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, a Democrat, announced his retirement. ''He's very likable; he really enjoys other people. The other is that he is fiercely competitive in a way that is not obvious to other people.''Despite his Wall Street pedigree, Mr. Corzine is still in many ways a Middle Westerner. His speech betrays traces of the flattened vowels and measured cadences of the plains. Mr. Corzine has confessed to growing uncharacteristically grouchy during the final week of the grueling race, but his wife, Joanne, said that even during the most anxious hours, when the Election Day results were still very much in doubt, he handled the uncertainty with Middle American stoicism.''I think people who grow up in the country tend to be less dramatic than  people who grow up in the city,'' he said in an interview here today.  ''What are you going to do, rant and rave while you're standing alone in the middle of a field? What are you ranting and raving about? There's just fewer chances to engage emotionally.''Mr. Corzine and his wife have three children: Jennifer, 29; Joshua, 24; and Jeffrey, 17. After a time-intensive career on Wall Street and the rigors of campaigning, he said he hoped his schedule as a senator would allow him more balance between home and work lives. But Mr. Corzine did all he could to savor his first day as senator-elect: he slept less than three hours, then greeted  commuters at a train station, made appearances on several national news programs and shook hands with civil service workers as they left an office building here in the afternoon.During an impromptu news conference, Mr. Corzine also told reporters that he was frustrated that the race would be remembered more for his $60 million campaign spending than for any of the issues he discussed. He argued that the money was essential because New Jersey was an expensive media market and he needed to match the name recognition of his two well-known opponents. Then Mr. Corzine betrayed a trace of regret about the spending -- but only for a moment.''With 20-20 hindsight, maybe we went too far,'' Mr. Corzine mused. He  did not elaborate.