https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/us/politics/kansas-tim-huelskamp-tea-party-elections.html
Voters in Kansas Send Message by Ousting Tea Party Firebrand Tim Huelskamp From House - The New York Times
Huelskamp  Tim,Marshall  Roger W (1960- ),Tea Party Movement,Republican Party,Kansas,Elections  House of Representatives,Primaries and Caucuses
Aug. 3, 2016
5227
WASHINGTON — Frustrated voters in a sprawling Kansas congressional district sent a blunt message on Tuesday that might yet break through the din of this election: At some point the government needs to do something for them.That sentiment was delivered in the harshest possible terms to Representative Tim Huelskamp, a firebrand Tea Party conservative who lost in a primary landslide after spending most of his six years in Washington feuding with his own leaders. He was so difficult to work with and troublesome that he was kicked off the Agriculture Committee.The loss of that crucial legislative post, and his vote against a long-term farm bill, did not endear him to the powerful farming interests in a state that likes its federal agricultural aid.Farm groups joined the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and another deep-pocketed advocacy group to get behind Roger Marshall, a political novice who promised to work on behalf of Kansas rather than rabble rouse. Mr. Huelskamp (pronounced HYULES-camp) had the backing of the Koch brothers political network as well as the conservative group Club for Growth, but it was not enough.Mr. Huelskamp’s loss to Mr. Marshall, an obstetrician, is not a sign of a run on congressional incumbents or hard-right conservatives. The vast majority of them will return next year.But it did show that even residents of one of the nation’s most conservative states favored the idea of action in Washington rather than the paralysis that has set in.Brian Baker, president of Ending Spending, a “super PAC” that dropped $1.2 million on ads and voter outreach against Mr. Huelskamp, said the results demonstrated that “voters are demanding that Republicans in Congress work together to advance a fiscally conservative agenda to actually end out-of-control spending — not just grandstand.”Clearly, Mr. Baker’s group and other Republican-leaning interests that lined up behind Mr. Marshall do not see Mr. Huelskamp’s defeat as an invitation to open the spending spigots.But they do want to see a more constructive atmosphere than the current one, where the fundamental budget and appropriations processes are in such a shambles that it is questionable each year whether the government is going to be funded or not. They want lawmakers to put governance over obstruction.Scott Reed, a senior political strategist for the U.S. Chamber, said the business group invested nearly a year in developing a strategy to pick off Mr. Huelskamp in a primary for the First District seat once held by Bob Dole, a Republican who saw government as a positive force.The goal, Mr. Reed said, was to identify and support “someone who has the courage to run for office, and once elected to come to Washington and take their job seriously, work with leadership and help move their district, state and country forward, not come here to shut down the government.”The fight was the latest manifestation in a continuing power struggle between more traditional business-oriented Republicans and movement conservatives who want to drastically shrink the size of the federal government and limit its role in daily life. The small-government faction credited the establishment with a win but said the fight goes on.“Republican establishment types are taking a victory lap today, which is a pretty good indication they still perceive small-government conservatives as a threat to their governing agenda,” said Dan Holler, a spokesman for Heritage Action for America. He said that “a G.O.P. that embraces amnesty and promises massive food stamp spending in an effort to appease the farm lobby is one that seems destined to fail time and time again.”Frustration with Washington has permeated the presidential campaigns of both parties this year, with Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump claiming to be the candidate who could restore some functionality. Mr. Trump just this week pledged to outspend Mrs. Clinton on new infrastructure projects, the type of public works spending that lawmakers used to showcase as evidence they were delivering for the folks back home.But the elimination of earmarks — pet spending projects — and the collapse of any kind of predictable spending process have deprived lawmakers of the traditional opportunities to steer federal money to their states. That outcome was just fine with Mr. Huelskamp and his allies though evidently not with his constituents.Mr. Huelskamp was a leader of an uncompromising group of House Republicans who have made it their job to tie up spending measures, industry subsidies and other business-friendly measures as well as immigration legislation. They have perfected the art of saying no.He and his colleagues in the Freedom Caucus were also a major thorn in the side of Speaker John A. Boehner, whom they accused of surrendering on spending and debt issues before ultimately engineering his ouster last year.Mr. Boehner was pleased enough with Mr. Huelskamp’s defeat Tuesday night that a former aide sent me a photo of him cheerfully toasting the outcome, leading to it being widely distributed via Twitter and other news coverage of the Kansas race.A veteran Republican House member told me years ago that the safest vote was always “no,” that it was hard to get in trouble by opposing things. Mr. Huelskamp’s defeat may be a sign that lawmakers need to again begin saying “yes” once in a while.