http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/world/middleeast/egypt-economic-crisis-abdel-fattah-el-sisi.html
Where’s My Mercedes? Egypt’s Financial Crisis Hits the Rich - The New York Times
Egypt,Sisi  Abdel Fattah el-,Currency,Economic Conditions and Trends,Luxury Goods and Services,International Trade and World Market,Shortages
March 10, 2016
8844
CAIRO —  Gucci Corner is the nickname for a bustling plaza at the private American University in Cairo, where well-heeled students hang out between classes and strut their imported fashions.These days, though, even the privileged are feeling the squeeze of Egypt’s economic crisis.Zeyad Mohamed, 19, a business student, said he was shocked to discover on a recent visit to a Mercedes-Benz showroom that his desired model would not be available for 18 months. “Normally I’m not interested in politics — if it doesn’t affect me, I don’t care,” Mr. Mohamed said, reflecting a disengagement that is typical among well-to-do youth. “But this is a problem. And things are getting more expensive.”Wealthy Egyptians were among President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s most ardent supporters after he seized power in 2013, favoring stability and a harsh crackdown on Islamists, even at the cost of civil liberties. But that loyalty is being tested now, as Egypt’s severe shortage of foreign currency cripples businesses, impedes luxury imports and crimps their lifestyles. And that has prompted a tide of unusually sharp criticism of Mr. Sisi.Mr. Sisi is using what scarce resources he has mainly to help the poor — and the seven million people on the state’s payroll — by propping up the value of Egypt’s currency. Politically, that makes sense: Mr. Sisi is mindful of the popular protests that drove President Hosni Mubarak from office in 2011. Even so, the poor have suffered from shortages of some staples, like cooking oil, while the rich are confronted with restrictions that amount to a sharp pinch, if not quite pain.“That’s what’s new — the suffering of the rich,” said Ibrahim Eissa, a prominent journalist who was once among Mr. Sisi’s loudest advocates, but who recently published a withering attack on the president’s policies. Mr. Eissa said: “No class or demographic is happy now, from Alexandria to Upper Egypt. Sisi isn’t satisfying anyone.”Stringent new government regulations restrict the use of Egyptian credit cards abroad and limit purchases of foreign currency. Business people seeking American dollars have scrambled to the black market, where the price has jumped 20 percent in recent months. Meanwhile, their families are faced with sharp rises in supermarket prices, long waits for luxury cars and worries about obtaining enough dollars or euros to pay for foreign vacations or for their children to study abroad.Last weekend at U Bistro, a lounge with a buzzing bar filled with local high rollers, the price of the dollar was “all people are talking about,” said Dina Alhassani, an education consultant at one of the tables. “People are worried,” she said. “There’s a sense of anxiety about what comes next.”The worsening currency crisis — one headline this week spoke of a “dollar fever” — is one of several woes facing Mr. Sisi, who is also under fire for rights violations by his security forces. The strain appeared to show in a recent speech where he lashed out at critics, urged them to “shut up,” and told the audience, “Please, do not listen to anyone but me.”The hectoring, emotional tone of that speech drew derision on the Internet. After Mr. Sisi rhetorically offered to ease the crisis by “selling” himself, one Internet user set up an eBay page with his picture, offering a “slightly used field marshal” for sale. The page attracted bids of over $100,000 before it was shut down.Such mockery can be dangerous to practice inside Egypt, where many Sisi critics languish in jail. But the widespread mirth that the gag inspired seemed to illustrate how the president’s aura has dimmed.In Mr. Sisi’s defense, government officials point to external factors driving the crisis. The country’s already-struggling tourism industry, a crucial earner of foreign exchange, was devastated after a Russian airliner crashed in the Sinai Desert on Oct. 31, probably as a result of a bomb. The country’s tourism minister says that the slump has cost Egypt $1.3 billion in revenue since then, and that the number of visitors to the country was down 44 percent in January.Egypt’s Gulf allies, like Saudi Arabia, used to give the country generous aid — some $30 billion in the first two years of Mr. Sisi’s rule — but since last summer that has slowed to a trickle. Low oil prices have also reduced remittances sent home by Egyptian workers abroad, and have cut into traffic at the Suez Canal, where Mr. Sisi inaugurated an $8 billion expansion last summer.The wealthy make up only a small fraction of Egypt’s 90 million people, while 26 percent of the population lives below the poverty line, according to the United Nations. And they are increasingly living apart, in Palm Beach-style gated communities ringing Cairo, far from the crumbling infrastructure and chronic poverty of the city center.But it is really businesses large and small that have been bearing the brunt of the currency crisis. General Motors has a car plant in Egypt, but it had to temporarily halt production recently because it could not get the parts it needed. Foreign airlines have threatened to curtail flights to Egypt because of rules blocking them from repatriating profits. For a time, British Airways stopped selling tickets in Egyptian currency.At the Gezira Sporting Club in Zamalek, an island in central Cairo, wealthy parents said they were struggling to pay their children’s tuition at private schools that require payment in dollars or euros. “Sisi has lost popularity with the upper segment of society,” said a businessman, Ashraf Omran. “He gave a good story, and people want to believe in it. But you need to follow through. We haven’t seen that.”The argument has been most heated on influential TV stations that were once staunchly pro-Sisi but have now adopted a more critical tone. “I hated that speech,” Youssef al Hosseiny of ONtv said, referring to Mr. Sisi’s much-derided remarks last week. “He looked isolated, and he looked angry. He’s been in power for just 20 months. It’s too early to be isolated.”The president’s popularity has been hurt by more than just the economy, Mr. Hosseiny said. The recent imprisonment of a TV evangelist, a novelist and a poet, all on charges related to religion and public morality, has stoked worries about free speech. Government critics are regularly prevented from leaving the country, including the journalist Hossam Bahgat and the human rights advocate Gamal Eid.And after a policeman shot and killed a taxi driver two weeks ago in an argument over a fare, a furious crowd surged through the streets, defying laws banning public protests.Still, there remain plenty of Egyptians, rich and poor, who continue to see Mr. Sisi as a bulwark against the instability that has roiled other countries in the region.At a sale for imported designer fashions on the banks of the Nile last weekend, Hala Mahmoud defended the president. “People are trying to frame Sisi, as if he did something wrong,” she said. “But he’s a military man, and we face a lot of problems here.”To older Egyptians, the shortages of luxury goods recall earlier periods of economic belt-tightening in the 1990s and 2000s. “We understand it,” said Hany Genena, chief economist at Beltone Financial, an investment house in Cairo. Noting that many foreign investors see Egypt as an attractive medium-term bet, he said, “Just forget the next two years.”Young Egyptians may have less patience. At the American University in Cairo, Nada el Halaswany, a recent graduate, said her family had voted for Mr. Sisi. But the hotel her father manages on the Red Sea is virtually empty now, and she is applying for jobs in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.“I don’t see any positive change on the horizon,” she said.