https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/world/middleeast/irans-revolutionary-guards-stage-second-day-of-missile-tests.html
Iran Tests More Missiles in Message to Israel and Biden - The New York Times
Missiles and Missile Defense Systems,Iran,Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps,Israel
March 9, 2016
9217
TEHRAN — The Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps of Iran conducted a second successive day of missile tests on Wednesday, firing two rockets that it said hit targets over 850 miles away and were capable of reaching Israel. The tests appeared clearly aimed at sending a message to the Israelis as Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was visiting.The missiles were launched from the eastern part of the Alborz mountain range that hugs the Caspian Sea in northern Iran, the semiofficial news agency Tasnim reported.While Iran has riled conservative critics of last summer’s nuclear deal with a succession of missile tests, it is not clear whether the latest activity violates any proscriptions.Before the signing of the accord with the United States and international powers, Iran was barred under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1929 from any work on ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads. That resolution was revoked with the nuclear deal and replaced by Security Council Resolution 2231, which “calls upon” Iran to abstain from such activity.Tehran says that it has a right to pursue defensive weapons systems and that, since it has given up any semblance of a nuclear program, it cannot in any event be working on a nuclear capability.“We have huge reserves of various range ballistic missiles that are ready to target enemies and their aims, at any time, from different points of the country,” Brig. Gen. Hossein Salami, the deputy commander of the Revolutionary Guards, told reporters on the sidelines of the missile-firing drills in Kavir, Qum Province, the semiofficial Fars news agency reported.The Obama administration concluded that an earlier round of missile tests in the fall violated the new resolution and prepared a list of sanctions against individuals and businesses involved in the launchings. It then infuriated congressional Republicans by delaying its application until after the nuclear deal went into effect.The administration has not yet said whether it believes these tests violate the resolution. A State Department official said the matter would be raised at the Security Council, and congressional Republicans promised to introduce new sanctions against Iran.Iranian commanders seemed to go out of their way to antagonize Western governments, as well as to impress upon regional rivals like Saudi Arabia the extent of their arsenal.“Taking into account that Hezbollah has stored more than 100,000 missiles,” General Salami said, “the Islamic Republic possesses 10 times more missiles of different types, and its power is unlimited.”Coming on a day when Mr. Biden was meeting Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel in Jerusalem, the second round of tests seemed also to be aimed at provoking an Israeli reaction.The head of the Revolutionary Guards’ missile program, Brig. Gen. Amir Ali Hajizadeh, said the rockets had a range of about 1,200 miles and were capable of hitting the “Zionist regime,” Iran’s name for its archenemy Israel, the semiofficial news agency Mehr reported.Fars reported that the missiles had text written on them in Hebrew saying, “Israel must be wiped off the face of the earth,” an allusion to the famous declaration by the former Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. However, the missiles seen in photographs of the launch did not seem to carry any text.Mr. Biden did not respond publicly to the missile tests, but alluded to American concerns about Iran’s conventional military capabilities in his remarks to reporters in Israel after a meeting with Mr. Netanyahu, who has criticized the nuclear deal as deeply flawed.“We’re united in the belief that a nuclear-armed Iran is an absolutely unacceptable threat to Israel, to the region and to the United States,” Mr. Biden said. “And I want to reiterate which I know people still doubt here: If in fact they break the deal, we will act. And all their conventional activity outside of the deal is still beyond the deal, and we will and are attempting to act wherever we can find it.”In the United States, the missile tests stoked further criticism of the Obama administration by Republicans who have asserted that the nuclear agreement amounted to a capitulation that the Iranians are now exploiting.“Iran is making a mockery of President Obama’s vow to confront Iran’s dangerous and illicit acts,” said Representative Ed Royce, Republican of California and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.