https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/opinion/sunday/the-houses-ethics-lesson-for-the-senate.html
The House’s Ethics Lesson for the Senate - The New York Times
Ethics and Official Misconduct,United States,Editorials,House of Representatives,Senate,Office of Congressional Ethics,Congress
Oct. 18, 2014
5983
The public’s low opinion of Congress has had one good effect: It has helped to insulate the Office of Congressional Ethics from members of Congress who might privately pray for the office’s demise.The semi-independent ethics office was created six years ago, after the Jack Abramoff corruption scandal, and has since become a credible watchdog of misbehavior by House members, who dare not abolish it, much as many of them resent its oversight. The office has built such a strong reputation of nonpartisanship and professionalism in conducting discreet preliminary investigations of accusations against House members that it stands as a powerful argument for creating a parallel office in the Senate, which has no such ethics monitor.The chambers’ differing approach to enforcing their ethics codes is no small matter in modern politics, with the rising torrent of secret and unregulated campaign money inevitably driving quid pro quo suspicions. Almost half of the complaints fielded by the House ethics office involve aspects of campaign money.The Federal Election Commission has such a woeful enforcement record in this area that Congress’s own ethics committees face a greater responsibility to guard against misbehaving lawmakers. Unfortunately, members of the Senate carry out ethics investigations in murky privacy, devoid of the sort of accounting to the public that the House ethics office is required to make.These differences have been laid out in a new study showing that the House’s own ethics committee has become much more active since the ethics office was created to vet complaints, not quietly bury them. Even without subpoena power, which it should have, the office referred about a third of its inquiries to the ethics committee for further consideration. As a result, 20 disciplinary actions were approved by the House committee in the last five years — four times the rate in pre-O.C.E. periods, according to the study by Public Citizen, an ethics watchdog group.In contrast, the Senate ethics committee has been as lumbering and guarded as a tortoise, dismissing most complaints with just a few letters of admonition and no disciplinary actions voted against members in the last seven years. A person familiar with the procedures of the Senate committee told The National Journal that the vast majority of accusations received do not fall under its jurisdiction and involve complaints about the executive branch or floor speeches by lawmakers. This may be so, but why is the public told so little about complaints that might merit review?In the House, complaints the ethics office sends along to the ethics committee must be disclosed regularly as something the public is plainly entitled to know.