https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/30/us/politics/a-snapshot-captures-the-awkward-courtship-between-trump-and-romney.html
A Snapshot Captures the Awkward Courtship Between Trump and Romney - The New York Times
Romney  Mitt,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,United States International Relations
Nov. 30, 2016
5628
At Jean-Georges, a three-star Michelin restaurant on the first floor of his namesake hotel in New York, Donald J. Trump took time out of his Tuesday schedule to share a four-course meal with Mitt Romney and Reince Priebus, his soon-to-be White House chief of staff.Rain was falling outside. Young garlic soup and frog legs were on the menu. In other words, it was the perfect occasion for a photo op.There were plenty of pictures taken of this meeting, but one stood out in particular. It cut Mr. Priebus out of the frame. It showed Mr. Trump leaning forward over his food — perhaps the soup, with an errant frog leg inching its way to the top of the bowl? — with a sly smile.And then there was Mr. Romney.The former Massachusetts governor, who has been mentioned as possible secretary of state in the Trump administration, was photographed as he turned, his chin leaning into the crook of his neck, and gazed with a furrowed brow into the camera. On social media, viewers — many of them journalists, authors, denizens of Hollywood and liberals for the most part — saw what they thought to be a pained expression.Of course, there were more important things happening on Tuesday:— Steven Mnuchin, a financier with connections to Wall Street and Hollywood, was reported to have been tapped for Treasury Secretary. Mr. Mnuchin got his start at Goldman Sachs, a frequent target of Mr. Trump’s ire on the campaign trail.— Carrier, a large air-conditioning company based in Indianapolis, said that it would keep about 1,000 jobs in the state after having prepared to move about 2,000 jobs to Mexico. The company is said to be receiving economic incentives from Indiana to stay.— Also, Mr. Trump set off a barrage of coverage after he said in an early morning tweet that people who burned the United States flag should perhaps be jailed or lose their citizenship.In this era, a lot can happen in one day.We’ll never really know what caused this uncomfortable-looking glimpse, of course. For all we know, it was a bad scallop. Maybe Mr. Romney doesn’t enjoy frog legs. And again, the photo, by Drew Angerer, was one of several taken.But Mr. Romney’s statement to reporters after the meeting seemed to reinforce a conclusion that many drew about this frozen instant of time.“He did something I tried to do and was unsuccessful in accomplishing: He won the general election,” Mr. Romney said after the meal. “He continues with a message of inclusion and bringing people together, and his vision is something which obviously connected with the American people in a very powerful way.”It was a departure from a statement made by Mr. Romney nine months ago, when he tried to draw support away from Mr. Trump in a speech, saying that the candidate was “playing the American public for suckers.” Mr. Romney targeted Mr. Trump on his vague economic policies, his bankruptcies, his admiration of Vladimir Putin, and his marital infidelity.He also invited the public to watch how Mr. Trump responded to his speech.“Will he talk about our policy differences?” Mr. Romney asked. “Or will he attack me with every imaginable low-road insult? This may tell you what you need to know about his temperament, his stability and his suitability to be president.”Mr. Trump quickly returned fire during a campaign rally in Maine, where he called Mr. Romney “irrelevant” and a “failed candidate.” Mr. Trump’s supporters booed and cheered.“He failed badly,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. Romney. “That was a race, I have to say folks, that should have been won. That was a race that absolutely should have been won, and I don’t know what happened to him.”Mr. Trump also described how Mr. Romney had begged for his endorsement in that race. “I could have said, ‘Mitt, drop to your knees.’ He would’ve dropped to his knees.”Whatever happens with Mr. Romney’s continuing public job interview, the Jean-Georges photo op was one of the stranger turns in the aftermath of the election. Already, articles listing all the critical things Mr. Romney and Mr. Trump have said about each other had become something of a genre. There had been calls for a public apology from Mr. Romney. And Mr. Trump’s inner circle was seemingly in open battle over the very idea of him joining the team.It all brings to mind the internet trope, drawn from an old Nationwide Insurance ad: life comes at you fast.Try not to spill your soup.