http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/16/world/europe/anti-putin-protesters-march-in-moscow-russia.html
Anti-Putin Protesters March in Moscow - The New York Times
Russia,Putin  Vladimir V,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Pussy Riot,Music
Sept. 15, 2012
3898
MOSCOW — Russia’s opposition movement drew tens of thousands to another large anti-Putin demonstration on Saturday, sending the message that its ranks are undaunted by a battery of new government sanctions and the two-year prison sentences handed down last month to the punk-rockers of Pussy Riot.This protest, like the ones that first jolted the Kremlin nine months ago, featured mockery of President Vladimir V. Putin — largely sendups of a recent stunt in which Mr. Putin flew in a hang glider at the head of a flock of cranes.The trademark neon balaclavas of Pussy Riot, whose members were prosecuted for singing an anti-Putin song in a cathedral, appeared on buttons and balloons and, in a basket carried by one marcher, on three disembodied mannequin heads. One demonstrator opened his vest for a photographer to show that he had shaved the image of a balaclava into his chest hair.The police estimated attendance at the demonstration at 14,000, around what they had reported at the last event. Organizers’ estimates were much larger. Over all, nine months after the first large protests sent shock waves through Moscow, the movement appears to have reached a kind of cruising altitude. It is not euphoric, as it was in December. But it is also not going away.“I often hear, ‘What, are we going to go to demonstrations as if we’re going to work?’ ” said Aleksei Navalny, the charismatic blogger whose messages helped spark the first large anti-Putin demonstration. “Yes, we will go. We go to work, to provide for our families — and we should go to demonstrations to supply freedom to ourselves and to our children, to defend our human dignity. We will go as if we are going to work. This should be part of our lives.”There were no arrests until hours after the event ended, when the police detained the leftist leader Sergei Udaltsov, who had called on supporters to remain at the site after the permit expired.During the three-month gap since the last such demonstration, the government has taken aggressive steps to rein in protest, most notably the use of criminal courts and investigations as a lever against leaders of the opposition, a path that Mr. Putin had for years avoided.“Today the authorities have set on a repressive course,” said Gennadi V. Gudkov, a four-term member of Parliament who was stripped of his seat on Friday in an unusual step seen as retribution for his participation in protests. “But they have forgotten that they have to deal with the people. And we will not allow our country to be turned into a gulag led by a kingpin who has frightened the whole country, frightened millions of his own citizens.”Officials from United Russia, the governing party, said Saturday’s turnout showed that the movement suffers from dwindling public support and irreconcilable political agendas, with one lawmaker commenting that “all that brings them together is hatred for the current system.”One notable change in this protest was the prominence of Communists; besides the appearance of white ribbons, associated with a liberal agenda, there were many red ribbons among the crowd, and one marcher noted with puzzlement a shout of “Death to the Bourgeoisie!” Indeed, organizers shaping the march’s platform last week added numerous planks like support for trade unions and caps on utility payments, seemingly to attract support from the left — a vast political force in a population much battered by its emergence into capitalism more than 20 years ago.Though Russia’s Communist Party has kept a distance from the protest movement, one official noted the shift approvingly via the party’s Twitter feed.“Today’s ‘March of Millions,’ in contrast to previous ones, has turned noticeably red,” it said.Aleksei Tyorkin was marching with others from the Communist Party’s Moscow branch, and said he had come to show that “not everyone who is opposed to what is happening in the country is part of the white” movement, dominated by liberal activists.“This is a red protest, too, that fights for justice, that fights against one group of people exploiting another,” said Mr. Tyorkin, a teacher who said he worked in construction to make ends meet. “We are against bureaucrats owning a Lexus when that Lexus costs the same as a new house for a homeless family.”There is little doubt that the risks of participating in the protests are climbing. Sixteen people have been charged with hooliganism, a charge that could bring a prison sentence of up to 10 years, for participating in a similar event in May that ended in a chaotic melee with police.At Saturday’s protest, someone had cut out sixteen forms of human bodies and spray-painted them with the defendants’ names. Mr. Navalny urged the crowd not to forget about them.“These people sit in jail in the name of our right to gather here,” he said. “They are hostages, seized to ensure we don’t gather anymore. Let them know that while they are in prison, we are not free.”As he marched on Saturday, Mr. Gudkov’s son, Dmitri, who also holds a seat in Parliament, said the government had made a strategic error by using law enforcement and the courts to rein in the opposition movement, because the public would reject those tactics.In the crowd, several people acknowledged that danger had become a restraining factor.Sergei Kukharenko, a former paratrooper, said many acquaintances decided not to take part in this march because they were still active servicemen and they “are all terrified for their own careers.”“People are scared,” he said, “so now there are fewer of us.”