http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/us/politics/military-sexual-assault-legislation.html
Senate Rejects Blocking Military Commanders From Sexual Assault Cases - The New York Times
Sex Crimes,United States Defense and Military Forces,Courts-Martial,Senate,Gillibrand  Kirsten E,McCaskill  Claire
March 6, 2014
7330
WASHINGTON —  The Senate on Thursday rejected a controversial bipartisan bill to remove military commanders from decisions over the prosecution of sexual assault cases in the armed forces, delivering a defeat to advocacy groups that argued that wholesale changes are necessary to combat an epidemic of rapes and sexual assaults in the military.The measure, pushed by Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York, received 55 votes — five short of the 60 votes needed for advancement to a floor vote — after a fellow Democrat, Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, led the charge to block its advancement. The vote came after a debate on the Senate floor filled with drama and accusations that Ms. Gillibrand and her allies were misguided.“What Senator Gillibrand is doing is way off-base,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, his voice rising. “It will not get us to the promised land of having fewer sexual assaults.”The debate pitted the Senate’s 20 women against one another, and seemed bound to leave hard feelings, given that a solid majority of the Senate actually backed Ms. Gillibrand’s proposal.“The only reason some are forcing a filibuster on the Gillibrand vote is because they know we have a majority,” said Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, who supported the bill, pointing to a sign that said “Don’t Filibuster Justice.” But Ms. McCaskill would not budge, and refused to allow the Gillibrand bill to actually get a yes-or-no vote.Several Republicans, including Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky and Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, supported the Gillibrand proposal, and expressed deep frustration with the military’s failure to stem the number of sexual assaults. Congress began scrutinizing the sexual assault problem in the military after a recent series of highly publicized cases, including one at the Naval Academy, and after the release of new data from the Pentagon on the issue. On Sept. 30, the end of the last fiscal year, about 1,600 sexual assault cases in the military were awaiting either action from commanders or the completion of criminal investigations.Critics of the military’s handling of such cases say that the official numbers represent a tiny percentage of sexual assault cases, while Ms. Gillibrand said that only one in 10 sexual assaults were reported. She and her supporters argue that forcing victims to go to their commanders to report sexual assaults is similar to forcing a woman to tell her father that her brother has assaulted her.Because commanders often know both the victims and the accused abusers, Ms. Gillibrand’s supporters say, victims often shy away from reporting abuse. Military commanders, they say, have not proven themselves able to deal with the issue.“The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result,” Mr. Paul said. Mr. Grassley added: “The Defense Department has been promising the American people for a long time that they’re working on the problem of sexual assault.” Then he said, “Enough is enough.”On Thursday, an Army general accused of sexual assault pleaded guilty to three lesser charges. Brig. Gen. Jeffrey A. Sinclair is accused of twice forcing a female captain to perform oral sex, and threatening to kill her family if she told anyone about their three-year affair. General Sinclair admitted to having improper relationships with two other female Army officers and to committing adultery with the primary accuser, which is a crime in the military.General Sinclair also acknowledged violating orders by possessing pornography in Afghanistan. Also on Thursday, military officials said that the Army was investigating allegations that its top sex crimes prosecutor groped a female lawyer at a sexual assault conference in 2011.  Officials have removed Lt. Col. Joseph Morse, who supervises 23 other special-victims prosecutors, but he has not been charged. The inquiry was first reported by Stars and Stripes.Three months ago, Congress passed legislation preventing commanders from overturning sexual assault verdicts. The measure also expanded a special counsel program for victims throughout the military, and made retaliation for reporting assault a crime.After blocking Ms. Gillibrand’s bill, the Senate agreed, 100-0, to move ahead with a measure sponsored by Ms. McCaskill and two Republicans, Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire and Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska. The legislation calls for a civilian review if a prosecutor and commander disagree over whether to litigate a sexual assault case. A vote on that bill is scheduled for next week.After Thursday’s vote, Ms. Gillibrand said she would continue her efforts on behalf of victims of sexual assault in the military.Paul Rieckhoff, the founder and executive director of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, called Thursday’s Senate actions part of “a frustrating pattern.” The Senate, Mr. Rieckhoff said, “has chosen to keep the status quo.” He added, “Our lawmakers should be able to provide a fair and effective military justice system worthy of our veterans and service members.”