https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/18/us/politics/landrieu-tries-to-gather-enough-votes-on-keystone-pipeline.html
Landrieu Tries to Gather Enough Votes on Keystone Pipeline - The New York Times
Landrieu  Mary L,Keystone Pipeline System,Louisiana,Cassidy  Bill (1957- ),Pipelines,Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  Senate,Elections  Senate
Nov. 17, 2014
6415
WASHINGTON — Senator Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana continued to work on Tuesday to round up votes for the Keystone XL oil pipeline, part of a last-minute effort to help her survive a close runoff and one of the toughest battles of her political career.Even if the Senate supports building the pipeline in a vote on Tuesday night, President Obama is likely to veto the measure on the grounds that an environmental review of the process remains incomplete.Nonetheless, the events of this week suggest that after the expected veto, Mr. Obama may eventually approve the pipeline, which would run from the oil sands of Alberta to the Gulf Coast. The project is anathema to the environmentalists who are part of the president’s political base.White House advisers have repeatedly said that they do not intend to issue a final decision until a Nebraska court issues a verdict on the route of the pipeline through that state. But that decision is expected to come as soon as January, the same month that an incoming Republican-majority Congress can be expected to send another Keystone bill to the president’s desk — one that could be within a few votes of a veto-proof majority.If that is the case, people familiar with the president’s thinking say that in 2015 he might use Keystone as a bargaining chip: He would offer Republicans approval of it in exchange for approval of one of his policies.In the meantime Ms. Landrieu, one of the last Democratic senators in the South, faces a runoff on Dec. 6 against her Republican rival, Representative Bill Cassidy. Both candidates hope to drive their campaigns across the finish line by pushing through bills forcing the president to approve the pipeline, which would be an economic boon to Louisiana by bringing carbon-heavy petroleum to the many refineries in the state.On Friday, a Keystone bill sponsored by Mr. Cassidy passed the House. Ms. Landrieu is now close to mustering a filibuster-proof 60 Senate votes in favor of the pipeline in the Senate. She told reporters on Friday that she had 59 votes and was reaching out aggressively to colleagues to round up the critical final vote necessary to send the bill to Mr. Obama’s desk.“We’ll continue to rally the troops for passage,” she said.But last week, Mr. Obama’s spokesman, Josh Earnest, said that Mr. Obama’s advisers had in the past recommended that he veto similar bills for approval of the pipeline.“And that does continue to be our position,” Mr. Earnest said.Since the beginning of his presidency, Mr. Obama has delayed a decision on the pipeline, but the issue has exploded politically as environmental activists have rallied against the project and been arrested in protests outside the White House. Republicans, labor unions and the oil industry have at the same time demanded that the president approve the project, which they call a job-creator and a critical piece of energy infrastructure.Energy policy experts say that in reality, the pipeline’s impact on job creation and the environment would be far less than both sides suggest. But even before the maneuverings for Ms. Landrieu, Keystone became a potent symbol of energy and environmental policy to serve both sides as a political tool.In the current Democratic-controlled Senate, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, has long refused to bring a Keystone bill to a vote for fear that it could hurt the re-election chances of environmental-minded Democrats who might have voted against a project that is popular with many voters.But with Ms. Landrieu now fighting for her political life, and in any event about to lose her coveted position as chairwoman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee when Republicans take the majority in January, pushing her Keystone legislation through the Senate could be a last chance for her to hold on to her seat.In an attempt to bolster Mr. Cassidy, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the soon-to-be majority leader, has promised him a seat on the energy committee if he wins.Throughout Ms. Landrieu’s career in the Senate, she has pushed Mr. Reid to help her advance bills — including those to increase offshore drilling — that she could promote back home to Louisiana’s oil industry. While many liberals chafed at such votes, Mr. Reid nonetheless held them in hopes of keeping the Louisiana Senate seat in Democratic hands.“She wasn’t afraid to barge in there and ask for what she wanted, even when it gummed up the works,” said Mr. Reid’s former communications director, Jim Manley. “And Senator Reid was interested in helping the senator from Louisiana point to accomplishments at home.”Now the question is whether this last vote will be enough to once again help Ms. Landrieu win re-election. Polls conducted last month, before the election, by the NBC News/Marist Poll and the University of New Orleans found Mr. Cassidy with a five- to eight- percentage-point advantage over Ms. Landrieu.Ms. Landrieu spent Monday campaigning in New Orleans and Baton Rouge as her staff reached out to a handful of moderate Democrats to drum up support for the Keystone bill. By Monday evening Ms. Landrieu was back in Washington, where she told reporters as she headed to the Senate floor that she felt “very comfortable” about the vote and said she might exceed the 60-vote threshold.Asked who the 60th vote was, Ms. Landrieu smiled, stepped into a waiting elevator and winked as the doors closed.Ms. Landrieu has so far secured the support of Democrats like Senator Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, Senator Thomas R. Carper of Delaware and Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, the chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.On Monday morning, advocates for and opponents of the pipeline were ramping up their campaigns ahead of the vote.Some three dozen pipeline protesters gathered in a cold rain outside Ms. Landrieu’s house on Capitol Hill to lay a black inflatable pipeline across her lawn, the same prop they once wrapped around the White House.“This house is high and dry, but the coastlines of Louisiana are sinking, very much like Senator Landrieu’s political career,” Erich Pica, president of Friends of the Earth, said to the small crowd. “And she is hooking her political career on the passage of the Keystone XL Pipeline that will worsen climate change, that will worsen sea level rise.”On Sunday, Russ Girling, the chief executive of TransCanada, the company hoping to build the pipeline, appeared on the ABC program “This Week” to make the case for the project. “The need for this pipeline continues to grow,” he said. “Because you’ve got more oil being produced, you need to transport it.”