http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/nyregion/nurse-held-by-new-jersey-over-ebola-exposure-sues-christie.html
Nurse Held by New Jersey Over Ebola Exposure Sues Christie - The New York Times
Hickox  Kaci,Christie  Christopher J,O'Dowd  Mary E,Ebola Virus,Quarantines,New Jersey,Suits and Litigation (Civil)
Oct. 22, 2015
5157
TRENTON —  A nurse who sharply criticized being forced into quarantine at a New Jersey hospital last year because she had had contact with Ebola patients in West Africa said in a federal lawsuit filed on Thursday that Gov. Chris Christie and state health officials held her against her will illegally.The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey and a New York firm filed the civil rights lawsuit on behalf of the nurse, Kaci Hickox, in Federal District Court in Newark. In addition to Mr. Christie, a Republican who is running for his party’s presidential nomination, the suit names the former state health commissioner, Mary E. O’Dowd, and other department officials as defendants. Ms. Hickox seeks at least $250,000 in compensatory and punitive damages.Ms. Hickox, 34, worked with Doctors Without Borders in Sierra Leone during last year’s deadly Ebola outbreak. She was stopped when she arrived at Newark Liberty International Airport and questioned over several hours before being sent to stay in quarantine in a tent outside a hospital in Newark, despite having no symptoms of the virus. She tested negative for Ebola, but was detained for more than two days before being driven to her home in Maine.“My liberty, my interests and consequently my civil rights were ignored because some ambitious governors saw an opportunity to use an age-old political tactic: fear,” Ms. Hickox said in a statement on Thursday.A spokesman for Mr. Christie did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Ms. O’Dowd said she had not received the lawsuit and referred comment to the state’s Health Department, which said it did not comment on pending litigation.Ms. Hickox was quarantined under a policy announced by Mr. Christie and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, a Democrat, that was stronger than federal standards. The governors’ plan came under fire from the White House and medical groups.