http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/18/world/americas/colombia-tries-again-to-end-drug-fed-war.html
Colombians Restart Talks in Hopes of Ending War - The New York Times
Colombia,Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Cocaine and Crack Cocaine
Oct. 17, 2012
5010
EL HORNO, Colombia — For the first time in a decade, rebels and the government of Colombia came together for formal peace talks on Wednesday, with the goal of ending the longest-running war in the Western Hemisphere — nearly 50 years old and counting.Despite three previous rounds of failed negotiations since the 1980s, many observers say there are reasons to hope that this time things could be different, including recent military successes by the government that have the guerrillas on the defensive.But the negotiations must not only convince members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, one of the world’s most tenacious armed groups, to finally lay down their weapons. They also aim to dismantle a major criminal enterprise that derives much of its income from drugs and is a prime source of cocaine to the United States.For many in the organization, known as the FARC, the drug profits may be simply too rich to leave behind.“The trick is to get the guy who is in charge of a front that’s getting tens of millions of dollars a year, has a lot of local power and is doing business” with other traffickers “to actually give it up,” said Adam Isacson, a senior associate of the Washington Office on Latin America, a research group.Here in the Cauca region, the dynamics of the war are inescapable. Sandbagged bunkers, roadblocks and tanks are regular sights along highways and roads. Fighting is so intense here, army officers and police officials say, because the region is important for producing and transporting the drugs the guerrillas rely on for income. In the mountains, coca, the plant used to make cocaine, is grown openly.Verónica Truque, 11, woke one day this past summer to the pop of gunfire, but she did not think much of it. Fighting between government troops and guerrillas had been breaking out every few days in this drug-producing region, and she had grown accustomed to the sound.Suddenly, her family’s small tin-roofed house across from a coca field was caught in the cross-fire. With a tremendous bang, a grenade punched fist-size holes in the wall. Shrapnel hit her wrist and the back of her head. A brother and a cousin were hit, too.“I thought they were going to kill us all,” Verónica, a wide-eyed girl in a school uniform, said of the battle in July. “I want peace,” she added. “And for them to go away.”This volatile mix of drugs and war is evident in the FARC’s leadership. The group’s top commander, who took over late last year and uses the alias Timochenko, has a $5 million bounty on his head in the United States. According to the State Department, he helped set the group’s policies for “the production, manufacture and distribution of hundreds of tons of cocaine,” and for the killing of hundreds of people who interfered.Beyond that, two of the FARC’s peace negotiators have been named in a 2006 federal indictment, charged with helping make the organization a narcotics powerhouse responsible for more than “60 percent of the cocaine sent to the United States” and for “vast numbers” of murders.Even if the guerrillas are willing to end the conflict, much depends on another factor that cannot be decided at the bargaining table: are Colombians, aching from years of kidnappings, bombings and indiscriminate killing, ready to let FARC members re-enter society and politics?“They say, ‘What if Timochenko gets elected to Congress?’ ” said Andrés Pastrana, a former president who led the last round of peace talks from 1999 to 2002. “I hope he gets elected to Congress.”Mr. Pastrana added, “If we are not willing to forgive, the peace process is going to be a failure.”Atrocities have been committed by both sides, but far more people blame the FARC, which is widely labeled a terrorist organization, for a war that has claimed thousands of lives. A peace deal would almost certainly include a mechanism for FARC members to avoid prison.“They have done lots of damage to the country, they have murdered, tortured, kidnapped,” said Brayan Ortiz, 26, a student in Bogotá who opposed letting FARC members who committed crimes go free. “A single word of apology is not going to be enough.”Leading the chorus of detractors is a former president, Álvaro Uribe, who stepped up the war against the FARC, and his political allies.José Darío Salazar, a senator, said of Colombia’s current leader, Juan Manuel Santos, “I am concerned that the president is being fooled” by the FARC. If the government is winning the war, he said, “why sit down as equals at a table?”Mr. Santos and the FARC leadership spent more than a year and a half in secret, preliminary conversations to prepare for the talks this week in Norway. They agreed to topics like drug trafficking, political freedom, rural development and the needs of war victims. Both sides, it seems, have a clear understanding of past mistakes.In the mid-1980s, a cease-fire was declared and the FARC entered politics through a party called the Patriotic Union. Hundreds of the party’s leaders and members were killed, if not more, often by right-wing paramilitary groups.In talks in the late 1990s, Mr. Pastrana gave the FARC a Switzerland-size jungle haven. The FARC used the area to train troops and traffic in drugs, gaining strength as talks dragged on fruitlessly.There are important differences, however, between the Colombia of those talks and the country today.The Colombian Army is much stronger, better trained and better equipped than it was, thanks in large part to billions of dollars in aid from the United States. And the FARC is weaker, with an estimated 9,000 fighters, down from about 17,000 in the 1990s. The army has also killed top FARC leaders, including the previous top commander, Alfonso Cano, last November.For the first time, analysts say, the FARC is entering negotiations saying it is willing to lay down its weapons. But the FARC has little credibility with most Colombians.Ricardo Téllez, one of the FARC negotiators, said last month in an interview in Havana that the group did not grow, process or transport drugs and merely charged a tax on drug activities in its territory. “We detest drug trafficking,” he said.Other FARC leaders have said that the group was not holding any kidnapped hostages (the group officially renounced kidnapping for ransom in February), infuriating those waiting for years for news of kidnapped relatives.“They should not sit down at the table to negotiate until they return the people they have kidnapped,” said Blanca Flores, whose son was kidnapped in 1998. “If they have massacred them, then they must give us their bodies.”In Bogotá, the capital, with its bustling neighborhoods and expensive restaurants, it is sometimes easy to forget the war.But in Toribío, a town in the Cauca region, where the FARC is defending its drug routes from increased army pressure, the nights are punctuated by the sound of mortar rounds. Soldiers and police officers patrol the streets, and many homes bear the scars of a large bomb set off more than a year ago.Adriana Pazu, 25, was wounded in July when a FARC missile landed at the clinic where she works. Shrapnel is still lodged in her body, though she is back on the job. She said she doubted the talks would bring peace.“The guerrillas say one thing and the army says another, and there’s no understanding,” she said.