https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/dining/cecconis-restaurant-opens-brooklyn.html
Cecconi’s, High-End Fare With a Global Presence, Opens in Dumbo, Brooklyn - The New York Times
Restaurants,Cecconi's (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Dumbo (Brooklyn  NY),Bars and Nightclubs,Junior's Cheesecake Inc,Ichimura  Eiji,New York City
June 13, 2017
9753
CECCONI’S DUMBO This high-end Italian restaurant group, based in London, which has branches in Barcelona, Berlin, Istanbul, Miami and West Hollywood, has planted its flag in Brooklyn. Nick Jones, the founder of Soho House, which owns the restaurant group, decided on Brooklyn because he wanted a location with outdoor seating and great views. “Brooklyn has all that and lots of people who live there and visit,” he said. It’s a spacious, elegant restaurant with a brick-walled main dining room, arched windows and starched linens. The barroom, paved with black-and-white tile, has a generous central counter and gleaming chandeliers. A large terrace abuts the waterfront with a Manhattan vista. The chef, Riccardo Bilotta, who has worked at the Lambs Club and A Voce Columbus Circle, is collaborating with Andrea Cavaliere, who oversees all Cecconi’s menus. They are creating an all-day menu of cicchetti (Venetian small bites), carpaccios, salads, pastas like spaghetti with lobster, pizzas and dishes like veal Milanese and branzino in broth. Mr. Jones described the restaurant as an “Italian grand brasserie”: Empire Stores, 55 Water Street (Main Street), Dumbo, Brooklyn, 718-650-3900, cecconisdumbo.com.ESTATE GARDEN GRILL The Ravel Hotel, in the shadow of the Queensboro Bridge, has expanded, adding a tower next to its original space and, atop it, this new indoor-outdoor restaurant with stunning views. Assorted grilled meats, seafood, sushi and a raw bar are available, and wines and beers are on tap. The chef is Seth Levine, who is responsible for the food at the hotel, including at its original rooftop restaurant, Penthouse 808. (Opens Wednesday): Ravel Hotel, 8-08 Queens Plaza South (Vernon Boulevard), Long Island City, Queens, 718-289-6118, estategardengrill.com.IMLI URBAN INDIAN CUISINE A focus on British-accented colonial food and Indian interpretations of dishes like Scotch eggs, pizza (tandoori-style) and a well-seasoned burger with masala-spiced fries sets this Upper East Side newcomer apart from the rush of new Indian restaurants. It has an open kitchen and an enclosed outdoor patio. Manuel Butler, who has cooked at several of the city’s restaurants including Awadh, Sahib and Chote Nawab, is the executive chef: 1136 First Avenue (62nd Street), 212-256-0073.JUNIOR’S RESTAURANT A new branch of this cheesecake specialist, founded in Brooklyn more than 60 years ago, is opening a short walk from the company’s theater district location. But this one, in the former Ruby Foo’s space, seats nearly 300. There’s a full menu of overstuffed deli sandwiches, seafood combos, Romanian tenderloin and assorted cheesecakes. (Wednesday): 1626 Broadway (49th Street), 212-365-5900, juniorscheesecake.com.EIJI ICHIMURA, whose namesake 10-seat omakase restaurant opened in TriBeCa four months ago, has taken a leave of absence for medical reasons. In a statement, the owner, Idan Elkon, said that a team of sushi chefs had stepped in to replace him and that the price of the set meal had dropped to $200 from $300.SCAMPI P J Calapa, who was with the Altamarea Group, where he was the executive chef at Ai Fiori, and who opened the Spaniard about three months ago, plans to add this Italian restaurant to his portfolio this fall. The name is not so much a reflection on a signature dish as it is borrowed from a restaurant in South Padre Island, Tex., that he loved when growing up: 30 West 18th Street.