http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/01/theater/reviews/01blac.html
The Black Eyed - Theater - Review - The New York Times
Theater,New York Theater Workshop,Palestinians,Shamieh  Betty,Swallow  Emily,Issaq  Lameece,Cox  Jane,Steinberg  Paul,Celik  Aysan,Gold  Sam,Serralles  Jeanine,Black Eyed  The (Play)
Aug. 1, 2007
5356
Heaven is low on testosterone in the bleak but whimsical vision of Betty Shamieh, the author of “The Black Eyed,” a thoughtful but rambling new play that opened last night at New York Theater Workshop. Adrift in an afterlife seemingly devoid of men, four women from Palestine debate the ethics of terrorism, the long history of female oppression and the knotty problems of the contemporary Middle East.Picture “The View,” with the wisecracking, sympathetic sweethearts of that ABC television show replaced by a panel of embittered, suffering or enraged Arab women, itching to air a couple of millenniums of grievances. Even the formidable Barbara Walters would have a tough time keeping this crew in line.Ms. Walters’s supervisory role on the morning chatfest is here taken by Aiesha (Aysan Celik), who lies on her back onstage as the audience enters. When the play begins, she rouses herself and, to the sound of ominous rumbling, emits some ominous rumblings of her own.“Unanswered questions, unquestioned answers,” she mutters. “I do someone good dead, I do someone dead good. What is the point of the revolution that begins with the little hand?”The discourse becomes less cryptic, thankfully, when Aiesha is joined by three women who clamber over the back wall of the set (a striking wooden shoebox by Paul Steinberg, bathed in pink lighting by Jane Cox). They have been drawn to this corner of heaven by the rumor that all the martyrs are sequestered in a special section. Each is in search of a particular man she suspects has found entry to this celestial V. I. P. room. Aiesha draws forth their stories with probing, hectoring, occasionally snarky questions.Delilah (Emily Swallow) shares her celebrated history first. As the opera-house maquillage and exotic hairdo suggest, she is indeed that Delilah, she who avenged her people by betraying Samson. With her fellow travelers acting as a sort of Greek chorus, chiming in together here and there, she recounts the story of Samson’s doom from her own perspective, emphasizing her use as a pawn in a conflict between her people and his.The tale of Tamam (Lameece Issaq) is more gruesome. She has come to be reunited with a brother, Muhammed, who died during the early Christian crusades. (“Muhammed?” snaps Aiesha. “Do you know how many Muhammeds are probably in there?”) To seek revenge for  the rape of Tamam before his eyes, he joined a group of rebels violently opposing their foes.Aside from a few jokes, both Tamam and Delilah speak in a kind of highfalutin blank verse that suggests that everyone was more articulate in antiquity. By contrast, Aiesha, who confesses that she is herself a martyr, a suicide bomber driven to despair and nihilism by the suffering of the Palestinians, is more blunt-spoken, even coarse. But the liveliest and most engaging testimony in the play comes from the contemporary woman referred to only as the Architect, played with glowing verve by Jeanine Serralles.After skulking around the periphery for a while, looking tightly wound in her wrap dress, she unleashes a torrent of angry neuroticism when her turn to expound arrives. Her story of an ego-bruising job interview with a celebrated architect unfolds in a caffeinated rush of bruised feelings and thorny resentment, rendered with captivating comic vibrancy by Ms. Serralles. Prone to fantasy, she daydreams a long life of emotional neglect and self-sacrifice as wife to that famous man,  working herself to a wild-eyed pitch of outrage, even in recollection.This endearingly unhinged character also leads us into some of the play’s overtly tendentious passages, unfortunately, as she imagines a day when “Palestinians are allowed the right to self-determination,” and “Iraqis are not killed so their oil can be stolen.”Directed by Sam Gold, “The Black Eyed” is hardly a dry tract. Ms. Shamieh, a Palestinian-American playwright whose “Roar” was produced off Broadway in 2004, does not confine herself to a single point of view in considering the ethics of using violence for political ends. But “The Black Eyed” circles back to the same ideas about oppression and its consequences — namely the fomenting of hard hatreds that can beget terrorism — with a regularity that becomes enervating.Long before its 90 minutes have concluded you may be wishing for a commercial break, or at least a visit from a celebrity guest, to interrupt the stream of angry harangues.THE BLACK EYEDBy Betty Shamieh; directed by Sam Gold; sets by Paul Steinberg; costumes by Gabriel Berry; lighting by Jane Cox; sound by Darron L. West; production stage manager, Rachel Zack; assistant stage manager, Terri K. Kohler. Presented by New York Theater Workshop, James C. Nicola, artistic director; Lynn Moffat, managing director. At New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village; (212) 239-6200. Through Aug. 19. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.WITH: Aysan Celik (Aiesha), Lameece Issaq (Tamam), Jeanine Serralles (the Architect) and Emily Swallow (Delilah).