https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/12/nyregion/melissa-mark-viverito-council-speaker-vows-to-pursue-new-criminal-justice-reforms.html
Melissa Mark-Viverito, Council Speaker, Vows to Pursue New Criminal Justice Reforms - The New York Times
Mark-Viverito  Melissa,State of the City Message (NYC),New York City,Prisons and Prisoners,Rikers Island Prison Complex,City Council (NYC),de Blasio  Bill
Feb. 11, 2016
7687
The speaker of the New York City Council, Melissa Mark-Viverito, vowed on Thursday to pursue a new round of criminal justice reforms aimed at shrinking the jail population to such a degree that officials could eventually contemplate shuttering the city’s scandal-plagued jail complex on Rikers Island.The centerpiece of her proposals, which came in her second State of the City address, was the creation of a special independent commission to be led by the state’s former chief judge, Jonathan Lippman, to review the entirety of the city’s criminal justice system, from how New Yorkers enter it to what happens to them once they are there.With her speech, titled “More Justice,” Ms. Mark-Viverito appeared to be claiming ownership of the issue of criminal justice reform — championed by many of her liberal colleagues on the Council — an issue that was mostly absent from Mayor Bill de Blasio’s State of the City address last week.“It’s New Yorkers who make New York great,” she said, according to a prepared copy of the speech. “And it’s New Yorkers who need more justice.”While the mayor heralded reforms to the city’s Police Department, including a new “neighborhood policing” model and training in “implicit bias,” he did not discuss the city’s jails or summons system. The word “justice,” frequently invoked by Ms. Mark-Viverito, was not mentioned in his address.In addition to the commission, Ms. Mark-Viverito, a Democrat from East Harlem, echoed a growing consensus around clearing backlogged cases out of the court system and improving the warrant process. On Thursday, she called for the creation of a system to clear a mountain of old arrest warrants that often emerge out of summonses for minor crimes, plague the court system and can result in New Yorkers’ languishing on Rikers Island.Ms. Mark-Viverito also said the Council would pass a bill requiring an inspector general for the Correction Department to focus on systematic issues in the city’s jails, modeled after the one created by the Council in 2013 to oversee the Police Department. (The city’s Department of Investigation already has an inspector general for the Correction Department, though its activities are not explained in law.)In her address, Ms. Mark-Viverito pointed to the case of Kalief Browder, who was held on Rikers Island as a teenager and released after three years without ever standing trial. Mr. Browder committed suicide last year.The speech by Ms. Mark-Viverito was a continuation of the themes she had articulated in last year’s address, in which she focused on the flow of mostly young minority New Yorkers into the city’s jails, often for low-level offenses that have been the hallmark of the Police Department’s “broken windows” approach to crime.The Council has since taken up a slate of bills to create a civil process for minor violations of city law, such as urinating or drinking alcohol in public, reforms pushed for by Ms. Mark-Viverito that would most likely reduce the impact of broken-windows policing on New Yorkers caught in low-level offenses. The reforms, which would give officers a civil option in lieu of arrest or criminal summons, have found support at the Police Department, though they have yet to come up for a vote.City lawmakers are also considering more contentious legislation, supported by police reform advocates, that would regulate stop-and-frisk encounters. Those bills are not sponsored by the speaker and are opposed by the Police Department.Both the mayor and Mr. Lippman have called for changes to ease the backlog in state courts. The district attorneys in Brooklyn and Manhattan have in recent months held “warrant forgiveness” events to help New Yorkers dispose of outstanding warrants — which number in the hundreds of thousands — without fear of arrest.The power of the City Council to reform the summons system, overseen by the state courts, is limited, and any proposals would have to be approved by Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat. The mayor’s office voiced support for the proposals, saying Mr. de Blasio had already announced similar plans on warrants and on reducing the number of New Yorkers in jail.“Wherever we house our jails, we will continue reducing our jail population — as a matter of fairness, justice, and safety,” Monica Klein, a mayoral spokeswoman, said in a statement.But by choosing Mr. Lippman to head her commission, Ms. Mark-Viverito appeared intent on creating reform that could hold sway in Albany as well as at City Hall.“We must explore how we can get the population of Rikers to be so small that the dream of shutting it down becomes a reality,” she said. The commission would “look at utilizing more community courts and borough-based jail facilities.”Mr. Lippman, speaking after the address, said the commission, which will be paid for and staffed by his law firm, Latham & Watkins, would take “an objective, hard look at Rikers” to see what populations could be reduced there — juveniles or perhaps the mentally ill — and consider whether to create a new system of local jails around the city, which would be likely to lead to neighborhood pushback. “We’re going to call it the way we see it,” he said.The commission would last a year and release reports and information periodically as it performed its work.There are about 10,000 inmates in New York City, a population that has been declining steadily for over a decade. A vast majority are held at the nine active jail buildings on Rikers Island. The Correction Department does run jails in Manhattan and Brooklyn, as well as on a floating barge in the East River. But these account for only about 2,400 beds and, like the infrastructure on Rikers, are in need of major renovations.Norman Seabrook, the president of the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association, who also attended the speech, called the notion of closing Rikers a “fantasy.”“Where do you put these individuals who continue to commit crimes?” he said. He suggested any new facilities were likely to end up in impoverished or minority areas of the Bronx and Brooklyn. “You’re not putting them on Wall Street.”