https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/20/us/missouri-attorney-general-chris-koster-puts-limit-on-contributions.html
Missouri Attorney General Puts Limit on Contributions - The New York Times
Koster  Chris (1964- ),Missouri,Campaign Finance,Lobbying and Lobbyists,United States Politics and Government,Elections  Governors
Nov. 19, 2014
4975
Attorney General Chris Koster of Missouri, a Democrat whose plans to run for governor in 2016 have been hurt by reports that his office may have given preferential treatment to campaign contributors and lobbyists, announced a new policy Wednesday banning donations from any company that he had targeted for investigation.“These new restrictions are the strictest conflict-of-interest provisions of any elected attorney general in the United States,” Mr. Koster said in a statement. “Transparency is the best way to erase any potential perception of a conflict.” His announcement came after a report last month in The New York Times examining actions by Mr. Koster as part of a broader look at a surge in lobbying of state attorneys general in the United States.A legislative committee had already been appointed by the House speaker in Missouri to investigate Mr. Koster after the article in The Times reported that Mr. Koster, who had taken donations from the distributor of 5-Hour Energy drink and a law firm representing it, ordered his office to drop its participation in a multistate investigation last year.Mr. Koster also settled a case with Pfizer, the pharmaceutical giant, for far less than other states of a similar size had received, after taking tens of thousands of dollars in donations from Pfizer and the law firm representing the company, Dickstein Shapiro of Washington, which also represents the owner of 5-Hour Energy, The Times reported. Mr. Koster denied that either company had received any special consideration.Under Mr. Koster’s new policy, he will no longer accept donations from individuals or companies that are the subject of an ongoing investigation or one that has been resolved in the prior three months, nor will he accept contributions from any lobbyists, lawyers or law firms who represent them. He also announced he would no longer take gifts of any value from registered lobbyists.Attorneys general across the country are considering possible voluntary changes in ethics codes to address issues raised by The Times, several current and former attorneys general said in interviews and in public comments.Mr. Koster said his policy was modeled after that of Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman of New York. A spokesman for Mr. Koster said he also supported Mr. Schneiderman’s call for the Democratic Attorneys General Association, which makes large contributions to attorney general candidates, to stop taking money from targets of investigation.Attorney General Bob Ferguson of Washington State has said he is also considering recommending that the legislature there ban former attorneys general from lobbying the office within a year of leaving the job, another practice that The Times documented has taken place recently in states including Washington and Georgia.