http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/31/us/politics/wasserman-schultz-rubio-mccain-primary.html
Wasserman Schultz, Rubio and McCain Are Among the Big Names in Primary Fights - The New York Times
Primaries and Caucuses,Florida,Arizona,Elections  House of Representatives,United States Politics and Government,Elections  Senate,Schultz  Debbie Wasserman,Rubio  Marco,McCain  John
Aug. 30, 2016
6503
One of the bigger congressional primary days on the summer calendar arrives on Tuesday with high-profile races in Florida and Arizona. Call it the Sunbelt Showdown.Florida has an array of contentious contests. Most prominent is the fight by Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Democrat, to hang on to her South Florida House seat in the face of a challenge from Tim Canova, a law professor and Bernie Sanders backer. His candidacy was given a jolt by criticism that Ms. Wasserman Schultz, while serving as chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, had put her thumb on the primary scale for Hillary Clinton.Ms. Wasserman Schultz stepped down from the post last month after the leak of embarrassing emails critical of Mr. Sanders. Sanders supporters later bolstered Mr. Canova’s candidacy. But polls still have her ahead in a district that extends from west of Fort Lauderdale to Miami Beach, and she has had campaign help from Mrs. Clinton.In the Senate primaries, Marco Rubio, the incumbent Republican, hopes to dispatch the businessman Carlos Beruff and begin his general election campaign against one of two Democratic House members — Representative Patrick Murphy or Representative Alan Grayson. Mr. Murphy is the party establishment choice over Mr. Grayson, the very vocal progressive.Other competitive Florida House primaries are taking place, notably one in the Jacksonville area where Representative Corrine Brown, a 12-term incumbent Democrat, is trying to hold on despite a recent indictment on fraud charges.In Arizona, Senator John McCain is facing a serious Republican primary challenge in what has been a difficult political year for him. He has been pressed repeatedly to explain his support for Donald J. Trump despite Mr. Trump’s minimizing his war hero record. In recent days, Mr. McCain’s primary opponent, Kelli Ward, has suggested that the Arizona senator, who turned 80 on Monday, was too old and not up to the job.Should he win on Tuesday as expected, Mr. McCain then faces a serious general election test from Representative Ann Kirkpatrick, a Democrat, in a year when Mrs. Clinton appears competitive in Arizona in part because of Mr. Trump’s stance on immigration. Mr. McCain has said this may be his toughest re-election cycle ever, and he appears to be right.