https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/29/us/the-line-forms-early-at-the-supreme-court.html
Lining Up, Early, for Same-Sex Marriage Arguments at Supreme Court - The New York Times
Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Supreme Court (US),Washington (DC)
April 28, 2015
5609
WASHINGTON —  The line outside the Supreme Court building on Tuesday snaked down the street and around the block. Many had waited for days to hear oral arguments on whether there is a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, and by sunrise, they shivered in the cool air as they hoped to catch a glimpse of history.With no cameras allowed in the courtroom, there are only a few options available for those hoping to observe the Supreme Court’s proceedings without a press pass. The court reserved about 50 seats for those wishing to stay through the whole argument, with about 30 seats for individuals who rotated into the room in three- to five-minute increments, said Kathleen Arberg, the Supreme Court spokeswoman.Victor Holmes and Mark Phariss, who are fighting Texas’ ban on same-sex marriage in federal court, held the precarious 49th and 50th spots in line as the 10 a.m. start approached, eager to witness the arguments that could confirm or upend their plans. They have already booked the site for their November wedding.But when someone jumped the line in front of them, they had little choice but to separate. They decided that Mr. Holmes — a retired major who served nearly 23 years in the Air Force and wore his uniform on Tuesday — would go in, leaving Mr. Phariss, a lawyer, to hope for a spot in the short-term seats.“The important thing is the result,” Mr. Phariss said, tears welling in his eyes.Other options to see the arguments include befriending a justice to get a prime seat in the justices’ guest box. Or lawyers can join the court’s bar for one of those designated seats, a process that involves gaining the sponsorship of two members and paying a $200 fee, among other requirements — but even members of the bar have to wait in line.For everyone else, there was a long line on the sidewalk on a cool spring weekend.The line started forming on Friday at 6 a.m., about 100 hours before arguments were set to begin, Ms. Arberg said.Sean Varsho, 28, claimed his spot on the sidewalk outside the Supreme Court at noon Friday. He was No. 24. Mr. Varsho, who is gay, booked his flight to Washington from Chicago as soon as the Supreme Court announced in January that it would consider the case.Even before 6 a.m. on Tuesday, he looked invigorated, freshly dressed in a suit and tie standing next to a sign that read, “I’ve waited my entire life for this moment, so I can do 4 days in this line.”“It was always my lifelong dream to be arguing this case,” said Mr. Varsho, who is a law student. “So just being here and inside the courtroom will be like the fulfillment of my lifelong goals.”The front spots were apparently claimed by paid line-standers, a sort of convenience for those who cannot (or do not want to) spend hours or even days in line. They declined to be interviewed, citing the instructions of their employers.Washington Express, a company familiar to many city residents for its courier services, charges $50 an hour to hold a spot at the Supreme Court for a minimum of three hours. Another company, Linestanding.com, charges $36 an hour, with a reservation form that gives customers the option of how early they would like to have someone waiting in line for them — from “2 Hours in Advance” to “Please Put Us at the Front of the Line.”More than an hour before the arguments, the sidewalk outside the Supreme Court already seemed far too small to hold all of the advocates waving signs and shouting. Bookending a sea of colorful same-sex marriage proponents were a number of people who said they were protesting on religious grounds, including about a dozen members of the Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka, Kan.Another group of same-sex marriage opponents used terms like “freak show” to describe some of their fellow protesters, preaching for hours through a megaphone that homosexuality is a sin.As he held a sign warning of damnation, Buddy Fisher, 48, called it “a foregone conclusion” that the court would find in favor of same-sex marriage.“We’re not here thinking we’re going to change Sotomayor’s mind because she walked past a banner and, ‘Oh O.K., now I get it,’ ” he said.As the arguments wrapped up, it was unclear what the court would ultimately decide. John J. Bursch, a former solicitor general of Michigan who argued against same-sex marriage, said he thought the justices had been “receptive” to his argument.“It’s not the job of the federal courts, nine people, to step in and decide for the whole country on something as important as what marriage is,” he said.Mary L. Bonauto, who represented the plaintiffs, told reporters that a ruling against them would mean reducing same-sex couples to “second-class status.”“You are enforcing that the families are deficient and inferior, and that will invite discrimination, as this court has recognized in other situations when federal law subjects people to an outlier status,” she said. “So it would be a very difficult period in our nation’s history.”