https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/business/media/at-stake-in-the-aereo-case-is-how-we-watch-tv.html
At Stake in the Aereo Case Is How We Watch TV - The New York Times
Aereo Inc,Supreme Court (US),Television,ABC Inc,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Computers and the Internet,Copyrights and Copyright Violations
April 22, 2014
6125
WASHINGTON — For most of its two years, Aereo has been an obscure start-up that gained little traction with consumers, partly because it took something that was traditionally easy — watching the broadcast networks — and made it sound complicated. It grabs local over-the-air signals on an array of tiny antennas that users can stream through the Internet to watch and record programming for $8 to $12 a month. Got that?But Aereo’s days in obscurity are over. By Tuesday afternoon, Aereo was the No. 1 ranked “hot search” on Google. That’s because that morning, the Supreme Court heard the broadcasters’ lawsuit against Aereo. The Washington Post put the fight on its front page, CNN did live stand-ups before and after the hearing, and reporters flocked to the court to grab all available seats.(Some seats were better than others — my obstructed view allowed me to see just five of the nine justices, but at least I had a majority. And truth be told, I was just happy to be in the room.)As issues of public moment go, the hearing wasn’t a huge deal. It wasn’t even the morning’s biggest news at the Supreme Court. The justices upheld a Michigan constitutional ban on affirmative action in admissions, and Justice Sonia Sotomayor read from the bench her searing dissent on the case. And before Aereo, the court heard an hourlong argument about an Ohio case that involved elections, abortions and free speech. A fight over dime-size antenna farms that let you watch the N.F.L. on your laptop seemed trifling by comparison.But the Aereo case has technology aficionados and media reporters in a tizzy, partly because it has a little bit of everything: legacy media hanging on to cherished business models, an insurgent with a crafty workaround and perhaps most important, the first big test at the Supreme Court of who owns and has rights to things that are stored in the cloud.  The justices themselves displayed various degrees of understanding about the service, with Justice Sotomayor asking how it was different from her Roku (very) while Justice Antonin Scalia wondered whether Aereo would be able to just start grabbing HBO (it won’t).Again and again, Aereo has been tagged as a Rube Goldberg-like invention. Some justices appeared to agree with that view, suggesting that Aereo was exploiting a loophole, a clever end run around federal copyright law.“Your technological model is based solely on circumventing legal prohibitions that you don’t want to comply with,” Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said to Aereo’s counsel. “Which is fine,” he added. “I mean, lawyers do that.”But if the Supreme Court chooses to bring Aereo to heel, it does not want to break the Internet in the process. Speaking about the potential damage that could occur to cloud-based services like Dropbox and Google Drive, Justice Stephen G. Breyer told a lawyer representing the broadcasters: “Your argument makes me nervous.”Aereo is a hybrid of old and new, built on a legion of miniature antennas that grab programming out of the airwaves, as has happened since the dawn of television, but then storing that content in the cloud to be called down in an instant or at a time of the subscriber’s choosing. As arguments proceeded, you could see the justices grappling with the implications attached to the start-up: was it a cable company, was it a cloud storage enterprise, and most important, was it distributing the broadcasters’ programming to the public and if so, should it pay the price for doing so?The American Broadcasting Company, or ABC, is the named party in the lawsuit, and the network and its rivals fear that a win for Aereo will hurt their ability to receive retransmission fees from the cable providers that carry their service.Media reporters were not the only ones who showed up for the legal fireworks — the media moguls queued up too. Senior executives and general counsels for the various broadcast networks sat in the gallery. Barry Diller, Aereo’s main financial backer, showed up bright and early. James Murdoch, the co-chief operating officer of 21st Century Fox, attended. Former Senator Christopher J. Dodd, who now faces off against his own digital insurgency as chief of the Motion Picture Association of America, was also present. On the courthouse steps after the argument, he said he was just there as a spectator. “I will leave it to the legal eagles to say what it all meant,” Mr. Dodd said.Across the plaza, Chet Kanojia, the founder and chief of Aereo, would say only that he was glad that the company’s day in court had arrived. “It’s over,” he said, leaving the courthouse. “I’m just glad it’s done.”If Aereo loses, it is out of business. Mr. Kanojia has told me there is no Plan B. And with some relish, Paul Clement, the lawyer for the broadcasters, said, “If all they have here is a gimmick, they will probably go out of business, and no one should shed a tear.”Even if Aereo wins, its business path is uncertain. Will consumers pay even small amounts of cash for a service that doesn’t have “The Walking Dead,” “SportsCenter” or “Shark Week”?Then again, few other than Mr. Diller ever gave Aereo a shot of going anywhere because of an approach to streaming content that gave a cut of exactly zero to those who produced it.Yet there Aereo was, before the highest court in the land, doing its best to explain to nine justices who grew up watching “M*A*S*H” over rabbit ears that television is in the middle of a jailbreak, and there is no going back.