https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/19/us/politics/republicans-push-to-halt-syrian-refugee-program.html
Republicans Push to Halt Syrian Refugee Program - The New York Times
Refugees and Displaced Persons,Paris Attacks (November 2015),Syria,United States Politics and Government,Republican Party,Law and Legislation,Terrorism,Muslims and Islam,House of Representatives,McCaul  Michael T,Ryan  Paul D Jr
Nov. 18, 2015
5802
WASHINGTON —  Congressional Republicans increased pressure on the White House on Wednesday to halt a program for Syrian refugees, setting up a confrontation with President Obama over the issue as they head into a battle over spending next month.Representative Michael McCaul, Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee, introduced  a bill on Wednesday that would beef up the screening process for Syrians and Iraqis who enter the United States as refugees. The House is expected to vote on the measure on Thursday, a remarkable pace for legislation that showed the urgency in Congress to respond to the deadly attacks in Paris.The bill, which received the full support of Speaker Paul D. Ryan, would require that the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security and the director of national intelligence confirm that each applicant from Syria and Iraq poses no threat. The bill did not go into specific measures; rather, it said that officials “shall take all actions necessary” for a “thorough” background check.In response, the White House issued a statement on Wednesday saying that President Obama would veto the legislation.But Mr. Ryan argued that the program needed to be paused “until we can be certain beyond any doubt that those coming here are not a threat.”“It’s that simple. And I don’t think it’s asking too much,” Mr. Ryan added. Despite calls by some Republicans that Muslim refugees be given different consideration from other religious groups, Mr. Ryan said the House bill would not take an applicant’s religion into account.By late Wednesday, several House Democrats said they too would sign on to the Republican measure, citing fears for American security and a lack of a cohesive plan by the administration.While Mr. Ryan and other Republican leaders are eager to keep the matter of Syrian refugees detached from a spending measure that Congress must pass before Dec. 11 to keep the government open, some lawmakers already raised the idea of tying funding to the policy.Representative Bradley Byrne, Republican of Alabama and a member of the House Armed Services Committee, introduced legislation on Wednesday that would eliminate all funding for resettling the refugees.“We have shared our language with the Appropriations Committee and would welcome its inclusion in whatever the final funding bill looks like,” said Seth Morrow, a spokesman. “Congressman Byrne believes the power of the purse is the best tool we have to stop the Syrian refugee resettlement program.”Across the rotunda, Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky and a candidate for the White House, said he would attempt to offer an amendment to a pending transportation bill that would block taxpayer benefits for new refugees from “high-risk countries.”Heritage Action for America, a conservative group that often pressures members to cut federal spending, supported the House bill, but also noted that the measure did not include any way for Congress to verify that the new vetting process was followed.“If the administration is unwilling to work with Congress in that manner, then it is perfectly appropriate for the legislative branch to use the appropriations process,” said Dan Holler, a spokesman for Heritage.Many Democrats argued against turning away all refugees in the name of fighting terrorism. “Slamming the door in the face of victims of terrorism, I think, would be a betrayal of our values,” said Representative Eliot L. Engel of New York, the top Democrat on the Foreign Affairs Committee. A group of moderate Democrats said they would support the Republican bill.The United States has taken in just over 1,500 Syrian refugees since the start of the conflict in Syria over four years ago, American officials said. The Obama administration has proposed, in the next year, to accept at least 10,000 new Syrians, who would be vetted from the roughly 18,000 referred by the United Nations for resettlement in the United States.On Twitter on Wednesday, Mr. Obama denounced Republicans’ efforts: “Slamming the door in the face of refugees would betray our deepest values. That’s not who we are. And it’s not what we’re going to do.”“We also win this fight with our values. America can ensure our own security while welcoming refugees desperately seeking safety from ISIL,” he added.When pressed, most Republicans could not specify which aspects of the rigorous refugee vetting program that they found inadequate. Mr. Ryan’s staff members cited a Bloomberg poll of 1,002 adults released on Wednesday, conducted by Selzer & Company, that found that 53 percent of those surveyed said the resettlement program should be halted.Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, said that while he supported the program and found it rigorous, Obama administration officials “have not done a good job in explaining what the process is.” That view was echoed by Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, one of the few members of his party to not immediately call for the suspension of the program.