https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/us/politics/obama-trump-transition.html
Trump, a New Style of Fighter, Takes the Ring - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,News and News Media,Obama  Barack
Jan. 11, 2017
6909
WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump’s aides often cite his appearances at professional wrestling matches as an inspiration for his outsize political speaking style, and his buoyantly belligerent news conference in New York on Wednesday proved he has no plans to betray his brawler’s roots in the service of seeming more presidential.Mr. Trump delivered a stream-of-consciousness survey of his transition to the presidency and an update on the state of his psyche, holding forth on his being a “germaphobe,” his belief that many foreign governments secretly videotape Americans in “the strangest places” inside hotel rooms, and his low opinion of BuzzFeed, which published an unsubstantiated report prepared by the intelligence community that Russia had collected compromising information on him.With Hillary Clinton vanquished, Mr. Trump trained his ire on the ripest adversary at hand, the “left-wing” news media. The news conference began with Sean Spicer, who will soon occupy the dual roles of White House press secretary and communications director, acting as an angry M.C., berating the news media for following up on the unverified report. Then Mr. Trump shouted down a CNN correspondent, accusing the network of broadcasting the same “fake news.”The fact that Mr. Trump’s performance was midrange for him doesn’t mean it is normal behavior for a president. “It’s absolutely without precedent, and even Republicans are really going to notice the absence of Obama, who was deeply concerned about elevating the reputation of the office,” the presidential historian Douglas Brinkley said.The inauguration is still eight days away, but Wednesday may be remembered as the day that ushered in the Trump era. The way was cleared by President Obama, who, in Chicago 14 hours before Mr. Trump’s news conference, gave what was billed as the final word on his presidency. And seldom has the contrast between a departing president and his successor been so stark.Mr. Obama delivered a solemn farewell, modeled, his aides said, on George Washington’s 1796 call for national unity. The way Mr. Trump stepped into the spotlight in the lobby of Trump Tower — taking turns onstage with aides, alternatively enraged and solicitous, and clearly loving the attention — owed more to the WrestleMania spectacles staged by Mr. Trump’s friend Vince K. McMahon, the World Wrestling Entertainment founder.Not surprisingly, aides to Mr. Trump and Mr. Obama had conflicting interpretations of the stylistic contrast.“To me, the irony of the split screen is that the guy who is leaving actually represents the future, and the guy who is replacing him represents the past,” said Dan Pfeiffer, Mr. Obama’s former communications director.Kellyanne Conway, who was Mr. Trump’s campaign manager and will be a counselor to the president, said the president-elect’s critics “just don’t get it” and are missing his appeal to voters who are fed up with Washington. “Mr. Trump is going to do what he was elected to do, which is to challenge the establishment,” she said.Mr. Obama also rode into town on a wave of disgust with the status quo in 2008, although his support came from a Democratic Party rebelling against the Iraq war and the social conservatism of President George W. Bush. But his political style was bookish, austere and far more subdued than Mr. Trump’s.At his first news conference in the White House, in the middle of the economic collapse, Mr. Obama issued a terse and sober assessment of the national situation that included a detailed discussion of his recovery plans and a comparison of the Great Recession to the situations that President Franklin D. Roosevelt faced in the 1930s and that Japanese policy makers dealt with during their crisis in the 1990s.Mr. Obama’s criticisms of Mr. Bush’s low-tax economic policies were pointed, but respectful.Mr. Trump’s election hasn’t tempered his tongue when it comes to adversaries. On Wednesday, he mocked Mrs. Clinton by name when he was pressed on his dealings with Russia and its president, Vladimir V. Putin. “Do you honestly believe that Hillary would be tougher on Putin than me?” he asked reporters. “Does anybody in this room really believe that? Give me a break.”He was even more contemptuous of Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a marginal opponent during the Republican presidential primary contests who is prodding the president-elect to tighten sanctions on Moscow. “He is going to crack that 1 percent barrier one day,” Mr. Trump joked, a reference to Mr. Graham’s low poll numbers when he was a candidate.Mr. Obama, like his successor, hasn’t been afraid to criticize the news media. But his attacks tend to be selective and based on his belief that journalists can be too obsessed with clicks to do their job responsibly. Last month at his final news conference, he singled out the reporting on the hacked emails of the Clinton adviser John D. Podesta. “You guys wrote about it every day,” Mr. Obama said. “Every single leak, including John Podesta’s risotto recipe.”Mr. Trump has been far less restrained and has made bashing the news media a defining characteristic of his politics. On Wednesday, he tore into BuzzFeed and other outlets that published articles on the Russia report. “There’s been such a concerted effort by some in the mainstream media to delegitimize this election and to demean our incoming administration,” he said.Mr. Trump’s approach is less madness than method, underscoring his toughness and subjecting reporters to a fusillade of verbiage that makes it hard to focus the public on any single controversy, in this case, the allegations against Russia.But there were more tangible signs of the new era beyond Mr. Trump’s news conference.The Trump White House vaulted from abstraction to reality this week with the start of contentious hearings on the nominations of Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama for attorney general and Rex W. Tillerson for secretary of state. In the middle of his news conference, almost as an afterthought, Mr. Trump announced that he was naming his latest cabinet appointee, Dr. David J. Shulkin, to be secretary of veterans affairs.The biggest problem Mr. Trump confronted in the news conference, and the one that threatens to spill into the first months of his presidency, involves the allegations that Russia not only tried to influence the election in his favor, but also gathered compromising intelligence on him.Before Mr. Trump answered a single question on Wednesday, he and his team rolled out a seemingly prescripted 30-minute denial of the unsubstantiated allegations involving him from his spokesman, Mr. Spicer. Next came a more muted statement by Vice President-elect Mike Pence and a forceful statement by Mr. Trump, who railed against leaks by intelligence agencies.But delving into policy and answering questions about his behavior aren’t the only goals of Mr. Trump’s periodic sparring sessions with the news media. Unlike Mr. Obama, who prides himself on his participation in the drafting of speeches, Mr. Trump cares far more about visual imagery and likes to use props.Ten years ago, nearly to the day, Mr. Trump dumped tens of thousands of dollars on delighted fans at a WWE fan appreciation night, bragging that he had upstaged Mr. McMahon.His Trump Tower appearance on Wednesday featured a less flashy theatrical flourish: A table near his lectern was heaped with paper-filled manila folders intended to illustrate his commitment to disentangling himself from his businesses.