https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/books/review/mary-alice-monroe-interview-beach-house.html
Readers Come for the Characters but Stay for the Animals - The New York Times
Books and Literature
June 30, 2017
4601
BIRD BY BIRD: The novelist Mary Alice Monroe lives on the Isle of Palms, in South Carolina’s Lowcountry, and her best-selling books often grapple with threats to the region’s environment. “The Summer Girls” dealt with bottlenose dolphins, “The Beach House” with sea turtles; her latest, “Beach House for Rent” — new at No. 12 on the hardcover fiction list — continues the “Beach House” series and features brown pelicans along with the collapse of shorebird populations on nearby Dewees Island. “There’s been a 70 percent drop in the number of North American shorebirds since the 1970s,” Monroe told me in a recent phone interview on her way to Augusta, Ga., for a book event. “If I’m the canary in the coal mine, as I’ve been called, I’m singing loudly right now.”Monroe was raised near Chicago and spent 12 years in Washington, D.C., before moving to the Isle of Palms in 1998. She took to it right away. “I must have been Southern in another life,” she said. “I was very struck by how beautiful this area was, and how quickly it can disappear.”There might seem to be an inherent conflict in wanting to safeguard the wilderness of a place and writing about it so enticingly that you draw hordes of visitors. Monroe — who spends much of her time volunteering with local environmental groups and actively rescuing animals — acknowledged the tension. “That’s something eco-tourism struggles with around the world,” she said. “You highlight a beautiful spot and everyone wants to come. But when the visitors arrive, at least if they’ve read my books, they know how to be responsible stewards. It’s a collective effort rather than ‘This is my beach, and I paid $3,000 to stay here.’”Writing her novels, Monroe told me, she usually decides what species to feature even before choosing a plot. “No one comes to my books to learn about pelicans or turtles,” she said. “They come for the people, for the emotions. But that’s how I hook them.” She laughed. “When a character in my books looks a dolphin in the eye,” she said, “I have been there.”WARTS AND ALL: Don Winslow’s thriller “The Force,” about a corrupt police officer, hits the hardcover fiction list at No. 10. “One of the great advantages we have in our genre of crime fiction is we write about people in extremis,” Winslow told The Huffington Post recently. “We write about flawed people. Before this, I wrote more about criminals than cops, but it’s the same principle. The flaws in these people make them interesting.”