https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/26/upshot/readers-turn-eliminate-fafsa.html
Readers’ Turn: Eliminate Fafsa? - The New York Times
Financial Aid (Education),Colleges and Universities,Tuition
Aug. 25, 2015
9367
This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.Many economists have pointed out that simplicity or little nudges can go a long way in bettering people’s lives.Last week, Susan Dynarski wrote an article endorsing an effort by lawmakers to simplify the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, known as the Fafsa, so that more lower-income students could go to college. Then she went one step further. She made the case that we’d be better off on balance without the Fafsa at all.A large number of readers disagreed strongly. As one reader put it: “Why should we dumb down the first hurdle to make college easier? You don’t deserve a high school diploma if you can’t fill out the Fafsa.”That led to a discussion that touched on empathy, coddling and fraud.Rhea Wong, Executive Director, Breakthrough New York (btny.org)When it comes to narrowing the gap in college attendance between rich and poor students, advocates and policy makers often propose large-scale solutions that never get implemented due to politics, lack of funding, or both. Susan Dynarski’s proposal to simplify the financial aid process would be not only quick and painless, but also effective. My organization, Breakthrough New York, successfully shepherds 100 percent of our low-income students to college, but each year we have to devote hours — including an annual daylong workshop — to helping students and parents navigate the Fafsa and other financial aid forms. Unfortunately, most low-income families don’t have the benefit of such programs. Any step we can take to eliminate small obstacles that keep our kids from being successful is a step worth taking.IndiaThe C.S.S. is the form used by the most competitive colleges for financial aid. And yes, they want to know what brand/model/year car each family member drives and how much they give to their church. Getting rid of Fafsa will do little to help students applying to schools that require C.S.S.Matthew M, ChicagoAs a somewhat recent college graduate, I am pretty familiar with the Fafsa. It’s not that complicated. If potential students are unable to complete this basic form, are they really college material? All too often, we hear of the dumbing down of American students, yet we insist on holding their hands as they complete a multipage form.Blue StateMost of the reasons not to move to a tiny or nonexistent Fafsa involve preventing fraud. Having worked in a state financial aid office, I know the people who tried to make their children emancipated to avoid paying for college, who tried to get state scholarships based on need so that they could buy their kid an SUV for their occasional trip back home instead of paying tuition. If there’s free money for poor people, rich people will work the angles. Every rich kid who gets need-based scholarships instead of paying tuition not only steals from taxpayers, but they also encourage tuition inflation as schools chase that scholarship money.Syoh, Chapel Hill, N.C.After reading this article, ask yourself this simple question: From whose perspective did you consider the difficultly of completing the Fafsa? In other words, were you thinking from the point of view of someone who regularly files their taxes, owns assets, has a checkings/savings account, and even has a retirement plan? Were you thinking from the point of view of someone who is financially literate? Did you ever consider the families who do not file taxes regularly because of reasons like unemployment or homelessness, or the families who do not have checkings and savings accounts? Before you criticize this article and say, “Well, if you can’t fill out the Fafsa, then you shouldn’t go to college,” ask yourself another question: What kind of student do you think has the right to attend college? A student from a family who knows it all or a student from a family who’s trying to figure it out?Dr. MehFafsa requires students to track down the financial records of their parents. If there is an absentee parent, the student must prove it. If there is an abusive parent or the parents refuse to help pay for college, the student must prove it. Can you imagine that? A hopeful student who is able to flee abusive parents needs to demonstrate that he filed police reports and pursued legal action. That’s a tall order for the average adult, yet alone the average 18 year old!An angry, resentful, mentally ill, abusive, etc. parent can easily derail Fafsa by refusing to provide info, leaving the student to flounder and hope. If lucky, the student will get help from a financial aid officer. More likely, an overwhelmed counseling staff will be unable to spend the required time to help the student. He leaves the college path and wastes talent.Jim Davis, St. LouisThank you for this article. I hate filling out the Fafsa. It’s especially irritating if you have more than one student in school. While we’re in the cutting mode, why don’t we take a look at those bloated administrations at our colleges and universities that are making it necessary to have a Fafsa in the first place? We could kill two birds with one stone!Concerned, Chatham, N.J.What about people who do not need to file an income tax form?Susan Dynarski replied: One option is for the I.R.S. to use nonfilers’ W2s to determine eligibility. A second option is to have nonfilers become filers by completing a 1040EZ. Either of these approaches reduces paperwork for these nonfilers, since the 1040EZ has about 35 questions and the FAFSA about 115.