http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/01/world/americas/3-soldiers-are-charged-with-homicide-in-mexico-killings.html
3 Soldiers Are Charged With Homicide in Mexico Killings - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Kidnapping and Hostages,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,San Pedro Limon (Mexico),Pena Nieto  Enrique,United Nations,Mexico,Murillo Karam  Jesus
Sept. 30, 2014
8251
MEXICO CITY —  In a rare case of prosecution for suspected human rights abuses, though one not likely to satisfy critics, three soldiers have been charged with homicide in the June killings of 22 people in western Mexico, Attorney General Jesús Murillo Karam announced on Tuesday.Mr. Murillo Karam said that what started with a brief firefight involving eight soldiers and a group of people suspected of being gang members in the small town of San Pedro Limón on June 30 ended with three soldiers unleashing “a new series of gunshots that had no justification whatsoever.”He did not say whether some of the victims had surrendered, as a witness reported, nor did he explain how only eight soldiers managed to subdue and kill 22 armed suspects in the span of what he said was eight to 10 minutes.Security analysts and human rights advocates reacted with skepticism and scorn.“Everything is the result of only three soldiers, really?” said Alejandro Hope, a Mexican security analyst and former intelligence officer. “There is something that does not fit. It sounds bizarre.”For three months after the episode in San Pedro Limón, military and government officials said that the 22 victims had died in a firefight with soldiers who were firing in self-defense. In his comments on Tuesday, Mr. Murillo Karam acknowledged “inconsistencies” in the military’s initial account, making clear that the explanation issued previously by senior military and civilian officials had not been accurate. The admission comes only after the government’s account began to crumble with reports from The Associated Press that there were no signs of a sustained shootout at the warehouse where the killings occurred.At least one witness later said that most of the people killed — including the witness’s daughter — had surrendered, then were murdered by soldiers shooting at close range.Last week, Mexico’s Defense Department announced that seven soldiers and an officer had been detained and charged with violating military law, a case separate from the attorney general’s civil prosecution. Mexico’s human rights ombudsman is conducting a third investigation. Yet international pressure continues to build.On Monday, Christof Heyns, a United Nations special rapporteur for human rights, called on Mexico to conduct a thorough investigation into what he described as a possible case of “summary executions.”Mr. Hope said that with the homicide charges announced Tuesday, President Enrique Peña Nieto and his appointed officials “are just trying to contain this as much as they can and not get into the broader issue of how the security forces use force.”