https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/02/books/for-younger-readers-march-revisits-civil-rights-movement-in-visual-detail.html
‘March’ Graphic Novel Revisits Civil Rights Movement in Rich Detail - The New York Times
Civil Rights Movement (1954-68),Graphic Novels,March (Book),Lewis  John R,Books and Literature,Blacks,Segregation and Desegregation,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Aydin  Andrew,Powell  Nate (1978- ),Education Department (NYC),Civil Rights and Liberties,Education (K-12),New York City
Aug. 1, 2016
4570
The third book of “March,” United States Representative John Lewis’s graphic novel trilogy about the civil rights movement, comes out on Tuesday. But Mr. Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, said he hoped that his firsthand account of the struggle for equality and the power of nonviolent civil disobedience would continue to inspire a new generation of activists.“I think the book to some degree has become what I like to call a change agent,” Mr. Lewis said. The graphic novel, he said, has caused “another generation to get out there and push and pull and try to set things right.” One of his goals is to have “March,” published by Top Shelf Productions, distributed in schools and universities throughout the country.Mr. Lewis, 76, was in San Diego, speaking on a conference call with Andrew Aydin, his co-author, and Nate Powell, the book’s artist, last week, a day after Book 2 of “March” received an Eisner Award, the comic book industry equivalent of an Oscar, for best reality-based work.Prestige aside, the Eisner may be the least of this graphic novel’s accomplishments. In May, the New York City Department of Education announced that “March” would be part of this fall’s Passport to Social Studies program for eighth graders. The series has also been included in reading programs at colleges around the country, including Michigan State University, Georgia State and the University of Utah.The genesis of “March” can be traced back to “Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story,” a 16-page, 10-cent comic book published in 1957, which advocated nonviolent resistance. In 2008, Mr. Lewis told Mr. Aydin, his digital director and policy adviser, how influential the comic book had been on him and the civil rights movement. Mr. Aydin, who wrote his master’s thesis on it, to convinced Mr. Lewis to tell his own story as a graphic novel.At nearly 600 combined pages, the three volumes capture a multitude of events in Mr. Lewis’s life: his formative years in Troy, Ala.; helping to organize sit-ins to protest the segregation of lunch counters in Nashville; joining the Freedom Riders to test the Supreme Court decision that outlawed bus segregation; and taking part in the 1963 March on Washington, of which he is the sole surviving speaker.Another moment, President Barack Obama’s inauguration in January 2009, is used as a framing device for the volumes. That day — depicted with smiles and beaming pride emanating from Mr. Lewis — stands in sharp contrast to the majority of the story, told in harrowing flashbacks that show brutality and humiliations endured by civil rights activists. “It was very difficult to relive moments,” Mr. Lewis said. “I was there and I wondered: ‘How could people be so mean and vicious? How could this happen?’”Many scenes are unsettling to read and to look at, whether bloodshed, racial slurs or ugly spectacles like a waitress dousing her unwanted customers with cleaning detergent and torrents of water. Mr. Powell powerfully captures these dark times in black and gray tones. Reviews of the book have been laudatory. Jody Arlington wrote on NPR.org that “March” is “a fresh and sometimes shocking work” for its violence and offers an “inside look at the leaders of the civil rights movement.”It is an understatement to say that “March” is still relevant. Mr. Lewis, when asked about the Black Lives Matter movement, said he hoped that people struggling today would look back to the 1960s to “study and understand what we did and what we attempted to accomplish.”“We did it in orderly, peaceful, nonviolent fashion,” he added, noting that discipline and time for preparation were essential.One of Mr. Lewis’s goals for “March” was to teach younger readers about the civil rights movement and to use it to inspire nonviolent civil disobedience.“It is working,” Mr. Aydin said. He pointed to Blair Imani, a Louisiana State University graduate who heard Mr. Lewis speak during a campus visit in 2014. “It reaffirmed my passion for activism,” Ms. Imani, 22, wrote in an email interview. Despite being arrested on July 10 while protesting the death of Alton B. Sterling, within days she helped organize a vigil in honor of three of the police officers in Baton Rouge, La., who were killed on July 17.Ms. Imani, a Muslim community activist, said she had long admired Mr. Lewis. “My parents would invoke his legacy to demonstrate that the fight for civil rights has a place in all arenas of society, whether it is peacefully protesting on the front lines or voting in Congress,” she wrote. “Not only had Aydin and Lewis provided a framework for nonviolence, they had effectively passed the torch to my generation.”The creators of “March” are most heartened by their youngest fans. Mr. Aydin recalled an interview with a reporter for The Wall Street Journal who shared the graphic novel with his son. “His 9-year-old son had gone and put on his Sunday suit and was now marching around his house demanding equality for everyone,” Mr. Aydin said. “Imagine if we could instill a social consciousness in every 9-year-old in America. What would that do in a generation?”