http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/25/insider/arizona-dreaming-a-foreign-correspondent-wakes-up-in-the-wild-wild-west.html
Arizona Dreaming: A Foreign Correspondent Wakes Up in the Wild Wild West - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Illegal Immigration,Arizona
Oct. 24, 2016
6497
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Declan Walsh — an Irish citizen who has taken a break from his role as The Times’s Cairo bureau chief to cover the United States election as a foreign correspondent — attends his first county fair with gun-club stands, falls asleep to the sound of howling coyotes and tries not to say “petrol.”Things seemed to be going so well. I was standing on a hilltop just outside Nogales, a border town in southern Arizona, using my iPhone to record an interview with a Border Patrol agent about the challenge of preventing drugs and migrants from entering the United States. In the background of the shot stood the border fence and, inside Mexico, a lookout post said to be manned by members of a drug cartel.Then it started to go awry. My gimbal — an elaborate, selfie stick-like device that holds the phone steady while filming — went haywire, pulling the camera up then down. I wrestled to hold it steady, fumbling for the off switch. The border agent kept talking. The problem: We couldn’t stop to fix it because we were live, broadcasting to thousands of viewers on Facebook.New forms of digital journalism brim with possibilities — telling stories in exciting, innovative ways, attracting new audiences, obtaining instant feedback. But they also involve an array of cables, batteries and equipment that, like my drunken gimbal, can malfunction at just the wrong moment. Sometimes I yearn for the days of a notepad and pen.And yet, when it comes to reporting on this crazy, helter-skelter presidential election, every tool helps. Since I arrived in America in July to write a series about how the campaign looks to an outsider, called Abroad in America, I’ve frequently turned to social media to solicit queries and advice from readers and to answer their questions. Technologies like Facebook Live, for all their limitations, help bring readers along for the ride, whether it’s to talk with coal miners in West Virginia or with impassioned delegates on the floors of the party conventions in Cleveland and Philadelphia.I had come to Arizona, with the photographer Tomas Munita, to write about one of the campaign’s totemic issues: Donald J. Trump’s proposed wall. What did the people who live along the border with Mexico think of the idea? We flew in to Tucson, 60 miles from the border, rented a 4-wheel-drive Jeep and headed south, toward the Mexican border, with Google Maps as a guide.That was already a novelty: Renting a car is impossible or inadvisable in Libya and Syria, two of the Arab countries where I’ve worked this year. Petrol (or gas, as Americans call it) is also strikingly cheap in Arizona: $30 for 15 gallons, or about one-third the price of what it costs in London, where I lived for a couple of years before moving to Cairo.We spent a week roving back and forth along a 120-mile stretch of border, under giant skies filled with dramatic columns of rolling clouds. Small towns with names like Apache, Rodeo and Tombstone echoed the Old West I had in my head. (The re-enactment of the shootout at the OK Corral in Tombstone was entertaining but not as eventful as it had been one day last year when an actor, having accidentally loaded real bullets into his gun, shot and wounded another cast member during the show.)The Cochise County Fair in Douglas, with its glittering fairground and rodeo riders, presented a slice of amber-hued rural Americana that, until then, I had imagined only existed in the pages of National Geographic. In the animal stalls, children in cowboy hats cleaned and blow-dried their competition goats and cattle; vendors offered a glorious profusion of snacks like “Zach’s Poppin Johnny Ice Cream,” made using a 1927 John Deere hit-n-miss engine that pops and chugs as it turns two old-fashioned oak churns (delicious). Otherwise they sold items that I found funny (“Warning: You are Entering a Red Neck Area,” read one sign) or faintly disturbing (Confederate flags hung from a stall where a tattoo-wearing trader displayed his array of large daggers to a spellbound young boy).We crossed the border several times, parking the Jeep and traveling by foot. Getting into Mexico was easy — a simple security scan and a desultory document check and we were over. (Once, I didn’t even have to show my passport.) Returning to America was another matter — a weaving journey through an elaborate, multimillion-dollar border post, replete with guards, cameras, scanners and dogs.Nogales, Ariz., is dwarfed by the eponymous city across the border in the Mexican state of Sonora. At a Christian shelter there, I interviewed a few migrants on Facebook Live, one of whom — a quietly determined Honduran coffee farmer named José Manuel Talavera — would become a central figure in our story. We spent a few hours with Mr. Talavera, walking the streets of Nogales and taking lunch together, so we could better understand why he was willing to risk all for such a perilous journey.The election was never far from the surface. One evening, returning to my room in the American Nogales, I found the maid had planted a copy of the Bible on top of the book I was reading: “Trump Revealed.” A political statement? If it was, others were more overt. An elderly Mexican-American woman declared herself a Trump enthusiast (“Viva el Donald Trump,” read the post on her Facebook page). A hardy cowboy rancher said he had rooted for Bernie Sanders, the failed Democratic contender, in the primary elections.Some folks exhibited hints of the anti-media hostility that has grown across America as this divisive campaign has progressed. At the Cochise fair, I found a man wearing a “Hillary for Prison” T-shirt at a gun-club stand. After a few minutes of terse conversation, the head of the club interjected, “Come over here, we need you,” and pulled the man away while glaring at me. The two men sat down together and pointedly turned their backs to me. Interview over.Food was part of the adventure — corn dogs at the fair, tacos and chilled beer on a Mexican street. Our interview subjects provided the best gastronomic leads. A pair of Border Patrol agents took us to an amazing taqueria down a rutted lane outside Nogales; Gretchen Baer, an artist who helps young Mexicans paint the border wall, brought us to a bustling lounge in Bisbee, a former copper mining town that’s now a hub of artists and hippies, where a band was playing. Ms. Baer’s transport is the “Hillcar” — a 1989 Toyota Corolla emblazoned with images of her political idol, Hillary Clinton.Accommodations varied. In Tucson we stayed at the historic Hotel Congress, where the notorious bank robber John Dillinger was captured in January 1934. One night in Douglas, a budget motel only had smoking rooms available: Imagine an air-conditioned ashtray with minimal comfort and a sign on the door that urged guests, “For Your Protection: When In Room Engage Deadbolt And Security Latch.” Not particularly reassuring.Then there was what you might call the serendipity of the road: chance meetings with good people. In the border town of Naco, we bumped into David Loyd, a gracious and generous resident who offered food and a bed for the night. Mr. Loyd had run a ferry to a remote island in Washington State, on the border with Canada, before moving to southern Arizona three years ago. On the night we stayed with him, we fell asleep in his guest room to the mournful sound of howling coyotes on the plains outside.The complicated reality of life on the border — sweeping beauty alongside human tragedy — loomed close. A kindly rancher named Dan Bell took us to see two monuments near the border: a memorial dedicated to Alexander Kirpnick, a border patrol agent killed in the line of duty in 1998, and a cross that marked the spot where an anonymous migrant, trying to cross the border, had died.Sometimes, though, you miss the moment. We had just finished a Facebook Live session and put away the equipment when there was a skirmish behind us. A border agent hustled two illegal migrants, a man and a woman, into a van. They had been scooped up minutes earlier, soon after they vaulted the fence, the agent said. They would likely be back in Mexico by evening.