https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/upshot/the-gop-health-bill-is-alive-again-heres-a-quick-way-to-catch-up.html
The G.O.P. Health Bill Is Alive Again. Here’s a Quick Way to Catch Up. - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),House of Representatives,House Freedom Caucus,Republican Party
April 27, 2017
2391
The Republican plan to repeal Obamacare and replace it with something quite different is heading for a House vote Thursday, after an embarrassing false start in March. The bill, the American Health Care Act, has changed considerably since it was first introduced. Here’s a refresher course to our coverage of what’s inside it. Click the links for fuller stories on each subject.A set of proposed changes has won over most members of the conservative Freedom Caucus, which opposed the original G.O.P. bill.The compromise would allow states to waive three big Obamacare rules.■ The law’s “essential health benefits” provision was devised to keep insurance to a minimum standard and make it useful for people who need it.■ Obamacare’s “community rating” provision helps protect people with pre-existing conditions from being charged more than healthy customers.■ Obamacare’s “age rating” rule lowers premiums for older Americans, who tend to use more health care services — though it raises prices for younger customers.■ States that pursue waivers of these three rules would be required to set up special programs for high-cost patients. States have tried high-risk pools before, with mixed results.■ States with waivers could also tap a special $8 billion fund to help lower insurance prices or deductibles. How far the money will go depends on how many states pursue waivers.All of these changes would be added to the basic structure of the American Health Care Act, which reshapes the health insurance system. ■ The bill would change the federal-state Medicaid program for all its 74 million beneficiaries, not just those who joined because of Obamacare.■ It would rearrange the subsidy system that helps middle-income Americans buy their own insurance coverage, creating new winners and losers.We don’t have an estimate of effects of the bill with the new changes, but we have some sense of the original bill’s impact.■ The Congressional Budget Office says an older version of the bill would mean that 24 million more Americans would lack health insurance in a decade.■ In addition to the insurance changes, the bill would also make big tax cuts, particularly on income from investments. Taken together, the bill would redistribute resources from the poor to the rich.Those shifts can be summarized in a simple chart.The articles summarized above come from me, Reed Abelson, Haeyoun Park and Kevin Quealy.