http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/21/upshot/history-of-insults-nasty-words-about-women-serve-a-purpose-for-men.html
‘Nasty Woman’: Why Men Insult Powerful Women - The New York Times
Discrimination,Presidential Election of 2016,Women and Girls,Debates (Political),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J
Oct. 20, 2016
6636
“Such a nasty woman.”Nearing the end of a campaign of disparagement, Donald J. Trump coined a classic in the annals of insults against powerful women.Mr. Trump’s remark — which he directed at Hillary Clinton during the third presidential debate Wednesday as she talked about a particularly nasty topic, Social Security — had all the makings of a feminist meme. It came across as impulsive and petulant, with sexist undertones, even if it lacked the sophistication of certain predecessors:Insults are, of course, an inextricable part of politics, and not only directed at women by men. Mr. Trump has weathered his fair share this election (Senator Mark Kirk of Illinois said on Twitter this month: “DJT is a malignant clown.”) Some of the most memorable came from women: Dorothy Parker, upon hearing that Calvin Coolidge had died, reportedly said, “How can they tell?” Barbara Bush, during the 1984 Reagan-Bush campaign against Walter Mondale, described Geraldine Ferraro, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, as an “I can’t say it, but it rhymes with rich.” Mrs. Bush later apologized and claimed the word she was looking for was “witch.”Mr. Trump in particular is an equal opportunity insulter — just look at the things he said about his male opponents during the primaries.But insults of powerful women by men perform a particular role, researchers say: cutting them down to size, and playing into discomfort with women in power.Historically, there has been a high penalty for explicitly attacking women, said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, professor of communication and director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania. As a result, rarely are insults of women as overt as “nasty woman” or some other Trump offerings:Instead, insults have generally been subtler — and perhaps more pernicious, by playing into people’s stereotypes without their knowing it. Calling Mrs. Clinton “angry,” as Mr. Trump did several times Wednesday, or “emotional,” as John McCain once did, evokes negative gender stereotypes of women as hysterical and irrational, Ms. Jamieson said.By questioning Mrs. Clinton’s “stamina,” Mr. Trump implies that she is too weak to be commander in chief. Terms of affection do something similar:People tend to be most bothered when men and women don’t fit the stereotypes they expect — men as confident, strong leaders and women as humble, cooperative and supportive, according to research by Laurie A. Rudman, a psychologist at Rutgers.Questioning a woman’s niceness — as some people thought Barack Obama did when he told Mrs. Clinton she was “likable enough” in a 2008 debate — serves that purpose, and also makes it hard for a woman to fight back because she will only appear less kind, Ms. Jamieson said.While women with children have been belittled as not having enough capacity to lead while mothering, women without children also receive blistering criticism for not living up to society’s expectations of women.Condescension is another common tool for deflating powerful women.Attacking women’s appearance serves a dual purpose: the attack itself, and the implication that a woman is valuable for her looks more than her brains. The same goes for sexual remarks, which some people heard in Mr. Trump’s use of the word “nasty,” though it’s possible he didn’t mean the word in that way at all.Mr. Trump is an expert at targeting a woman’s looks, but he’s hardly the first to do it.Attacking women in power goes back centuries:But the thing about gendered insults is that they can backfire, by rallying at least half the population. When Patty Murray was told by a state representative that she couldn’t make a difference because she was just “a mom in tennis shoes,” she turned around and used it as a campaign slogan that put her in the Senate.