http://www.nytimes.com/2000/04/24/us/elian-gonzalez-case-overview-raid-miami-opens-new-front-struggle-over-cuban-boy.html
THE ELIAN GONZALEZ CASE: THE OVERVIEW; Raid in Miami Opens New Front In Struggle Over the Cuban Boy - The New York Times
MIAMI (FLA),CUBA,JUSTICE DEPARTMENT,DELAY  TOM,GONZALEZ  ELIAN,RENO  JANET,GONZALEZ  JUAN MIGUEL,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,CHILD CUSTODY AND SUPPORT,ARBITRATION  CONCILIATION AND MEDIATION,PUBLIC OPINION,IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES,CUBAN-AMERICANS
April 24, 2000
6199
Both the Miami relatives of Elian Gonzalez and the federal government battled to sway public opinion today by mustering new details about the raid to return the boy to his father, focusing on the issues of tactics and trust during the 48 hours leading up to the predawn operation.The Justice Department revealed that negotiators with close ties to Attorney General Janet Reno were on the phone with her when the raid occurred, having tried until the last minutes to broker a deal that would have resulted in a peaceful transfer of Elian to his father.Hoping to counteract suggestions by the government that the negotiations were hopelessly deadlocked, civic leaders sympathetic to the Miami family produced what they said was a draft of a six-point proposal to reunite the boy and his father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez.The plan, which they said was still being fine-tuned when the raid occurred, would have had both sides of the family live temporarily together in a neutral setting. The proposal foundered on two points, both sides agree: where they would live together and who would technically have custody. The family said it wanted to work those differences out, but the Justice Department said the family refused to compromise.The Miami relatives, who had traveled to Washington on Saturday night, held a news conference this morning to press their version of events. Marisleysis Gonzalez, Elian's 21-year-old cousin, pleaded for permission to visit the boy and began a fresh round of attacks against the raid, saying the family had been duped by Ms. Reno.''You know what, Janet Reno? Even though it would have been 3 minutes or 30 seconds, it happened, and the harm was done,'' she said. ''And it happened to a kid who had gone through a lot.''She also said photos released on Saturday showing a beaming Elian reunited with his father were faked. ''That is not Elian,'' she said. ''Look how short the hair looks when he was taken out of the house and look how long the hair is in the picture that they show today.''Moving to refute those assertions and calling them absurd, Gregory B. Craig, Mr. Gonzalez's lawyer, produced five more photos taken on Sunday that portrayed a smiling Elian, eating, playing ball and cuddling with Juan Miguel.The film was developed by The Associated Press, which vouched for its authenticity. The lawyer asserted again that the boy was happy to be with his father, stepmother and infant half-brother.Mr. Craig said today that the boy and his father needed to have at least 48 hours together before any sort of meeting could possibly take place with the Miami relatives, who have been demanding to see Elian.He said Mr. Gonzalez planned to discuss with a psychologist the repercussions of such a meeting. But Mr. Craig did not sound optimistic.  ''He feels no obligation to them at all,'' Mr. Craig said. ''He feels that they have damaged this child, that they have used him. He does not want to recreate the circus conditions of Miami around his family.''Politicians also continued to take sides. Representative Tom DeLay, Republican of Texas, called for Congressional hearings into the raid.''I think both branches, the legislative branch and the judiciary branch, should look into this in depth,'' Mr. DeLay said on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, ''because this is a frightening event, that American citizens now can expect that the executive branch, on their own, can decide whether to raid a home.''As the verbal sparring wore on, two distinctly different portraits were painted of the events surrounding Elian's removal from the house.The view from Miami was of a hasty commando-style operation ordered by the Justice Department in the midst of negotiations that held real potential for breaking the months-long impasse, mostly because they were spearheaded by a small clutch of powerful and respected civic leaders, including two close friends of Ms. Reno.One, Aaron Podhurst, was on hold with Ms. Reno on the phone at his own home when the agents entered the family's Little Havana house. The civic leaders and lawyers and the family in Miami all said they had not been under the impression that the negotiations had broken down until they heard the commotion outside the house.The view from Washington was of a family in Miami growing more entrenched and increasingly stubborn in their refusal to turn the boy over to his father without a set of conditions that were seen as untenable and ridiculous by Elian's father.''As far as we were concerned, it had deteriorated, all in the name of having a peaceful turnover,'' Mr. Craig said today in an interview. ''They were using the boy as a negotiating chip.''In the midst of it all was Ms. Reno, playing go-between for the opposing camps, reaching, even in the middle of the night, for a solution that evaded her until the end.The final talks began after a group led by Carlos M. de la Cruz, chairman of the University of Miami board of trustees and of Eagle Brands, decided to intervene, Mr. de la Cruz said today. He enlisted the support of Edward T. Foote II, president of the University of Miami and a friend of Ms. Reno's; Carlos Saladrigas, a University of Miami trustee and head of ADP Total Source; and Mr. Podhurst, a lawyer.After consulting with the relatives, a plan was put forward by the negotiators. ''Why not try to put both families with the boy in a compound in two houses side by side,'' Mr. de la Cruz said. ''And have them all go in there without the presence of the Cuban government.''Mr. Foote argued that the relatives should all live in Miami, and Ms. Reno seemed to back the idea, Mr. de la Cruz said. ''She told us she could live with this. She knew, and rightfully so, that that was an important point for the Cuban community here in Miami.''Ms. Reno told Mr. Podhurst that the Miami relatives would have to give on one point: recognizing Juan Miguel Gonzalez's right to legal and physical custody of Elian.By Thursday evening, Mr. de la Cruz said, the men had a proposal  that Mr. Gonzalez and the Miami relatives would live in Miami at a ''mutually agreed neutral site'' until all legal appeals were concluded and that the relatives ''understand that you have transferred temporary custody of Elian to his father.''Even as the talks continued, preparations for the raid went forward. At 6 p.m. Friday, Doris Meissner, the immigration commissioner, had received a federal search warrant giving her the authority to remove Elian from the Little Havana home.And in Washington, word of renewed negotiations was not greeted warmly by Mr. Gonzalez. ''It had a huge adverse impact on Juan Miguel's confidence in her,'' Mr. Craig said of the new round of discussions laid out by Ms. Reno.Throughout the night, Ms. Reno played tag-team telephone. She spoke with Mr. Podhurst, who was at his home. He in turn spoke to the relatives' lawyers and Mr. de la Cruz, who had gathered in the Little Havana home. At the same time, Ms. Reno was on the phone with Mr. Craig, in his Washington office. New deadlines came and went. The lawyers could not agree on where the relatives should live and on the technical custody arrangement. The Miami relatives had gone to sleep, but sensing that time was running out, Mr. de la Cruz awakened them and their chief lawyer, Kendall Coffey, who was also in the house.Everyone in the house was under the impression that they were making progress, Mr. de la Cruz said.But Ms. Reno did not leave any false impressions, said Carole Florman, a Justice Department spokeswoman. She was emphatic about the urgency, officials said. One Justice Department official recalled Ms. Reno as saying to Mr. Podhurst: ''Aaron, I have to have this child tonight. I am going to have to enforce the order.''Another official said Ms. Reno was prepared to call off the operation at any time. After the assault team left its staging area, Ms. Reno ordered it to halt as she continued to talk with Mr. Podhurst. The vehicles pulled off a road and waited until they were given a signal to go ahead.Ten minutes more, Mr. Podhurst pleaded on the telephone with Ms. Reno, said Eric Holder, deputy attorney general, on NBC's ''Meet the Press.'' She agreed.''At the conclusion of the 10 minutes, the raid began, and at that point, the attorney general was still on the phone,'' Mr. Holder said. ''But at that point negotiations had ended.''The Miami relatives said they were stunned by the commotion.Mr. de la Cruz's wife, Rosa, who was outside, said she was sprayed with tear gas and pushed to the ground. She also said Ramon Saul Sanchez, who led the peaceful protests outside the house, was hit with a rifle and lay dazed on the floor.Meanwhile, tear gas canisters were shot inside. The relatives described a chaotic scene, full of shouting agents, blazing guns and hurled insults. Ms. Meissner gave a different account.Eight agents ''announced themselves when they went into the house,'' Ms. Meissner said on ''Face the Nation'' on CBS. ''They told people to stand aside. They asked for cooperation. They did not receive cooperation.''Donato Dalrymple, the fisherman who found the boy in November, said he heard Elian screaming in fear: ''What's happening? What's happening?'' Mr. Dalrymple said he grabbed him and hid in a closet, trying to protect the boy. An Associated Press photographer, Alan Diaz, ran with him. Mr. Diaz said Lazaro Gonzalez, Elian's great-uncle, was pinned on the couch.Marisleysis Gonzalez said: ''I looked at those machine guns and I said, 'I beg you. I beg you. Please don't do this. There are kids in this house. They didn't care. They put guns on my cousin's head right there. 'You move I'm going to blow your brains out.' ''Psychologists had instructed the Justice Department that a Spanish-speaking immigration agent, a woman, should hustle Elian out of the house with reassuring words.The guns, the gear, the masks, the tear gas, were all necessary, Ms. Meissner said. ''We had information, a great deal of information. Some of the information included the possibility that there might be guns.''