http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/24/us/24mcnair.html
Robert McNair, Governor of South Carolina in the ’60s, Dies at 83 - The New York Times
McNair  Robert,Discrimination,Race,Deaths (Obituaries),Politics and Government,South Carolina,Humphrey  Hubert H Jr
Nov. 24, 2007
3304
CHARLESTON, S.C., Nov. 23 — Former Gov. Robert E. McNair of South Carolina, the political moderate who was a finalist to become Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey’s running mate in 1968 but whose promising career was cut short by what became known as the Orangeburg Massacre, died last Saturday  in Charleston. He was 83.The cause was brain cancer, O. Wayne Corley, senior shareholder in the McNair Law Firm, announced.Mr. McNair was remembered as a progressive governor at a time of racial change and social and political upheaval, but the deaths on Feb. 8, 1968, of three black college students from state highway patrol gunfire, and the wounding of 27 others, put an end to his hope of higher office.Mr. McNair, born Dec. 14, 1923, in the rural Low Country of South Carolina, was buried Tuesday near his childhood home in Berkeley County. As lieutenant governor in 1965, he succeeded Gov. Donald S. Russell, who resigned to take the Senate seat vacated by the death of  Olin D. Johnston. Mr. McNair was elected to a full four-year term in 1966.Mr. McNair received contemporary attention for his deft handling of several tense racial conflicts, including a student protest at the historically black South Carolina State College, now university, in Orangeburg, in the spring of 1967. But then came the shootings the next February.The shootings occurred on the third night of growing tension that began with student protests against the refusal of Orangeburg’s only bowling alley to accept black patrons. Nine highway patrolmen, who had been issued deadly buckshot in a crowd-control situation and given individual authority to fire weapons if they believed their life or that of a fellow officer was in danger, were later acquitted of federal charges of imposing summary punishment without due process of law.Mr. McNair had blamed “black power” influences for the events; he also incorrectly stated the morning after the shooting that it had occurred “off the campus.”In 1967 Mr. McNair had played host to Humphrey on a visit to the state that included an address to the Legislature and a luncheon meeting that Mr. McNair set up in Greenville. There Humphrey heard local and state business and industry leaders, as well as the state president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and chief executive of the state N.A.A.C.P., which remained the state’s dominant civil rights organization, speak with pride of South Carolina’s linked progress in economic development and accommodation to the 1964 Civil Rights Act and 1965 Voting Rights Act.At the raucous Democratic National Convention in Chicago in the summer of 1968, Mr. McNair arrived as chairman of both the Southern Governors Conference and the National Democratic Governors Conference. His South Carolina delegation included 12 African-Americans, including the state N.A.A.C.P. president, Alonzo W. Holman.In vetting Mr. McNair, who was notified he was one of four finalists for Humphrey’s running mate, a top aide to Humphrey asked Mr. Holman if he could support Mr. McNair. Mr. Holman responded that if not for what had happened at Orangeburg, he could have supported Mr. McNair enthusiastically, but that he no longer could. Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine became the party’s vice-presidential nominee.With no Southerner on the Democratic ticket for the first time in decades, Humphrey and Muskie carried only President Lyndon B. Johnson’s Texas among the 11 states that had formed the Confederacy.Mr. McNair, who built a highly successful law firm, never again sought public office.He is survived by his wife of 63 years, Josephine Robinson McNair of Columbia; a son, Robert E. Jr., of Columbia; three daughters, Robin Lee Howell and Corinne Godshall of Myrtle Beach, S.C., and Claudia Crawford McNair of Jamestown, S.C.; , six grandchildren; and one great-grandchild.In a biography published in 2006, Mr. McNair acknowledged “responsibility” for what happened in Orangeburg.The state of South Carolina has never conducted an official investigation of the shootings. A bill introduced in the state House of Representatives this year providing for such a study never emerged from a subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee, but remains available for consideration in 2008.