https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/smarter-living/college-savings-529-plan.html
The Secrets to Saving for College - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Financial Aid (Education),Personal Finances
July 16, 2017
2625
When it comes to  financing a college education, the complex web of savings plans and strategies can seem like a big tangle. Saving for college is particularly tricky because each family has its own set of financial priorities and trade-offs. Do you want a public or private school? Are you looking for a four-year or two-year college?Regardless of your particular circumstance, there are a few basic things to know as you plan for one of your family’s biggest expenditures.Saving for college is easier if you start earlier.Financial experts recommend using a consistent savings strategy to help you set manageable goals, but where to begin? Let’s say you want a simple, catchall formula to figure out how much you should save. Here’s one rule of thumb: Multiply your child’s age by $2,000 to get a rough estimate of how much you should have saved at that point. For more back-of-the-napkin rules, read this handy guide. Read More »____Want more stories to help you better understand the world, sent straight to your inbox? Sign up for the Smarter Living newsletter here.____A 529 plan is a popular way to save for your child’s college education. In short, the plan is a state-sponsored, tax-free investment fund that you can use for costs related to education, including tuition, books and room and board. To learn more about how to manage the money you put into a 529 — especially if your child is entering high school — read these tips. Read More »While it may seem that saving for college is a huge burden, dividing savings into categories makes it easier to conquer. Here’s a four-step plan that helps you pay for college with less stress. Read More »Circumstances can make it difficult to save for college, but you should know that you are not alone. Even without savings, paying for college can still be attainable. Loans, financial aid packages, merit awards and gap years can all be effective strategies to offset the high cost of higher education. Read More »Most families won’t be able to save for the full cost of college ahead of time. So when decision time comes, they will be faced with some difficult choices in which costs may be five or even six figures apart. Here are how some families reckon with those situations. Read More »____Want more tips on retirement, paying for college, credit cards and the right way to invest? Sign up for the Your Money newsletter here. ____