https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/automobiles/autoreviews/video-review-volvo-v90-cross-country-rolls-into-suv-territory.html
Video Review: Volvo V90 Cross Country Rolls Into S.U.V. Territory - The New York Times
Automobiles,Volvo Car Corp,2017 Volvo V90 Cross Country
July 6, 2017
8064
Welcome, friend. Surely you’ve glanced at the photo of the Volvo V90 Cross Country and understood that it’s a station wagon. And yet you read on. Possibly you’re an original thinker and open-minded about wagons.Or perhaps you’re just odd. Lately, it seems, you have to be to own a wagon.In 2016, 40 percent of the vehicles sold in the United States were crossovers and sport utility vehicles, according to IHS Automotive. Wagons? About 1 percent.For some reason, automotive writers love station wagons. When we don our smoking jackets in our secret lair, we lament the dearth of wagons (but celebrate that few of us actually smoke). It can be argued that S.U.V.s are simply raised wagons in camping clothes. I have owned five station wagons, one with fake wood paneling on the side. And full disclosure, the other four have been Volvos, two of them Cross Country models.Let’s cherish the V90 and its outdoorsy sibling, the V90 Cross Country. The two, along with the Mercedes-Benz E400 4Matic, are the last full-size wagons sold in the United States. The Cross Country starts with the handsome V90, adds rugged body cladding and exterior trim, and lifts the ride height by some 2.5 inches. Think Ranger Rick dressing for success.A standard panoramic glass roof makes it easy to spot Woodsy Owl in the wild. The dark ebony wood in the cabin and the special seat stitching reflect Volvo’s Scandinavian sensibility.Based on the same architecture as the XC90 S.U.V., the 2017 Cross Country has one powertrain, designated T6. Its two-liter four-cylinder engine is turbocharged and supercharged, turning out a healthy 316 horsepower and 295 pound-feet of torque. The gearbox has eight speeds. All-wheel drive is standard. Drive modes noticeably change the vehicle’s dynamics, and the Cross Country’s suspension gets extra range of motion for smoothing out forest service roads.This 4,220-pound machine moves from a standstill to 60 miles an hour in a robust six seconds. For hikers in less of a hurry, the 2018 models will be available with a less expensive T5 engine (basically the T6 without the supercharger).For highway trekking, the quiet, comfortable and composed Cross Country lives up to its name. A wagon typically has a lower center of gravity than an S.U.V., giving the Cross Country confidence in corners even with a suspension properly tuned for comfort.The Cross Country is higher than a standard V90. But it’s more aerodynamic than the XC90 so the wagon’s fuel economy is five miles per gallon better on the highway (the government rates it at 22 miles per gallon in the city, 30 highway).Fully describing the standard safety equipment would exceed this article’s allotted length. It includes automatic emergency braking for cars, bicyclists, pedestrians and large animals. Pilot Assist, also standard, is Volvo’s semiautonomous driving technology, which can handle steering, braking and acceleration, in many cases. After about 10 seconds of hands-free driving, though, it wants your hands back on the steering wheel (which is heated). Pilot Assist works at speeds up to 80 miles an hour but is best at reducing the stress of tedious stop-and-go commuting.Unlike urbanites dressing in expensive technical outdoor clothing, the Cross County is no poser. I’ve confidently driven this Volvo on unimproved access roads at speeds that would scare most passengers (purely for research, mind you). The Cross Country glides over tree roots and dirt heaves on the way to remote trailheads. Hill descent control automatically applies the throttle and braking on extremely steep grades — drivers only have to steer. Will it challenge a Jeep Wrangler’s abilities? Nope. But few owners will challenge the Cross Country’s capabilities.Modern Volvo interiors have a warm, rich Scandinavian ambience that sets them apart from Audi, BMW, Lexus and Mercedes. Hefty interior door releases are shaped so fingers slide inside them in a soul-satisfying manner. Poke fun at me now, but you’ll understand when you try them. Volvo seats are often held up as the best in the business and these don’t disappoint. A $4,500 package that was not on my tester adds seemingly infinite adjustments and a massage feature to the front seats.User interfaces are important in modern cars, and the LCD screen Volvo uses is as large and responsive as an iPad. Swipe left and right to get to different pages. Easy? Yes, but the graphics can be small and tough to read or accurately hit on bumpy roads. A few more dedicated hard buttons would be nice. Apple CarPlay and Android Auto help.Back-seat room is generous and the outboard seating positions (with an integrated child booster seat option) are as comfortable as the front seats. Middle passengers must deal with a drive shaft tunnel and a seat back that’s a little lumpy. The package that adds massaging seats upfront includes a climate zone, heated cushions and full sunshade treatment for the rear. Everyone’s happy.Volvo eliminated the rear-facing third row years ago. So if your children like to wave at the cars following behind (my kids called it “sweet and sour,” depending on the engagement of the driver), the Mercedes E Class wagon is the way to go.The Volvo’s cargo space has all sorts of elastic bands that keep things from rolling around. Obviously, the space doesn’t have the depth of the XC90 S.U.V.’s space, but it will easily swallow the luggage of five poorly packed people. Drop the split rear seats and two mountain bikes should easily slide in. I advise a tarp to keep things clean — speaking from experience.Volvo has been turning out attractive designs lately. The svelte V90 may be the best-looking of the bunch. (But hey, the automotive journalist brain sees things that way.) Chances are, station wagons aren’t going to become wildly popular again. But the stylish V90 Cross Country does nearly everything an S.U.V. does, only in a sleeker package.