https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/27/opinion/for-transgender-americans-legal-battles-over-restrooms.html
For Transgender Americans, Legal Battles Over Restrooms    - The New York Times
Editorials,Bathrooms and Toilets,Series,Discrimination,Education (K-12),Virginia,Transgender and Transsexuals,Grimm  Gavin,Transgender Today (Series)
July 27, 2015
5651
Gavin Grimm sat quietly in the audience last November as dozens of parents at a school board meeting in Gloucester County, Va., demanded that he be barred from using the boys’ restrooms at school. They discussed the transgender boy’s genitals, expressed concern that he might expose himself and cautioned that being in a men’s room would make the teenager vulnerable to rape. One person called him a “freak.”When Gavin, 16, got his turn at the podium, he was remarkably composed. “I didn’t ask to be this way,” Gavin said. “All I want to do is be a normal child and use the restroom in peace.”On Monday, Judge Robert Doumar of Federal District Court in Virginia is scheduled to consider whether the school board’s decision to prohibit Gavin from using the male restroom is unlawful discrimination. The case addresses one of the main unresolved battles in the fight for transgender equality.A favorable decision for the student would be the first time a federal court has ruled that refusing transgender students access to proper restrooms is discriminatory. Any other outcome would reinforce cruel policies that deny dignity to some of the most vulnerable students and subject them to more bullying and stigmatization.Access to public restrooms has been a divisive issue in past civil rights struggles. During the 1950s, African-Americans challenged Jim Crow laws that barred them from so-called white restrooms.In the following decade, as more women joined the labor force, they had to fight to get employers to provide restrooms in workplaces that had historically been dominated by men. In the 1980s, when advocates for Americans with disabilities began getting traction in their quest for equal access to public accommodations, many questioned the cost and burden of building special restroom facilities.It may seem inconceivable today that people on the forefront of those struggles were dismissed, mocked and shunned for years. Yet each was a hard-fought victory.The debate over which public restrooms transgender people and those who are gender-nonconforming should be allowed to use has been brewing for years. Federal agencies have issued sensible guidelines in recent years for government workers and private employers. Last month, for instance, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration urged employers to allow workers to use restrooms that “correspond with their gender identity.”Some states and jurisdictions, including New York State, have adopted good guidelines for schools, while others have vague rules or none at all. The issue has generated heated debate in many communities across the country. In the absence of clear guidelines, many educators, parents and school board members have taken alarmist positions, suggesting that allowing transgender students to use the restroom of their choice would enable predators or make them easy prey for sexual assault.“I have seen absolutely no empirical evidence, anything that comes close to any factual basis for either of those concerns,” said Carlos Ball, a law professor at Rutgers University who has studied the history of policies regarding access to public restrooms. “On the other hand, there is a plethora of reports of transgender people being physically assaulted, verbally abused and harassed for being quote-unquote in the wrong bathroom.”Federal civil rights officials first addressed the issue in 2013, when they sided with a male transgender student in California who had been forced to change in an isolated facility for gym class and use a restroom that was far from his classrooms. Those rules were repealed in a settlement between the school district and the government.Only a handful of cases have been brought in federal courts. In March, a District Court judge in Pennsylvania ruled against a student who was expelled from the University of Pittsburgh for using the men’s room, preposterously concluding that the student had no right to do so because he was admitted as a female.Some state legislators have eagerly entered the debate. A controversy at a Kentucky high school, which allowed a transgender girl to use the girls’ restroom, prompted a Republican lawmaker  to introduce a bill earlier this year that would have forced people in the state to use public restrooms according with the gender on their birth certificates.Lawmakers in Florida, Minnesota and Texas have introduced similar “bathroom bills,” which transgender activists have fought with a smart social media campaign — #WeJustNeedToPee. They showed how incongruous transgender men and women looked, standing next to non-transgender people in the restrooms lawmakers were insisting they use. None of those bills passed.Gavin’s lawsuit, which was filed by the American Civil Liberties Union, is one of two cases with similar facts currently before federal judges. The other was filed by a high school student in Michigan who was ostracized and barred from using the proper restroom.The Department of Justice has submitted filings supporting both plaintiffs. The plaintiffs and federal officials argue that preventing transgender students from using restrooms that match their gender identity is a violation of Title IX, a federal law that bars discrimination based on gender in schools that receive federal funding. The Justice Department’s statement of interest in Gavin’s case notes that singling out transgender students makes it more likely that they will be bullied and harassed.Before coming out as transgender in April 2014, Gavin wrestled with depression and anxiety. After he confided in his mother, who was supportive, he sought medical treatment for gender dysphoria and legally changed his name. He began the last school year as Gavin, with little notice at first. Initially, in consultation with his principal and teachers, he decided to use the nurse’s restroom in school, rather than a gender-specific one, because he wanted to see how classmates would react to his transition.Soon, though, feeling that most students were supportive or unfazed, he received permission to use the boys’ room, and did so for seven weeks last fall without any problem. But when word of this reached parents in the community, many were incensed. In response, a Gloucester County school board member, Carla Hook, introduced a resolution in November stipulating that access to locker rooms and restrooms “shall be limited to the corresponding biological genders, and students with gender identity issues shall be provided an alternative appropriate private facility.”Her motion passed by a 6-to-1 vote after several parents threatened to vote school board members out of office if they sided with Gavin. That decision was met with resounding applause. “To hear a lot of people clapping and cheering for my failure was very upsetting,” said Gavin, who aspires to go to college far from his community and become a neuroscientist. “I was in a room full of adults, and it felt vicious.”Since then, Gavin has tried to use the nurse’s restroom at school as infrequently as possible, which has caused urinary tract infections. The ordeal has made him a pariah to many in his community. Judge Doumar has an opportunity to end blatant discrimination by ruling against the school board. Gavin’s lawyers are seeking an injunction that would restore his right to use the proper restroom before school starts in September. A final ruling in the case may take several months.In the meantime, the Department of Education, which has supported transgender students in individual lawsuits, should issue detailed across-the-board guidelines to all schools and universities. By doing so, it would help students in hostile communities who are having to wage humiliating fights for a basic right.