http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/09/nyregion/lessons-learned-from-l-will-be-applied-to-no-7.html
Lessons Learned From L Will Be Applied to No. 7 - The New York Times
BROOKLYN (NYC),MANHATTAN (NYC),NEW YORK CITY TRANSIT,TRANSIT SYSTEMS
June 9, 2005
7707
PITTSBURGH, June 8 - A project by New York City Transit to computerize the signals along the L line in Brooklyn and Manhattan has resulted in more than 300 service disruptions, annoying residents and business owners. It has also led the agency to alter its approach as it prepares to begin a similar project on a second subway line, the No. 7.Representatives of the transit agency and its contractors presented papers here on Wednesday at a conference of subway officials from across the United States, organized by the American Public Transportation Association. The presentation focused on the $288 million project for the L line, which is about a year behind schedule.The L line is the first subway line to be completely modernized with a system known as communications-based train control. The traditional fixed-block signaling system, which relies on electromechanical switches, trip stops and humans who operate the trains, is being replaced by a system that uses microprocessors, two-way digital radio frequencies and lasers mounted under the trains.Planning for the project began more than a decade ago, and work began in December 1999. The system was supposed to be in place by last December, but the date has been pushed back to the end of this year or early 2006 because of the need for extensive testing.The total time during which service has been disrupted on the L, according to one paper presented at the conference, has been about double the time specified in the agency's contract with Siemens, which is supplying the new signaling system."The pattern of diversions is complex and varies from week to week, leading to confusion for operators and customers," the paper said, noting that "there have been many complaints from customers and from businesses" that border the 10-mile train route, which serves Williamsburg, Bushwick, East New York and other neighborhoods.The disruptions have occurred mostly on weekends and nights and have affected varying stretches of the line, in both Manhattan and Brooklyn. This weekend, for example, there will be no service between Eighth Avenue and Union Square in Manhattan from 12:01 a.m. Saturday to 5 a.m. Monday.The acknowledgement of significant disruptions did not surprise Brooklyn residents like Simone Manwarring, 34, who owns a store in Williamsburg that sells children's clothing and accessories. "On Sunday afternoons I am heavily reliant on the destination travelers and shoppers," she said in a telephone interview, estimating that the shutdowns have reduced her regular business on Sunday by 60 percent.A New York City Transit spokesman, Charles F. Seaton, said in a phone interview on Wednesday that the agency was trying its best to notify riders about the disruptions in advance. He said the excessive disruptions would result in financial penalties for the contractor, Siemens, but the amount of those penalties would be calculated only after the project was completed.A Siemens official, Jean-Pol Mura, said at the conference that the disruptions were regrettable, but estimated that the system was 95 percent finished. He said the new system would be activated in phases, starting with the easternmost segment of the line, between Broadway Junction and Rockaway Parkway."Resignaling a line under revenue service is no bed of roses," Mr. Mura said, using a term for trains that are carrying passengers. He said that only a few other cities, including Hong Kong, had tried to replace a signaling system on an active line.Edwin A. Mortlock, who was the lead author of the paper that noted the extensive service interruptions, said there were important lessons from the L line project that would be applied when a similar project, scheduled for next year, began on the No. 7 line.For example, said Mr. Mortlock, a systems engineer at Parsons, an engineering company hired by the transit agency as a consultant, it took months to study how to safely operate short work trains, like vacuum trains and geometry trains that measure the distance between tracks, using the new system.