https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/30/arts/television/bachelorette-episode-2-right-reasons-demario.html
On ‘The Bachelorette’ for the Wrong Reasons? Whaboom. - The New York Times
Television,The Bachelorette (TV Program),Lindsay  Rachel L
May 30, 2017
687
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is underway, and unlike DeMario, The New York Times is still here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives are following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey. Can we steal you for a sec?CARYN GANZ “The Bachelorette” often feels like a training exercise for criminal profilers: Can you tell if someone is sincere by knowing the likely-made-up profession the show’s producers have assigned him, his age and his hometown? What indicates truthfulness in this onscreen universe?Viewers love the satisfaction of catching a bad guy in the act (see “To Catch a Predator,” Maury Povich, your local news’s consumer complaints segment), and contestants on “The Bachelorette” are obsessed with policing themselves. They’ve done the mental gymnastics to justify the idea of 20 men dating the same woman, but if a man is “not here for the right reasons,” he has broken the rules. Justice may take months or years in the real world; on “The Bachelorette” you get it done in a few hours.Usually this becomes a plot point later in the season when the field narrows. But it was the focus of Episode 2 on Monday night even though the show brought out some of the most impressive A-list star power it has mustered: Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher presented a “Husband Material” challenge on one group date, and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar coached basketball on a second one.But “The Bachelorette” isn’t fueled by Hollywood stars; it runs on deception. So the guest spots were overshadowed by the drama surrounding two of the men: Lucas (a.k.a. Whaboom) and DeMario. The host, Chris Harrison, said it first — “I hope everybody is here for the right reasons” — just three minutes into the episode. It seemed clear an execution was in store.A contestant named Blake tried to cast another hopeful, Lucas, as untrustworthy, telling the Bachelorette that the walking Whaboom wasn’t here for the right reasons. He said it to the camera (“I know the real Lucas, Lucas is garbage. Rachel is looking for a husband, and Lucas is not here to find a wife. Lucas is here to be on television”), and to Ms. Lindsay (“He’s just not here for the right reasons”), and to Lucas (“I told her the truth: that you’re here for the wrong reasons”).But tattletale Blake couldn’t compete with the appearance of Lexie, a very angry woman who said she had dated DeMario for seven months until he vanished, only to reappear a few days later — on television, introducing himself as a contestant on Ms. Lindsay’s season. Lexie came armed with text messages DeMario was ill prepared to explain, and Rachel initiated swift justice. “I have no idea why you’re here right now,” she said. “I just don’t think you want to be here for me.” Whaboom.AMANDA HESS I’d just like to take a moment to recognize the coinage of what might be my all-time favorite “here for the right reasons” euphemism: “I know that you’re here to further your whaboom.” (From this point forward, contestants will be sorted into the categories of “looking for love” and “furthering their whaboom.”) Monday night’s chest-beating between Blake and Lucas was a classic Bachelor confrontation between the guy crassly promoting himself on TV and the guy crassly promoting himself on TV by dramatically challenging the other guy’s crass self-promotion. Kenny wisely stayed out of the whole thing, saying: “Listen, I’m a professional wrestler. I know all about white dudes acting crazy.”The jury is still out on whether Lucas is here to further his whaboom or simply — as he argued — to authentically represent the whaboom lifestyle. But after a review of the tape, it appears as though the whaboom that leaves Mr. Kutcher so utterly demoralized inexplicably charms our Bachelorette, so Lucas may survive to whaboom another day. The same could not be said for DeMario, who was booted from the arena when it was revealed that he had been getting some whaboom on the side.