http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/26/us/politics/jerry-moran-garland-nomination-republican-backlash.html
Backlash as Senator Breaks Ranks on Supreme Court Hearings - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Moran  Jerry (1954- ),Kansas,Garland  Merrick B,Republican Party,Appointments and Executive Changes
March 25, 2016
5715
WASHINGTON — Senator Jerry Moran, Republican of Kansas, faced a barrage of criticism from conservative groups on Friday after he broke with his party’s leadership by saying he favored holding hearings on President Obama’s nominee for the Supreme Court.A founder of the Tea Party Patriots, Jenny Beth Martin, threatened to encourage a primary challenge against Mr. Moran, saying that grass-roots conservatives were “furious” with his stance. The reaction from that group and others made it clear that they will tolerate no concessions in the court battle, even as Democrats characterize Republicans’ actions as an unprecedented dereliction of their constitutional obligation.Mr. Moran said at a small gathering in his home state this week that the Senate should consider the nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland. On Friday, Mr. Moran said that he opposed the judge’s nomination, but he did not back down on his support for holding hearings on the nominee.“As I have said since the vacancy was created, I believe I have a duty to ask tough questions and demand answers,” he said in a statement. “I am certain a thorough investigation would expose Judge Garland’s record and judicial philosophy, and disqualify him in the eyes of Kansans and Americans.”Mr. Moran is one of only  four Senate Republicans who have said they support holding hearings on the nomination, in spite of a vow by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, to let the next president fill the vacancy left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia.Although Mr. McConnell has said there is no need to meet with the nominee, more than a dozen Republican senators have said they will do so. Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, who is facing a difficult re-election fight, said on Wednesday that he would sit down with Judge Garland.Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, another endangered incumbent, will meet with the judge on Tuesday, his spokeswoman said on Friday. It is expected to be the nominee’s first such meeting with a Republican senator.Mr. Moran, a first-term senator who won 70 percent of the vote in his 2010 campaign, does not currently have any primary challengers. The filing deadline for candidates in Kansas is June 1.Ms. Martin, the Tea Party leader, raised the prospect of backing another run by Milton Wolf, who challenged Kansas’ other senator, Pat Roberts, in a Republican primary in 2014. Mr. Wolf, a physician, ultimately lost, unable to overcome such travails as the revelation that he had posted patient X-rays on Facebook with mocking commentary.The firestorm touched off by Mr. Moran’s remarks was all the more notable because, while serving as chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, he oversaw the 2014 campaign effort that gave Republicans a majority. Mr. Moran made the remarks, first reported by  The Garden City Telegram, before a group of 10 people at a Town Hall in Cimarron, Kan.“I would rather have you complaining to me that I voted wrong on nominating somebody than saying I’m not doing my job,” Mr. Moran told his constituents on Monday.“I can’t imagine the president has or will nominate somebody that meets my criteria, but I have my job to do,” he added. “I think the process ought to go forward.”Adam Brandon, the chief executive of FreedomWorks, an organization with ties to the Tea Party movement, said Mr. Moran’s stance explained the lack of trust voters have in public officials.“Statements like these are exactly why the grass-roots conservatives are rebelling against the Republican establishment,” he said in a statement. “They send a signal that Republicans will sell out their principles when it becomes politically convenient to do so.”Mr. Brandon said activists had been urging Senate Republicans to stick to the party leaders’ vow not to hold hearings on Mr. Obama’s nominee.“If Republicans continue to ignore their calls, they do so at their peril,” he said.