http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/11/sports/swimming-katie-ledecky-coach-bruce-gemmell.html
Katie Ledecky’s Coach Moves On From His Masterpiece - The New York Times
Olympic Games (2016),Gemmell  Bruce,Swimming,Ledecky  Katie,Coaches and Managers
Dec. 11, 2016
9022
COLLEGE PARK, Md. — The banner that greeted the Nation’s Capital Swim Club coach, Bruce Gemmell, at the natatorium on the University of Maryland campus gave him a start. It announced that his son, Andrew, a 2012 Olympian, and his most famous swimmer, Katie Ledecky, would be signing autographs during the age-group meet that Nation’s Capital annually hosts.Gemmell hastily arranged to have the sign, which was from last year’s event, taken down before more people saw it “and we have a mob scene,” he said Friday, on the second day of the competition, which ran through Sunday.With Ledecky 2,800 miles away preparing for her first round of final exams at Stanford, the only mad rush at this year’s meet came at the athletes’ entrance around midday, when dozens of swimmers were trying to push through the door to get inside to warm up as dozens of others were leaving after their morning races.This year’s event was a relatively relaxed affair — if any gathering of more than 1,000 athletes in a chlorinated bandbox can be considered as such. Gemmell, under whose tutelage Ledecky set 13 long-course world records, could walk through the door alongside the other coaches and athletes instead of having to spirit his star athlete through another entrance so she wouldn’t be besieged by autograph seekers. None of this year’s participants set an American record, as Ledecky did last year in the 1,000-yard freestyle while in the middle of heavy training. Eight months later, she won five medals at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics.For four years, Gemmell was more than Ledecky’s coach. He was her chief of staff, the man responsible for setting and overseeing her audacious agenda of becoming the first swimmer since Debbie Meyer in 1968 to win the 200-, 400- and 800-meter freestyles in the same Olympics. Ledecky, 19, worked long and hard — and endured a thousand tiny failures along the way, according to Gemmell — to spin their shared goal into four golds.Their four-year plan worked to perfection. “We painted the Rembrandt,” Gemmell said.For the past four months he has contemplated a new question: How do you top a masterpiece?As soon as the Olympic swimming competition ended, Gemmell left Brazil and traveled home, staying long enough to empty his suitcase and repack for a weeklong vacation with his wife, Barb, and daughter, Erin, in Bermuda.“That was an opportunity to sit around and do nothing,” Gemmell said, “but I was not at all comfortable doing nothing. I ended up being antsy the whole time.”While staring out at the cerulean waters of the Atlantic Ocean, Gemmell mulled the offer of a head-coaching position with the Mission Viejo Nadadores in Southern California. He later met with club officials before deciding to stay put. His primary reason for turning down the job, Gemmel said, was his desire to work with the next generation of Nation’s Capital swimmers, a “high-potential” group, as he described it, that includes his 11-year-old daughter.Few swimmers possess the winning combination that powered Ledecky to the top: desire, work ethic, talent, competitiveness and family support. It is not easy to create and nurture an environment in which Ledecky could reach the point of winning an Olympic race by more than 11 seconds, which Gemmell recently reminded the parents of 20 of his team’s high-achieving swimmers in a group meeting. He told them that it was a daily, 50-week-a-year grind, requiring sacrifices from every member of the family. “And the guarantee of success is zero,” he added.Gemmell said he had scared some of the parents, who had not considered having to rise before dawn to shuttle their children to morning practices or to forgo leisurely family vacations in favor of getaways tied to competitions.He harbors no illusions about topping the singular sensation that was Ledecky’s run in Rio. “However long I coach, I will never experience that again,” he said. “Even if you had these experiences again, it wouldn’t be the same.”Gemmell is not sure when, or if, he will work with Ledecky again. The Stanford academic year ends right before the start of the national championships, from which the United States team for the 2017 World Aquatics Championships in Budapest will be selected.He was looking forward to coaching Ledecky when she was home for Thanksgiving, but the two days he had her didn’t go quite as planned. Gemmell unsuccessfully encouraged her to skip one workout when she showed up looking under the weather, and he kicked her out of the other when it was clear by her sluggishness in the water that she was not well.“I told her, ‘I know you better than you know you,’” Gemmell said with a laugh.He is torn between two thoughts when he considers the possibility that Ledecky will spend most of the next four years training at Stanford under the women’s coach, Greg Meehan.“One is that we painted the Rembrandt and I don’t want to touch it again because Rio really was the perfect ending,” Gemmell said. The other, he added, is, “What I wouldn’t give to have another season with Katie.”Coach and swimmer keep in regular touch, mostly through text messages. In one recent exchange, Ledecky informed Gemmell that she had included him in her PowerPoint presentation for a psychology class assignment. The topic, as he understood it, was how failure is a critical steppingstone for success.On the Sunday before Thanksgiving, Gemmell attended the musical “Hamilton” in New York ahead of U.S.A. Swimming’s awards gala at a Midtown hotel. At intermission, he turned on his phone to check his messages and learned that Ledecky had broken her American record in the 1,650-yard freestyle at an invitational in Ohio. He sent her a text that consisted of two emojis, a check mark and a thumb’s up, which was their shorthand for “mission accomplished.”Gemmell had just finished that story on Friday when he was approached by a volunteer meet official, who was about to convene a meeting with other volunteers in the office off the pool deck where Gemmell was seated. “Are you timing?” he asked Gemmell.There is no freezing time, no replicating golden moments that passed in a blur. Rio is history, and another Olympic quadrennial is underway. Gemmell is fine with that. Indeed, he has embraced it. The T-shirts on the backs of many of his swimmers at the meet read, “The Olympic Tradition Continues, Tokyo 2020.”