https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/business/dealbook/procter-gamble-trian-nelson-peltz.html
Morning Agenda: Nelson Peltz, Activist or Constructivist? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 18, 2017
2783
It was once the subject of business school case studies praising its methodologies and innovation. Now, Procter & Gamble is the quarry of activist investors.It suffered 13 consecutive quarters of declining sales, its shares lagged the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index, and start-ups like the Dollar Shave Club ate into its market share.Then along came Nelson Peltz, the billionaire investor and activist shareholder.Or is he something else?Mr. Peltz does not like being labeled an activist. He prefers “constructivist,” which sounds much friendlier to the companies he is trying to engage.Certainly, his play for a seat on Procter & Gamble’s board was couched in friendly terms. He was not advocating the breakup of the company, nor trying to replace the chief executive or directors.And there is often charm in what he does. He shuns huge leverage, and does not demand big buybacks or dividends. He presses companies to increase revenues and encourages them to spend on marketing.Mr. Peltz’s past victories also give him legitimacy, according to The Wall Street Journal — Trian took a stake in Bank of New York Mellon in 2014 and each sides has lauded the other since.But let’s be honest: He is clearly an activist, as Andrew Ross Sorkin writes.Many of his campaigns follow a similar pattern:1. Make a large, multibillion-dollar investment in a company and tell management it has his support.2. Ask for meetings to discuss some tweaks that could be made here and there.3. Show up with a thick “white paper” featuring charts and numbers.4. If the company does not carry out the changes suggested, oust its chief executive or break it up. (Indeed, some analysts still expect a breakup of Procter & Gamble, despite Mr. Peltz’s assurances to the contrary.)Often, he has not had to take all four steps. A proxy contest at Procter & Gamble would only be his third — in other instances, he settled and took a seat on the board before having to go public with his complaints.His approach has helped him achieve returns nearly double those of the S.&P. 500 since 2005.So what does this mean for Procter & Gamble? Its stock had better go up.The small partnership that began with $120,000 and grew to become the $137 billion colossus now known as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts has been planning for a world without K, K or R.It is still unclear when Henry R. Kravis and George R. Roberts will step away from the business. (Jerome Kohlberg Jr., their fellow founder, died in 2015; he quit K.K.R. in 1987.)But on Monday, the firm revealed its succession plans, naming Joseph Y. Bae and Scott C. Nuttall as co-presidents and co-chief operating officers.In an industry where founders continue to drum up deals, the unveiling of a succession line is rare.Blackstone, for example, has an heir apparent in its real estate chief, Jonathan D. Gray, but Stephen A. Schwarzman has shown little inclination to retire anytime soon.Tens of thousands of people who took out private loans to pay for college but have not been able to keep up payments may have their debts wiped away. The reason? Missing paperwork.At least $5 billion in troubled loans are at the center of a legal dispute that has echoes of problems that arose from the subprime mortgage crisis a decade ago.Private student loans, which come with higher interest rates and fewer consumer protections than federal loans, are often targeted at the most vulnerable borrowers, but judges have already dismissed dozens of lawsuits against former students because of insufficient documentation.Court records reviewed by The New York Times show that many other collection cases have been brought without complete ownership records.Like those who took on subprime mortgages, many people who took private student loans may never earn enough to repay the debt.Nearly the entire board of the start-up responsible for Just Mayo resigned last month. The company’s founder and chief executive, Josh Tetrick, is its only remaining member.Hampton Creek did not say why the board members resigned, but there was friction between them and Mr. Tetrick, according to a Bloomberg News report, which cited people familiar with the matter.The high-profile start-up has faced a series of problems recently. In June, it said it had uncovered an attempt to “derail” its mission and fired three senior managers.It also came under scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission after a report by Bloomberg that it had been sending undercover contractors into stores to buy large quantities of its plant-based mayonnaise.