http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/04/business/worldbusiness/horse-trading-for-a-venture-in-china.html
Horse Trading for a Venture in China - The New York Times
CHINA,THE GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC,GOLDMAN SACHS GAOHUA SECURITIES,GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP,HAINAN SECURITIES,PAULSON  HENRY M JR,FANG FENG LEI,GIFTS,STOCKS AND BONDS,BROKERS AND BROKERAGE FIRMS,BANKS AND BANKING
March 4, 2005
3384
BEIJING - Shortly after a SARS crisis scared many people off the streets of this city, Henry M. Paulson Jr., the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, flew here for a quiet dinner on June 4, 2003, with two of China's most influential power brokers.They worked out a remarkable deal, approved last year by President Hu Jintao, that marks a triumph for Goldman -- the creation of a joint venture that gives the firm greater access than any other foreign investment bank to China's increasingly lucrative financial services market.But to gain that access, Goldman engaged in an unusual horse trade. In exchange for making a $67 million "donation" to cover investor losses at a failed Chinese brokerage firm, Goldman won government approval to set up its own joint-venture investment bank in Beijing.And to jump-start the venture, Goldman also agreed to lend $100 million to one of the men Mr. Paulson met that evening at the marble-columned Noble Court restaurant in the Grand Hyatt: a 52-year-old Chinese banker named Fang Feng Lei.The Goldman deal, which the company hopes will mean millions of dollars in profits in the coming years, offers a rare glimpse into the maneuvers that many foreign companies undertake to get a leg up in the rough-and-tumble race to establish business in China. And like others before it, the joint venture was years in the making, involving frequent huddles with high Communist Party officials.What was so unusual about the Goldman deal is that a blueblood American firm was willing to pay $67 million to help the government dissolve an entirely unrelated state-owned enterprise, Hainan Securities, whose officials have been accused in lawsuits of embezzling millions of dollars from investor accounts.Why the Chinese government chose Hainan Securities remains unclear. But Mr. Fang and another power broker at the dinner table that evening, Wang Qishan, the mayor of Beijing, had ties in Hainan Province -- Mr. Wang had been Hainan's party secretary from 2002 to 2003. And Mr. Fang had overseen a real estate investment with Hainan Securities in the mid-90's.Goldman officials declined to comment on any aspect of the Hainan Securities money or the joint-venture loan, including what kind of collateral Mr. Fang pledged to back the loan.But there is no evidence that Mr. Fang or Mr. Wang was involved in fraud at Hainan Securities, or that Goldman's donation money will benefit them in any way.Analysts say major investment banks like Goldman are expecting a growing number of Chinese companies to tap the capital markets and they expect increasingly wealthy Chinese to start investing."There's a lot of talk now about a dysfunctional stock market," said Li Jin, an assistant professor at Harvard Business School, "but in the future China's capital markets will be huge."Carson Wen, a Hong Kong securities lawyer, added: "Everyone wants to be in China because it's a market that holds a lot of potential for the long term. And Goldman wants to be one of the first with control over their own venture."Until now, most foreign investment banks have largely taken Chinese companies public in Hong Kong or New York, or married Chinese companies with Western counterparts. Goldman will have greater control over a venture that will be able to take companies public in China and sell shares directly to Chinese investors -- a level of control that neither its rival Morgan Stanley nor any other foreign investment bank can yet claim.Goldman is paying an additional $30 million for its one-third stake in the joint venture, to be called Goldman Sachs Gaohua Securities, bringing the cost of its ticket to China to nearly $200 million. And that just gets Goldman a foot in the door; it does not cover the cost of buying equipment, renting office space or hiring staff members.Most foreign investment banks operate profitably out of Hong Kong. Goldman already employs about 1,000 people there. The new Beijing investment bank, whose chairman will be Mr. Fang, has not yet begun operations. Goldman's push into China comes a decade after Morgan Stanley and the China Construction Bank won government approval to form the nation's first joint venture investment bank, the China International Capital Corporation, or C.I.C.C.The bank, which had a $35 million investment from Morgan, ran into trouble almost immediately. Cultural clashes and disputes over who controlled the new company rattled Morgan executives in the first few years. In 1997, for instance, when China Mobile was preparing a $4 billion stock offering, C.I.C.C. did not underwrite the deal with Morgan Stanley; it worked with Goldman Sachs instead.According to former bankers, an important player in pushing the deals to Goldman was C.I.C.C.'s deputy chief executive, Mr. Fang, who had sparred with Morgan executives over how to operate in China.For his role in the China Mobile offering, Mr. Fang earned a reputation as a visionary who knew how to move deals through the Chinese bureaucracy. "He's a big deal maker," said Cao Yuanzheng, chief economist at Bank of China International and a former colleague of Mr. Fang. "This isn't like the U.S. Here in China, you have to know about reforms and state-owned companies. You need a special guy and that's him."Early in 2000, Mr. Fang left C.I.C.C. to join a rival state-owned bank. Morgan Stanley, which operates out of Hong Kong with about 700 employees, mended relations with C.I.C.C. Since then, Morgan Stanley has bounced back with some huge initial public offerings of Chinese companies in Hong Kong and New York, including a state-owned oil giant, Sinopec, and China Unicom.And C.I.C.C., which operates independently but is 34 percent owned by Morgan, has grown into a powerhouse, pulling ahead of both Morgan and Goldman with more than $18 billion in mainland equity deals in the last four years. Morgan shares in the firm's profit.That may explain why, a few years ago, Goldman executives began talking to the man many say has the inside track on stock deals in China: Mr. Fang.The son of a midlevel government official, Mr. Fang grew up in Beijing and was a farmer, soldier and factory worker before attending Zhongshan University, where he discovered a passion for economics.Mr. Fang also worked on his connections, particularly with two officials who are important figures in the Goldman deal: Mr. Wang and Zhou Xiaochuan, the head of China's central bank. In 2003, Mr. Zhou was China's top securities official when regulators seized Hainan Securities.Such relationships run deep. In 1991, after a trip to the United States, Mr. Fang broached the idea of creating a Western-style investment bank to Mr. Wang, then vice governor of the China Construction Bank. Mr. Wang, a protégé of former Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, is a Mr. Fix-It in Chinese government circles.Four years later, in 1995, Beijing approved Morgan Stanley's joint venture with China Construction Bank. Mr. Fang became a top executive in the new venture, C.I.C.C., and Mr. Wang was named chairman, later succeeded by Mr. Zhou.At C.I.C.C., Mr. Fang was called the rainmaker for his behind-the-scenes work on two landmark deals: China Mobile's 1997 stock offering; and the restructuring of PetroChina, another big state-owned oil company, which went public in 2000.After leaving the Morgan venture in 2000, Mr. Fang worked for the Bank of China International and then seemed to drift for several years, former colleagues said, taking time to study in the United States. Then late in 2002 or early 2003, he got involved in government discussions on what to do with Hainan Securities.In the early 1990's, Hainan Securities was considered a pioneering retail brokerage firm. But by 2003, it had become a symbol of the country's troubled brokerage industry. Mounting debt and a series of lawsuits accusing company officials of embezzling millions of dollars from investors had led regulators to seize control of the firm.That was when Mr. Zhou, who was China's top securities regulator, turned to Mr. Paulson of Goldman Sachs. According to people involved in the talks, Mr. Zhou asked if Goldman was interested in paying an entrance fee to acquire a stake in a troubled state-owned brokerage house.Goldman officials were reluctant to invest in any brokerage firm with a checkered past. But by June 2003, Mr. Fang and Mr. Wang stepped into the negotiations and helped Goldman massage the deal, the people involved in the talks said.The result was that Goldman would pay off some of Hainan Securities' debt and then start a joint-venture bank with Mr. Fang. Goldman Sachs, people involved in the talks say, will have no future relation to Hainan Securities, which the government is expected to shut down once investors are repaid. And Goldman structured the agreement so that it could eventually get majority control, something Morgan Stanley never won with C.I.C.C.But why Hainan Securities?It had a prominent presence on the freewheeling island of Hainan, which turns out to have been fertile ground for cementing relationships with Chinese officials who would in time have leading positions in the economy."It was a very small circle of people in the finance sector at that time and even fewer people in Hainan," said Zhang Gaobo, a former top executive at Hainan Securities, which was founded by former central bank employees. "So everyone knew and saw each other frequently."Mr. Fang had met often with the founders of Hainan Securities in the early to mid-90's. He set up a real estate subsidiary in Hainan for China Construction Bank at the request of Mr. Wang, then the bank's head, in 1992. That company, Intime Holdings, invested more than $1 million in a beachfront real estate project with Hainan Securities, according to company documents. That real estate project now includes a hotel that Mr. Fang's brother operates. The property on which the hotel sits was later acquired by a conglomerate that Mr. Fang and Mr. Zhou, the central banker, helped prepare for a public offering when they were with C.I.C.C.Lu Tao, one of the Chinese officials overseeing the $67 million payout, said safeguards were in place to ensure that none of the donation money went to any related parties, including friends or relatives of Mr. Fang or government officials.In many ways, Mr. Fang's ties to Hainan are just the kind of connections Goldman is banking on. After all, in financial circles here, Mr. Fang is considered the ultimate relationship man. "Whenever anyone needs a chop, they go to Fang," said a former C.I.C.C. colleague, referring to the highly sought-after government approval stamp.Yet Victor Shih, who teaches political science at Northwestern University, said there are dangers in relying too heavily on the politically connected in China. "When you get someone well connected," he said, "you get all the connections, but it's also volatile. If they fall out of favor, or get involved in some corruption case, you're in trouble."Still, people close to Goldman's deal said that after the firm did its due diligence, it decided to bet on Mr. Fang and his connections, including agreeing to lend him and his partners $100 million. At a banquet in November to celebrate the deal, Mr. Fang and Richard Gnodde, Goldman's Asia president, dined with Wei Liucheng, Hainan's governor.Mr. Wei is the former chief executive of Cnooc, a state oil company that Mr. Fang helped take public in 2001 when he worked for Bank of China International. Such old ties help explain why Goldman sees Mr. Fang as the ideal Chinese partner.