http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/18/us/florida-man-gets-life-in-prison-in-fatal-dispute-over-music.html
Florida Man Gets Life Term in Fatal Dispute Over Music - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Davis  Jordan Russell (1995-2012),Dunn  Michael David,Jacksonville (Fla),Self-Defense,Sentences (Criminal),Healey  Russel L,Florida
Oct. 17, 2014
7569
MIAMI —  A man who was found guilty of premeditated murder in the 2012 shooting of an unarmed teenager during a dispute over loud music was sentenced on Friday to life in prison without parole by a Florida judge.Judge Russell Healey added another 90 years to the sentence for the attempted murder of three other teenagers and for firing a weapon into a car.At the end of the emotional hearing in Jacksonville, Michael Dunn, who was convicted of murder this month, read an apology to the grief-stricken parents of Jordan Davis, the 17-year-old high school junior who was shot three times as he sat in a parked car with friends.“If I could go back and do things differently, I would,” Mr. Dunn, 47, said in court. “I was in fear for my life, and I did what I felt I had to do. Still, I am mortified I took a life, whether it was justified or not.”Mr. Dunn was tried twice on the first-degree murder charge. The first proceeding, in February, ended in a mistrial on the murder charge after jurors disagreed on whether Mr. Dunn shot in self-defense. The jurors convicted him of the lesser charges. It took less than six hours for a jury this month to convict him of murder.Mr. Dunn, who testified during the trial, told the jury that he shot Mr. Davis because the teenager was pointing a shotgun at him. But no gun was ever found by the police or seen by witnesses.The murder occurred in a Jacksonville parking lot after Mr. Dunn asked the teenagers to lower the volume of rap music blasting from their car. Mr. Davis cursed at Mr. Dunn and disregarded his request. Prosecutors argued that this disrespect enraged Mr. Dunn, who reached for his gun. Mr. Dunn fired 10 shots.Through tears, Lucia McBath, Mr. Davis’s mother, said she would always mourn the milestones she would miss. “I, too, must be willing to forgive,” she said. “And I choose to forgive you Mr. Dunn for taking my son’s life. I pray that God has mercy on your soul.”Although jurors concluded that Mr. Dunn was unjustified in shooting Mr. Davis, Judge Healey said Florida’s so-called Stand Your Ground law continued to be misunderstood and misused. “While that debate will continue, I’m sure,” Judge Healey said, “we should remember there is nothing wrong with retreating or de-escalating the situation.”