https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/22/us/politics/budget-spending-federal-deficit.html
Trump’s First Budget Works Only if Wishes Come True - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),United States Economy,Congressional Budget Office,Federal Taxes (US)
May 22, 2017
1020
WASHINGTON — In its inaugural budget, the Trump administration projected that booming economic growth would allow the president to keep a wide range of expensive campaign promises while eliminating federal deficits in 10 years.It is wishful thinking.The budget promises a deep tax cut for businesses and consumers that would not reduce federal revenue. An increase in military spending would be offset by trillions of dollars of unspecified or loosely sketched reductions in federal spending.And it all works because the budget assumes an acceleration of economic growth to an annual pace of 3 percent a year, much higher than the post-recession average of 2 percent.“I see no way that’s going to remotely happen,” said David A. Stockman, the budget director under President Ronald Reagan. He noted that the White House is depending on the continuation of an economic expansion that is already among the longest in American history. “It assumes you’re going to go 206 months without a recession, which has never happened,” he said. Not in the United States, at least.Presidential budgets are political statements — wish lists that Congress never grants in full, and sometimes rejects completely. A preliminary version of President Trump’s plan already got a frosty reception on Capitol Hill even though Republicans control both houses of Congress. Many Republicans share the Democrats’ wariness about large-scale cuts to the social safety net. And increased military spending would require Democratic support to lift the caps imposed by the Budget Control Act of 2011, giving the minority party valuable leverage.Strikingly, Mr. Trump’s budget would increase the share of the nation’s economic output the federal government collects each year. The Congressional Budget Office projected in January that under current law the government would collect 18.37 percent of gross domestic product in 2027. Mr. Trump’s budget projects that the government would collect 18.43 percent — even after a proposed tax cut. Because the White House also projects faster economic growth, the combined effect would increase federal revenues over the 10-year period by an estimated $2.7 trillion.The White House expects the government to claim a smaller share of a much larger pie. By 2027, the Trump administration estimates, higher growth would yield an additional $344 billion in individual income taxes even after the proposed reductions in individual tax rates.Mr. Trump wants to combine that stream of revenue with sharp spending cuts to reduce annual federal deficits. The White House projects the budget would swing from a deficit of $440 billion in 2018 to a surplus of $16 billion in 2027, which would be the first since 2001.Some proposed reductions in federal spending are clearly specified. The budget assumes, for example, that the government can save $48.8 billion in disability payments by returning to work men and women who the government has previously concluded are unable to work.Other proposed reductions are unspecified, like a “two-penny plan” to reduce discretionary spending by 2 percent a year. That wide-ranging category of spending includes everything except the defense budget, interest payments and obligations like Social Security. But the administration provided no details about the particulars of the plan, just an estimate that the cuts would save $1.4 trillion, or about 40 percent of the total reduction in federal spending.A combination of fiscal restraint and faster growth could quickly render the federal debt much more manageable. The standard measure of government debt is in comparison to a nation’s economic output. Under Mr. Trump’s budget, the debt would decline from 76.7 percent of annual economic output in 2018 to 59.8 percent of annual economic output in 2027.By contrast, the Congressional Budget Office estimated in January that under current law the debt would reach about 88.9 percent of annual economic output over the same period.“The C.B.O. assumes that we’ll never grow at more than 1.9 percent again,” said Mick Mulvaney, director of the Office of Management and Budget. “That assumes a pessimism about America, about the economy, about its people, about its culture that we refuse to accept.”But economists generally regard the projection of 3 percent annual economic growth as highly optimistic. The Federal Reserve estimated in March that the maximum sustainable pace of economic growth is around 1.8 percent. The Congressional Budget Office puts the ceiling at 1.9 percent. Those are low numbers by historical standards, but growth is determined by the expansion of the work force and the improvement in the amount that workers can produce. The growth of both the working-age population and productivity have slowed in recent years.“Without violating some of the most basic laws of economics and history, we are not going to get the kind of growth that will yield a balanced budget in 10 years,” said Steve Bell, a former staff director at the Senate Budget Committee who is now at the Bipartisan Policy Center.That would leave two possible outcomes: deeper spending cuts or larger deficits.Mr. Trump has some big spending plans. His budget would provide an additional $469 billion for defense discretionary spending over 10 years. It also calls for $2.6 billion in 2018 to bolster border security and begin work on a wall along the border with Mexico. And he has called for a family-leave program that would allow new mothers and fathers to take six weeks off work while receiving their full salaries. The idea, the brainchild of Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka Trump, would cost $19 billion over a decade.Mr. Trump’s budget sheds little new light on the main planks of his legislative agenda. The budget allocates $200 billion over 10 years to “support” $1 trillion in infrastructure investment. This would entail using federal money to attract investment from the private sector to help rebuild roads and bridges. A summary of the budget proposal also describes the Keystone XL pipeline as an example of an infrastructure project that might not happen without the Trump administration’s involvement, though it would not receive federal funding.Even less specificity was offered on the tax plan, which Mr. Trump’s economic team has promised will become law by the end of this year. Mr. Mulvaney said Monday that the budget projected that the proposed tax cuts would not increase the federal debt because they would produce offsetting economic growth.That assertion is disputed by a wide range of economists, both liberal and conservative. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated last month that the ideas presented by Mr. Trump, including cutting the corporate tax rate to 15 percent from 35 percent and doubling the standard deduction for individual taxpayers, could reduce tax revenues by $7 trillion over 10 years.The budget contained no new information on the plan. Materials released by the White House showed tax projections that appeared unrelated, and the White House did not respond to a request for comment. “The tax plan as you know is in its very early stages,” Mr. Mulvaney said.