https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/19/arts/might-ivanka-trump-speak-up-if-her-father-guts-the-arts.html
Might Ivanka Trump Speak Up if Her Father Guts the Arts? - The New York Times
Culture (Arts),Trump  Ivanka,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government
Feb. 19, 2017
8004
Ivanka Trump recently helped defend gay rights from a proposed executive order from her father, Donald J. Trump, that would have scrapped Obama-era L.G.B.T. protections. Now, with the White House drafting plans to eliminate the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities, it is Ms. Trump who could emerge as a key player again, inasmuch as culture has been a rich part of her life.Ms. Trump owns a few significant pieces of art — including works by Christopher Wool, Alex Israel and Wade Guyton — and is known to attend the ballet and museum events. As a child, she gave painting a shot and took piano lessons, but was probably most devoted to dance, performing in New York City Ballet’s “The Nutcracker” at 8.Those performances remain an indelible memory for her. Ms. Trump was enrolled in the School of American Ballet’s children’s division from the fall of 1989 to the spring of 1991, starting as a beginner in Girls I and progressing to Girls II. Those classes were taught primarily by the Russian ballet masters Helene Dudin, who died in 2008, and Antonina Tumkovsky, who died in 2007.Ms. Trump danced in “The Nutcracker,” a New York holiday tradition, in December 1989 and December 1990, appearing in both years as Party Scene Girl and Angel.True, that was nearly 30 years ago. And no, Ms. Trump never did go on to become a Sugar Plum Fairy, though she did audition for “Les Misérables” (“It didn’t work out,” she told Us Weekly in 2015). But her daughter, Arabella, 5, seems to be following in her mother’s ballet steps.And while Ms. Trump declined to be interviewed about her cultural interests, she did offer this statement to The New York Times through a spokeswoman: “Ballet instilled me with a sense of discipline and focus from a young age. These traits created a strong foundation for me as a student and were later incredibly valuable as I set out in my professional career. Dancing inspired me with a lifelong appreciation for the arts, and I continue to have the greatest admiration for the beauty of dancers who exhibit both strength and grace.”In her book, “The Trump Card: Playing to Win in Work and Life,” published by Touchstone in 2009 when Ms. Trump was just 27, she conveys a respect for the ballet school and a reverence for “The Nutcracker” that she once feared might be jeopardized by the attendance of Michael Jackson, who then lived one floor below her in Trump Tower:Jackson, as it turns out, was inspired by Tchaikovsky. “If you take an album like ‘Nutcracker Suite,’ every song is a killer, every one,” he told MTV News in 2007. “So I said to myself, ‘Why can’t there be a pop album where every [song is a killer]?’”Mr. Trump arranged to get him a ticket to “The Nutcracker.” This made his daughter — and her fellow cast members — thrilled but also concerned.Ms. Trump has posted images and video highlighting Arabella’s interest in dance and took her to see the ballet at the Mariinsky Theater on a visit to St. Petersburg. Which invites the question: Will she also give her two little boys the opportunity to try tights and dance?