https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/28/opinion/rulings-on-abortion-and-appointment.html
Rulings on Abortion and Appointment - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Abortion,Appointments and Executive Changes,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Obama  Barack,Presidents and Presidency (US),Constitution (US)
June 27, 2014
1810
To the Editor:Re “Court Rejects Zone to Buffer Abortion Clinic” (front page, June 27):When I worked at a women’s clinic in Tampa that had no buffer zone, our patients had to walk a gantlet of harassment to enter the building. We had to have volunteers who would walk with our patients to protect them from highly aggressive and confrontational protesters.Our clinic was firebombed. Our doctor (in a separate incident) was met at the back door of our clinic by a man who held a gun at the doctor’s head, until we threw money at the gunman and he let go to grab the cash. Clinic workers received threats. Our doctor was followed by someone in a van as he jogged near his home, so we ended up with guard dogs at the clinic and the doctor armed himself.I don’t think that anyone who hasn’t worked under those kinds of intimidating conditions can understand the stress and fear of having to pass by hostile strangers in order to get to the doctor. There is a history of violence against providers of women’s health care that goes back decades, and I fear that this ruling will increase the vulnerability of our patients and doctors and embolden those who act against them.ELLEN GOLDIN Brooklyn, June 27, 2014 To the Editor:It is indeed a relief that the Supreme Court has ruled against abortion clinic buffer zones.Although abortion is a so-called constitutional right, there is no moral right to abortion, and pro-life sidewalk counselors, far from being a threat, help save lives.MATT C. ABBOTT Chicago, June 27, 2014The writer is a Catholic commentator for RenewAmerica.com. To the Editor:Several years ago, while walking with my 5-year-old son to a groundbreaking ceremony for a new Planned Parenthood regional center, I was accosted by a protester who came up to me and screamed in my son’s face: “Your mommy’s a murderer! Your mommy’s a murderer!” Repeatedly.Clinic protesters claim to seek “quiet conversations with women entering clinics.” But yelling in the face of my young son was anything but “a quiet conversation” with a woman. It was, instead, a horrifying screech at a child that he remembers to this day.KATE BARKER SWINDELL Portland, Ore., June 27, 2014 To the Editor:I remember well the 1994 shooting at an abortion clinic in Brookline, Mass., that your article alludes to, and I’m pretty shocked that the Supreme Court would determine that a minor, sensible policing method to prevent domestic terrorism could be construed as violating the First Amendment.There are many presumably constitutional law enforcement methods that are much more restrictive. How can youth curfews and protest zones for rallies be legal when a tiny area that restricts harassment (and possibly more) of patients and workers is deemed unconstitutional?JONATHAN SADOW Oneonta, N.Y., June 27, 2014 To the Editor:Re “Justices Rebuke Obama on Right of Appointment” (front page, June 27):This is not a radical ruling; it’s actually quite pragmatic and sensible. And it isn’t about President Obama. It applies to all presidents.The point of the original law on recess appointments was to enable the president to govern when Congress wasn’t around — not when it obstructed his agenda or failed to agree with him, but just when its members couldn’t quickly be gathered together.The Senate’s every-three-day pro forma sessions may seem like a technicality, but on most of those mini-breaks you actually could get members of Congress together on short notice. It’s during the summer recess or major holidays, when they are all traveling, that you might need an emergency appointment. So in effect, the Supreme Court has said that an emergency can’t be defined as “I didn’t get my way.” Good call.WILLIAM WORKMAN Willison, Vt., June 27, 2014