https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/15/world/middleeast/syria-aleppo-car-bomb.html
Dozens Killed as Blast Strikes Convoy Carrying Evacuated Syrians - The New York Times
Terrorism,Evacuations and Evacuees,Al Qaeda,Free Syrian Army,Hezbollah,Syrian Observatory for Human Rights,Assad  Bashar al-,Aleppo (Syria),Syria
April 15, 2017
8663
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Dozens of people were killed in the Syrian city of Aleppo on Saturday when a car bomb struck a group of buses carrying residents and fighters who had been evacuated from two besieged towns the day before.The blast interrupted a deal between the government and the rebels to evacuate people from four villages that have suffered prolonged sieges.Photographs from the scene posted on social media showed a line of buses destroyed in the blast, their windows blown out and charred bodies scattered in the road.Syrian state television said at least 39 people were killed in what it called a terrorist attack. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which opposes the government and tracks the war from Britain through contacts in Syria, said at least 43 people were killed.Most of the dead were residents of two Shiite villages in Idlib Province that have been surrounded by Islamist Sunni rebels for about two years. Rebels accompanying the convoy were also killed.No group immediately claimed responsibility for the attack, but jihadist groups, like the Syrian affiliate of Al Qaeda, have a presence in the area and consider Shiites apostates who should be killed.The evacuation deal bogged down on Saturday, apparently over the terms between the rebels and the government.More than 2,000 people, including 400 fighters, had been bused out of Madaya, a predominately Sunni town near the border with Lebanon that had long been held by rebels. About 150 fighters from another rebel-held town, Zabadani, were still waiting to be evacuated. Both towns have been besieged by government forces and Lebanon’s Hezbollah militia.About 5,000 people, including 1,300 fighters, had been bused out of Fouaa and Kfarya, two Shiite villages in Idlib Province that are loyal to President Bashar al-Assad. They are surrounded by Islamist rebels, including some affiliated with Al Qaeda.By midday Saturday, both convoys had reached the city of Aleppo, and the Shiites were waiting to be allowed to enter government-held territory while the Sunnis were waiting to go to rebel-held Idlib Province.Then the car bomb struck the Shiite buses, causing widespread panic and overwhelming local medical facilities.Some evacuees said they feared that the deal would collapse. “We are now hostages,” Ahmad Abdul-Wahab from Madaya said when reached on one of the buses that was not attacked. He said he worried that the blast would enrage the pro-government fighters escorting his convoy. “I don’t know if they’ll seek revenge,” he said.By late Saturday, the transfer appeared to be resuming. The Syrian Observatory said some buses had been allowed to move, and state news media said the first buses carrying Shiites had reached government-held areas.