https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/23/us/defending-family-farm-traditions-in-battle-against-keystone-pipeline.html
Defenders of Tradition in Keystone Pipeline Fight - The New York Times
Nebraska,Keystone Pipeline System,Agriculture and Farming,Eminent Domain
Jan. 22, 2015
6418
BRADSHAW, Neb. —  An unpainted wooden barn sits in a snow-dusted cornfield along a gravel road, one of many that dot the rural horizon here.This barn, however, contains no horses, tractors or farming tools. Its roof is covered with solar panels, there is a windmill out front, and the interior is plastered with signs with slogans like “Build Our Energy” and “#NOKXL,” in protest of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline, which could run under the property if President Obama approves the project.The 1,179-mile pipeline, first proposed in 2008, would carry oil from Canada into the United States, connecting with existing pipelines in southern Nebraska. In Congress, the Senate continues to debate a bill to approve the pipeline, and the House has already passed a bill to approve its construction.Four Harrington sisters — Abbi, Terri, Jenni and Heidi — grew up in the 1960s and ’70s tending livestock and crops here, and three of them have remained in Nebraska and continue to farm the land. They fear that construction of the pipeline could threaten their livelihood and a family farming tradition that dates back about 150 years, to when their great-great-grandfather settled on the plot.Their wind- and solar-powered barn, constructed in 2013 after activists raised thousands of dollars online, was built as an unsubtle protest against the pipeline, a physical barrier along the proposed path.The pipeline project has become a cause célèbre, and not just among conservatives, who cite its potential to create jobs, or among environmentalists, who lament the risks they say it poses to groundwater. Several farmers like the Harringtons are also in a personal battle to protect land that in many cases has been passed down through generations.This week, TransCanada, the company proposing the pipeline, began eminent domain proceedings in Nebraska county courts, seeking to gain access to almost 90 properties where the owners have not agreed to terms. Many of those landowners have said they have no intention of allowing construction.“Imagining all those big earthmovers coming in and digging this big scar down our heritage just feels wrong,” said Terri Harrington, the sister who owns a plot where the pipeline would run. She worries that a leak — like one that sent 50,000 gallons of oil into the Yellowstone River in Montana last week, contaminating drinking water — could endanger the land she loves.The Harrington farm, divided among the sisters years ago but still in many ways managed as a single unit, sits amid the quiet, flat farmland of southeast Nebraska, miles from the nearest town. Corn and soybeans are the main crops here, and they grow in abundance largely because of the Ogallala Aquifer, the underground water source farmers depend on for irrigation.As children, the Harringtons rose early to do their chores, and as teenagers, some of them caught a tan while driving the tractor wearing a swimsuit. Terri Harrington moved to Denver after college and became a lawyer, but the other sisters stayed in Nebraska and made their careers in agriculture.Jenni Harrington said she had not been a political activist before the Keystone XL proposal, but after watching a video of oil sands extraction in Alberta, where the Keystone XL route would start, she began speaking out.“Having to be forced to have that run through our property just seemed like a really wrong thing, and we couldn’t stay quiet,” said Ms. Harrington, who has testified about the issue at local government meetings and has written postcards to Mr. Obama expressing her opposition.Though the vast majority of Nebraska landowners along the route have agreed to terms with TransCanada, the well-organized 12 percent who have not signed on make this state the emotional heart of anti-pipeline activism.For the Harringtons, the opposition has become a family cause. Last Friday, Terri Harrington was among several landowners who filed lawsuits in county court challenging the route through Nebraska. Another sister, Abbi Kleinschmidt, was once arrested at a Keystone XL protest outside the White House. All four siblings have signed public letters asking for the project to be scrapped. And a short video about the family’s farm played last fall before Neil Young and Willie Nelson took the stage at an anti-pipeline concert in the northern Nebraska countryside.But in rural Nebraska, politics can be taboo in polite conversation, and the publicity has had drawbacks. Jenni Harrington said her children had been teased at school about her activism. When she installed a giant yard sign last year supporting Dave Domina, the anti-pipeline Democrat running for the United States Senate, a neighbor countered with an equally large tribute to the pro-pipeline Republican and eventual victor, Ben Sasse.Still, the efforts of the Harringtons and their allies have resounded far beyond the Nebraska farmland, and national environmental groups have joined forces with an unlikely, and bipartisan, team of farmers, ranchers and city dwellers. The pipeline has also become a favored cause of some Republicans nationally, who say the project would bring needed energy from an allied nation at minimal risk.TransCanada officials insist the pipeline is safe and note that they shifted the route through Nebraska because of ecological concerns. That revised path won the blessing of the governor then, Dave Heineman, and a State Supreme Court ruling this month allowed his approval to stand.But the pipeline’s prognosis here is complex. Four of seven justices on the Nebraska Supreme Court ruled that the law giving Mr. Heineman the authority to sign off on the route was unconstitutional. The other three justices did not say whether they thought the measure was constitutional, and the law stood because five votes were needed for it to be overturned.With new lawsuits and the recent eminent domain claims, landowners and TransCanada are bracing for what could be another protracted court fight. Anthony Schutz, a law professor at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, said those with property along the route had a number of options to state their opposition. He said the original Supreme Court case could continue to be litigated, other landowners could sue, or someone could challenge eminent domain proceedings.After years of legal wrangling, and with other hurdles to construction remaining in South Dakota and at the federal level, the continued lawsuits in Nebraska have frustrated some of the project’s backers. Shawn Howard, a spokesman for TransCanada, said opponents were grasping for reasons to drag out the process now that the State Supreme Court has ruled on the case.“It’s this never-ending, ‘We don’t like the answer, and you’d better do it our way,’ ” Mr. Howard said. “And they’re never, some of them, going to say it’s fair.”Opponents like the Harringtons, though, say the issue is deeper than that. In her kitchen last week, Jenni Harrington flipped through a box of yellowed pictures of her family’s land, some of which dated back well over a half-century.The black-and-white snapshots included images of the homestead’s original house, which was torn down during Jenni’s childhood, and of men in overalls working in the fields or sitting atop a new tractor that today would be considered an antique. One photo showed a building with “Centennial Hill Farm” freshly painted on its face. Today, those letters have faded, but the structure still stands behind a cattle pen and an empty hog building.“We’re everyday people,” she said. “I don’t feel we’re crazy.”