https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/world/canada/canada-carbon-pricing-environment-energy.html
Canada Wonders, if U.S. Balks, Is Carbon Pricing Still the Answer? - The New York Times
Carbon Caps and Emissions Trading Programs,Trudeau  Justin,Canada,Bakken Shale Field (ND),United States,Trump  Donald J,Global Warming,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Carbon Dioxide
Dec. 8, 2016
1606
OTTAWA — When Prime Minister Justin Trudeau meets on Friday with the leaders of Canada’s provinces and territories to work out a national carbon pricing plan, Donald J. Trump will also be in the room, in a manner of speaking.The president-elect has expressed skepticism about climate change, support for the fossil fuel industry and a desire to pull the United States out of the Paris climate accord. That has raised a big question for Canada: Can it move forward with a carbon policy if America is headed in the opposite direction?Mr. Trudeau certainly wants to push ahead. His government wants every province and territory to adopt a plan to reduce carbon emissions by putting a price on them — either through a tax on fossil fuels or a cap-and-trade system of emission allowances for industry. If they refuse to do one or the other voluntarily, he has warned, the national government will impose a plan on them.Many of Mr. Trudeau’s political rivals argue that it would be irresponsible to move ahead now with carbon pricing in Canada if the United States will not be doing the same thing. But carbon-tax proponents say the opposite, that Canada could gain a competitive advantage by acting before its much larger neighbor.The only regional leader who has balked publicly is Brad Wall, the premier of Saskatchewan. He has emerged as the effective head of an informal group that says having Mr. Trump in the White House must mean no carbon taxes in Canada.Carbon pricing “is very risky for us to do, especially when our biggest trading partner is not going to do it,” Mr. Wall said in an interview last week. “It does not mean that we’re not concerned, or we don’t want to move on climate change. I just think there’s an orthodoxy that’s grown up around carbon pricing: ‘If you don’t care about carbon pricing, you don’t care about the earth.’”But next door to Saskatchewan, in the oil-producing province of Alberta, Shannon Phillips, the environment minister, is equally adamant that Mr. Trump’s election makes no difference to Canada’s decision. “On Nov. 7, the American price on carbon was something like zero,” she said. “So Nov. 8 changes very little.”Mr. Trudeau said in early October that the provinces would have to introduce a minimum carbon price of 10 Canadian dollars per metric ton (about $6.80 a ton) starting in 2018. Over the next five years, that would quintuple.Several provinces are already well down that road. The carbon emissions tax in British Columbia is now about 30 Canadian dollars per metric ton, and Christy Clark, the premier, has said it will be raised. Quebec, Ontario and Manitoba have all agreed to cap-and-trade systems linked to that of California; in Quebec, that has created an effective carbon price of about 19 Canadian dollars a ton.Mr. Wall, who leads the conservative Saskatchewan Party, initially objected to carbon pricing in part to protect his province’s relatively small coal mining industry and its coal-fired power plants. The province has been trying to deal with carbon from those plants a different way, by physically capturing and storing it, an effort that has proved costly and is off to a slow start. Even so, Mr. Wall got the Trudeau government to agree to let some of the coal-fired plants keep operating after a national phaseout date of 2030, as long as the province substantially lowers its overall emissions from power plants.Now Mr. Wall’s chief worry is the Bakken oil field, which straddles the American border. If Saskatchewan has a carbon tax and the United States does not, Mr. Wall said, the oil companies working the field “will literally go a mile and drill in North Dakota.”Several economists say that worry is misplaced. Aside from ignoring Saskatchewan’s advantages over North Dakota, most notably its pipeline network, they said Mr. Wall was exaggerating the impact of carbon taxes on investment decisions.For the oil industry, “the carbon price is really a rounding error,” said Andrew Leach, an environmental economist at the University of Alberta in Edmonton. “I don’t mean to say that it’s nothing,” he added, noting that some oil operations will feel its effects more than others. “But relative to oil prices, it’s small.”Mr. Leach, who was part of a group that proposed climate measures to the provincial government of Alberta, estimates that they will add about $2.50 to $3 in American dollars to the price of a barrel of crude oil from Alberta’s oil sands, after adjusting for tax write-offs.The main opposition party in the federal Parliament, the Conservatives, say that carbon pricing will jeopardize the future of Canadian industry, which generally exports most of its production to the United States.“By far, the United States is our biggest trade and investment partner, and they are also our biggest competitor,” said Ed Fast, a former cabinet minister who is now the Conservative spokesman in Parliament on climate issues. “Carbon pricing at this time is going to be devastating to our economy. Some people are in denial.”Before Mr. Trudeau’s election in November 2015, the Conservative-led government under Prime Minister Stephen Harper withdrew the country from international commitments on climate issues, saying they were unrealistic. Mr. Trudeau campaigned on a promise to reverse that policy.Like Mr. Wall, Mr. Fast would prefer to focus on cutting emissions with new technology rather than with taxes or cap-and-trade. But proponents of carbon pricing say the new technologies will only be developed and used if carbon prices force companies to act.Dave Sawyer, an economist with EnviroEconomics, a consulting firm in Ottawa, said that long before the American election, policy makers in Canada were assuming that the United States would not move ahead soon on carbon pricing.“So what has Trump changed? Not a lot,” Mr. Sawyer said.He noted that most of the existing provincial carbon policies were intended to not have much effect on industrial plants. “You’re imposing costs on a new factory,” he said, adding that by doing so, the provinces were pushing new factories to be more efficient and keep other operating costs lower, potentially giving them an edge over plants in the United States.Elyse Allan, chief executive of General Electric Canada, told an energy-industry group shortly after the election of Mr. Trump that carbon pricing was “now a fact of life in Canada” and would swiftly force productivity improvements.“When viewed through this lens,” Ms. Allan said, “carbon pricing moves from threat to opportunity.”Mr. Sawyer said the advent of a Trump administration would not force Canada to change course on climate policy, but it might slow the pace a bit.“Canada has moved rapidly in the last two years at the federal and provincial level at implementing a whole series of stringent policies,” he said. “So Canada’s gotten a little bit ahead of everyone else right now. It doesn’t mean stopping, it doesn’t mean getting a little more aggressive. Canada has to pause and take stock, basically.”