https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/nyregion/rudolph-giuliani-diplomat-cabinet-about-new-york.html
Diplomatic, He’s Not. But Giuliani Might Be Our Top Diplomat. - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Arafat  Yasir,Giuliani  Rudolph W,Trump  Donald J,State Department,New York City,United States Politics and Government
Nov. 15, 2016
6877
Rudolph W. Giuliani had a mission for his trusted chief of staff, Randy M. Mastro: Get Yasir Arafat out of Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center. It was October 1995, and Mr. Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, had turned up with an entourage for a peace concert celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations.So had a thousand other leaders and officials from around the world. But Mr. Giuliani, a Republican then in the second year of his eight as mayor of New York, had decided that Mr. Arafat, whom he deemed a terrorist, would not be welcome.Mr. Mastro delivered the message to Mr. Arafat’s box, and at some point, the group departed. (Mr. Mastro, now in private legal practice, has not lost his ability to take on seemingly impossible assignments over the years: He led an investigation in 2014 that, he claimed, exonerated Gov. Chris Christie of any involvement in the George Washington Bridge traffic scandal; as WNYC’s Matt Katz revealed, the Mastro report on the matter was among the Bridgegate labors for which the taxpayers of New Jersey paid Mr. Mastro’s firm $11.2 million. So far.)The final movement of that 1995 evening was not “Ode to Joy,” but a front-page headline in The New York Post about how Mr. Giuliani had told off Mr. Arafat.Mr. Giuliani left elected office at the end of 2001 — he sought a three-month extension of his term on the grounds that the city needed him as mayor to oversee the recovery from the Sept. 11 attacks — then ran in the 2008 Republican presidential primaries. He took home a single delegate. Over the last year he found in the candidacy of Donald J. Trump, a Republican, just the right dose of smelling salts to revive a public life that had long wilted.Tirelessly, almost single-handedly, Mr. Giuliani argued Mr. Trump’s cause and maintained that his opponent, Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, had acted criminally in her use of a private email server, although a federal investigation had found otherwise.It is no surprise that Mr. Trump would want to reward Mr. Giuliani, but in a startling turn, the former mayor is on a very short list of people to be secretary of state.Had anyone ever described Mr. Giuliani as diplomatic, he might have taken it as an insult.Mr. Giuliani has said that much of his success as mayor arose from his willingness to take extreme positions by the standards of New York’s political culture in the 1990s. That same temperament — no matter how titrated and calculated he may believe it to have been — got him into any number of fights that ended up hurting people and costing the city money to get out of lawsuits that accused the mayor and his aides of abusive, personal retaliation.When a limousine driver criticized a red-light trap set up by the police in the Bronx, Mr. Giuliani was infuriated. He waved police documents at a news conference and wrongly said that the man had been convicted of a serious sexual assault.An advocacy and housing organization for people with AIDS lost its city contract after criticizing Mr. Giuliani’s policies; others who claimed retaliation by Mr. Giuliani or his aides included a jail warden who supported a political opponent of the mayor and a police officer who publicly criticized what she saw as recklessness in certain stop-and-frisk tactics.After Mr. Giuliani left office, the city paid about $7 million to settle lawsuits in these cases. The payments, the city said, were not admissions of wrongdoing by Mr. Giuliani.On the global front, Mayor Giuliani frequently used the United Nations as a chew toy. That played well with many New Yorkers fed up with street-parking privileges enjoyed by diplomats and consular employees. Moreover, they ignored parking summonses. Mr. Giuliani won cheers when he said the United Nations was “acting like the worst kind of deadbeats.” He suggested that the body could leave town, but later explained that he was just trying to push the United Nations and the State Department into taking more responsibility for the scofflaws.In his 2008 campaign, Mr. Giuliani cited his 1995 confrontation with Mr. Arafat as evidence of his muscular foreign-policy approach. Not everyone saw it that way, including Gillian Sorensen, a United Nations official who was backstage with Mr. Giuliani when he learned about Mr. Arafat’s presence.“He claimed that as his qualification to be a leader — imagine!” Ms. Sorensen said. “I have to call it a tantrum, like a 2-year-old, red in the face. I simply cannot imagine him being in the most visible diplomatic assignment, secretary of state. People should know in advance what they’re getting.”And he’s proud of it.