https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/10/us/keystone-pipeline-nebraska-supreme-court-transcanada.html
Obama Facing Rising Pressure on Keystone Oil Pipeline - The New York Times
Keystone Pipeline System,Nebraska,Obama  Barack,State Department,TransCanada Corporation,Heineman  Dave,House of Representatives
Jan. 9, 2015
6426
WASHINGTON —  President Obama came under new pressure on Friday to make a decision on the Keystone XL oil pipeline as the Nebraska Supreme Court cleared the way for its construction through the state and the House passed a bill to approve the project.The House vote of 266 to 153 in favor of the pipeline sends the measure to the Senate, which is likely to pass the bill in the coming weeks.The Nebraska ruling eliminates Mr. Obama’s chief reason for delaying his decision on whether the pipeline should be built, since he had said repeatedly that he would wait until the state court weighed in.The ruling also strengthens demands from Republicans and some Democrats that Mr. Obama approve the pipeline, which would carry 830,000 barrels of oil per day from the oil sands of western Canada to the ports and refineries of the Gulf Coast.“He’s out of time and excuses,” said Brigham McCown, an administrator of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration during the George W. Bush administration. “It puts the ball fully in his court.”As debate on the Keystone bill began on the House floor just hours after the court’s decision, Speaker John A. Boehner said Mr. Obama had to act. “Finally, it’s time to start building,” he said.Republicans and some Democrats support the pipeline because they say it will create jobs and promote economic growth, while environmentalists and other Democrats oppose the project, saying the process for extracting the oil sands petroleum creates significantly more planet-warming carbon emissions than the process for conventional oil. Energy policy experts say the practical impact of the project, both on the environment and the economy, is limited.On Friday environmental groups called on Mr. Obama to follow the Nebraska ruling with a decision not to build the pipeline. “The only decision that will bring peace of mind to landowners is watching the president use the power of the pen to stop this risky pipeline once and for all,” said Jane Kleeb, the head of the group Bold Nebraska, which has led the fight in the state against Keystone.Mr. Obama has vowed to veto a bill from Congress approving the pipeline, and a White House spokesman said Friday that the veto threat still stood. But White House officials said that Mr. Obama would veto the measure not out of opposition to the pipeline itself, but because it would remove the president’s authority to make the decision and instead transfer that power to Congress.Eric Schultz, a White House spokesman, said, “Regardless of the Nebraska ruling today, the House bill still conflicts with longstanding executive branch procedures regarding the authority of the president and prevents the thorough consideration of complex issues that could bear on U.S. national interests.”But the Nebraska decision puts more pressure on the president to use that authority. Although the State Department has the official authority to permit the project because it would cross an international border, it has become clear that the final decision rests with Mr. Obama as the project has grown into a political fight.The State Department has conducted multiple reviews of the project since 2008, most recently an 11-volume environmental analysis released last January. The State Department is waiting for eight other government agencies to weigh in on whether the pipeline is in the national interest, but Mr. Obama could pre-empt that process by making the decision at any time.“Today’s court decision wipes out President Obama’s last excuse,” said Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, the Republican chairwoman of the Senate Energy Committee. “He’s had six years to approve a project that will increase U.S. energy supplies and create closer ties with our nearest ally and neighbor, and he’s refused to act. Regardless of whatever new excuse he may come up with, Congress is moving forward.”Gov. Dave Heineman of Nebraska had approved the Keystone project after the pipeline company, TransCanada, proposed a route that avoided the state’s ecologically delicate Sandhills region. The Nebraska justices, in their decision, effectively overturned a lower court’s ruling that had blocked a state law giving the governor the right to approve the project.That law, passed in 2012, let oil pipeline companies take their projects directly to the governor, bypassing the Nebraska Public Service Commission.In February, however, a state district judge ruled that the 2012 law was unconstitutional. That ruling was appealed to the seven-member State Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in September.Friday’s decision turned on an unusual provision of the Nebraska Constitution, which says that “no legislative act shall be held unconstitutional except by the concurrence of five judges.” Four justices, making up a majority of the court, voted to hold the law unconstitutional, while the other three said only that the plaintiffs had not suffered the sort of direct injury that gave them standing to sue.“Because there are not five judges of this court voting on the constitutionality” of the law, Justice William M. Connolly wrote for the majority, “the legislation must stand by default.”Mr. Heineman, a Republican who was not eligible to seek re-election because of term limits, left office on Thursday. Though Keystone XL has broad support from Republicans nationally, his deeply conservative state has been an unlikely center of opposition to the project.A bipartisan coalition of environmental advocates, ranchers and farmers has argued for years that the project poses unacceptable risks to Nebraska’s groundwater and agricultural land because of the potential for oil spills.In a 2013 speech, Mr. Obama said that the pipeline’s potential impact on climate change would be a key factor in his decision.Last January, the State Department review seemed to give the president the cover to approve the pipeline by concluding that it would not significantly increase the rate of carbon pollution into the atmosphere. The State Department’s rationale was that the oil was already moving to market by rail and other pipelines, and that it would be extracted with or without construction of the pipeline.But appearing in December on the television show “The Colbert Report,” Mr. Obama spoke negatively of the project. “We’ve got to make sure that it’s not adding to the problem of carbon and climate change,” Mr. Obama said. “We have to examine that, and we have to weigh that against the amount of jobs that it’s actually going to create, which aren’t a lot.”The president added: “Essentially, this is Canadian oil passing through the United States to be sold on the world market. It’s not going to push down gas prices here in the United States. It’s good for Canada.”The State Department review estimated that Keystone would support 42,000 temporary jobs over its two-year construction period — about 3,900 of them in construction and the rest in indirect support jobs, such as food service. The department estimated that the project would create about 35 permanent jobs.The report also estimated that building the pipeline would contribute about $3.4 billion to the American economy.On Saturday afternoon, environmental activists plan to demonstrate outside the White House, calling on Mr. Obama to reject the pipeline. 