http://www.nytimes.com/2001/01/29/world/mexican-jail-easy-to-flee-just-pay-up.html
Mexican Jail Easy to Flee: Just Pay Up - The New York Times
MEXICO,GUZMAN  JOAQUIN,GERTZ MANERO  ALEJANDRO,FOX QUESADA  VICENTE,PRISONS AND PRISONERS,BRIBERY,PRISON ESCAPES,COCAINE AND CRACK COCAINE,DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC
Jan. 29, 2001
8248
The maximum security Puente Grande prison is supposed to be one of the toughest in all Mexico: two guards for each convict, hundreds of isolation cells, sophisticated video surveillance. There was only one way out for Joaquín Guzmán, serving 20 years as one of the nation's biggest cocaine traffickers.He bought his way out.Mr. Guzmán needed plenty of help to escape on Jan. 19, and he got it. Someone opened his electronically secured cell. Someone disabled the video cameras. Someone smuggled him onto a laundry truck in a burlap bag, and someone drove him away.All this has driven President Vicente Fox and his new public security chief, Alejandro Gertz Manero, to towering rages. It offered evidence, as if more were needed, of how the law in Mexico can be bent with a fistful of money.Mr. Fox has inherited a system so dirty that no amount of purging seems to cleanse it. Mr. Fox himself said that ''the pervasive influence of dirty money'' had infected ''law enforcement organizations and dishonest government bureaucrats'' throughout Mexico.''The corruption of the past can't be ended overnight,'' he said Friday at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, ''but now we are truly trying to eradicate it.''As the president vowed to win that war, Mr. Gertz said the nation's drug gangs had taunted the new government, which took office last month, by sending threatening and impudent messages warning of political assassinations. ''In our country,'' he said, ''throughout its existence, and especially in the last few years, forces have arisen that are much stronger and more effective than the official ones. Cloaked by political corruption for generations, they have truly become overwhelming.''In the last few years, the federal anti-drug chief, who was an army general, and other senior military officers fighting the war on drugs, along with the chief of the federal police and hundreds of his subordinates, have been accused of being bought off by the cocaine cartels.The nation's attorney general fired more than 1,400 of 3,500 federal police officers for corruption -- or two out of every five members of the force -- and prosecuted 357 of them.When Mr. Guzmán's colleague in the Sinaloa drug cartel, Héctor Luis Palma Salazar, was arrested in Guadalajara a few years back, 34 police officers -- his bought-and-paid-for private protection force -- went to jail with him.Seven prominent members of the Juárez cartel now doing time were law enforcement agents who turned to a more lucrative line of work.The problem long ago entered Mexico's prisons, where ''an entrenched system of corruption undermined authority and led to abuses,'' according to the State Department in Washington. Almost anything can reportedly be bought in prison -- drugs, sex, liquor -- including, apparently, freedom.Mr. Guzmán, who is 45 years old and 5 feet 6, is known as El Chapo, or Shorty. He began his career as a kind of air traffic controller overseeing drug flights within Mexico. Then he went into business for himself.He grew so successful that a rival drug gang tried to rub him out, and one of Mexico's two Roman Catholic cardinals, Juan Jesús Posadas Ocampo, was killed in the crossfire. Cardinal Posadas died at the Guadalajara airport in 1993 when the gang's gunmen fired on his car, apparently thinking it was Mr. Guzmán's.That year, Mr. Guzmán was arrested on drug trafficking and murder charges. But his organization lived on. United States drug enforcement officials said it transported tons of Colombian cocaine a month through Mexico to the United States.It even appears to have built a 1,500-foot, concrete-reinforced, air-conditioned cocaine smuggling tunnel between Tijuana and Otay Mesa, Calif., near San Diego. The organization's profits could have been used to grease the way for Mr. Guzmán's escape.Corruption at the Puente Grande prison, which is outside Guadalajara in the state of Jalisco, was no secret. Guards complained a year ago to the state human rights commission that their bosses were forcing them to comply with the system of selling privileges and protection to prisoners. The state commission sent its report to the federal government but received no response until two weeks ago, when Mr. Fox's administration ordered an investigation.The coincidence of the investigation and the escape did not go unnoticed. Nor did the fact that the escape came the day after Mexico's Supreme Court ruled that criminals like Mr. Guzmán, who is wanted in the United States, could face extradition and interrogation by American authorities.