https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/arts/television/a-take-charge-bachelorette-sends-the-boys-home.html
A Take-Charge ‘Bachelorette’ Sends the Boys Home - The New York Times
Television,Lindsay  Rachel L,The Bachelorette (TV Program)
June 6, 2017
8430
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is underway, and unlike DeMario (and possibly Eric), The New York Times is still here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives are following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey while steering clear of the mud-wrestling ring. Can we steal you for a sec?JOE COSCARELLI Finally, some compelling character development. (No, not the battling clown duo of Lucas and Blake. Good riddance.)It took three episodes, but I feel as if we really met Rachel-as-Bachelorette at the start of Monday’s episode. Up to this point, the show had been so adamant about portraying her as an openhearted recovering skeptic that she bordered on seeming too credulous of the (absurd) process, too susceptible to sweet-talking men with allegedly pure intentions. (For instance, repeatedly being nothing but chill with Dean’s “ready to go black” comment.)But in her unambiguous, deliciously brutal dismissal of DeMario, who may or may not have had a girlfriend back home, Rachel got to flex a bit. I couldn’t help but feel as if she had been holding back after watching her shut down a groveling DeMario as he tried to weasel his way back into the suitors’ frat-houseish mansion. “That was a boy; I need a man,” she told him, in reference to his pathetic showing upon being confronted, “Cheaters”-style, in the previous episode.“The Bachelorette” production and editing team also played the moment perfectly. After two episodes of softening its lead, the show got to safely play up Rachel’s more feminist, take-no-nonsense bona fides in the face of an obvious scrub. The point was driven home as she returned to the tittering group of bros who were acting tough but were just trying to eavesdrop on her conversation with DeMario. When one guy asked meekly if DeMario was coming back, Rachel dropped a “[expletive] no,” was called “fierce” and eventually made it all explicit. “I feel empowered after that,” she said — as if it wasn’t already obvious what the scene was meant to accomplish. It worked on me anyway.CARLA CORREA Farewell, Lucas and Blake — or should I say, “Whaboom” and “aspiring drummer.” May you both enjoy short-lived careers hawking teeth whiteners on Instagram, because America is not quite sure what “jobs” await you postshow.A job is a fuzzy concept on “The Bachelorette” and “The Bachelor,” but it hasn’t always been that way. Early in the franchise, contestants’ jobs were straightforward: Trista Rehn, the OG bachelorette, dated men, including a mortgage broker, a couple of pilots and a couple of firefighters.There were at least five pharmaceutical sales reps in 2004 alone. Yawn. We did see a socialite in 2006 and a “manscaper” in 2011, but almost every other job was vanilla. Then, in 2014, the series started taking itself way less seriously: The daters included a dog lover and a free spirit (she didn’t like clothes), a pantsapreneur and an explorer. #goals.What changed? “The Bachelor” and its spinoffs had become appointment viewing in a stream-it-later world. Fans had wine in hand, one eye on the television and the other on Twitter. #Bachelor Twitter was a big thing. Instagram was a thing. Snapchat was about to become a thing. And the contestants, who in the past were discouraged from using social media as their season aired, began joining the fray.So, as one of about 30 suitors, how do you become a thing when the “Bachelor”-verse is flooded with commentary? Maybe you have an absurd “job.” When describing Jonathan, one of Rachel’s men who is a “tickle monster,” Chris Harrison said on Facebook Live that fans will talk about a “tickle monster” over a doctor. “That’s his thing,” Chris said. “We figure when we have some fun with these labels, it’s not necessarily what they are. It’s kind of who they are.”In 2015, we met a sport-fishing enthusiast and an amateur sex coach. In 2016, twins and a woman who was simply unemployed. We’ve also seen a “Bachelor” superfan, a hipster, a chicken enthusiast and an aspiring dolphin trainer. Then there’s my personal favorite: a Canadian.Being a “former” something is also a staple: war veteran, former athlete, former dancer for the NBA, former Miss Illinois, etc. Yes, these folks are making money in other ways. But if they’re not, thank goodness that several of the lead’s castaways go on a paid trip to “Paradise.” It’s a (small) source of income!Of course, contestants are in on the joke. We’re all in on the joke, too. We know Whaboom is not a Whaboom. But who wants to buy teeth whiteners from a boring guy?