http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/27/us/politics/obama-urges-senate-to-renew-phone-record-collection-program.html
Obama Warns Senators on Lapse in Surveillance - The New York Times
USA PATRIOT Act,Surveillance of Citizens by Government,Obama  Barack,National Security Agency,Senate
May 26, 2015
5195
WASHINGTON —  With time running out, President Obama on Tuesday urged the Senate to pass legislation to renew surveillance programs that are scheduled to expire next weekend or risk endangering the American people.“The problem we have now is that those authorities run out at midnight on Sunday,” Mr. Obama told reporters as he hosted NATO’s secretary general at the White House. “So I strongly urge the Senate to work through this recess and make sure that they identify a way to get this done.”The president’s plea, though, fell on absent ears. With Congress on recess this week, the chances of the Senate’s passing the legislation before the Sunday night deadline are problematic at best even with senators called back for a rare Sunday session. And so the White House faces the prospect that its legal authority to carry out some of these programs will vanish at least for a few days until the political gridlock in the Senate is resolved.At question are sections of the USA Patriot Act, which was initially passed after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Among the provisions scheduled to lapse this weekend is authority for the bulk collection of telephone data that has been so controversial since it was exposed by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor. A federal appeals court has ruled the program illegal but did not shut it down pending further appeal.With Mr. Obama’s support, the House has passed bipartisan legislation that would take the government out of the business of bulk collection while leaving the data in the hands of private telecommunications firms and available for searches in cases when a court approves. The Senate failed to overcome a filibuster against that bill, with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican majority leader, preferring to renew the law as it now stands.Mr. Obama addressed the issue after meeting with Jens Stoltenberg, the NATO secretary general. The two discussed what Mr. Obama called “the increasingly aggressive posture that Russia has taken” in Ukraine as well as NATO efforts to help in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.In his remarks, Mr. Obama warned that the bulk collection program was not the only authority that would expire this weekend if the Senate did not act by Sunday.“You have a whole range of authorities that are also embodied in the Patriot Act that are noncontroversial, that everybody agrees are necessary to keep us safe and secure,” Mr. Obama said. “Those also are at risk of lapsing. So this needs to get done.“And I would urge folks to just work through whatever issues can still exist,” he added. “Make sure we don’t have on midnight Sunday night this task still undone, because it’s necessary to keep the American people safe and secure.”