https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/world/asia/china-emissions-xi-jinping-limit-cap-and-trade.html
Enacting Cap-and-Trade Will Present Challenges Under China’s System - The New York Times
China,Xi Jinping,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Global Warming,Carbon Caps and Emissions Trading Programs
Sept. 25, 2015
2173
BEIJING — American officials have applauded President Xi Jinping’s commitment to a national market for greenhouse gas quotas as a breakthrough in environmental cooperation.But to work well, Mr. Xi’s pledge, made at the White House on Friday, will demand big changes from a Chinese government accustomed to heavy-handed intervention and skewed statistics. It will take years of effort to build a substantial market that plays a major role in curbing emissions, and even then, it could founder, like similar initiatives elsewhere, experts said.China has had local trials underway since 2013. Their records have been mixed, supported by the liberal doling out of emissions permits or by cajoling companies to take part. Expanding those initial efforts nationwide by 2017, as Mr. Xi pledged to do, will be daunting even for China’s authoritarian leaders.“It will be a heavy burden having all this ready in time for 2017,” said Yang Fuqiang, a senior adviser on energy and climate change policy in Beijing for the Natural Resources Defense Council. “Now we’re not even sure just how much energy we consume, so how can you go ahead with trading?”Mr. Yang and other policy experts said that Mr. Xi’s target date would be just the start of a national trading plan, which would initially include big companies in several industries.Mr. Xi’s “cap and trade” system would cover power, iron and steel, chemicals, building materials, papermaking and nonferrous metals. But the big transport sector has been left out for now.“We’ll face the question of how to reduce emissions in industries and sectors not covered by emissions trading schemes,” Mr. Yang said. “Then there’ll be coordination issues between the different policies and sectors. It’s complicated.”Mr. Xi arrived in Washington to doubts that his government was serious about market overhauls, reducing pollution or shouldering global burdens. He hoped to rebuff those criticisms by promising to recruit the forces of capitalism to tame the smokestack pollution driving global warming.So-called cap-and-trade programs limit the amount of pollution that companies can emit and then let them pay competitive prices for a share of the quota. Companies that do not use their entire quota can sell the remainder, while those that need more than their quota have to buy additional permits.The intended result is a competitive market that induces companies to devise ways to reduce emissions. The European Union’s struggle to make its 10-year-old emission trading program a success underscores how difficult it is to strike such a balance.To create a system that works for China, regulators must develop policies and trading platforms that give companies confidence that they are being treated equally and transparently as they buy and sell emission permits. If China’s stock market is any guide, plenty of investors say their experience is often the opposite.“There’s been a debate in Western countries about whether or not China is a market system,” said Qi Ye, the director of the Climate Policy Institute of Tsinghua University in Beijing. “Europe certainly is a market system, so if Europe cannot do an emissions trading system well, how would you expect China to have a successful carbon market?”For now, United States officials and many environmental groups have welcomed the plan as a stimulus for negotiations on a new global climate change treaty in Paris in December. Chinese officials have said before that they want to establish a nationwide emissions market by 2017, but Mr. Xi’s declaration will put presidential weight behind that goal, the officials said.“China starting its national emissions trading scheme will have a major signaling effect globally,” said Frank Jotzo, director of the Center for Climate Economics and Policy at the Australian National University in Canberra, who closely tracks developments in China.“The world’s second-largest economy puts in place a price on carbon emissions, and this will be noted the world over,” Professor Jotzo said. “If successful, it can grow into playing a major role in facilitating China’s objectives for a cleaner energy and industrial system.”Mr. Xi’s declaration builds on one he made last November, when he and President Obama announced an agreement that China’s carbon dioxide emissions would stop rising by around 2030. That was the first time the Chinese government had given a clear goal for a peak.A growing number of scientists now say that China’s slowing economy and weakening dependence on heavy industry for growth make a peak by 2025 feasible.China’s greenhouse gas emissions are about double those of the United States, the second-biggest polluter. That has magnified international pressure on Beijing to do more to avert climate change. But Mr. Xi appears unlikely to budge from his more conservative peak date.Experts and policy advisers said the proposed national carbon trading plan would test a government that, during stock market turbulence in recent months, has shown that it can swiftly turn against private investors and subvert transparency.“You can envision there’s a lot of political and technical challenges ahead,” said Ranping Song, the developing country climate action manager for the World Resources Institute in Washington.He added: “There’s no guarantee that this will go smoothly. But this coming from the head of state, Xi, gives more confidence that this is going to be fairly significant and is a lot less likely to be watered down.”Since 2013, China has experimented with pilot plans across seven economically varied areas, including Beijing and Guangdong Province, that allow designated companies to buy and sell the right to use power, burn fossil fuels and release carbon dioxide into the air.The trial plans initially struggled with murky rules; reluctant companies picked by the government to take part; and regulators inexperienced in measuring how much pollution factories, boilers and buildings release. Similar problems have troubled carbon markets in advanced economies like Europe, and several experts said China’s markets were improving.“It can work perfectly if we have all the pieces of the puzzle ready, but if we don’t have the rest of them, this one alone will not generate much benefit,” said Wang Tao, an analyst at the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy in Beijing. “There are also risks if we don’t manage this well. The collapse of the carbon price may actually shut down the market.”That process will start when big companies in several industrial sectors, including steel, chemicals and construction materials, set quotas and prices so they can start trading the right to consume power and fossil fuels, Mr. Wang and other researchers familiar with China’s plans said.Official indications of the scope of the proposed national program suggest that it could initially cover about 10,000 companies and other emitters in a market for up to four billion metric tons of carbon dioxide, said ZhongXiang Zhang, an economics professor at Tianjin University in northern China and author of a recent assessment of China’s emissions trading plans. That would be about twice as large as Europe’s emission trading program, now the world’s largest.Chinese officials have been studying that market and others. But the lessons have not always been promising. Europe’s emissions trading system has stumbled amid criticism that it gave out emissions permits too generously and failed to make companies change their energy habits.“Carbon emissions trading requires a trading exchange, third party inspection, and then there’s a whole lot of monitoring and verification,” said Mr. Yang from the Natural Resources Defense Council. “The transaction costs are very high.”The challenges in China are compounded by unreliable statistics, corruption and local officials who have made blazing economic growth a point of honor. Overcoming those problems will demand far-reaching changes to the energy sector, so that trading emissions translates into reduced consumption of coal and other polluting fuels, several experts said.Under China’s plans, the government would not place an overall cap on carbon dioxide emissions, an idea the government has rejected as premature.Instead, the system favored by Chinese policy makers would limit emissions for designated companies in certain industries. The companies would obtain quotas for their emissions through allocations, auctions or initial purchases.“A national scheme can become effective over time,” said Professor Jotzo, from the Australian National University. “It will not be the biggest factor in China’s climate change policy toolbox at the start, and perhaps not for some time.”