https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/world/americas/mexico-environmental-activist-shot-sierra-madre.html
Isidro Baldenegro, Mexican Environmental Activist, Is Shot to Death - The New York Times
Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Mexico,Caceres  Berta,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Forests and Forestry,Amnesty International,Global Witness
Jan. 18, 2017
668
MEXICO CITY — Isidro Baldenegro López, an indigenous activist whose struggle to protect the pine-oak forests of Mexico’s Sierra Madre range won him the prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize, has been killed by a gunman, the authorities said on Wednesday.A leader of the Tarahumara people who live among the jagged peaks of the western Sierra Madre, Mr. Baldenegro defended the area’s old-growth forests against powerful local strongmen allied with drug traffickers and loggers.The killing was the second of a Goldman prizewinner in less than a year. Last March, gunmen attacked and killed Berta Cáceres, who led her Lenca people of Honduras against a proposed dam.Seven people have been arrested in her killing, but in a statement on Sunday, her family said that the Honduran government had yet to investigate who had ordered it.The death of Mr. Baldenegro, coming so soon after Ms. Cáceres’ murder, highlights the danger faced by environmental defenders in Latin America, where mining, energy, agribusiness and logging interests have generated violent conflict with local communities.His fight to protect his community’s ancestral lands went back decades, and his father, Julio Baldenegro, was assassinated in 1986 for his opposition to logging.Threats had forced the younger Mr. Baldenegro, 51, to leave his community in the remote southern part of Chihuahua State, said Isela González, the director of Alianza Sierra Madre, an organization that works with the Tarahumara to defend their land rights.He returned recently to visit an uncle in the village, Coloradas de la Virgen. On Sunday afternoon, Romero Rubio Martínez, who was present at the uncle’s house, pulled a gun, fired six shots and fled, according to the Chihuahua prosecutor’s office.Mr. Baldenegro died a few hours later, Ms. González said. The motive was unclear, according to the prosecutor’s statement.Mr. Baldenegro won the Goldman Prize in 2005, the year after he was released from prison, where he had spent 15 months on weapons and drug charges that were eventually thrown out.In 1993, Mr. Baldenegro formed an advocacy group and began organizing sit-ins and marches to force the government to suspend logging licenses, according to the Goldman Prize. But despite early victories, the government continues to grant concessions, Ms. González said. Legal cases filed by the Tarahumara to assert their rights over their ancestral lands have been stuck in court for decades, she said.The violence in the region has intensified since the government’s campaign against drug cartels began at the end of 2006. Local bosses known as “caciques formed alliances with drug traffickers, which provided them with hit men,” she said.Many of the Tarahumara, including Mr. Baldenegro and his family, were forced to leave their communities before the threat of armed men who arrived to clear the forest and plant marijuana on the deforested mountainsides.Over the past six years, he had been working with a “very low profile,” Ms. González said. In the last year alone, four other activists in the same municipality, Guadalupe y Calvo, have been killed, she said.Susan R. Gelman, president of the Goldman Environmental Foundation, called on the Mexican authorities to find Mr. Baldenegro’s killers and bring them to trial. “Unfortunately, too many governments are failing to create safe spaces where people can voice their dissent and organize movements free of persecution and violent attacks,” she said in a statement.Almost three-quarters of the known deaths of environmental activists worldwide occurred in Central and South America, according to a report by the organization Global Witness, which analyzed 116 killings in 2014.Erika Guevara-Rosas, the Americas director at Amnesty International, called the killing of Mr. Baldenegro “a tragic illustration of the many dangers faced by those who dedicate their lives to defend human rights in Latin America, one of the most dangerous regions in the world for activists.”