https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/opinion/mr-obamas-honest-message-in-cuba.html
Mr. Obama’s Honest Message in Cuba - The New York Times
Editorials,Obama  Barack,United States International Relations,Cuba
March 22, 2016
1873
President Obama began his speech to the Cuban people on Tuesday with humility and grace. “Cultivo una rosa blanca,” he said, reciting the opening line of one of the most famous poems by José Martí, the island’s national hero. “I plant a white rose.”It was an inspired way of extending an olive branch to a neighboring nation with which America has feuded for more than half a century. Mr. Obama made a compelling case that the ties that bind Cuba and the United States are more powerful than their differences.“I have come here to bury the last remnant of the Cold War in the Americas,” Mr. Obama said Tuesday morning at the Grand Theater of Havana, drawing applause. He spoke movingly about the human toll the acrimony between the two governments has taken on Cuban exiles and those who remained on the island. He hailed Cuba’s rich culture and the tenacity and resourcefulness of its people.And he made it clear that the United States has neither the capacity nor the intention to impose change on Cuba. “What changes come will depend upon the Cuban people,” he said. “We will not impose our political or economic system on you. We recognize that every country, every people must chart its own course and shape its own model.”His message included a healthy dose of criticism and a call for change, which were delivered with both force and tact. He said President Raúl Castro, who attended the speech, “need not fear the different voices of the Cuban people — and their capacity to speak, and assemble, and vote for their leaders.” He said “sustainable prosperity” in the 21st century requires the “free and open exchange of ideas.”Mr. Obama said that the United States was not beyond reproach, but that in a democracy, freedom to choose a nation’s leaders and freedom to speak without fear can lead to change. There is too much money in American politics, he acknowledged, and America still wrestles with the legacy of slavery and segregation. “But the fact that we have open debates within America’s own democracy is what allows us to get better,” he said.That openness was also on display on Monday as Mr. Obama took a few questions from journalists while standing next to Mr. Castro. In Mr. Obama, Cubans saw an articulate statesman who is months away from stepping down from office. In Mr. Castro, they saw a cantankerous autocrat who failed to string together a few coherent sentences when a journalist asked why his government continues to detain people for their political beliefs.Leading Cuban dissidents who met with Mr. Obama at the American Embassy after the speech described his visit as a transformational moment.“It was the speech we and millions of Cubans yearned to hear,” José Daniel Ferrer, the leader of Cuba’s largest dissident group, the Patriotic Union of Cuba, said in an email. “It was a light in the dark.”