http://www.nytimes.com/1997/11/19/arts/ballet-review-young-talent-from-russia.html
BALLET REVIEW; Young Talent From Russia - The New York Times
BOLSHOI BALLET,KIROV BALLET,DIAGHILEV  SERGE,REVIEWS,DANCING
Nov. 19, 1997
5349
It ain't over until the Russians run out of dancers, as Yogi Berra might have said after an unexpectedly fine program on Monday that introduced an entire new generation from the Bolshoi and the Kirov.There is no secret that both ballet companies (the Bolshoi in Moscow, the Kirov in St. Petersburg) are in disarray. Short of viable repertory and bereft of a credible resident choreographer, they are also struggling to emerge from inner turmoil under the aegis of acting directors.But what these once-fabled troupes do have is solid academies that produce reserves of young talent with star potential. The 21-year-old Diana Vishnyeva from the Kirov was the dazzling revelation of this showcase at the New York State Theater, a rarity in her combination of passion with pure classical form and powerful technique. There were, also and in a different category, dancers like Nikolai Tsiskaridze from the Bolshoi, whose charismatic projection fused an idiosyncratic style with astonishing precision in his bravura.Don't ask why this program was labeled, not very persuasively, ''A Gala Tribute to Serge Diaghilev's 125th Birthday.'' It is true that Diaghilev, guiding spirit behind the famed Ballets Russes, was born in Perm, Russia, in 1872. But he died in 1929 and left little direct impact on his native country during the Soviet era. Until very recently, none of the ballets that had their premieres abroad with his company from 1909 to 1929 were performed in their original authentic form by a Russian company.The only work on this program that was created for Diaghilev's troupe was Michel Fokine's ''Spectre de la Rose,'' danced by Ms. Vishnyeva and Vladimir Malakhov, now a star with American Ballet Theater but trained at the Bolshoi school. Mr. Malakhov and the equally familiar Igor Zelensky, who continued to dance with the Kirov while at the New York City Ballet (he left last spring to dance at the Royal Ballet),  were the headliners here. Both seemed in even better form than ever and were matched easily with their young ballerinas from the Kirov.The gamble, won triumphantly, was the performance of George Balanchine's ''Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux,'' which Ms. Vishnyeva and the highly gifted Vyacheslav Samodurov carried off without betraying the master's Neo-Classical style. But both gave it a full-blooded animation rarely seen since Violette Verdy created the ballerina role in 1960.Most of the evening, however, consisted of the excerpts and brief entries that make up every standard ''concert program'' by Russian troupes. Yet unlike some recent groups on the United States touring circuit, this single showcase offered professional production values, thanks largely to Ken Tabachnik, the American lighting designer engaged by Ardani Artists Management, the New York-based producer that presented the event with its Moscow and New York backers, Soyuz Kontrakt and Russian World Gallery (publishers of a recent Diaghilev exhibition catalogue).All the dancers are in their 20's except Svetlana Zakharova, 17, of the Kirov, Mariya Aleksandrova, 19, and Galina Stepanenko, 31, both of the Bolshoi. Most had not been seen in New York.Anastasia Yatsenko and Konstantin Ivanov, of the Bolshoi led off in a sluggish Grand Pas de Deux from ''The Sleeping Beauty.'' ''Grand Pas Classique,'' set to Auber's music by the Russian-born French choreographer Victor Gsovsky (Ms. Verdy's teacher) was treated as joke by Cynthia Gregory at American Ballet Theater. Ms. Aleksandrova, tall and clear in a refreshing manner, and Mr. Tsiskaridze did their best to make sense of illogical sequences.Ms. Zakharova is definitely a newcomer to watch, although her extremely high leg extension in the pas de deux from Act II of ''Giselle'' made her a rather wild wili or ghost with a romantic partner from the Kirov, Ilya Kuznetsov.The high extension craze at the Kirov has not yet hit the Bolshoi, where Anna Antonicheva, with her brilliant leaps, and Dmitri Belogolovstev, with his arching jumps, obviously learned to dance Agrippina Vagonova's ''Diana and Acteon'' more fluently than anyone else around.Ulyana Lopatkina from the Kirov looked mechanical with Mr. Zelensky in the ''white'' adagio from ''Swan Lake'' but both came more than alive in their excerpts from the Shades scene of ''La Bayadere.''Ms. Stepanenko had more power than finesse with her Bolshoi partner, Yuri Klevtsov, and represented the old bravura ethetic. Mr. Malakhov gave us his Ballet Theater gala showstoppers -- his extraordinary whirling spirit of a rose and his strutting everyman in a contemporary solo ''Voyage.''Andrei Batalov, compact in body and beautiful in his classical purity partnered Maya Dumchenko, somewhat stiff in the Kirov's ''Corsaire.'' Kasyan Goleizovsky, Balanchine's mentor in the 1920's, choreographed ''Narcisse,'' a solo through which Mr. Tsiskaridze wiggled and spun with riveting conviction.