http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/19/us/politics/19obama.html
Obama Urges U.S. to Grapple With Race Issue - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Race,Speeches and Statements,Presidential Election of 2008,Blacks,Religion and Churches,Discrimination,Wright  Jeremiah A Jr
March 19, 2008
4842
PHILADELPHIA — Senator Barack Obama delivered a sweeping assessment of race in America on Tuesday, bluntly confronting the divisions between black and white as he sought to dispel the furor over inflammatory statements by his former pastor.Mr. Obama again condemned the more incendiary remarks of the pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr. But, drawing on his experiences as the son of a white mother and a black father, Mr. Obama went on to try to explain to white voters the anger and frustration behind Mr. Wright’s words and to urge blacks to understand the sources of the racial fears and resentments among whites.While his immediate political goal was to tamp down any doubts that his association with Mr. Wright has caused among voters as he battles for the Democratic presidential nomination, Mr. Obama also sought to link his theme of understanding and reconciliation to more concrete issues at stake in the election as the economy weakens.“The fact is,” he said, “that the comments that have been made and the issues that have surfaced over the last few weeks reflect the complexities of race in this country that we’ve never really worked through — a part of our Union that we have yet to perfect.“And if we walk away now,” he continued, “if we simply retreat into our respective corners, we will never be able to come together and solve challenges like health care, or education, or the need to find good jobs for every American.”After running a campaign that in many ways tried not to be defined by race, Mr. Obama placed himself squarely in the middle of the debate over how to address it, a living bridge between whites and blacks still divided by the legacy of slavery and all that came after it.His language reached at times for the inspiration and idealism of the civil rights movement, but for the most part addressed the politics of race in straightforward terms that seemed intended to keep the discussion grounded in the realities of the moment.“It’s a racial stalemate we’ve been stuck in for years,” Mr. Obama said. “Contrary to the claims of some of my critics, black and white, I have never been so naïve as to believe that we can get beyond our racial divisions in a single election cycle, or with a single candidacy — particularly a candidacy as imperfect as my own.”For Mr. Obama, who is engaged in an intense fight for his party’s nomination with Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the 37-minute speech five weeks before the Pennsylvania primary was an attempt to realign his campaign after a turbulent two weeks. Images of Mr. Wright, replayed again and again on television, threatened to damage a coalition of black and white voters that Mr. Obama has been trying to forge.“I can no more disown him than I can disown my white grandmother,” he said, “a woman who helped raise me, a woman who sacrificed again and again for me, a woman who loves me as much as she loves anything in this world, but a woman who once confessed her fear of black men who passed by her on the street, and who on more than one occasion has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that made me cringe.”The speech, delivered before a small audience of local supporters, elected officials and clergy members at the National Constitution Center, was broadcast live on cable. His words were directed at a variety of constituencies, including the superdelegates who, it now seems likely, will decide the nomination, and white voters in states like Pennsylvania that could be vital both in the primary and in the general election.Mr. Obama stayed up well into the night writing much of the speech himself, aides said. His words carried familiar strains of the biography he wrote more than a decade ago about his search for racial identity.In recent days, televised images of Mr. Obama have been accompanied by old sermons of Mr. Wright delivering a blistering critique on white America. As the days go on, it remains an open question whether the images of the pastor will fall to the side and Mr. Obama’s campaign message regains its prominence. This speech was a political risk, his advisers said, whose wisdom may not be fully known for months.“It was very dicey at a time when race is misunderstood by some and overplayed by others,” L. Douglas Wilder, the mayor of Richmond, Va., who was the nation’s first elected black governor, said in an interview. “It was a very, very difficult subject to bring up. It had to be approached in a way that was really something of substance.”Mr. Obama indicated that he wanted to move quickly to other issues, scheduling two high-profile speeches over the next two days on topics other than race.“I suppose the politically safe thing would be to move on from this episode and just hope that it fades into the woodwork,” Mr. Obama said. “We can dismiss Reverend Wright as a crank or a demagogue, just as some have dismissed Geraldine Ferraro, in the aftermath of her recent statements, as harboring some deep-seated racial bias.”He noted that his candidacy had been successful in predominantly white states and in largely black states, but he conceded that the nation’s racial divisions remained firmly ingrained and that black anger and white resentment was rarely interchangeably understood.“For the men and women of Reverend Wright’s generation, the memories of humiliation and doubt and fear have not gone away, nor has the anger and the bitterness of those years,” Mr. Obama said. “That anger may not get expressed in public, in front of white co-workers or white friends, but it does find voice in the barbershop or the beauty shop or around the kitchen table.”“In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community,” he said. Later, he added: “So when they are told to bus their children to a school across town, when they hear that an African-American is getting an advantage in landing a good job or a spot in a good college because of an injustice that they themselves never committed, when they’re told that their fears about crime in urban neighborhoods are somehow prejudiced, resentment builds over time.”A few hours after the speech, Mrs. Clinton arrived at City Hall here for a campaign stop. She said she had not seen it, but said she was “very glad” that Mr. Obama had made it, given that race had been a “complicated” issue in America marked by “pitfalls” and “detours.”For nearly a week, Mr. Obama has struggled to distance himself from statements by Mr. Wright, who had cast the government as racist, corrupt and murderous among other things. Mr. Obama concluded over the weekend that he had failed to resolve the questions, aides said, and told advisers he wanted to address the firestorm in a speech.Standing against a backdrop of eight American flags on Tuesday morning, Mr. Obama offered the most thorough explanation to date about his association with the church and his pastor, whom he has known for nearly 20 years.“For some, nagging questions remain. Did I know him to be an occasionally fierce critic of American domestic and foreign policy? Of course,” he said. “Did I ever hear him make remarks that could be considered controversial while I sat in church? Yes. Did I strongly disagree with many of his political views? Absolutely — just as I’m sure many of you have heard remarks from your pastors, priests or rabbis with which you strongly disagreed.”“The profound mistake of Reverend Wright’s sermons is not that he spoke about racism in our society,” he added. “It’s that he spoke as if our society was static, as if no progress has been made.”