http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/22/us/politics/from-dawns-early-light-a-day-filled-with-pomp-and-exuberance.html
From Dawn’s Early Light, a Day Filled With Pomp and Exuberance - The New York Times
Inaugurations,Obama  Barack,Washington (DC),Presidents and Presidency (US)
Jan. 21, 2013
6441
WASHINGTON — The second time around is never as exhilarating as the first, but to President Obama’s most ardent supporters this year brought its own kind of magic.There were crowds and congestion, but the mood around town on Monday — from the streets to the bars to the parties to the hotels to the Mall to the monuments — was exuberant and, compared with 2009, relaxed.“It’s a lot more laid-back,” said Kerwin Miller, a Washington lawyer who was at a brunch for the Martin Luther King Jr. Foundation at the Hay Adams Hotel. “People are excited, clearly. But it’s not a frenzied kind of excitement.”Here, a minute-by-minute diary of the celebration.6:28 a.m.Sunrise at the MemorialAs the sun peeked across the Tidal Basin in brilliant oranges and pinks, a handful of people gazed up in the cold at the memorial of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. “It’s not a novelty this time,” said Holly Wieland, 57, of Reston, Va., who attended President Obama’s first inauguration. “It’s like the first time you say, ‘Maybe it’s an aberration.’ But it’s for real now.”Marquita Payne, 30, came from Lynchburg, Va., with her 9-year-old daughter, who took photos a few yards away. Ms. Payne talked about why she and her daughter braved the 30-degree temperatures to see the memorial before sunrise. “He’s big,” she said, admiring the statue. “He stands for everything that’s going on now.”8:45 a.m.Gone Fishin’Aboard the Coast Guard cutter Chock on the Potomac River, a call crackled over the radio: A small craft had been spotted in a restricted area near the Woodrow Wilson Bridge. Within minutes a Coast Guard fast boat with a large automatic weapon mounted to the bow raced to interdict.“We fight against complacency,” said Brian Kuhar, the chief petty officer of the Chock, a 65-foot small harbor tug, as he listened in on the radio conversation between the dispatcher and the fast boat. “Anything moving on the water right now doesn’t have a purpose to be here.”Washington was heavily fortified on Monday, including its cold, gray waterways. Several dozen boats from the Coast Guard, Federal Bureau of Investigation and Washington Metro Police patrolled the Potomac shoreline, looking for suspicious craft among the driftwood and scudding ducks.The radio crackled again with an update from the fast boat’s crew: “The vessel is in the creek stopped, appears to be fishing.”9:11 a.m.Silence in Section 60Huge throngs were assembling on the National Mall, but Arlington National Cemetery, normally packed with visitors, was deserted. A cold wind blew the handmade Christmas decorations on the graves in Section 60, where the war dead from Iraq and Afghanistan are buried. Many tombstones have birthdates in the 1980s.“With everything going on, it’s something you would expect,” Greg Veney, who works at the cemetery’s welcome center, said of the absence of crowds. “We think maybe after everything is over they’ll make their way here.”9:17 a.m.Lost LuggageOn the Washington Metro from Farragut North to Judiciary Square, Faye and Earl Sadberry were wondering what to wear to one of the inaugural balls. It wasn’t fashion indecision: Their airline had lost their luggage, including Mr. Sadberry’s tuxedo and Mrs. Sadberry’s ball gown.“I heard Macy’s is open later today,” Mr. Sadberry said. “We’re not giving up just yet.”10:37 a.m.Marnie at the CapitolSitting in a black folding chair front and center at the foot of the Capitol, Allison Williams — the daughter of Brian Williams, the “NBC Nightly News” anchor, and perhaps now best known for playing the character Marnie on the HBO show “Girls” — chatted with fans and posed for pictures.She also took a minute to ponder a question she called “impossible to answer:” Which is more exciting, today’s inaugural festivities or the recent Golden Globe victory for “Girls”?“They’re such different kinds of excitement,” she said. “This is a national and international and historic kind of excitement. And while I feel our show winning was momentous, it was personal for our little family, and this is something I’m sharing with half a million of my best friends.”Over all, celebrities were sparse compared with 2009. But a number turned up, including Katy Perry, John Mayer, John Legend, Beyoncé, Jay-Z and James Taylor.11:15 a.m.We Are StuckCrammed into the nonticketed area and not moving any closer long before the ceremony began, people stood shifting weight from one foot to the other on the National Mall, with little else to do but watch the comings and goings of honored guests on the Jumbotrons.For the most recognizable faces, there were cheers — and boos, reflecting the unpopularity of Congressional Republicans with this crowd.Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio, Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin and Newt Gingrich elicited waves of disapproving sounds. Scattered boos for Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, prompted a few to turn to their friends and ask, “Who’s that?”Patty Williamson, 38, of Pasadena, Calif., volunteered for Mr. Obama’s campaign twice. As her 3-year-old daughter climbed around in her stroller, Ms. Williamson said maneuvering the crowds with a young child hadn’t been too hard to manage so far. But the sight of so many knees seemed to be getting to her daughter.“Are we stuck, Daddy?” she asked, looking up at her father as she turned around in her seat.“Yes, we are,” he said.11:30 a.m.HatsHat check from Section 3 of the inaugural platform: Four mink toppers, eight Tuskegee Airmen caps, a plaid beret and 12 white Coast Guard covers with, according to their wearers, distinctly uncomfortable bills.11:40 a.m.The Producer RelaxesGeorge Stevens Jr., who was the executive producer of the 2009 inaugural concert at the Lincoln Memorial — the one with Bruce Springsteen, Bono, Renée Fleming, Beyoncé, Garth Brooks, Herbie Hancock, Stevie Wonder and Mary J. Blige, just to name a few — was having a far more relaxed experience this time around.“It’s just a different pleasure,” he said, dressed in a peach crew-neck sweater as he held a cup of hot chocolate at the Motion Picture Association of America on I Street, where guests watched the inaugural festivities on television in the warm confines of the association’s screening room. “We had friends over last night and it was great fun. We had a huge inaugural before, so this is lower-key. I think the scale of this is just right.”NoonFlashes, Applause, QuietAs Mr. Obama took to the podium, a sea of cellphone lights, like so many fireflies, lit up from the steps of the Capitol to the Washington Monument. Mr. Obama’s references to Stonewall, gay marriage and pay equality sparked fast and loud bursts of applause, but when his words turned to Newtown, Conn., there was only quiet, enough to hear a slight wind rustle through the trees.12:15 p.m.An Old Rival ApplaudsSenator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who ran for president against Mr. Obama in 2008 and lost, was an interesting study in Inaugural Address applause. A longtime skeptic of overturning the military’s “don’t ask, don’t tell” rule, Mr. McCain clapped when the president declared, “Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law.”When Mr. Obama said that climate change must be confronted, Mr. McCain also applauded, even as several Republicans seated on the platform did not join him.After the remarks, Mr. McCain said that he wished the president would have pledged to work with Republicans, but he bluntly acknowledged, as he knows firsthand, that elections have consequences.“The president has high favorability ratings and Republicans have very low favorability ratings,” Mr. McCain said. “So he’s succeeding as far as the P.R. side of it is concerned.”1:48 p.m.Lunch at LastThe inaugural luncheon was a splendor of orange (the centerpieces, not the complexions) and odd pairings (not the New England lobster and South Dakota bison, but the seating arrangement).Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the Republican whip, got the draw many others obviously wanted. He sat next to former President Bill Clinton, who had to greet virtually everyone in attendance. The other former president at the lunch, Jimmy Carter, was seated next to Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California. Rosalynn Carter drew Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the taciturn Republican leader.Timothy F. Geithner, the departing Treasury secretary, was seated with Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, expected to soon be secretary of state. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, got plenty of time to talk over impending military cuts at the table of Representative Howard P. McKeon, Republican of California, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.In keeping with the inaugural theme of equality, Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, the chairman of the inaugural committee, lamented that only one woman was immortalized with a statue in the hall: Frances Willard, a suffragist and 19th-century social reformer. But he delivered news that another female face would soon be joining the assembled statuary.“Rosa Parks completes her journey from the back of the bus to the front of Statuary Hall later this year,” Mr. Schumer said.2:20 p.m.PedicabsNew York has a lot of things that Washington lacks, like good bagels, tabloid newspapers, skyscrapers — and pedicabs. So late last week, Gordon Gertsen, 32, loaded his bike onto a truck and headed to Washington, where he had heard that pedicab drivers who made a similar trip in 2009 made of lot of money on Mr. Obama’s first inauguration.He was startled by what he found.“New York is pretty dirty,” he said. “I was really surprised by how clean it was here. It’s hillier and more difficult to ride.” He added: “My legs are much more sore.”There was another challenge in navigating Washington’s circles and squares and places like K Street. “At first it was complicated to get around the Mall, how to get through the alphabets, the monuments, the hotels; a lot of people wanted to be taken to the subway,” he said.In the end, his balance sheet wasn’t inspiring. Friday and Saturday were not very profitable, he said, although business picked up on Sunday, when he made about $700. “I probably did a little better than break even,” he said.3 p.m.Empty Bar StoolsPerhaps it was the afternoon sunshine or simply the case that a second act is not as big of a draw as the first, but the city’s hot spots were not nearly as bustling as they were during Mr. Obama’s first inauguration.The fireplace was crackling at Adour, the fashionable bar at the St. Regis, but getting a table was a cinch. Sitting just two blocks from the White House, the pace at the St. Regis — the hotel of choice for the president’s most prolific fund-raisers — was far slower than in 2009. “Four years ago, people were packed in here,” a server said. “You couldn’t see across the lobby. Where is everyone?”The weather was far more seasonable this time, which seemed to draw more people to the parade route along Pennsylvania Avenue. But that wasn’t the only explanation: Fewer campaign contributors made the trip to Washington, several donors said, not out of a lack of enthusiasm for Mr. Obama’s second term, but more out of a reluctance to deal with the hassles of a trip. The California contingent, for example, was significantly smaller than four years ago.4 p.m.DronesAs the crowds left the inaugural ceremony, protesters a few blocks from the Capitol held large pictures of children they said were killed in drone attacks. “King had a dream,” one of them yelled. “Obama has a drone.”8:30 p.m.Making the CurveAs the temperatures dropped, partygoers gasped as they encountered a line snaking around the block to get into the two inaugural balls at the Walter E. Washington Convention Center. Some argued with volunteers, claiming others had cut ahead, but many stuck it out, bracing against an icy wind in little more than their gowns and tuxedos. This late into the inaugural day, they could only celebrate the little victories.As one woman exulted as she progressed through the line, “We made the curve!”The night had just begun.