https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/29/world/turkeys-focus-on-crushing-kurd-extremists-complicates-isis-efforts.html
Turkey’s Focus on Crushing Kurdish Separatists Complicates the Fight Against ISIS - The New York Times
Turkey,Erdogan  Recep Tayyip,Kurds,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Terrorism,International Relations,Kurdistan Workers' Party,Syria,United States,Iraq,North Atlantic Treaty Organization,Defense and Military Forces
July 28, 2015
8936
BAGHDAD —  In the days after reaching an agreement with the United States to combat mayhem in Syria and Iraq, Turkey said it had vaulted itself into the battle against extremists menacing Turkish security.But the extremists the Turks have in mind are not just members of the Islamic State. Instead, as has become increasingly clear this week, Turkey is at least as focused on crushing the Kurdish militants it has struggled to contain for many years.President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey increased tensions with Kurdish militants on Tuesday, telling reporters it was impossible to continue a two-year-old peace process with them.He spoke as Turkey, a NATO member, convened an emergency summit meeting of the alliance, suggesting that Kurdish separatists were at least as big a threat to Turkey’s part of the world as the fighters of the Islamic State. The Turks got a NATO pledge to battle both groups.Turkey’s new airstrikes last week against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, came alongside an equally intense barrage on Kurdish militants in Iraq, whose Syrian affiliates are also fighting the Islamic State.Violence has since flared in Turkey’s southeast, where Kurds are a majority.Mr. Erdogan’s stance presents a complication for the United States and other NATO allies. Under alliance rules, they are bound to protect Turkey from threats, and they have long listed the Kurdish militant group that fought a long insurgency in Turkey, the P.K.K., as a terrorist organization.Yet they are eager not to let the Kurdish issue overshadow the international fight against Islamic State militants who have seized much of Syria and Iraq and sought to inspire attacks around the world.A senior Obama administration official said on Tuesday that the hostilities between Turkey and the P.K.K. had been started by the Kurdish insurgent group and that Turkey had been within its rights to bomb P.K.K. targets in Iraq.Turkey’s abruptly renewed focus on the Kurds has raised new questions about Mr. Erdogan’s true motives. Among his critics in Europe, some are asking if he is less interested in fighting the Islamic State than suppressing the Kurds.Those opponents include not only armed groups, but also members of a pro-Kurdish political party in Turkey whose strong showing in recent elections cost the president his parliamentary majority. Mr. Erdogan appeared to take aim at that faction, the People’s Democratic Party, or H.D.P., on Tuesday.He called on the Turkish Parliament to strip politicians who have links to terrorist organizations of their immunity from prosecution, apparently referring to the H.D.P., which some in the government consider to be the political wing of the P.K.K.The escalating tensions between Turkey and Kurdish groups pose a number of threats to the effort against the Islamic State. If widespread violence between Kurdish militants and security forces breaks out in Turkey, the government could be diverted from its new commitment to battle the Islamic State, made with the United States last week.And the conflict rippled further through the anti-Islamic State alliance on Tuesday.In Iraq, which is fighting to regain large areas from Islamic State militants, the government declared the Turkish attack on the P.K.K. in Iraqi territory “a dangerous escalation and an offense to Iraqi sovereignty.”Iraqi Kurds have been on the front lines against the Islamic State. In Syria, the tensions heighten the risk of conflict between Turkey and Syrian Kurdish militias that — theoretically, at least — are on the same side in battling the Islamic State.It also risks damaging a United States alliance with those militias, which in recent months have been America’s most effective partners on the ground in Syria against the Islamic State.A senior American official, discussing operational planning on the condition of anonymity, said over the weekend that the Turkish attacks on the P.K.K. were “complicating the relationship” with the Syrian Kurdish militias. The official said the United States was pressuring Turkey not to attack the Syrian Kurds.On Tuesday, another senior administration official said the Turks had assured the United States that they would not strike Syrian Kurdish militia targets in Syria.It was the success of the Syrian Kurdish militias that partly spurred the change of heart in Turkey that led to a deal with the United States.The Syrian Kurdish militias have connections to the P.K.K. but insist they do not view Turkey as a target and only seek Kurdish autonomy within Syria.Still, Turkey was wary of the growing autonomy on its southern border and, some analysts say, increasingly envious of the Syrian Kurdish role in the American alliance — which was allowing the militias to expand their territory along the Turkish border with the help of American airstrikes.That, along with the first mass killing of civilians in Turkey in an Islamic State bombing last week, led to the shift by Turkey, with an agreement that provides for American warplanes to use two Turkish bases.The agreement also calls for the countries to cooperate to help primarily Arab Syrian insurgents take over a segment of northern Syria near the Turkish border.That means driving out the Islamic State — but also making sure that the Syrian Kurds do not get there first.According to senior Obama administration officials, the United States and Turkey are to agree on which Syrian opposition fighters will be supported by airstrikes from the United States and its allies under the new agreement.Francis J. Ricciardone, a former ambassador to Turkey who is now vice president and director of the Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East at the Atlantic Council in Washington, told reporters on Tuesday that the deal was not entirely at the expense of the Syrian Kurds, who could benefit from what he called a shift in Turkish policy toward them.He said that Turkey appeared to have adopted the West’s policy of differentiating between the P.K.K. and the Syrian Kurds.The P.K.K., he said, “is operating against the Turkish state, and we consider it an international terrorist group,” while the Syrian Kurds had “explicitly long ago taken on ISIS” and aligned with the Americans.He interpreted a recent public visit to Turkey by the Syrian Kurd leader Saleh Muslim as a sign that the Turkish authorities appeared more tolerant toward his group. Still, Mr. Ricciardone said, a Turkish alliance with Syrian Kurds against the Islamic State is an idea that “remains to be tested.”Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey said over the weekend that the Syrian Kurds “did not bother us like Daesh or the P.K.K.”The deeper tension over Kurdish separatism appears to be within Turkey.The pro-Kurdish party there has come under great scrutiny since stripping Mr. Erdogan’s ruling Justice and Development Party of its parliamentary majority in a June election. The setback for Mr. Erdogan has forced Turkey into a period of uncertainty as opposition parties jockey to form a coalition government for the first time in more than a decade. If they fail, Mr. Erdogan could call for a snap election in November.Analysts say that one of his main incentives in targeting the P.K.K. is to undermine the Kurdish opposition and recapture the Turkish nationalist vote. An absolute majority for his party would serve his own ambitions of changing the Constitution to establish an executive presidency.