https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/arts/design/what-to-see-in-new-york-art-galleries-this-week.html
What to See in New York Art Galleries This Week - The New York Times
Art,Graffiti,Photography,80WSE Gallery,Bonakdar  Tanya  Gallery (Manhattan  NY),Firestone  Eric  Gallery (Manhattan  NY),Lundqvist  Rita,Linklater  Duane
Jan. 12, 2017
5413
Through Feb. 4. Tanya Bonakdar Gallery, 521 West 21st Street, Manhattan; 212-414-4144, tanyabonakdargallery.com.Rita Lundqvist’s third solo show at the Tanya Bonakdar Gallery is her most impressive yet. Over the years, this Swedish artist’s grave little paintings have negotiated a Minimalist peace between figuration and abstraction that is increasingly pared down, spellbinding and formally powerful.Her figures are to the fore: mainly barefoot women in simple, timeless dresses whose staring Iberian eyes contribute to an aura of both power and penitence. Behind the figures, generally flat horizons divide the backgrounds into two colors conjuring abstraction at its most severe. The palette covers the spectrum but in subdued grayish tones reminiscent of Brice Marden’s early panel paintings. Mexican ex-votos, book illustrations and folk tales are possible sources, but whatever her precedents, Ms. Lundqvist grinds them finely and mixes them well.Most effective is the quiet motionlessness of the scenes; they have an air of finality that suggests the end of the story, or perhaps the very beginning. Narrative is unobtrusive; the formal elements of color, scale and space, fine drawing and unfinicky matte surfaces are a big part of the magic. A tree abloom with white orbs seems gigantic next to the woman observing it. In “Arch,” a woman towers over a figure in a choirboy-ish white gown who, as in Sienese painting, may or may not be a child. Similarly, the white disc he holds may be a ball or a large communion wafer, given the Roman arch glimpsed on the left. Spirituality, and occasionally ritual, seem to be the general subjects here. Each painting captures an epiphany of unknown dimension. In “Bird,” the most contemporary, the woman dons a skirt, sweater and shoes and stands among tall trees staring up at a falcon. Where the light illuminating them comes from is anyone’s guess.ROBERTA SMITHThrough Feb. 18. 80WSE Gallery, 80 Washington Square East, Manhattan; 212-998-5747, steinhardt.nyu.edu/80wse.As part of his 2012 graduate project at Bard College’s Center for Curatorial Studies, Duane Linklater, a Cree artist from Northern Ontario, did a beautiful thing: He planted blueberry bushes on the center’s wide lawn. It was a gesture of both possession and sharing. The garden was on land rightfully owned by indigenous people, as every inch of American soil is, but its bounty was beyond owning, there for everyone to sample.Mr. Linklater’s solo show at 80WSE Gallery, “From Our Hands,” is also a multilayered take on the telling of history and who has access to what. Three walls of the galleries have been stripped of drywall and studs, exposing their original brickwork, and new studs have been added spelling out “WHAT THEN REMAINS.” The front gallery is filled by upright beams of plywood and steel, with materials thrown over them — animal hides, blankets, plastic sheets — that suggest associations with modern Native American urban labor. In two back galleries are low wood platforms arranged, museum style, or market style, with objects, including traditional bead-embroidered moccasins and gloves, a short Claymation video playing on a flat screen and a bouquet of dried flowers.The embroidered pieces were made by Mr. Linklater’s grandmother Ethel Linklater (1932-2004) and appeared in a traveling museum show of Native American art called “From Our Hands.” The stop-motion video is by Mr. Linklater’s son Tobias, 12. Titled “Origin of the Hero,” it’s a Nintendo-derived quest narrative that may or may not incorporate elements of tribal stories. The words spelled out by the steel studs, which have been painted bright red, are from a 2015 statement by the Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor in a case involving indigenous sovereignty: Take it away completely, she asked, and what remains?Native Americans now have rights in their originating lands only through United States law. Mr. Linklater has access to his grandmother’s art, his family heritage, only through the institution that owns it. (Ethel Linklater’s works are on loan from the Thunder Bay Art Gallery in Ontario.) What Tobias Linklater keeps and loses of his cultural heritage in a media-saturated world, only time will tell. The bouquet in the exhibition — organized by Georgina Jackson of Mercer Union, a Toronto art space, and Nicola Lees, director of 80WSE — may be taken as a memorial gesture to indigenous lives and powers lost. Yet the words written in the steel studs will remain in place behind new walls built after the show closes, unseen but remembered, into the indefinite future.HOLLAND COTTERThrough Jan. 21. Eric Firestone Gallery, 4 Great Jones Street, Manhattan; 917-324-3386, ericfirestonegallery.com.Few artists have a connection to art history the way graffitists who knew Henry Chalfant did. A short film included in “Henry Chalfant: 1980” at Eric Firestone shows how, after “bombing” a subway car with aerosol paint, graffitists would leave a message for Mr. Chalfant with a precise description of the subway line, car and nature of the work they had just made. Mr. Chalfant would then grab his 35-millimeter camera and document it before transit authorities could buff the train.The photographs here are the result of that relationship — particularly centered on the events of April 1980, when an 11-day strike by transportation workers gave artists extraordinary access to the subway system. One wall shows the original prints, which Mr. Chalfant pieced together by hand to recreate a facsimile of the work. The rest of the gallery is filled with rows and rows of digital versions: 150 subway cars of brightly colored mobile murals by Blade, Crash, Daze, Futura, Mare, Skeme and others. (Lady Pink is the only woman in the exhibition.)These subway friezes became signature emblems of New York. Thanks to Mr. Chalfant and others, like Martha Cooper, the ephemeral work was preserved in photographs. Sure, it was illegal. But graffiti art has become one of the most globally recognizable and copied forms of contemporary culture. And in the realm of creative civil disobedience, it is one of the most extraordinary instances of a bunch of young, working-class artists affecting the world.MARTHA SCHWENDENERThrough Jan. 28. Galerie Lelong, 528 West 26th Street, Manhattan; 212-315-0470, galerielelong.com.From a distance, the paintings in Samuel Levi Jones’s exhibition “Burning All Illusion,” at Galerie Lelong, resemble sedate geometric abstractions, structured around the traditional artist’s grid. Step closer, however, and you see it’s not paint on the surface, but book covers ripped from their sources and arranged, quiltlike, on the canvas. Step even closer and you can make out a few titles, although most have been removed: “Reference Library of Black America: Volume II”; “Race and Ethnicity in the United States”; “West’s Illinois Digest” volumes on homicide or assault.The book covers came from the library of the African American Studies department at the University of California, Berkeley, which was deaccessioning obsolete items. They are, of course, very charged objects. The existence of such a library shows some kind of progress for African-Americans. Yet, seeing the torn-off covers reminds us of how differently laws have been — and still are — applied to various Americans.Painting offers another method for considering these issues. In the same way that artists like Tomashi Jackson and Torkwase Dyson — and before them, Alma Thomas and Norman Lewis — have noted that 20th-century color theory mirrored discussions around race in this country, Mr. Jones puts pressure on concepts like truth. “Truth in Painting,” to cite the Jacques Derrida tract, might be relative, and that might be O.K. The law, however, which is purportedly a search for truth and justice, and which has immediate, material consequences, has often, for many Americans, gone wildly astray.MARTHA SCHWENDENER