https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/upshot/trump-strategy-win-3-key-states-and-warn-about-rigged-election.html
Trump Strategy: Win 3 Key States, and Warn About ‘Rigged’ Election - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Race and Ethnicity,Trump  Donald J,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Aug. 3, 2016
6249
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor in New York,  discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.Toni The latest reporting from Maggie Haberman and Alexander Burns of The Times says Donald Trump’s strategists have settled on the most direct route to the White House: Win Florida, Pennsylvania and Ohio. And hold onto North Carolina. Can’t argue with that, right?It makes a lot more sense than some of the bluster about winning states like Oregon or Connecticut. [Update: Or Trump’s secret plan to win blue states; he boasted about it to The Washington Post]Nate It makes a lot more sense. Virginia and Colorado seem all but off the table, given how well educated those states are. If that’s true, the only credible alternative to sweeping the big three is to sweep Florida, Ohio and the little three: New Hampshire, Nevada and Iowa. And even that would get them only to 269 (they could win Maine’s second district, I suppose). That’s a rough path.Toni You might have seen that Hillary Clinton was campaigning in Omaha. In that possible 269-269 scenario, Nebraska’s Second Congressional District (NE-2) could put her over the top. In fact, Warren Buffett, who ripped into Trump during that campaign stop, mentioned that scenario and “pledged to personally transport 10 Nebraskans to the polls on Election Day on behalf of Mrs. Clinton and urged others to do the same.” Can you quickly explain the recent history of NE-2?Nate NE-2 includes the core of the Omaha metropolitan area. It voted for Mitt Romney by seven percentage points in 2012, but its educational attainment is quite high, it’s easy to organize, and the Clinton campaign basically gets to target it for free, since they’d be airing ads in the Omaha market to appeal to western Iowa anyway.Toni So it’s a two-for-one deal. You can try to win over Iowans while aiming for that one electoral vote in Nebraska.Nate Exactly; there’s no real cost to the Clinton campaign.[Note: Nebraska and Maine are the only states that award some Electoral College votes by congressional district]Toni The Electoral College matters only when it’s a close election. Your article Tuesday pointed out that Clinton has re-established a clear lead over Trump and that there’s reason to think she can retain her polling bounce. She’s largely consolidated the party. And the person who might have been most helpful with that — more than Michelle Obama, President Obama, Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders, with their speeches at the Democratic convention — seems to have been Donald Trump himself.Nate Maybe. I mean, Trump has been around for a while and it wasn’t enough to unify the Democratic base until those other people spoke on her behalf.Trump is certainly doing his part, though.Toni Neither of us is an expert on campaign advertising. But I don’t think you have to be an expert to think that a TV ad built around the story of Humayun Khan, the Army captain who was killed in Iraq, and his parents could be very powerful in the last few weeks of the campaign. This latest Trump episode could even peel away some members of the military, who have long been a part of the G.O.P. base.Nate It’s pretty difficult to untangle the effect of the Khan story and the convention, since, well, the Khan story was part of the convention. But yes, it’s powerful stuff.Toni On Monday, Trump said: “I’m telling you, Nov. 8, we’d better be careful, because the election is going to be rigged.” We wrote about this possibility about six weeks ago: “If Donald Trump Lost, Would He Concede?” Trump is a connoisseur of conspiracy theories.Nate So I can think of two basic ways to interpret it. One is that it’s Trump; he’s prone to indulge conspiracy theories and he can’t seem to accept the legitimacy of a defeat either. He said the same thing after Barack Obama won in 2012. The other theory is that it’s a deliberate attempt to undermine the credibility of the result in advance, perhaps even with the intention of contesting the result — which seemed like the implication of a recent Breitbart interview with his former adviser Roger Stone (who is still close to him).Back six weeks ago, I was thinking much more about the first theory than the second. Now I’m not so sure.Toni Maybe it’s not the best strategy for Trump to tell his supporters it’s rigged. What happens if they don’t show up? Here’s one comment from a reader today: “I had never met a Trump supporter until this weekend, so I was very interested in his perspective. He was a cabdriver in Boston who said: ‘He’s crazy, but I’m crazy, too. And Hillary will just keep giving my money away to people who don’t work. I work every day and I want to keep the money I earn.’ The only bright spot: At the end of the ride, the driver said: ‘Anyway, I don’t vote. It’s all rigged.’ ”Nate It’s an interesting question: I don’t know whether the people who believe elections are rigged are the ones who don’t show up, or if they’re actually just fervent true believers.Toni Getting back to Roger Stone, I suspect that he and Trump could make mischief after a loss in a very close election. But if it’s not close, I think there’ll be a lot of momentum (from Republican officials, too) to dismiss any claim of a rigged election.By that point, I think the country would be ready to move on.Nate I definitely agree the country would be ready to move on. I’m not sure what to expect from Republican officials at this point.Toni It seems G.O.P. politicians have two main reasons to stick with Trump: 1) To hold the team together to win as many down-ballot races as they can and protect their own political futures; 2) To make Trump “own” the loss if he loses. In positioning for the future, they don’t want him to be able to point the finger at them and say they’re the reason he lost. But it’s coming at a great cost. And I‘m sure it’s painful for some of them; they would love to repudiate Trump.Nate Sure, I bet they’d love to. I’m not sure there’s a great cost, though.I think they’ll ride it out.Toni Why ride it out?Nate I just think most of them think they can survive this, and that doing much of anything in the interim is more hardship than it’s worth.Toni Survive ... and get the G.O.P. back to the way it was?Nate I don’t think they have any idea what the G.O.P. of 2020 will look like. But if he loses, they can hope, with some credibility, that they can return to some semblance of normalcy fighting Clinton and try again later.Toni Some suspect that Trump is already laying the groundwork for skipping the debates. But there’s also a strong reason he wouldn’t. He’s trailing in the polls, and there’s a good chance he’ll be trailing by the first debate Sept. 26. He seems to need a debate “moment” or moments more than she does.Nate You can’t really draw up a candidate who could benefit more from a debate than Donald Trump. His numbers on experience and preparedness are very weak. He’ll probably be trailing in the polls heading into the debates. If he could fare well, it would probably help him more than most. On the other hand, a one-on-one debate with Clinton in the sterile setting of a presidential debate hall seems like a terrible contrast for him.Toni He would have to study quite a bit.Nate Yeah, and it might pay off: Expectations for him would be awfully low.Toni I saw that you posted a mini-poll on Twitter: “Which state (where Clinton isn’t airing ads) does Clinton have her best chance to win?”ArizonaGeorgiaMissouriUtahAnd you noted: “Something I caught a few days ago but kind of brushed off: Bill Clinton to campaign in Utah on Aug 11.”I would pick Arizona, narrowly over Georgia.Nate I think I’d pick Arizona, too. But it’s close. And Utah is a true wild card. I just don’t know what to make of it.I was just watching a Clinton ad that came on the air here. It’s the ad showing children watching Trump. Seems like that would play extremely well in Utah.Toni Most people know Arizona has a growing Hispanic population, but it also has an above-average-size Mormon population. That helps keep Arizona competitive. Mormons tend not to like Trump. In the end, most Mormons will probably choose him over Clinton, but it doesn’t mean they’ll like doing it.Nate Yeah, that’s definitely a factor. Maybe it’s only worth a point or two in the end, but a point or two is a lot if it’s a close race.Toni In a recent CNN poll, the four-way matchup has both Jill Stein (8 percent) and Gary Johnson (8 percent) leading Trump (7 percent) among nonwhite voters. That’s quite a statement.Nate It’s a little hard to believe. Wouldn’t that be amazing?Toni Dog-whistle politics have proved to be effective over the decades. More explicit racial resentment doesn’t seem to be a winning strategy for the general election, as those polling numbers show, and as this article from Salon suggests with regard to the reaction of moderate white voters. But I guess we’ll find out in November.Nate Well, Trump is definitely doing worse among well-educated and moderate voters — that’s for sure. But one of the weird things about Trump is that he’s so different in so many ways that it’s hard to untangle what’s really ever helping or hurting him.Toni Today, a reader said about his blue-collar support: “It would be nice to have some serious data on this block of nondegree white men: income, occupation, occupational status, union membership especially. What do we really know about them besides clichés?”Nate Yeah, I agree with the sentiment. In general, the standard demographic variables that are available in traditional polls aren’t very good at helping us think through complicated issues of class and identity.Toni That’ll be a rich area of study in the social sciences in the months and years ahead.For now, Obama’s Gallup approval rating is at 53 percent — unusually high for him. That can only help Clinton, as you wrote recently. Any final thoughts on the state of the race?Nate Let’s wait two or three weeks. If Clinton’s still near 50 percent and holding a comfortable lead, that means a lot.Last week, Nate and Toni discussed the electoral map that Democrats should fear the most. 