https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/28/realestate/compare-homes-in-columbus-ohio-bloomfield-township-michigan-and-old-chatham-new-york.html
$600,000 Houses in Ohio, Michigan and New York - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Columbus (Ohio),Bloomfield Township (Mich),Old Chatham (NY)
June 28, 2017
9999
WHAT A 1900 house with three bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $619,900SIZE 2,041 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $304SETTING This three-story brick house is on a cobblestone street in the historic German Village neighborhood, just south of the center of Columbus. It is a few blocks north of Schiller Park, a 23-acre green space with a fishing pond, a playground and athletic facilities. It is also near many restaurants.INDOORS The house has double front doors with stained glass that open into the living and dining rooms. The living room has built-in bookshelves on both sides of a decorative brick fireplace as well as a refinished hardwood floor that extends into the dining room and kitchen. The kitchen has Carrara marble counters, a subway tile backsplash, stainless-steel appliances and an island with space for stools. There is also a small powder room.Upstairs, there is a landing on the second floor with a reading nook with built-in drawers. There are two bedrooms on this level, including a sunny master with a vaulted ceiling and exposed beams, as well as two full bathrooms with generous marble-topped vanities. One bathroom has a tub; the other has a glass-enclosed marble-tiled shower. A third bedroom on the top floor is used as a home office.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.07-acre lot with a brick driveway. The fenced backyard has a brick patio accessible from the kitchen with space for gardens.TAXES $8,451 a yearCONTACT Tonda Adiansingh, Faulkner Realty Group, 614-204-2382; faulknerrealty.com•WHAT A 1961 house with four bedrooms and three bathroomsHOW MUCH $550,000SIZE 2,565 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $214SETTING This ranch-style house is in a residential neighborhood about 25 miles northwest of downtown Detroit. The Cranbrook Academy of Art is a couple of miles away. The property is surrounded by trees, lakes, country clubs and other midcentury modern houses.INDOORS The house was recently renovated by one of its owners, the designer Patrick Thompson, but retains some original features, including slate floors and a pair of distinctive pendant lamps in the foyer. There are new white oak floors in the living room, which has a painted brick wall with a fireplace open on three sides and a wall of windows looking out to the backyard. This room flows seamlessly into an office area. The kitchen has been opened up to a dining area and completely overhauled with new laminate counters, Heath Ceramics tile and Sub-Zero and Bosch appliances.The master suite is at the back of the house and has a wool carpet. It is connected to a large tiled bathroom with a double white-oak vanity, a free-standing tub, a separate shower with a built-in bench and a floor with radiant heat. The other three bedrooms are also in this wing, and one has an en-suite bathroom. Downstairs is a media room with another fireplace and a sliding glass door opening to the backyard.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.48-acre lot with a curved driveway leading to an attached two-car garage. There is an additional paved section for off-street parking equipped with a basketball hoop. A new 1,200-square-foot cedar deck wraps around the back of the house, and stairs descend to a downward sloping yard.TAXES $6,904 a yearCONTACT Mike Mattucci, Max Broock Realtors, 248-506-5543; maxbroock.com•WHAT A 1799 house with four bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $595,000SIZE 2,272 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $262SETTING This two-story house is perched on a small hill set back from the road, in a rural area of rolling landscapes and woodland trails. The nearest stores and restaurants are in Chatham, N.Y., a small town with a charming Main Street about 11 miles away, and a greater variety of offerings are in the larger city of Pittsfield, Mass., about 20 miles away.INDOORS The house retains many early details, including wide-plank pine floors, exposed beams and old doors, windows and trim. There are two entrances: one front door with sidelights that opens into the foyer and another more frequently used door that opens into the kitchen from a porch. To one side of the foyer is the living room, which has windows on three sides, built-in cabinetry and a large brick wood-burning fireplace. This room is long enough to hold multiple seating areas. Straight ahead from the foyer is the dining room, which has period woodwork and connects to a small library and a powder room.The kitchen is at the back of the house, with rustic wood cabinets and counters, older appliances, an adjacent laundry room and reading nook, and a door to a stone patio. There are three bedrooms upstairs in the main part of the house, including a master with a sloping ceiling and a wood-burning fireplace; all the bedrooms share one full bathroom. A separate guest suite, with another bedroom, a full bathroom and a landing that could be used as an additional small bedroom, is above the kitchen.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 106.6-acre property with a gravel driveway. There is a large landscaped area with a lawn, gardens and trees, as well as a pond suitable for swimming. A small bridge crosses the pond to a gazebo, with woods beyond. There is also a detached one-car garage.TAXES $11,146 a yearCONTACT Lisa Bouchard, the Kinderhook Group, 413-329-1162; tkgre.com