http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/06/world/europe/russia-vladimir-v-putin-levada-center-polling-duma-united-russia.html
Russian Polling Center Is Declared a ‘Foreign Agent’ Before Elections - The New York Times
Levada Center,Gudkov  Lev D,Russia,Putin  Vladimir V,United Russia
Sept. 5, 2016
9099
MOSCOW — Russian officials declared the Levada Center, the country’s only major independent pollster, a “foreign agent” on Monday, two weeks before nationwide parliamentary elections and days after a poll showed sliding support for the governing party, United Russia.The decision, announced by the Justice Ministry, means the Levada Center will probably shut down its polling operations, which it has been conducting since the late 1980s.“This manifests the increase in internal repressions carried out by the country’s leadership,” the center’s chief, Lev D. Gudkov, said in an interview broadcast by Dozhd, Russia’s only liberal independent news station. “If they won’t cancel this decision, it will mean that the Levada Center will have to stop working, because you cannot conduct polls with such a stigma put on you.”A law signed by President Vladimir V. Putin in 2012 requires all nonprofit organizations that receive foreign funding and are engaged in loosely defined political activity to register and declare themselves as foreign agents, a term widely associated with spying in Russia. Rights activists have criticized the law as an instrument to marginalize independent civil society groups.The Russian government has made an effort to portray the coming elections for the State Duma, scheduled for Sep. 18, as more transparent than those in 2011, which ended with thousands of protesters taking to the streets. A reform-oriented official was elected as head of the Central Election Commission.The decision to label the Levada Center a foreign agent was widely seen as a setback to the efforts to foster greater transparency.“It began after we have demonstrated a drop in popularity of the United Russia,” Mr. Gudkov said.The Levada Center published a poll on Thursday that showed a significant decline in support for United Russia, from 39 percent in July to 31 percent in August.Other major Russian polling organizations have not reported such a decline. But in a recent interview with Bloomberg, Mr. Putin acknowledged the drop and attributed it to criticism from other political parties.“Sometimes they simply say things that even laymen realize are hardly practicable, or just unfeasible,” Mr. Putin said. “However, they look good on-screen, scolding and holding up to shame members of the ruling party.”