https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/opinion/hong-kong-and-taiwan-dont-see-eye-to-eye.html
Hong Kong and Taiwan Don’t See Eye to Eye - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Taiwan
July 17, 2017
469
To the Editor:“Hong Kong’s Future in Doubt” (editorial, July 11) connects a dot here and there to paint a much bleaker picture than a dispassionate assessment might otherwise conclude.Hong Kong is a city with a big future. Billions are spent in infrastructure development. Thousands of international companies and start-ups strategically invest their time and money in our economy. Five of our universities are in the top 100 ranking.Our markets remain open to American companies. The United States achieved the largest trade surplus with Hong Kong among all economies. Law enforcement cooperation with the United States is strong, and navy port calls have continued since 1997, when Britain returned Hong Kong to China.Our courts are fiercely independent and respected; judgments by our Court of Final Appeal are referred to in British and Australian courts. The media are as free and probing as ever. Indeed, major American media, including The New York Times, have regional offices in Hong Kong.Like the United States and anywhere else, views can be sharply divided on political and livelihood issues in Hong Kong, and it takes us longer to resolve them. But it shows that our community is open and diverse. And we see this as our institutional strength rather than weakness.CLEMENT LEUNG, WASHINGTONThe writer is Hong Kong’s commissioner to the United States.To the Editor:Re your editorial “Hong Kong’s Future in Doubt,” about the Chinese Communist Party’s interference in Hong Kong’s affairs and how it has increased under President Xi Jinping, “who has also intensified efforts to reduce international acceptance of Taiwan”:The people of Taiwan cherish their freedom, democracy, human rights and rule of law, and firmly believe that these universal values should also be enjoyed by the people of Hong Kong. However, since Britain’s handover of Hong Kong to China in 1997, the city’s democratic universal suffrage has stalled, freedom of the press has deteriorated and judicial independence is being challenged.Taiwan calls on Beijing to honor its pledges to Hong Kong and its people’s pursuit of democracy. Only in this manner can Hong Kong continue to prosper, can mutual understanding and shared values exist between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, and can opportunities for sincere cross-strait interaction be realized.BRIAN SU, NEW YORKThe writer is deputy director general of the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in New York.