https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/30/technology/uber-and-alphabets-rivalry-heats-up-as-director-chooses-sides.html
Uber and Alphabet’s Rivalry Heats Up as Director Chooses Sides - The New York Times
Driverless and Semiautonomous Vehicles,Uber Technologies Inc,Alphabet Inc,Maps,Navigation,Drummond  David C,Google Maps
Aug. 29, 2016
3735
SAN FRANCISCO — The rift between Uber and Alphabet is growing.David Drummond, a longtime executive at Alphabet and a director at Uber, recently stepped down from the ride-hailing company’s board, Uber said on Monday. Mr. Drummond had served on Uber’s board for the last three years.The departure is a sign of the growing friction between Uber and Alphabet, which is the parent company of Google. While Google and Uber had started off as partners — Uber counts GV, Alphabet’s investment arm, as an investor, and the ride-hailing company has long used Google’s mapping technology — they have become increasingly competitive with each other. Uber is moving into self-driving vehicle technology, for example, an area Google has long been working on.In a statement on Monday, Mr. Drummond was upfront about the rivalry. “I recently stepped down from Uber’s board given the overlap between the two companies,” he said in an emailed statement. He added that “Uber is a phenomenal company.” Google declined to comment beyond Mr. Drummond’s statement.Travis Kalanick, Uber’s chief executive, thanked Mr. Drummond in a statement and said he “looks forward to continued cooperation and partnership” with Alphabet.Uber has no plans to replace Mr. Drummond on its board, which now has seven voting members.Mr. Drummond, who leads corporate development and investment initiatives at Alphabet, goes back at least three years with Uber. He was instrumental in helping Uber in 2013 secure a $258 million investment from GV, then Google’s venture capital arm. GV is now Alphabet’s venture capital arm after a restructuring of Google under a holding company structure last year.In a sign of the increased rivalry, last week Uber announced it had spent nearly $700 million to acquire Otto, a 90-person start-up staffed by former Google and Carnegie Mellon University engineers who are working exclusively on autonomous vehicle technology, an area in direct competition with Google’s research. Anthony Levandowski, Otto’s chief executive who will now lead Uber’s self-driving car efforts, was a key member of Google’s autonomous car team.Uber has also been working to build its own mapping technology, an attempt to decrease the company’s reliance on Google Maps.Google has, in turn, dabbled in ride-sharing experiments, including an early car-pooling test using its navigation app, Waze. These efforts have caused consternation among executives at Uber, including Mr. Kalanick, who in a recent interview said Google’s focus on the area gave him cause to “sweat” and work harder on his own company’s efforts.On Monday, technology news site The Information also reported that Mr. Drummond had been prohibited from attending some director meetings and from learning certain strategic company secrets given his role at Google.