https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/us/politics/comey-fbi-memo-rod-rosenstein.html
Deputy Attorney General’s Memo Breaks Down Case Against Comey - The New York Times
Letters,United States Politics and Government,Classified Information and State Secrets,Attorneys General,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Comey  James B,Trump  Donald J
May 9, 2017
5555
WASHINGTON — When President Trump fired James B. Comey as F.B.I. director on Tuesday, the White House made public a memorandum from Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, recommending the dismissal. The firing was highly fraught because the F.B.I. is investigating contacts between members of the Trump campaign and Russia.Mr. Rosenstein, who served as the United States attorney in Maryland under Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, has a reputation as a by-the-book, nonpartisan prosecutor. In his memo, Mr. Rosenstein focused on the continuing fallout of Mr. Comey’s handling of the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state.Here are some excerpts from the memo, with comments by The New York Times. “Over the past year, however, the F.B.l.’s reputation and credibility have suffered substantial damage, and it has affected the entire Department of Justice. … I cannot defend the Director's handling of the conclusion of the investigation of Secretary Clinton’s emails, and I do not understand his refusal to accept the nearly universal judgment that he was mistaken. Almost everyone agrees that the Director made serious mistakes; it is one of the few issues that unites people of diverse perspectives.”This is the memo’s first attempt to frame the firing of Mr. Comey as nonpartisan — a theme to which Mr. Rosenstein will return.“The Director was wrong to usurp the Attorney General’s authority on July 5, 2016, and announce his conclusion that the case should be closed without prosecution. It is not the function of the Director to make such an announcement. At most, the Director should have said the F.B.I. had completed its investigation and presented its findings to federal prosecutors.”Mr. Comey and his defenders have said that he had to take on the role of publicly ruling out charges because the attorney general, Loretta E. Lynch, was compromised by the fact that she had met with former President Bill Clinton at an airport. Mr. Rosenstein goes on to suggest that the solution was for Mrs. Lynch to recuse herself. But Mr. Trump has been criticizing this move in a different way, saying on Twitter as recently as last week that “Comey was the best thing that ever happened to Hillary Clinton in that he gave her a free pass for many bad deeds!”“Compounding the error, the Director ignored another longstanding principle: we do not hold press conferences to release derogatory information about the subject of a declined criminal investigation. … The Director laid out his version of the facts for the news media as if it were a closing argument, but without a trial. It is a textbook example of what federal prosecutors and agents are taught not to do.”Here, Mr. Rosenstein shifts to complaints, heard largely from Democrats, about Mr. Comey’s highly unusual news conference.“Concerning his letter to the Congress on October 28, 2016, the Director cast his decision as a choice between whether he would ‘speak’ about the decision to investigate the newly-discovered email messages or ‘conceal’ it. ‘Conceal’ is a loaded term that misstates the issue. When federal agents and prosecutors quietly open a criminal investigation, we are not concealing anything; we are simply following the longstanding policy that we refrain from publicizing non-public information. In that context, silence is not concealment.”This is a rebuttal to Mr. Comey’s testimony at a congressional hearing last week, when he defended his decision to send a letter to Congress about newly discovered emails (which turned out to be immaterial) 10 days before the presidential election. Faced with the same circumstances, Mr. Comey said he would do it all over again. Mr. Comey’s letter, which quickly became public, cast a negative cloud over Mrs. Clinton in the closing days of the election, and her lead in the polls over Mr. Trump dwindled.“My perspective on these issues is shared by former Attorneys General and Deputy Attorneys General from different eras and both political parties.”In this section, Mr. Rosenstein emphasizes that his recommendation is not driven by partisan considerations, but rather by his break from Justice Department traditions and procedures. To that end, he quotes at length from a series of top former Justice Department officials from both parties who publicly criticized Mr. Comey’s handling of the email investigation at least partly in those terms. They included two Democrats: former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. of the Obama administration and Jamie S. Gorelick, a deputy attorney general during the Clinton administration.“The way the Director handled the conclusion of the email investigation was wrong. As a result, the F.B.I. is unlikely to regain public and congressional trust until it has a Director who understands the gravity of the mistakes and pledges never to repeat them. Having refused to admit his errors, the Director cannot be expected to implement the necessary corrective actions.”The attention will now turn to whom Mr. Trump nominates to succeed Mr. Comey in overseeing the F.B.I. — and the investigation into the contacts between Russia and Trump associates.