https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/15/opinion/the-coming-battle-for-mosul.html
The Coming Battle for Mosul - The New York Times
Mosul (Iraq),Iraq,Obama  Barack,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Abadi  Haider al-,Sunni Muslims,Kurds,Editorials
Oct. 14, 2016
8964
The coming battle to retake Mosul in northern Iraq could be a turning point in the American-led fight against the Islamic State. The city is the terrorist group’s stronghold in that country and critical to its claim to having established a caliphate.For two years the Islamic State, or ISIS, has exercised total authority over Mosul’s inhabitants and subjected many of them to brutal treatment. If, as the allies expect, Mosul is soon liberated, ISIS will suffer a huge blow.But what happens next? Despite months of planning by the United States, the Iraqi government and their partners, much could go wrong. A comprehensive post-battle arrangement for governing the city has yet to be worked out, meaning that even the best-executed military operation could unleash new tensions. It is also not clear whether the allies are prepared to handle the humanitarian needs of hundreds of thousands of civilians who might flee the fighting.The one lesson America should have learned in Iraq and Afghanistan over the last 15 years is that unless governments reduce corruption, calm sectarian divisions, integrate all groups into the political process and deliver services to their citizens, extremists are sure to rise again.After the Americans overthrew Saddam Hussein, the once-oppressed Shiite majority came to power and ran roughshod over the Sunnis, Kurds and other minorities. The current Iraqi prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, has tried to be more inclusive. But old resentments linger, not only among his fellow Shiites but also among the Sunnis, whose anger at being largely excluded from governance contributed to the rise of the Islamic State. The Kurds, the other major sectarian group, are similarly disaffected.These forces are in play in Mosul, a Sunni-majority city that some Sunnis say should be granted more autonomy from the central government once ISIS is pushed out. For that reason, some experts have argued that the attempted liberation of Mosul should be delayed until governance and other issues are addressed.The counterargument is that delaying the battle for Mosul would carry its own risks. American officials say that after recent victories in retaking Ramadi, Falluja and other towns from ISIS, the American-Iraqi coalition has momentum. Meanwhile, ISIS — knowing something is coming — has stepped up its abuse of the local population and strengthened its defenses. President Obama also does not want to leave the operation to his successor.The Americans and Iraqis have made some attempt to improve governance by assigning advisers to bolster the weak governor in Nineveh Province, where Mosul is located. As for the threat of mass displacement, the hope is that residents will stay put and help secure the city once ISIS is routed. Nevertheless, American, Iraqi and United Nations officials have planned for a worst-case outcome — in which 750,000 or more people flee the fighting — by setting aside $2 billion and preparing emergency sites where civilians can live until it is safe to return.The Americans have already negotiated an elaborate battlefield plan with the Iraqis that is designed in part to avoid more sectarian conflict. The best American-trained Iraqi counterterrorism forces, backed by some army units, federal police and American air power, will make the assault on Mosul. Iranian-backed Shiite militias, accused of human rights abuses after earlier battles, and Kurdish forces will be kept on the outskirts of the city. Post-battle security is being assigned to thousands of local police officers and tribal fighters.There is a lot riding on a victory against ISIS — for the civilians suffering under the terrorists’ rule; for Mr. Abadi, Iraq’s embattled leader; and for Mr. Obama, whose regional credibility has been damaged by his decision not to intervene directly in Syria. But retaking Mosul may be the easier part of an operation whose ultimate success will depend on putting in place effective long-term plans for maintaining stability and rebuilding a shattered city.