https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/world/americas/abroad-in-america-trump-clinton-party-divisions.html
Trying to Recognize America in a Wild Campaign - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Democratic Party,Republican Party
Aug. 3, 2016
4103
Something, it seems, is off in America. What is it?I recently attended the Republican and Democratic conventions, where there were moments of unscripted drama — high dudgeon, low cuts and poignant testimony — typical of this year’s unusually polarized presidential race.Not only do the two main candidates, Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton, offer starkly different prescriptions for the United States, but their supporters are divided, too. Schisms among rival groups of Republicans and Democrats played out openly during the conventions, as rival factions booed and jeered one another.Another fault line opened when Khizr Khan, a Muslim immigrant whose son was killed on military duty in Iraq, made an impassioned critique of Mr. Trump, electrifying the Democratic convention audience. Mr. Khan’s emotive testimony reverberated through the national conversation for days.Now, less than 100 days until the vote, the campaigns are expanding to focus on the voters outside their core supporters who are likely to decide this election. What drives their choices? Where will the contest be hardest fought? Which issues will tilt the final result?As a foreign correspondent for The New York Times, I set out to write about the campaign with our broad global readership in mind. I’m approaching it much as I would any foreign assignment, bringing a correspondent’s curiosity and, hopefully, some of the fresh-eyed wonderment of a recently arrived outsider.This series is called Abroad in America — I’m from Ireland and normally based in Cairo, where I cover the Middle East. My aim is to try to cut through the political duststorm to find the stories that reveal the essence of this strange yet momentous election.The material is rich, largely thanks to Mr. Trump and his machine-gun mouth. But that doesn’t mean it will be easy: Among other things, the success of Mr. Trump’s unorthodox campaign suggests a society in flux.“I pity you,” one American friend told me. “Because right now we all feel like we are abroad in America. We’re having trouble recognizing ourselves.”In the coming weeks, I will explore the battleground states and pressure points on America’s shifting political map. As I take to the road, I am humbly soliciting your help: What puzzles, frustrates or amazes you about this election? Where should I go, or whom should I meet? What am I missing?International readers might see telling comparisons with their own countries. Some might have a story tip or an insight that can help to make sense of it all.More than ever, this American election is connected to broader global trends: rising frustration with globalization; surging nationalism and xenophobia; growing popularity of insular policies that seek to close borders and build walls. In the past, the United States has stood out for its restless, boundless sense of optimism. If, as some fear, that outlook is now dimming, this election may help determine what perspective will replace it.Ultimately, every question boils down to just one: What shapes the choices that American voters make on Nov. 8?Please share with me your questions, guidance and comments — or just come along for the ride.