http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/19/world/europe/russian-bill-pussy-riot-greenpeace.html
Amnesty Bill in Russia Could Free Activists - The New York Times
Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Russia,Pussy Riot,Greenpeace,Amnesties  Commutations and Pardons,Music,Arctic Regions,Prisons and Prisoners,Political Prisoners
Dec. 18, 2013
9810
MOSCOW —  An amnesty bill that seemed to promise freedom for defendants in some of Russia’s most politically charged criminal cases passed the lower house of Parliament on Wednesday. The two jailed  members of the punk protest group Pussy Riot and the 30 Greenpeace demonstrators  arrested at an Arctic offshore oil rig appeared to be among those likely to receive amnesty.The bill was initiated by President Vladimir V. Putin and passed swiftly through the State Duma, the lower house of Parliament. The full text of the bill was not made public before the voting; it was scheduled to be printed in state outlets on Thursday. The bill is expected to grant amnesty to as many as 25,000 prisoners, including those charged with hooliganism, which would seem to include Pussy Riot and the Greenpeace demonstrators.The amnesty is seen as a way for Mr. Putin to move those two prosecutions, which have attracted wide criticism abroad, out of the spotlight before the Winter Olympics begin in Sochi, Russia, in February. There has been speculation that some world leaders were considering staying away from the Games because of concerns over Russia’s record on human rights.Mr. Putin said this month in a meeting with Russia’s human rights ombudsman and a presidential adviser on human rights that the amnesty bill “should have a conciliatory effect, and should underscore our country’s humane approach.”The original bill, submitted by Mr. Putin last week, sought to release pregnant women or women with young children, elderly convicts, victims of the Chernobyl nuclear accident, war veterans and others convicted of minor crimes. Amendments to the bill widened its scope to include defendants accused or convicted of committing hooliganism or participating in mass protests.That provision would cover some people who were arrested  after an anti-Putin rally  in Moscow last May that descended into pitched battles between police officers and protesters. But most of those arrested were charged with inciting mass rioting or attacking police officers, and would not receive amnesty under the bill.A lawyer for the two Pussy Riot members, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina, said she expected the women to be released quickly. They have already served most of their two-year sentences for reciting a “punk prayer” against Mr. Putin in Moscow’s largest cathedral last year.Leaders of Greenpeace said they were cautiously optimistic that prosecutors would drop the charges against the group’s members, who are free on bail while awaiting trial.“But before having the material on paper, it is hard to be sure,” said Ivan Blokov, the Greenpeace Russia program director.The bill would not cover some of Mr. Putin’s most vocal political opponents, including Aleksei A. Navalny, the opposition blogger turned mayoral candidate who was convicted of embezzlement and given a five-year sentence in July that was suspended.