https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/podcasts/the-daily/kris-kobach-voter-fraud-trump.html
‘The Daily’: Kris Kobach’s Quest Against Voter Fraud - The New York Times
The Daily,Kobach  Kris W,Presidential Election of 2016,Voting and Voters
July 17, 2017
2135
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherEarly in his presidency, Donald J. Trump called for a federal commission to investigate an issue that was personal for him: voter fraud in the 2016 election.Now, that commission is requesting data on 200 million American voters, and the states are fighting back.On today’s episode:• Michael Wines, a national correspondent for The Times, introduces us to Kris Kobach, the Kansas secretary of state and the de facto leader of President Trump’s commission to investigate voter fraud. Mr. Kobach has established himself as the leading advocate of strict laws on who can and cannot cast ballots, and he has said it is plausible that millions of illegal votes cost Mr. Trump a popular-vote victory.• We call Elaine Bowers, a Republican state senator in Kansas, to discuss voting legislation her state.Background reading:• A secretaries of state meeting used to be friendly. Then the White House asked for voter data.• How Mr. Kobach plans to remake America through restrictive voting and immigration laws.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”