http://www.nytimes.com/2001/02/17/world/attack-iraq-overview-us-british-jets-strike-air-defense-centers-iraq.html
ATTACK ON IRAQ: THE OVERVIEW; U.S. AND BRITISH JETS STRIKE AIR-DEFENSE CENTERS IN IRAQ - The New York Times
IRAQ,GREAT BRITAIN,BUSH  GEORGE W,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-IRAQ,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Feb. 17, 2001
7774
Correction AppendedThe United States and Britain staged air strikes against radar stations and air defense command centers in Iraq today, including targets around Baghdad, in what President Bush called a necessary response to Iraqi provocation.The raid -- carried out by more than three dozen aircraft shortly after night fell in Baghdad -- represented an escalation of the long-running, low-level skirmishes between American and British jets and Iraqi forces. The strikes were the first in two years against Iraqi targets north of the no-flight zone over southern Iraq, which American and British planes have patrolled since 1992.American military commanders in the region requested the strikes -- which Mr. Bush approved on Thursday -- because Iraqi air defense stations had become increasingly aggressive and effective in targeting the patrols over the zone, officials said.''We will continue to enforce the no-fly zones,'' Mr. Bush said today during an appearance with President Vicente Fox in San Cristóbal, Mexico. ''The no-fly zones are enforced on a daily basis. It is a part of a strategy, and until that strategy is changed, if it is changed at all, we will continue to enforce the no-fly zones.'' [Excerpts, Page A4.]The strike aircraft had as their targets five separate sites that included as many as 20 radars and command centers.Mr. Bush and his aides described the raid as routine, saying the United States and Britain were simply responding to Iraqi provocations, as they have repeatedly in the last two years. Since Mr. Bush took office on Jan. 20, American and British jets have struck targets in the southern zone three other times, most recently on Tuesday. They also attacked one in the smaller zone over northern Iraq.Striking outside the declared zones, however, required commanders to seek explicit approval from Mr. Bush, forcing him to decide whether to authorize a more aggressive military action only weeks into his term. Administration and defense officials said the strikes came before Mr. Bush's national security team had been able to formulate its own comprehensive policy toward Iraq.But with the Iraqi actions intensifying, they had little choice, they said, underscoring the extent to which President Saddam Hussein can still dictate the agenda of American presidents, a decade after Mr. Bush's father organized the coalition that drove Iraqi occupying forces out of Kuwait.President Clinton was also confronted by aggressive Iraqi air defenses, and beginning on his second day in office, he oversaw repeated military strikes against Iraq.In the last six weeks, Iraqi forces have fired antiaircraft artillery at American and British aircraft 51 times and, more significantly, launched more dangerous surface-to-air missiles on 14 occasions, according to the Pentagon. Although none of those attacks succeeded in hitting any of the allied jets, commanders were concerned enough to seek permission to widen their retaliation. Officials said they believed that the firings were a deliberate attempt by Mr. Hussein to test the new administration's resolve.Officials said today's attack was not the beginning of a sustained assault against the Iraqis, but they left the door open to additional strikes if Iraq continued aggressive behavior.Air Force F-15's and F-16's, joined by British Tornadoes, carried out the attack from air fields in Kuwait, while Navy F-18's attacked from the American aircraft carrier the Harry S. Truman in the Persian Gulf. American officials said all of the aircraft had returned safely. In all, there were 24 strike jets -- 18 American and 6 British -- as well as support aircraft.Iraqi television said numerous civilians had been wounded in the attacks, which began shortly after 12:30 p.m. Eastern time. But Pentagon officials said they had no evidence of civilian casualties, asserting that the five targets were all in relatively secluded areas -- and had been chosen for that reason.The strikes were far below the scale of the last major attack against Iraq, which occurred in December 1998. In that case, American and British forces carried out four nights of air and missile strikes against more than 100 targets to punish Mr. Hussein's government for ending cooperation with international weapons inspectors. Those targets included missile and chemical production installations, as well as military headquarters and air defenses.Since then, Iraqi air defense forces have routinely fired on the American and British patrols over the zones in what has amounted at times to a low-grade war, though an entirely one-sided one. The strikes today were comparable in scale to the larger of those periodic strikes, but were significant because the targets were outside the declared no-flight zones.Pentagon officials said the American and British jets had attacked five sets of targets in all, including four outside the zone and a fifth inside it. The targets included radar installations within a few miles of the heart of Baghdad, as well as radar or command centers at Taji, Suwaira and Taqaddum, the officials said. The fifth target, in the southern zone, was a command center near Numaniya.All of the installations, the officials said, were involved in the recent escalation. ''They thought they were tucked just over the 33nd and were safe,'' a defense official said, referring to those targets north of the parallel. ''They thought they could act with impunity.''While Mr. Bush played down the significance of the strikes, he also suggested that, so far, his policy toward Iraq would remain largely unchanged from President Clinton's.''Saddam Hussein has got to understand we expect him to conform to the agreement that he signed after Desert Storm,'' Mr. Bush said. He referred to the cease-fire agreements negotiated by his father's administration at the end of the Persian Gulf war, which required Iraq to recognize Kuwait, make reparations and abandon its programs to build nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as long-range missiles.He also made it clear that under his administration, the United States and Britain would continue to enforce the no-flight zones over the north and south. Those zones -- and the repeated strikes on Iraqi targets -- have come under increasing diplomatic criticism.''We will continue to enforce the no-fly zone until the world is told otherwise,'' Mr. Bush said.Within an hour of leaving their bases, the warplanes dropped precision-guided bombs and other weapons that were aimed at the five locations of Iraqi radars and command centers. Though Pentagon officials declined to offer more specifics about the weapons, they said no cruise missiles had been used in the attack.Pentagon officials said they would not be able to determine whether the bombs had hit their targets at least until after sunrise in Iraq. But they said early indications were that all the weapons had worked ''properly,'' maintaining their signals with guidance systems until impact.''All the initial looks say it looks pretty good,'' said Rear Adm. Craig Quigley, a Pentagon spokesman.United States commanders requested the attack because the pilots who patrol the southern no-flight zone had reported increasing evidence that the Iraqis had become more sophisticated and accurate in detecting and targeting American and British warplanes, Pentagon officials said.''Three months ago, they weren't seeing us,'' a senior Pentagon official said. ''But suddenly, they were. Something was different.''The improvements in the Iraqi air defenses are not the result of new radar systems; they continue to use equipment that is 30 to 40 years old, Pentagon officials said. But the Iraqis seem to have acquired better communications equipment and software to link their radar sites, and also appear to have employed more sophisticated strategies for using that equipment, the officials said.Given those improvements, they said, it would have just been a matter of time before a United States or British plane was shot out of the sky.''It reached the point where it was obvious to our forces that they had to conduct operations to safeguard those pilots and aircraft,'' Lt. Gen. Gregory Newbold of the Marine Corps, director of operations for the Joint Staff, said during a briefing at the Pentagon today. ''As a matter of fact, it's essentially a self-defense measure in conducting the operation.''American military officials said the Iraqis also appeared to have improved their air defenses along a northern no-flight zone above the 36th parallel that is also patrolled by American and British planes. But the officials said the Iraqis had been less provocative in those northern regions.The attack was generally well received by members of Congress. ''This was a very important signal to Iraq that we won't stand for violations at the no-fly zone, putting our pilots at risk,'' said Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, a Republican from Texas. ''I approve of the president's action in standing up for America.''Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said, ''Today's action implementing this policy was an appropriate response to the increased threat from the Iraqi air defense system reported by our pilots.''But one Congressional aide said there was surprise that some senior Congressional leaders had not been informed of the attack before it was staged.Correction: February 19, 2001, Monday  A front-page article on Saturday about the United States and British air strikes in Iraq misspelled the surname of the junior senator from Texas, who called the action a signal that the Bush administration would stand up for America. She is Kay Bailey Hutchison, not Hutchinson.