https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/18/opinion/can-trumps-visit-prompt-new-mideast-talks.html
Can Trump’s Visit Prompt New Mideast Talks? - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Israel
May 18, 2017
8565
JERUSALEM — President Trump leaves for the Middle East on Friday. The trip’s objectives, his national security adviser, H. R. McMaster, has told reporters, is to “broadcast a message of unity to America’s friends” and to pay his respects to the “homelands and holy sites of the Jewish, Christian and Muslim faiths.”Mr. Trump will begin in Saudi Arabia, with which his administration is nearing consummation of a $100 billion arms deal; he’ll meet with leaders of the Arab League — America’s “partners,” as General McMaster says — whom he’ll encourage “to take bold, new steps to promote peace and to confront those, from ISIS to Al Qaeda to Iran to the Assad regime, who perpetuate chaos.” In Jerusalem, Mr. Trump will “reaffirm America’s unshakable bond to the Jewish state” and in Bethlehem, “express his desire for dignity and self-determination for the Palestinians.” American leadership is necessary to “move the region toward the peace, security and stability that the people there so deserve,” General McMaster said.Let’s strain to ignore the latest reasons to question Mr. Trump’s fitness for office or, indeed, his survivability in it: the firing of James Comey as F.B.I. director, the intelligence leak to Russia. General McMaster has laid out the policy lines of a Republican administration that is just beginning its four-year term.To be sure, the approach has been enigmatic so far. But that may be an advantage, since progress toward those goals does not depend on the president alone. Among Trump advisers like General McMaster, a refreshed realists’ view of the Middle East seems to be unfolding. Impeach Mr. Trump and you get Mike Pence, who was instrumental in replacing Michael Flynn with General McMaster and was the lead adviser in appointing Jim Mattis as secretary of defense and Rex Tillerson as secretary of state.Just before the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, visited Washington in early May, General McMaster said at the Israeli Embassy that the administration “seeks to challenge failed policies of the past with a businessman’s results-oriented approach.”The question is, what results would General McMaster want, and for whom?The answer, while still emerging, has changed since before Mr. Trump took office. Then, he and the Republican leadership seemed determined to bolster Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel. They mocked the United Nations Security Council’s condemnation of settlements and promised to move the American Embassy to Jerusalem. And within days of Mr. Trump’s inauguration, the State Department froze the last payment to the Palestinian Authority authorized by President Barack Obama.Mr. Trump appointed his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and his corporate lawyer, Jason Greenblatt, both with pro-Zionist sympathies, to handle negotiations. Mr. Pence said at an American Israel Public Affairs Committee conference in March that “every freedom-loving American stands with Israel, because her cause is our cause.”But if the presidency has not weakened Mr. Trump’s affinity for Mr. Netanyahu, it has at least exposed the administration to countervailing pressures, especially from vulnerable Arab leaders who want America to think differently about the Palestinian question. King Abdullah II of Jordan and the Saudi deputy crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, have often stressed that violence in Palestine threatens the stability of America’s Arab allies. They have argued for a military alliance against Iranian mischief, including insurgencies in Yemen and Bahrain. They’ve affirmed the Arab Peace Initiative of 2003, which promised normalization of relations with Israel if the question of Palestine were resolved.Mr. Netanyahu has suggested that Israel should be included in such an alliance — that normalization should precede a deal, and might even advance it. In late March, at a meeting of the Arab League in Jordan, King Abdullah scotched that notion. Mr. Trump met Abdullah just after the meeting, and the king praised the president for his “holistic approach to all the challenges in the region.” He also insisted that Palestine “is the core conflict for a lot of us in the region” and that “the president knows this.”The people around Mr. Trump obviously do. General McMaster’s phrase, “dignity and self-determination for the Palestinians,” was borrowed from Mr. Abbas. At the Aipac conference, Mr. Pence added that the administration was “also invested in finding an equitable and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.” On “Meet the Press,” Secretary Tillerson denied that an embassy move could be separate from an overall peace initiative.As for Mr. Mattis, his views have hardly been hidden. “I paid a military security price every day as the commander of Centcom because the Americans were seen as biased in support of Israel,” he said in 2013, adding that “moderate Arabs who want to be with us” could not “come out publicly in support of people who don’t show respect for the Arab Palestinians.” Foreign Policy magazine reported, meanwhile, that the State Department is discreetly proposing a 5 percent raise in aid to the Palestinian Authority, to $215 million.In advance of his trip, Mr. Trump has seemed uncharacteristically disciplined in the balancing act he’s expected to perform. An agreement, he told reporters in Mr. Abbas’s presence, “cannot be imposed by the United States, or by any other nation.” That reaffirmed a longstanding Netanyahu position and implied that Mr. Abbas should negotiate without preconditions and without an assurance that the United States would pressure Israel. But then Mr. Trump added, “I will do whatever is necessary to facilitate the agreement — to mediate, to arbitrate anything they’d like to do.” The next day, General McMaster appointed to his national security team Air Force Col. Kris Bauman, who had proposed security arrangements for both sides in 2013.Mr. Abbas must find President Trump’s inconsistency and reversion to mogul banalities a relief. His people reportedly proposed to Mr. Trump’s people, businesslike, that new talks with Israel could start where Mr. Abbas and Mr. Netanyahu’s predecessor, Ehud Olmert, broke off in 2008, having covered most major issues — security, borders, Jerusalem and refugees — and leaving potentially bridgeable gaps. Nor did Mr. Abbas miss the chance for some tactical flattery, telling Mr. Trump that with his “great negotiating ability,” peace was possible.Mr. Netanyahu cannot feel equally sanguine. Many have questioned whether Mr. Abbas can survive a new round of peacemaking. Mr. Netanyahu may be wondering whether the administration is inadvertently threatening his fragile coalition. And Mr. Abbas made clear to Mr. Olmert that any Palestinian conception of two states entailed a capital in East Jerusalem and international arrangements for the Holy Basin.The Wall Street Journal has reported that the Saudis and the Emiratis have been discussing an interim plan “aimed in part at aligning them with Mr. Trump” that would establish direct telecommunications links with Israel, allow overflight rights to Israeli aircraft and lift restrictions on some trade — but only if Israel froze settlements outside the large blocks along the Green Line and eased Gaza’s commercial quarantine. Any of these concessions would cause hard-line ministers on the Israeli right to bolt, though they are acceptable to Netanyahu’s rivals in the opposition.Mr. Netanyahu, to be sure, still has powerful Republican allies like Senator Lindsey Graham and the casino tycoon Sheldon Adelson. And Mr. Trump has not encountered them pushing back — yet.But one thing is clear. The administration is operating from an emerging logic that could well appeal to many more Republicans and a great many Democrats as well. President Trump has said he wants the “ultimate deal,” and the people around him — who may well outlast him — do, too.