http://www.nytimes.com/2003/01/14/nyregion/3-facing-extortion-charges-in-abduction-of-financier.html
3 Facing Extortion Charges in Abduction of Financier - The New York Times
GREENWICH (CONN),LAMPERT  EDWARD S,HARRIS  DEVON,GORDON  SHEMONE GARTH,CHILDREN AND YOUTH,KIDNAPPING
Jan. 14, 2003
3714
Three people were charged today with conspiracy to commit extortion in connection with the kidnapping of one of Wall Street's most successful financiers, but many questions about the case remained unanswered.The three, Shemone Garth Gordon, 23, of New Haven, Devon Harris, 19, of West Haven, and an unnamed juvenile were charged in a sealed complaint with conspiracy to violate the federal Hobbs Act by participating in the 30-hour abduction last weekend of Edward S. Lampert, the chairman of ESL Investments here. Prosecutors said a fourth suspect was being sought.Mr. Lampert, 40, named one of the 300 richest people in the country by Forbes magazine, was kidnapped Friday night and released ''physically drained'' but otherwise unharmed before dawn Sunday, the authorities said. The F.B.I. took the three men into custody that night.Investigators remained tight-lipped about a motive for choosing the victim, and only the barest of details emerged in a hearing in federal District Court in Bridgeport before Magistrate Judge Holly B. Fitzsimmons, who ordered the two men held without bail. The complaint was sealed because of the charges against the juvenile, who appeared separately before the judge in a cleared courtroom.Both men, who prosecutors said had previous convictions for the possession and sale of drugs, were assigned public defenders because they said they could not afford lawyers. They answered softly when the judge asked rudimentary questions about knowing their rights. They wore street clothes. Mr. Gordon appeared in a blue-checked shirt and glasses, and Mr. Harris was in a black hooded jacket.James Finnerty, an assistant United States attorney, said investigators found a shotgun and a mask at the Days Inn motel in Hamden, Conn., where the men were found on Sunday night. He said Mr. Gordon ''had control'' of the weapon. But the authorities did not disclose how the lives of the men and Mr. Lampert had intersected, or how they had planned to extort from him.Francis O'Reilly, Mr. Harris's lawyer, said ''It appears to be a random thing,'' but he would not discuss the case further. When asked why the men had released Mr. Lampert, he replied, ''the speculation is they got scared.''Mr. Lampert manages more than $5 billion in assets. His clients have included some of America's wealthiest people. He Lampert has a personal worth of $800 million and is the 288th richest American, according to Forbes magazine.Steve Lipin, a spokesman for Mr. Lampert, said he had no comment. People at ESL Investments declined to comment, and a security guard barred reporters from entering Mr. Lampert's gated Field Point Park neighborhood. Residents here, in one of the wealthiest towns in the country, take security seriously, so much so that at one of Mr. Lampert's former residences, a man dressed in camouflage and wearing a Navy Seal hat nudged reporters away.But several residents and visitors said that while they were concerned, they did not know enough about the circumstances of the kidnapping to feel alarmed.''When something happens concerning someone that's wealthy it doesn't surprise people,'' said Jim Amburn, 50, a publisher from Stamford.Wendy Ray, who was staying at the Days Inn where the three people were arrested, said officers evacuated the motel Sunday about 7 p.m. ''The only thing they told us to take were our shoes,'' she said.Patel Patel, who cleans rooms at the motel, unlocked Room 132, where he said police officers spent hours poring over things. Today it remained in disarray: an empty pizza carton, soda bottles, a disposable lighter and red and black leather jacket lay on a bare mattress next to a pile of clothing and a portable radio. A bottle of cough syrup sat on a low bureau. The bathroom was covered in black dust. Mr. Patel said federal agents had dusted the area for fingerprints.Experts in corporate and private security called Mr. Lampert's kidnapping unusual. Such crimes, they said, are more typical overseas.But Kelly McCann, a managing director at Kroll Associates, the security firm, said he had seen an increase in calls from corporate chiefs and the well-to-do in recent years out of an overall increase in concern for safety and an economic slide that often yields disgruntled workers.Even so, he said, abduction is often far from their minds. ''A lot of people don't consider themselves as a target or they think abduction is so melodramatic,'' Mr. McCann said.