http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/18/us/politics/senate-race-rnc-trump.html
Ignoring Donald Trump, Republican Senators Orbit Their Own Worlds - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Republican National Convention,Elections  Senate,Trump  Donald J,Portman  Rob,Toomey  Patrick J,Elections,Ohio,United States
July 17, 2016
6546
CLEVELAND — Senator Rob Portman of Ohio plans a very busy convention week as Republicans pour into his home state beginning Monday.On two mornings, he will remodel houses in inner-city Cleveland with Habitat for Humanity. On Tuesday, he will kayak on the Cuyahoga River with wounded veterans. As the convention is gaveled to order on Monday afternoon, Mr. Portman, a Republican facing a tough re-election fight, will address hundreds of his campaign volunteers at a community college.One place he will not speak, having addressed the past six Republican conventions, is inside Quicken Loans Arena, where Donald J. Trump will accept the nomination of the most divided national party of modern times.Mr. Portman once looked forward to a convention in Cleveland that would turbocharge his re-election campaign. Now he joins other swing-state Republican senators who are shying away from the party gathering. They will be busily campaigning at home, running local races as if for sheriff, offering a split-screen view of a party that fears its Senate majority will be the collateral damage of a polarizing nominee.The convention avoiders include four of seven senators on the ballot in states President Obama won twice. (Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa has said he plans a “fast in, fast out” visit. Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, after saying for weeks he would stay home, reversed course on Sunday and said he would make a one-day convention visit to speak about Islamic terrorism.)Their strategy is to focus on home-state issues that in voters’ minds place them as far as possible from Mr. Trump.“Localize, localize, localize,” said Whit Ayres, a Republican pollster, offering the mantra of endangered Senate incumbents on the ballot with Mr. Trump.Mr. Portman and Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire are highlighting their co-sponsorship of a bill to fight opioid addiction that Congress passed last week, an issue of intense concern in their states — and which few associate with the name Trump.Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, also skipping the convention, is visiting 13 counties in his state, where he has attacked Philadelphia’s liberal mayor for refusing to cooperate with federal immigration authorities.Senator Marco Rubio of Florida has seized on an issue unmentioned when he ran in the presidential primary: toxic algae blooms in state waters. Since making a late decision last month to run for re-election, Mr. Rubio struck Cleveland — he had offered to speak at the convention — from his itinerary and has visited polluted Florida waters, issuing a flurry of algae-related statements.During the convention, Mr. Rubio will campaign in Florida, in Fort Myers, Orlando, Tampa and elsewhere.Democrats have no intention of letting Republicans escape from the penumbra of Mr. Trump. Mr. Toomey’s opponent, Katie McGinty, bashed the “Trump-Toomey ticket” on Saturday. Mr. Portman’s Ohio opponent, Ted Strickland, is sending eight supporters dressed as Supreme Court justices to heckle Mr. Portman’s event on Monday.“They will highlight how Portman will help Trump reshape the court for generations,” said David Bergstein, a spokesman for Mr. Strickland.“Trump is a total nightmare for Rob Portman,” said Rebecca Pearcey, Mr. Strickland’s campaign manager.In fact, most down-ballot Republicans cannot afford to completely distance themselves from Mr. Trump. They will need his supporters in the fall, while also attracting independents and Republicans who say they will abstain from voting for either major party’s presidential nominee.Some senators have tried to split hairs, like Ms. Ayotte, who says she “supports” Mr. Trump as the party’s nominee but does not “endorse” him.Only Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, one of the most vulnerable Republican senators this year, running in a heavily Democratic state, has disavowed Mr. Trump, calling him “too bigoted and racist” to be president.Mr. Portman, long a favorite of the Republican establishment, said in an interview that he would vote for Mr. Trump, but was not sure that he would find time to campaign with him in Ohio.He and the other convention avoiders are hoping for a resurgence of split-ticket voting, capturing the votes of Republicans and independents who do not support Mr. Trump.The problem is that ticket splitting has declined for decades as voters have become more polarized. It was last a factor in the 1980s, when Southern Democrats voted for Ronald Reagan and for Democrats in Congress.Mr. Trump’s divisiveness could bring back ticket splitting, Republican strategists said. “We’re starting to see hints of the largest amounts of split-ticket voting since the 1980s,” Mr. Ayres said.Recent polls in swing states show Republican senators with more favorable margins against their Democratic challengers than those separating Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton. The early polling suggests some voters who do not support the Republican presidential nominee back the party’s senators.A Quinnipiac survey of Ohio that showed Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton tied last week found that Mr. Portman led Mr. Strickland by seven percentage points. In Florida, the same poll had Mr. Trump leading by three percentage points, but Mr. Rubio with 12- and 13-point advantages over potential Democratic challengers for his Senate seat.Thanks to the brutal Republican primary campaign in Florida, during which Mr. Trump and Mr. Rubio traded insults, Florida voters already have strong impressions of how they differ.“There was a two-week stint in March where the differences between the two were very well litigated,” said Alex Conant, an adviser to Mr. Rubio. “Voters know he’s not Donald Trump.”As he campaigns in Ohio, Mr. Portman, 60, spares no occasion to raise the threat of opioid abuse, a signature issue that establishes him as his own man, while fending off his opponent’s most dangerous attack: his long history as a free-trade supporter, putting him at odds with Mr. Trump’s base.Mr. Portman has visited a dozen drug treatment centers in the past month. “People are seeing, O.K., this is a little different kind of Republican,” he said in his campaign R.V. recently as it rumbled between Dayton and Toledo.He was one of four Senate authors of a bipartisan opioid treatment bill, one of Congress’s few accomplishments this year, which last week moved to President Obama’s desk.Mr. Portman, a mild-mannered Washington insider who defied his party by embracing same-sex marriage in 2013 after learning that one of his sons was gay, sighed when asked if Mr. Trump had the right temperament to be president. “We’re different,” he said. “That doesn’t mean my temperament is right for the presidency, or his is wrong.”Mr. Strickland, his opponent, wants voters to hear more about Mr. Portman’s stint as the country’s top trade negotiator under President George W. Bush. “The Best Senator China Ever Had,” the Strickland campaign labeled Mr. Portman, accusing him of failing to stop the illegal “dumping of steel.”PolitiFact determined that the attack was false. But the nuances may go over voters’ heads in a year when Mr. Trump has made China and American trade deals the culprits for lost factory jobs.“What the Trump campaign is going to do is shine a spotlight on Portman’s trade record that’s not going to work with Ohio voters,” said Ms. Pearcey, the campaign manager for Mr. Strickland.Mr. Portman said he agreed with Mr. Trump about cracking down on China for dumping steel. But he strongly defended the economic benefit of free-trade deals to Ohio’s economy. “We have 25 percent of our factory workers” making goods for export, he said. If tariffs are erected in a trade war, as many experts believe Mr. Trump’s policies would spur, “farmers would see their prices totally crater,” Mr. Portman said.“I think he’s just wrong,” he said of Mr. Trump.