https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/01/us/politics/attorney-generals-political-donations-eric-schneiderman-john-cahill.html
Donations Are Assailed by Hopefuls in New York - The New York Times
Schneiderman  Eric T,Cahill  John,New York State,Campaign Finance,Attorneys General,Democratic Attorneys General Assn,Republican Attorneys General Assn
Oct. 31, 2014
4977
WASHINGTON —  The political associations run by Democratic and Republican attorneys general must discontinue taking money from corporations that are targets of investigations, the two candidates for the job in New York State said at a debate Thursday night. The incumbent attorney general said he might step down from his party’s group if it did not curtail the practice.“It is an issue that is going to come up in both of the associations,” the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, a Democrat, said at the debate. “I think it should be cleaned up.”John Cahill, the Republican candidate, said he agreed that law enforcement officials, or a political association that represents them, should not be taking money from targeted companies.“I think it is a huge problem,” said Mr. Cahill, once a top aide to former Gov. George E. Pataki. “It goes to the whole issue of how I started about the politicization of the office of the attorney general.”The question came up in response to an article in The New York Times on Wednesday that examined the surge in lobbying and campaign contributions coming from corporations that are trying to gain access to and influence these top state law enforcement officials.Much of this money is donated — and special access provided — to get tickets to attend retreats organized at resort hotels in spots around the United States by the Republican Attorneys General Association or the Democratic Attorneys General Association. The list of sponsors for these events routinely includes companies that are targets of continuing investigations.For example, executives at the Michigan-based company that sells 5-Hour Energy, the highly caffeinated drink, suddenly started to donate a total of more than $245,000 to both groups in early 2013, after 33 states opened an investigation into accusations that the company was making false claims in its advertising.Mr. Schneiderman, who has accepted at least $50,000 in contributions from the Democratic Attorneys General Association since 2010, said, “I don’t go to many of their meetings anyway, but I would consider taking steps to ensure that this doesn’t happen in the future or stepping down.”The debate, held at Hilbert College in Hamburg, N.Y., was sponsored by NY1 and Time Warner Cable News.Jessica Medeiros Garrison, executive director of the Republican group, declined to comment Thursday about the notion of placing limits on who can donate to her organization, which has collected $11.7 million just in the first nine months of this year. The Democrats have collected $7.6 million since January 2013. A spokesman for the Democratic group could not be reached for comment.