https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/podcasts/introducing-dear-sugars-our-radically-empathic-advice-podcast.html
Introducing ‘Dear Sugars,’ Our Radically Empathic Advice Podcast - The New York Times
Podcasts,Strayed  Cheryl,Winfrey  Oprah,Dear Sugars
July 15, 2017
4596
This is the story of Dear Sugars, a radically empathic advice column from Cheryl Strayed and Steve Almond. It began with Steve. In 2008, he created an anonymous persona, Sugar — a tough-yet-vulnerable woman who turned her emotional bruises into hard-earned wisdom about life and love.One day, Steve got a fan letter from a literary acquaintance, Cheryl, and realized she was the real-life embodiment of Sugar. In that moment, he knew that Cheryl should be writing the column in his place.There were a million reasons for her to say no. The column paid nothing. She had two small children. And she was already struggling to finish her memoir, “Wild.” But she said yes. And the rest is history. Sugar quickly gained a devoted cult following.A few years after that, Cheryl and Steve said yes again, this time to reuniting and turning the column into a podcast, “Dear Sugar Radio.”And now, they are bringing their signature advice style to The New York Times as a podcast and a column in Thursday Styles, the first of which will run next week.Fittingly, their first episode of the new season is all about saying yes — the thrill, and also the danger. They talk about how to say no, why to say no — and what happens in the wake of that. And they are joined by someone who has struggled tremendously with learning to own her “nos”: Oprah Winfrey.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or want to subscribe to ‘Dear Sugars’ for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “Dear Sugars.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “Dear Sugars” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “Dear Sugars” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/dearsugars.