https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/18/science/1940-electroshock-therapy.html
1940: Electroshock Therapy - The New York Times
Mental Health and Disorders,Therapy and Rehabilitation,New York Times,Electroshock Therapy
Aug. 17, 2015
8371
“Insanity Treated By Electric Shock” read the headline of an article published on July 6, 1940, in The New York Times. The article described “a new method, introduced in Italy, of treating certain types of mental disorders by sending an electric shock through the brain.”It was the first time that what is now called electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, had been mentioned in The Times.The electric shock, the article said, “is produced by a small portable electric box which was invented in Italy by Professor Ugo Cerletti of the Rome University Clinic.”Dr. S. Eugene Barrera, the principal researcher on the project, “emphasized that hope for any ‘miracle cure’ must not be pinned on the new method.”On April 29, 1941, the subject came up again, this time in an article about a scientific meeting at which a professor of psychiatry at Northwestern reported “ ‘very promising instantaneous results’ in the recently developed electric shock method of relieving schizophrenic patients of their malady.”The treatment entered clinical practice fairly quickly. In October 1941, The Times reported on the opening of several new buildings at Hillside Hospital in Queens (today called Zucker Hillside Hospital).“The hospital has pioneered in the use of insulin and metrazol, and also in the electric shock treatment, which has proved useful in shortening the average stay of patients,” the article read.Over the years, ECT has had its ups and downs in the public imagination and in the pages of The Times. In an article on Nov. 25, 1980, the reporter Dava Sobel seemed to relegate it to another age.“The oldest patients have had lobotomies, the middle-aged ones extensive shock (insulin coma or electroconvulsive therapy), and the younger patients the antipsychotic drugs introduced in the 1950s, along with psychotherapy,” he said.Today, ECT is widely accepted as a safe and effective treatment for depression, and few contemplate banning it.But the controversy has not gone away. On Jan. 29, 2011, an article in the Business section carried the headline: “F.D.A. Panel Is Split on Electroshock Risks.”