https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/us/planned-parenthood-leader-apologizes-for-video.html
Planned Parenthood Leader Apologizes for Video - The New York Times
Abortion,Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Richards  Cecile,Apologies,Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Nucatola  Deborah,Los Angeles (Calif),Biotechnology and Bioengineering
July 16, 2015
6108
WASHINGTON —  The president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Cecile Richards, apologized Thursday for what she called the lack of compassion shown by a staff member who was secretly recorded describing how affiliates provide tissue from aborted fetuses to researchers.The official shown in the video, Dr. Deborah Nucatola, the senior director of medical services, remains employed by Planned Parenthood, according to a spokesman for the organization, but “she has been reprimanded.”The actions by the century-old women’s health group came two days after abortion opponents posted the year-old video online, inciting a political storm that prompted Republicans in Congress and several states to order investigations. Conservatives have intensified their campaign for abortion restrictions and a cutoff of federal money to Planned Parenthood and other family-planning providers.Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, told reporters on Thursday, “I think I’d vomit trying to talk about” the video.Ms. Richards responded to Planned Parenthood’s critics in a web video of her own, deploring as false the allegation that her group “profits in any way from tissue donation.” She added, “Our donation programs — like any other high-quality health care providers’ — follow all laws and ethical guidelines.”But Ms. Richards, after saying that “our top priority is the compassionate care that we provide,” acknowledged: “In the video, one of our staff members speaks in a way that does not reflect that compassion. This is unacceptable, and I personally apologize for the staff member’s tone and statements.”The video at issue shows Dr. Nucatola, over lunch with red wine in a Los Angeles restaurant last July, answering questions from two people off-camera who are pretending to be interested in acquiring fetal parts for their biotechnology firm. Between bites of food and sips of wine, she describes at one point how a doctor performing an abortion might manipulate a fetus’s position to preserve organs that are desirable for research. Some medical experts have said such action would be unethical, because the well-being of the patient is paramount.The other two people heard on the video seem to encourage some flippancy in the conversation. All three chuckle as they talk about how fetal livers seem to be especially in demand.While the man and woman off-camera have not been identified, the video is the work of David Daleiden, an abortion opponent familiar to Planned Parenthood for similar stealth videos and activism. It was posted on a recently created website for a group called the Center for Medical Progress.But several times during the discussion, Dr. Nucatola says that Planned Parenthood does not try to make money in providing fetal tissue to medical centers, research institutes or companies that act as middlemen. It charges $30 to $100, she said, to cover expenses like preservation, transport or shipping.It is against the law to profit from the sale of remains from aborted fetuses. Planned Parenthood can legally charge fees for its costs.Mr. Boehner, a day after he announced that House committees would investigate the matter, said: “I want them to do their hearings. And once they have them, we’ll decide what’s the proper course of action.”Ms. Richards, however, said that the allegations of profiteering were “outrageous,” and that Planned Parenthood would continue to donate fetal tissue for research on diseases like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s when women choose to allow it. “It is always their decision,” she said.The organization’s opponents are trying “to ban abortion completely and cut women off from care at Planned Parenthood and other health centers,” she added. “We will never let that happen.”