https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/mightier-than-the-sword-kj-parker-science-fiction-and-more.html
Pirates, Drugs and Time Travel: The Best of New Science Fiction and Fantasy - The New York Times
Books and Literature
July 14, 2017
4614
On the surface, K. J. Parker’s fantastical new tale of empire, MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD (Subterranean, e-book, $4.99; limited-edition cloth, $40), is a whodunit writ large. Mysterious hordes of itinerant pirates have repeatedly attacked the monasteries of a sprawling quasi-Holy Roman Empire. The wife of the ailing emperor sends an Imperial legate — her nephew — to investigate. His mission is to discover where the pirates come from, how they seem to know which monasteries are the poorest defended and, most important, on whose orders they might be acting.Beneath this mystery topsoil, however, lies a treasure trove of rich, engaging characters. Our protagonist — nameless, as is the empire itself, because naturally in a first-person account the tale-teller knows what matters most and need not say it — is a man of wry wit, with a surprisingly cheerful nature for someone whose entire life has been steeped in political intrigue and war. As he tours the monasteries, his meditations on the nature of empire are a treat and treatise in themselves. His philosophizing serves to highlight two characters who exemplify the ways those born without privilege can (if they’re lucky) advance: the protagonist’s formidable regent-aunt, and a sex worker for whom the protagonist risks life and scandal, having fallen in love with her. Our protagonist doesn’t exactly suffer in comparison with them, but literature is lousy with pleasant, learned men — and either of these brilliant, ruthless, unorthodox women could have carried a book of her own. The same applies to other hinted-at tales within this tale: those of the abbots and abbesses of the monasteries, those of the pirate “savages” and that of the dying emperor. Theirs are also good, exciting tales. They’re just not the tales this book tells.But a book that can indirectly encompass so much within so short a space is worth reading regardless, so this one’s highly recommended.Long ago, as one character explains early in Nicky Drayden’s THE PREY OF GODS (Harper Voyager/HarperCollins, paper, $15.99), the human race was fathered by a god who gave unique powers to each of his children. Though human beings have lost these abilities over the generations since, they remain present in mitochondrial DNA, latent except in a few rare individuals. And except in those humans whose latent DNA has been awakened — which a new street drug called godsend just happens to be able to do.This is the mytho-scientific premise underlying a madcap, rapid-fire tale of South Africa in the year 2064, where a handful of individuals are suddenly plagued by godhood. One, Nomvula, is a lonely little township girl born with power. Several others acquire their abilities from godsend, to varying degrees of trauma or delight: Muzi, a gay teenager facing multiple tests of manhood; Stoker, a politician struggling with identity and idealism; and Riya, a diva with a magical voice and a hidden disability. Meanwhile Sydney, a nail technician who was born powerful like Nomvula but is much older and more ruthless, decides it’s time to reclaim her birthright as a bloodthirsty, vengeful demi-goddess. As a genetically engineered virus spreads and threatens to awaken the latent godhood of billions, these few special individuals come together to decide, ultimately, what manner of gods will rule the future. Oh — and also, the technological apocalypse looms as personal robots all over the world quietly become self-aware.Nomvula’s and Muzi’s tales end up being the most compelling of this lot, if only because those are coming-of-age arcs, while Stoker’s and Riya’s are more single-note. Villainous Sydney is the novel’s weak point, although she is hilariously horrific, but her monotonous evil serves well as a foil for the more complex main characters. Drayden’s delivery of all this is subtly poignant and slap-in-the-face deadpan — perfect for this novel-length thought exercise about what kinds of gods a cynical, self-absorbed postmodern society really deserves. Lots of fun.A generation or two after a plague of fake news and societal polarization brought America to the brink of another civil war, most major cities in Brenda Cooper’s WILDERS (Pyr/Prometheus, paper, $18) have sealed themselves off from the rest of the country as sovereign states. Now the megacity of Seacouver (the combined metropolitan areas of Seattle and Vancouver) is a technological superpower, sending forth “ecobots” and “rewilding” crews to transform ecologically damaged land back into forest. The teenager Coryn Williams, a citizen of Seacouver who lost her parents to tragedy, decides to venture forth from the city in order to find her older sister, Lou, who abandoned her and went Outside two years before.The first half of the story is more engaging, as it follows Coryn’s quest; she’s completely unprepared for the world beyond the city, where she finds murderous warlords and patriarchal cults, among other horrors. Yet the second half, after Coryn finds Lou and finally begins to wonder who’s behind the curtain both within the cities and Outside, is where Cooper’s world feels most real. Here is the rest of America, left behind by its urbanized technocracy: the descendants of farmers and rural people displaced by rewilding efforts, people of color in an echo of the digital divide, and religious groups. Unfortunately, here too the novel’s characterization falters, because for some reason these disparate people all sound alike; even the subcultures of today don’t all talk like English-speaking middle-class Middle Americans. The story’s pace also suffers in this half, mostly because Cooper tends to have characters pause and give expository speeches. Also, Coryn’s coming-of-age arc is left somewhat incomplete — but since this book is the first of a planned series, maybe Cooper is saving a fuller characterization for later. Another visit to this world and its characters may be worthwhile, in the next book.The first 20 percent of Steven R. Boyett and Ken Mitchroney’s unusual new portal fantasy, FATA MORGANA (Blackstone, $26.99), feels a bit like the movie “Stand by Me,” except starring grown men who only talk like pubescent boys and set during World War II instead of the 1950s. Amid harrowing yet realistic descriptions of flak fields and how to successfully arm 8,000-pound bombs, readers are treated to a loving character study of the crew of the Fata Morgana, a B-17 bomber about to face its first combat mission. There’s Farley, the captain, a no-nonsense fellow who is nevertheless haunted by visions of a mysterious woman; he has her painted onto the bomber, pinup style. There’s also Broben, the chain-smoking co-pilot; Boney, the nimble bombardier; Martin Proud Horse, the Lakota ball gunner; and more — all of them wisecracking, scared young soldiers just hoping to make it through the Big One intact. The story’s pace between missions is as leisurely as a coming-of-age journey. There’s even a lengthy digression for the tale of Martin’s previous, fateful posting aboard the Ill Wind, whose namers clearly never heard of an omen. It’s a good campfire story.And then the whole thing pulls a one-eighty. During a run over Zennhausen, the bomber passes through a strange portal in the air. Germany is gone; World War II is gone; the world as they know it is gone. The crew finds that they’ve been hurtled hundreds of years into the future, long after their war spiraled into a planet-wide conflagration that wiped out all life except within an enormous impact crater. At the bottom of this crater, two high-tech societies remain, eking out a doomed existence — and here Farley meets the literal woman of his dreams, a perfect match for the cheesecake image drawn on the nose of his bomber. Even the writing style changes for these chapters, becoming less nostalgic and more didactic. It’s all a bit schizoid. And for a time, what had been a beautiful story teeters on the brink of H. G. Wellsian cliché, with Farley falling in love and the Fata Morgana somehow becoming the key to defeating far more advanced technology.Fortunately this segment of the story turns out to be a clever feint. Boyett and Mitchroney have the sense to forgo Hollywood predictability, so the ending’s perfect. A worthy adventure.