http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/06/us/politics/vp-debate-issues.html
Debate Segment on Race and Policing Leaves Activists Underwhelmed - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016
Oct. 5, 2016
6672
For 10 minutes at their debate on Tuesday, the Republican and Democratic vice-presidential nominees argued about race and policing, offering their opinions on what might improve the relationship between police officers and members of minority groups across the country.Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, the Republican nominee, questioned whether black officers could be biased against other black people, and Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, the Democrat, suggested that community policing could be part of the solution.The discussion left some black activists scratching their heads, wanting a much more in-depth conversation about discriminatory policing practices they see as systemic and wondering about the very framing of the debate.The debate moderator, Elaine Quijano of CBS News, raised the issue by quoting the former Dallas police chief, David O. Brown, who said after several of his officers were fatally shot at a demonstration in July, “We’re asking cops to do too much in this country.”Ms. Quijano then asked the candidates: “Do we ask too much of police officers in this country? And how would you specifically address the chief’s concerns?”And there began the problem for some activists, like Brittany Packnett, who served on President Obama’s task force on 21st-century policing.“If you’re going to frame the segment as a segment about race and policing, then ask about race and policing,” said Ms. Packnett, 31. “The amount to which a professional has to deal with societal issues doesn’t negate the fact that they are responsible for the bias that they carry into the profession. So it feels, at the least, disingenuous to frame things in this way and not spend time talking about what is happening to people of color in this country.”As the debate went on, Ms. Packnett, who is voting for Hillary Clinton, added that she was frustrated that Mr. Pence did not seem to understand the meaning of implicit bias: He seemed to suggest that black officers’ biases would not affect how they treated black people.Mr. Pence, in his answer, attacked Mrs. Clinton for commenting recently on the fatal police shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, a black man, in Charlotte, N.C. (she posted his name on Twitter and said, “This has got to end”). The police have said that Mr. Scott had a gun and did not follow orders to put it down, and that a black officer, Brentley Vinson, shot him.“I just think what we ought to do is we ought to stop seizing on these moments of tragedy,” Mr. Pence said. “Enough of this seeking every opportunity to demean law enforcement broadly by making the accusation of implicit bias every time tragedy occurs.”Mr. Kaine insisted that police bias needed to be discussed and pointed to the case of Philando Castile, a black man killed by the police in Minnesota, leading Mr. Pence to interject.“Senator, when African-American police officers are involved in a police action, shooting, involving an African-American, why would Hillary Clinton accuse that African-American police officer of implicit bias?” Mr. Pence asked.Activists criticized Mr. Pence for that question, saying it suggested he did not understand that everyone, regardless of race and gender, has natural biases that affect how they judge people.“Listening to Mike Pence’s answer shows me that he doesn’t actually understand what implicit bias is and the fact that anyone can have it,” Ms. Packnett said. “And that there’s not going to be forward movement on the issue that we have been continuing to bring to the forefront for the last two years under a Trump presidency. So, did I hear a perfect answer from Tim Kaine? No. Do I feel like there is more room to make progress there? Yes.”Mr. Kaine, in his answer, suggested that building bonds between the police and minority communities would help. “The way you make communities safer and the way you make police safer is through community policing,” he said.But Mary Hooks, the co-founder of a chapter of Black Lives Matter in Atlanta, said she was not satisfied with either man’s answer and faulted Mr. Kaine for using the broad term “community policing” without explaining how he and Mrs. Clinton would invest in minority communities.“Where is the spending on training and the investment in people’s lives?” Ms. Hooks asked. “Unless there’s a deliberate divestment of pulling away resources from police and investing that into the lives of those who are marginalized in this country, that relationship is not going to change.”