http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/21/fashion/21Gimlet.html
Celebrating the Photographer Jerry Schatzberg’s Career - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Photography,Schatzberg  Jerry,Women Then (Book),Celebrities
Oct. 20, 2010
915
A STIFF wind was blowing through Chelsea, driving the cold rain sideways. It was last Thursday, early evening, just after quitting time. Seven in the evening is hardly a decent hour for a must-attend party, let alone one held outdoors in a space sheltered, though barely, by the elevated train tracks of the High Line. Still, New York being New York, there were already people lining up by a half-shuttered riot gate, umbrellas blown inside-out, waiting to get in.“Beyond! Beyond! Beyond was ‘the city,’” the New York intellectual Alfred Kazin once wrote in a tender memoir of his Brownsville boyhood. Manhattan beckoned then and somehow it beckons still.The guest of honor at this particular party may have been raised at the opposite geographic pole from Brownsville, way up on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx. But, like Kazin — like so many, really — Jerry Schatzberg once felt the magnetic pull of Manhattan and followed it across the river to a place where he could set about inventing himself.First he was a fashion photographer, discovered and trained by the great Russian-born designer and photographer Alexey Brodovitch. Mr. Schatzberg photographed for Vogue, Esquire and Glamour, along with other magazines that dominated the publishing world 50 years ago and that anyone ineligible for a senior discount has never seen: Life, for instance, or McCall’s.Then, somehow, in the mysterious way that can occur here, Jerry Schatzberg became a celebrity photographer, his lens trained “on everybody,” as he said, the everybody in this  case notably including Bob Dylan, whose friend and unofficial portraitist he became. The scowling, defining cover image for “Blonde on Blonde” was shot by Mr. Schatzberg, who by 1967 had become more than an auxiliary of the famous but a minor celebrity himself.In a. Los Angeles Times article about Mr. Schatzberg, a journalist described coming upon him at the George V Hotel in Paris, where he was holed up with Faye Dunaway, one of the numerous beauties he was associated with across the years. “I guessed that this must be Jerry Schatzberg, 40-year-old fashion photographer and Ms. Dunaway’s true love of two years’ standing,” the reporter wrote. “He looks about 30, and was once the hero of an article in the late New York Herald Tribune entitled ‘The Sweet Life of Jerry Schatzberg.’ ”The sweet life of Jerry Schatzberg remains so, and not merely because he still looks 60 at 83. The sweet life after the years of fashion photography led to relationships, professional and otherwise, with stars of the era, people like Andy Warhol and Edie Sedgwick and Aretha Franklin and the Rolling Stones, whom he photographed at their manager’s urging dressed in matronly costumes. “They were really into it,” Mr. Schatzberg said of a now-legendary sitting for which all of the Rolling Stones, then still including Brian Jones, dragged-up in military woolens and support hose, dressed as war widows or members of the W.A.A.F. “They wanted to wear it all, including the underwear,” Mr. Schatzberg said.For the fans attending Thursday’s party, an event celebrating publication of a new book titled “Women Then” (Rizzoli, $60) — “then” being the years from 1954 to 1969 — the shank of Mr. Schatzberg’s career, the years he spent making movies, was surely the most memorable. That his films, often dismissed by critics here or else treated as cult obscurities, found a passionate following abroad owed a great deal to their sharp observations of the city, the coldness of its structure so at odds with the passions people bring here in their will to succeed. The followings his films attracted resulted in no small part from the performances he got out of actors — Stockard Channing, Al Pacino, Gene Hackman, Alan Alda, Sam Waterston — who, long before Hollywood claimed them, belonged to New York.“I go to other countries and I’m treated like a spoiled child,” Mr. Schatzberg said on Thursday. The spoiling, if that is the right word, has included accolades like the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival, which he was awarded for “Scarecrow,” in 1973.IN the New York of now, all that Mr. Schatzberg gets by way of celebration is an outdoor party with donated booze and hay bales for seating in a pop-up “Tea Shop” off 10th Avenue. All the same, he is not complaining. “I’ve spent so much time walking the city over the years,” he said, “that there isn’t any part of it that isn’t like a studio for me.”His apartment is on the Upper West Side. His photography lab is in Bushwick. Wherever he goes, he takes his little digital Ricoh. Pulling the camera from the pocket of his leather jacket, he showed off a snapshot of an enormous warehouse standing in isolation on a desolate block in Bushwick. Blanketed with graffiti, it looked like a great monument to a lost civilization. Possibly it was.The routes of Jerry Schatzberg’s wanderings vary. He rides the subway sometimes and exits wherever the mood strikes, and hoofs it home. Not long ago, he led the German crew filming a documentary about him to one of those stops, near 175th Street and the Grand Concourse, which happens to be the neighborhood where he was raised.Far from being unrecognizable, his old haunts, he said, were little altered. P.S. 70, which  he attended, is still standing. It still looks a lot like it did then and also,  he said, a lot  like the backdrop for a freak death chillingly described in “World’s Fair” by E. L. Doctorow, another neighborhood boy. The vendor who once sold two-penny ices is long gone. Yet 70 years later there remains a man on a corner with a cart selling shaved ice sweetened with syrup in poisonous colors. “The ices are $2 now,” Mr. Schatzberg remarked.Despite the wistful title of Mr. Schatzberg’s new book, he is not nostalgic. He does not say so, but New York itself appears as a recurring character in “Women Then,” alongside Faye Dunaway and Charlotte Rampling and Catherine Deneuve and Edie Sedgwick and the fashion models (Anne St. Marie, Betsy Pickering) whose stylized beauty is not so very different from that of the women at Thursday’s party, the ones with Dries van Noten dresses and eager expressions, lovely and slightly, though necessarily, hard.The city itself, Mr. Schatzberg said, is after all not so different now from the place it was then. “It’s still the best experiment ever, because, like it not, we all come here and we come together with the same goals,” he said, referring to the disparate hopefuls, the outlanders, the ones from distant countries and the ones like himself who come from places that once seemed pretty foreign, back when the rivers separating Manhattan from the other boroughs could seem impassable. “We all want the same thing when we come here,” Jerry Schatzberg said. “We want to produce.”