https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/02/world/middleeast/iraq.html
As Iraqi Violence Rages, Lawmakers Fail to Reach Deal on New Government - The New York Times
Iraq,Legislatures and Parliaments,Deaths (Fatalities),Civilian Casualties,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Maliki  Nuri Kamal al-,Baghdad (Iraq)
July 1, 2014
8751
BAGHDAD —  Iraq’s major parties initially thought they had a deal ready when they sat down Tuesday to form a new government, but the effort collapsed in factional acrimony in less than half an hour.“We need our salaries,” shouted a Kurdish representative, Najiba Najib, complaining that the Shiite-dominated government in Baghdad had not been paying Kurdish officials since the Kurdistan region all but broke away last month. When extremists with the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, drove the Iraqi Army from northern Iraq, the Kurds took the opportunity to seize control of the oil-rich city of Kirkuk. The Kurds have long laid claim to the city, and insisted that they intend to keep it.“You brought ISIS into our country and took the Iraqi flag down in Kirkuk and put your flag up!” shouted Mohammed Naji, a Shiite politician, at Ms. Najib. “Go and sell your oil to Israel.”The meeting’s rocky start did not come about for lack of incentive. American diplomats have suggested that any major new military assistance against extremists would come only if the Iraqis form an inclusive government acceptable to all sects. The powerful Shiite religious establishment had issued an edict telling legislators they had to conclude the entire deal by Tuesday. And around much of the country, Sunni militants pressed the government on numerous fronts.The seriousness of the violence was reflected in a United Nations report issued Tuesday confirming that June had been the deadliest month in Iraq since at least 2008, with 2,417 people killed, 1,531 civilians and 886 members of the security forces — three times as many as in May.Yet only 255 of the 328 newly elected lawmakers even showed up for the first session of Parliament, with some boycotting, and others afraid to travel to Baghdad because of the violence. That was enough, however, for the two-thirds quorum needed to elect a speaker and begin forming a government.As Parliament members arrived amid heavy security, there were reports from police and Interior Ministry officials of violence from many quarters. A roadside bomb exploded in Ghazaliya, a Sunni neighborhood in west Baghdad, killing four civilians. A government employee was assassinated in the Jihad neighborhood nearby. Four other civilians were killed in a bombing in Ramadi, and six soldiers were wounded in a mortar barrage near Falluja, both in Anbar Province, west of Baghdad. A police officer was killed during a fight with insurgents in Diyala Province, and three soldiers were killed in an explosion in Iskandariya, south of Baghdad.Monday night, six civilians were killed when the extremists fired mortar rounds at the  Askariya Shrine  in Samarra, revered by Shiites. But the damage to the shrine was slight, and the attack did not cause any immediate public reaction, as a similar attack did in 2006, when it set off a sectarian blood bath.The sense of urgency seemed to have little effect on Iraq’s new legislators. The major players arrived thinking they had a deal that would speed up formation of a government, a process that took nine months in 2010, but during a time of relative calm.Sunnis and Kurds were to have agreed on Salim al-Jabouri, a Sunni, to become the new speaker, replacing Osama al-Nujaifi. In exchange, they expected the Kurds to announce their choice for president, who has to be a Kurd, and the Shiites’ National Alliance bloc to announce a Shiite prime minister to replace the incumbent, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. Both Sunnis and Kurds, along with some Shiites, have insisted that Mr. Maliki has to go.Sunnis at the last minute faced a challenge from Mr. Nujaifi, who wants to hold onto his seat, said the Shiite politician Haider al-Abadi, a supporter of Mr. Maliki’s State of Law party. And Kurds were nowhere near agreeing on a candidate for president. Kurds and Sunnis, however, said the Shiites reneged by not coming to the meeting with a nominee for the post of prime minister.Iraq’s complex system of choosing a government makes such deal-making difficult and essential. The speaker is necessary to preside over Parliament to elect a president, who then chooses the biggest bloc in Parliament, which picks the prime minister. But a two-thirds vote is required to choose the speaker, so politicians try to have the entire deal agreed on in advance.“We cannot jump to the last stages without taking the first step,” said Mr. Abadi, adding that it would be foolish for the Shiites to announce their candidate for prime minister now if the process ended up taking months. That, he said, might render Mr. Maliki a lame-duck leader in the middle of running a war, if someone else were chosen.So after Ms. Najib and Mr. Naji exchanged words, a recess was called by the temporary speaker, Mahdi Ahmed Hafith. Only 60 legislators returned from the recess, however, so there was no quorum to continue. Parliament was adjourned until July 8.“I think there will be an agreement by then, maybe sooner,” Mr. Abadi said. “Yesterday we thought we had an agreement.”A Kurdish legislator, Ala Talabani, said: “It was not a good beginning. But it’s not bad as well.”Within hours, the United Nations issued an unusually strong rebuke. “Politicians in Iraq need to realize that it is no longer business as usual,” said the top representative here, Nickolay Mladenov. “I call upon all political leaders to set aside their differences.”Mr. Mladenov called the June death toll “staggering.”Not only was it three times as high as that of May, when 799 people were killed in Iraq, 240 of them security forces, but it was the highest such toll since at least 2008, when 7,000 people were killed. The figures do not take into account Anbar Province, much of which has been under the control of ISIS-led insurgents and where the United Nations has no presence. The United Nations cited Health Ministry officials in Anbar as recording 244 civilians killed and 588 wounded from June 1 to 29, bringing the total death toll for the country in June to at least 2,661.“What can be achieved through a constitutional political process cannot be achieved through an exclusively military response,” Mr. Mladenov said. “Security must be restored, but the root causes of violence must be addressed.”