https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/upshot/how-the-poll-on-medical-bills-was-conducted.html
How the Poll on Medical Bills Was Conducted - The New York Times
Medicine and Health,Polls and Public Opinion,Health Insurance and Managed Care
Jan. 5, 2016
9263
The New York Times/Kaiser Family Foundation survey on medical bills is based on interviewing conducted Aug. 28 through Sept. 28 with 2,575 adults nationwide from ages 18 to 64.Questionnaires were administered both online and by telephone in both English and Spanish, including a longer questionnaire for 1,204 respondents who reported problems paying household medical bills in the previous 12 months and a shorter questionnaire for 1,371 respondents who did not report such problems.The Times and Kaiser contributed financing for the survey, and teams from both organizations worked together to develop the questionnaire and analyze the data. Each organization is solely responsible for its own interpretation and conclusions.NORC at the University of Chicago conducted sampling, interviewing and tabulation for the survey, using the AmeriSpeak Panel, a representative panel of adults 18 and over throughout the United States. AmeriSpeak Panel members are recruited through probability sampling methods using the NORC address-based national sampling frame.A total of 1,956 panel members with Internet access completed the survey online, while an additional 619 members without access were interviewed by telephone.For purposes of analysis, respondents who reported problems paying medical bills and respondents who reported no such problems were sampled at different rates. (Those with no problems were under-sampled.) The two groups were then weighted to their proper proportion of the population.The combined results have been weighted to adjust for variation in the sample of the United States population aged 18 to 64 relating to geographic region, gender, race/ethnicity, age, education and household income.In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, overall results based on such samples will differ by no more than 3 percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all adults from this population. This margin of sampling error takes into account that weighting procedures increase its size slightly.For smaller subgroups, the margin of sampling error is larger. For example, it is plus or minus 4 points for both the group with problems paying medical bills and the group reporting no such problems.In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of the public may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variation in the wording, order and translation of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.Complete questions and results are available at nytimes.com/polls.