https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/nyregion/what-you-need-to-know-a-plan-to-improve-new-yorks-subways.html
Frustrated by Subway Delays? How the M.T.A. Plans to Improve Commutes - The New York Times
New York City,Subways,Delays (Transportation),Transit Systems,Metropolitan Transportation Authority
May 16, 2017
7701
On Monday, officials announced a new plan to address soaring subway delays in New York City. After several major disruptions in recent weeks, riders have grown increasingly frustrated with the reliability of the system. Here is what you need to know about the plan:What is the Metropolitan Transportation Authority doing to fix subway service, and will I see any improvements on my line?The authority is rolling out several new initiatives to reduce delays on the Eighth Avenue lines in Manhattan, which have been particularly plagued by problems. This includes 19 stations on the A, C and E lines between 125th Street and Fulton Street. If the plan is successful there, officials want to expand the program to the rest of the subway system. The first phase will also focus on two bottlenecks in the South Bronx: the stations at 149th Street-Grand Concourse and Third Avenue-138th Street.What is in the plan?Subway officials want to address the root causes of delays: overcrowding, sick passengers and track and signal problems. The plan includes expanding rapid response teams to fix problems on the tracks; assigning EMTs at five crucial stations to respond when passengers need medical assistance; and directing riders to less crowded areas of a platform to make it easier for them to get on and off trains. Stations might have painted zones and signs aboard trains to direct traffic — measures already used in other cities like London.Will it help?Transit advocates praised the authority for finally recognizing the pain subway riders endure on a regular basis, though some said the plan did little to address systemic issues, like antiquated signals. Benjamin Kabak, who writes the Second Ave. Sagas subway blog, called the plan “a combination of smoke-and-mirrors with some potential for real improvement.” John Raskin, the executive director of the Riders Alliance, an advocacy group, said he hoped the short-term ideas were effective and called on Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who oversees the authority, to focus on the challenge. “Fixing the problem will require real funding for our subways and buses,” he said, “as well as sustained attention from Governor Cuomo, who ultimately runs our transit system.”Is the transportation authority getting a new leader?In recent years, the agency has been run by one top leader who served as chairman and chief executive. The new plan calls for separating that role into two jobs: a chairman who leads the board and focuses on major decisions like fare increases, and a separate chief executive who oversees daily service. The roles were combined in 2009 as part of a reform measure to make the authority more accountable, and the idea of separating the jobs is a contentious move. Two people recently were interviewed to run the authority: Veronique Hakim, the agency’s current interim executive director, and Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.What else is the authority doing to improve the subway?The new plan is intended to make quick fixes to improve service in the short term. But officials are also working on more long-term solutions, including upgrading the antiquated signal system and building new stations. Officials plan to introduce a modern signal system on the No. 7 line, which runs between Manhattan and Queens, by the end of the year. But rolling out new signals on the entire system could take half a century and cost $20 billion. After the opening of the first segment of the Second Avenue subway on Jan. 1, officials want to extend the line north to 125th Street in East Harlem.