http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/22/us/politics/obama-job-discrimination-gays-executive-order.html
President Calls for a Ban on Job Bias Against Gays - The New York Times
Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Obama  Barack,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Government Contracts and Procurement,Discrimination
July 21, 2014
1696
WASHINGTON —  President Obama, declaring himself on “the right side of history,” called on Congress on Monday to ban job discrimination against gay Americans as he signed an executive order doing so for workers of federal contractors.In a ceremony at the White House, Mr. Obama noted that in much of the country, companies can fire employees based on their sexual orientation. “That’s wrong,” he said to an audience of supporters. “We’re here to do what we can to make it right — to bend that arc of justice just a little bit in a better direction.”Before signing the order, Mr. Obama noted that Congress has debated such legislation for decades without agreeing to it, and he implored his supporters to raise the temperature on lawmakers even as they have achieved great momentum in the drive to legalize same-sex marriage through much of the nation. “I’m going to do what I can with the authority I have to act,” he said. “The rest of you, of course, need to keep putting pressure on Congress.”The federal government already prohibits discrimination against gay men, lesbians and bisexuals in its own work force, but the order Mr. Obama signed on Monday would extend that to companies that do work for the federal government. It also for the first time explicitly protects federal workers based not just on sexual orientation but also on gender identity, meaning transgender employees.But Mr. Obama rebuffed requests by religious groups to exempt them. Religious groups argued that they should not be forced to go against their beliefs in order to win or keep federal contracts available to others. Advocates for religion said the order would lead to a court fight.“The fact is that nondiscrimination rules like the order issued by President Obama can become a weapon used to punish and harass individuals and groups who support marriage as the union of one man and one woman,” said Brian S. Brown, the president of the National Organization for Marriage, which opposes legalizing same-sex marriage.Mr. Obama did not address their concerns in his brief remarks on Monday. But easing the fears of some religious social agencies, Mr. Obama left in place existing protections allowing them to give preference to members of their own faith in leadership positions.The president’s order applies to only a fraction of those who would be affected by congressional legislation, but he has been under heavy pressure from a critical Democratic core constituency to take action on his own without waiting for lawmakers.His order adds sexual orientation and gender identity to the list of categories protected among federal contractors that was first approved by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1965. And it adds gender identity as a protected category to a 1969 directive by President Richard M. Nixon that applies to federal employees, which was later amended by President Bill Clinton to include sexual orientation.“We’ve got a long way to go,” he said. “But I hope as everybody looks around this room, you are reminded of the extraordinary progress that we have made. Not just in our lifetimes. But in the last five years. In the last two years. In the last one year. We’re on the right side of history.”