http://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/03/nyregion/new-york-marine-convicted-of-assaulting-iraqi-prisoners.html
New York Marine Convicted of Assaulting Iraqi Prisoners - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,IRAQ,NASIRIYA (IRAQ),PITTMAN  GARY,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,WAR CRIMES  GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY,PRISONERS OF WAR,CAMP WHITEHOUSE (IRAQ),MILITARY PERSONNEL,DECISIONS AND VERDICTS,TORTURE,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Sept. 3, 2004
6456
CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., Sept. 2 - A Marine reservist from New York City was convicted Thursday in a military court of assault and dereliction of duty for his conduct as a prison guard in Iraq last year.After four hours of deliberation, a jury of nine senior Marine officers here found the reservist, Sgt. Gary Pittman, guilty of assaulting unidentified Iraqi prisoners, but acquitted him of charges related to the killing of a prisoner in the custody of Sergeant Pittman's Long Island-based reserve unit.A military lawyer who attended the court-martial said it appeared that the jury did not believe the government's star witness, a former lance corporal who traded his testimony for immunity, and who said he had seen Sergeant Pittman brutalize the prisoner who died.Sergeant Pittman, 40, of Flushing, Queens, faces nine months of military prison and a bad-conduct discharge. Had he been convicted of the more serious charges, he would have faced up to two years of prison and a dishonorable discharge. He is to be sentenced on Friday.After Col. J.J. Coghlan read the verdict in the dank courtroom here, about 30 miles north of San Diego, Sergeant Pittman's wife, sitting behind him, wept. He turned and hugged her, whispering, and they left the courtroom without comment.Almost a year before photographs of sadistic treatment of Iraqi prisoners at the hands of American military personnel surfaced from Abu Ghraib prison, near Baghdad, detainees were systematically beaten by reservists from the Second Battalion, 25th Marine Regiment, at Camp Whitehorse outside the town of Nasiriya, prosecutors said.The prisoner who died in the custody of Sgt. Pittman's unit was Nagem Sadoon Hatab, 52, described as an official in Saddam Hussein's Baath Party and a gunman in the ambush of Pfc. Jessica Lynch's convoy.In June 2003, Mr. Hatab was taken to the Camp Whitehorse detention facility. Three days later he lay dead, curled up in the dirt and covered with his own feces. An autopsy by an Army colonel concluded that he had died of asphyxiation from a broken bone in his neck and had suffered six broken ribs and blunt trauma to the backs of his legs, and the death was ruled a homicide.But the possibility of murder or manslaughter charges evaporated after Mr. Hatab's remains were left in an ice chest on a tarmac in the hot Iraqi sun. Gases from decomposing tissue eventually caused the ice chest to explode. The exact cause of death could not be confirmed, and counts against six of the nine marines charged were dropped.A military hearing is scheduled in October for Maj. Clarke Paulus, who is accused of ordering that Mr. Hatab be dragged out into the yard where he was later found dead, and for Maj. Michael Froeder, commander of Camp Whitehorse, for negligence and abuse of prisoners."It is difficult to prove murder on the battlefield," said John D. Hutson, dean of the Franklin Pierce Law Center in Concord, N.H., and former judge advocate general for the Navy. The rules of evidence for military tribunals are tailored after federal rules of evidence."Everything is more difficult in a war zone," Mr. Hutson said. "The first objective is to fight the war. All this other stuff is, in some respects, nice-to-do's but not the primary responsibilities."In civilian life, Sergeant Pittman is a federal corrections officer; prosecutors told the jury on Thursday that he had told others in Iraq that abusive treatment toward prisoners maintains jailhouse discipline.Sergeant Pittman testified Thursday on his own behalf, maintaining that he was not to blame for the Iraqi's death and that he never abused prisoners, despite testimony from others in his unit.The most damning evidence against Sergeant Pittman came from William S. Roy, then a lance corporal, who has been demoted to private first class. Private Roy said Sergeant Pittman had kicked Mr. Hatab in the chest, sending the hooded and handcuffed prisoner tumbling to the ground. Private Roy testified he had grabbed Mr. Hatab by the neck several times before his death in order to make him stand up.According to Private Roy, Mr. Hatab protested his beating in halting English, telling his captors he was the father of 11 children.About two days after his beating, Mr. Hatab did not, or could not, eat or drink, was unable to stand and was covered with excrement. He was ordered dragged outside to be cleaned, where he was forgotten after marines left to confront a group of local Iraqi protestors. Mr. Hatab was found around midnight, dead.