https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/business/dealbook/goldman-sachs-struggles-to-navigate-the-markets.html
Goldman Sachs Struggles to Navigate the Markets - The New York Times
Goldman Sachs Group Inc,Banking and Financial Institutions,Blankfein  Lloyd C,Dimon  James,Stocks and Bonds,Company Reports
July 18, 2017
1361
Who cares about a few bad weeks in fixed-income markets?Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase’s chief executive, raised that reasonable question last week. The answer is Lloyd C. Blankfein at the rival Wall Street firm Goldman Sachs, which on Tuesday reported a 40 percent year-on-year slump in revenue from trading bonds, currencies and commodities. Goldman’s market compass is a little off, and investors may soon expect Mr. Blankfein to fix it more quickly.The quarter to June was the second in a row in which Goldman, the $90 billion financial company, has been out-traded by its peers. While others warned that the period would not be as good as a year earlier — basically because fewer freaky things happened in the market — JPMorgan and Citigroup reported revenue shrinkage in their equivalent divisions less than half as severe as Goldman’s.They may be less exposed to commodities or benefit more from steady corporate business rather than hedge funds. And swings in markets can have a bigger impact on Goldman because it lacks a large commercial banking business. Last quarter, the firm’s dire fixed-income performance was offset by strong equities trading and a $1.2 billion slug of revenue from equity investments that Goldman holds on its own book.Over time, the firm’s exposure to volatile fixed-income trading will become more muted. In the most recent quarter F.I.C.C., as it’s known, made up around 15 percent of net revenue, against 24 percent in the second quarter of 2016.Mr. Blankfein’s push into retail banking is still in its infancy, but the 20 percent-plus returns on equity that other consumer lenders manage — more than twice what Goldman reported last quarter — suggest that is a promising new direction.Targeting less flighty corporate clients and longer-term asset managers may also muffle some of the noise, though that will take time, too. Of course, that will also dampen Goldman’s traditionally unmatched ability to ping back significantly when markets do.That ping-back potential — referred to in analyst-speak as operating leverage — is a big part of Goldman’s investment appeal. It helps explain why the bank trades at 1.1 times its estimated book value a year from now, according to Thomson Reuters Eikon.The implication is that investors believe Goldman can push its return on equity well into double digits. As Mr. Dimon at JPMorgan suggested, a few bad trading weeks needn’t change their minds. But a couple more uninspiring quarters might.