https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/business/dealbook/jpmorgan-wells-fargo-citigroup-earnings.html
Results for Big Banks Show a Reliance on Washington - The New York Times
Wells Fargo & Company,JPMorgan Chase & Company,Citigroup Inc,Banking and Financial Institutions,Company Reports,Interest Rates,Credit and Debt
July 14, 2017
8870
A bumper set of second-quarter earnings on Friday from Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo reveals their reliance on Washington.Higher interest rates, partly driven by the Federal Reserve, helped all three big lenders exceed analysts’ estimates. Yet without more help from the nation’s capital, it’s hard to justify the three banks’ healthy valuations.JPMorgan, for example, cranked out $6.5 billion of net income. That equates to an annualized return on equity of 12 percent, allowing the bank run by Jamie Dimon to perform the rare feat of besting its rival Wells Fargo, if only by a hair. JPMorgan has to improve on that, however, to make its current price-to-book ratio of 1.4 times look reasonable. That metric implies a 14 percent return on equity over the long term.Meanwhile, stripping out a one-off gain from a legal settlement eliminates almost one percentage point of JPMorgan’s return on equity. Apply the tax rate from last year’s second quarter, which was almost six percentage points higher, and the return would drop to around 10 percent.On top of that, credit costs fell. That’s fine, but at some point the bank will have to set aside more to cover potential losses. The same is true of Wells Fargo, where charge-offs represented less than 0.3 percent of average loans.Citigroup’s credit costs are rising, but that is mainly because it has been aggressively expanding its credit-card business.Wells Fargo is also less efficient than it used to be, with costs taking some 61 cents of each dollar of revenue. That used to hover around 57 to 58 cents, the range where Citigroup and JPMorgan are now. Wells Fargo’s chief executive, Timothy J. Sloan, is, as a result, targeting $2 billion of cost cuts by the end of next year. With such distractions and a slight drop in lending, it is hard to see how the bank’s earnings will match its 1.5 times book multiple any time soon.Citigroup may be able to squeeze more profit from its growing cards business. But its annualized return on equity for the quarter was just 6.8 percent, below what is implied by its trading multiple just shy of 90 percent of book value.Unless trading and lending, for example, suddenly pick up, the best ways for banks to meet their shareholders’ expectations are out of their hands. The tax cuts and looser regulation hoped for from President Trump are Exhibits A and B. Given the dysfunction in Washington, Mr. Dimon and his counterparts can’t rely on that help.