https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/06/your-money/strategies-corporate-cash-repatriation-bipartisan-consensuss.html
A Stranded $2 Trillion Overseas Stash Gets Closer to Coming Home - The New York Times
Tax Shelters,Corporate Taxes,Taxation,United States Politics and Government,Foreign Investments,Corporations,Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Internal Revenue Service,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016
Nov. 4, 2016
1199
The next president may have a rare opportunity to close tax loopholes that have let American corporations stash more than $2 trillion in untaxed profits outside the United States.This enormous hoard of stranded cash has barely been an issue in the contentious election campaign of 2016, and precise predictions of deals that could be made in Washington are foolhardy until the nation goes to the polls.But this much is clear: There is a growing political consensus that the time has come for change in the tax rules to encourage repatriation of the vast troves of corporate earnings held outside the country. Companies, ordinary American taxpayers and thousands of investors have substantial and sometimes conflicting stakes in the outcome.“Everyone agrees that something is going to be done about this,” said Edward D. Kleinbard, the former chief of staff of the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation, and now a law professor at the University of Southern California. “The question, of course, is exactly what.”Under current rules, by declaring that foreign profits are permanently or indefinitely reinvested abroad, American companies can defer taxation on that money. How much money, exactly, is subject to interpretation, but careful estimates extend from about $2.4 trillion to roughly $3 trillion.Both Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump have indicated that they plan to tax at least some of that money and induce corporations to bring it home, though details are scarce. There was bipartisan support in Congress for a deal on corporate repatriation in 2015, but it fizzled. The usual gridlock in Washington — and the likelihood of changes in the political firmament after the election — dimmed prospects for a deal in 2016. That could soon shift.One reason is that the sums that could be made available for use by the government have become staggeringly large. Like the gravity of an outsized planet, the concentration of so much money creates a nearly irresistible force: Something needs to be done about it.An approach called deemed repatriation — in which untaxed foreign corporate profits are subject to immediate taxation — would provide a gigantic infusion to the Treasury and give corporations a significant incentive to move money home. Leading plans in Congress include this approach, Mr. Kleinbard said.Reforming the tax code is anything but simple, however. The details are crucial, and there are plenty of them, giving corporate lobbyists ample opportunity to shape eventual changes in a manner that favors the big companies.First, it’s not easy to discern the actual size of the stash of corporate money abroad. One solid figure comes from the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation, which estimated in late August that as of 2015, the total of “undistributed” and “not previously taxed” foreign earnings of American companies amounted to $2.6 trillion.Consider the implications of that sum for a moment.On paper, if not in reality, corporations are required to pay a federal tax rate of 35 percent. If all of that money had been taxed at that rate, it would amount to $910 billion in taxes.In fact, Goldman Sachs research indicates that companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index paid a median federal effective tax rate of 28 percent, on average, over the last decade, while companies with high foreign earnings paid about 22 percent.But let’s stick with the statutory 35 percent rate for a moment. My calculations show that at that rate, the lost corporate tax revenue would amount to almost two-thirds of all the money ($1.39 trillion) paid by Americans in personal income tax in 2014, according to Treasury data. And the lost tax revenue is more than 2.5 times the income tax paid annually by American corporations. Even if corporations were given a big break — which is highly likely under any tax code revision — the impact of any tax payments on those profits would still be large.In reality, current legislative plans for bringing the money home call for lowering the statutory rate — to somewhere below 20 percent on a one-time basis — as well as for lowering the overall corporate tax rate permanently. That could be part of an overhaul of the entire tax code — a long-thwarted achievement that might gain new impetus after the election, as my colleague James B. Stewart has written.Taxing the stranded corporate earnings, whatever their amount, is certainly on the Washington agenda. Goldman Sachs estimated that an Obama administration proposal to tax American corporations’ existing foreign earnings at a 14 percent rate could generate $240 billion in taxes.And the Clinton campaign has advocated using tax revenue from repatriated foreign earnings to help finance an ambitious domestic infrastructure program. At the same time, Mr. Trump has proposed a one-time 10 percent tax on American corporate money held abroad, while reducing the tax on future corporate earnings to 15 percent. Any of these variations would yield a lot of revenue, and the higher the corporate tax rate, the greater the short-term benefit for American taxpayers.Stock investors would also enjoy a windfall under earnings repatriation plans, but the lower the corporate tax rate, the greater the benefit. It’s easy to see why.For one thing, studies show that in 2004 when the American Jobs Creation Act granted a “tax holiday,” in which companies were allowed to bring money home at a 5.25 percent tax rate, they used very little of their repatriated money to create jobs or develop new businesses or technologies. Most of the cash simply flowed to investors in the form of buybacks and dividends.“The holiday gave multinational firms a signal that there was no reason to pay the full tax due at repatriation,” Kimberly Clausing, a professor at Reed College, wrote in a recent paper. “Instead, one should wait for the next holiday or lobby for a tax system that exempts foreign income entirely.”That’s why the details of a tax deal are so important. A tax holiday could encourage companies to stockpile earnings overseas again and defer American taxes, while enriching investors. If $1 trillion were repatriated and companies funneled nearly all of it to their shareholders, the windfall would be very large indeed: It could come close to the $975 billion in buybacks and dividends for all S.&P. 500 stocks for the 12 months through June, according to data provided by Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at S&P Dow Jones Indices.Dividends and buybacks are important. They have been helping prop up the stock market. Bringing money back this way might give the market, and specific companies, an ephemeral sugar high.For these reasons, in a recent report for clients, Goldman Sachs suggested that investors consider buying shares of companies with the biggest untaxed foreign earnings: Microsoft, General Electric, Apple and Pfizer, which also top the list of untaxed earnings giants compiled by Audit Analytics, an accounting research firm.With earnings stranded overseas, many big corporations have been able to borrow at very low interest rates to pay dividends and to buy back stock. But interest rates will rise eventually, and using their own cash that is parked overseas would be beneficial.Big companies would benefit in other ways, too. The Treasury effectively blocked Pfizer last year from a so-called tax inversion merger with Allergan, a smaller company with Ireland as its tax domicile. Unproductive, untaxed foreign earnings make that kind of merger tempting. But a change in the tax code that lets companies lower their tax burdens while bringing money back home could make inversions — as well as “permanent” investment of earnings overseas — irrelevant strategies.Furthermore, companies like Apple, which has been drawn into a nasty dispute with the European Union over the low level of taxes it pays to Ireland, might not engage in elaborate overseas tax maneuvers if the American code were straightforward, and if the United States and tax haven countries harmonized their rules, making tax collection more effective.There is a surprising degree of bipartisan consensus that the American tax system needs to be fixed and that the stranded earnings should be brought home. Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and the House speaker, and Chuck Schumer of New York, who is in line to be the Senate’s Democratic leader, have favored tax changes that would encourage corporate repatriation. Mr. Schumer and Senator Rob Portman, an Ohio Republican, agreed on the framework of such a plan, and President Obama did as well.A gigantic pot of money is sitting overseas. It will be up to the next president and Congress — and their counterparts abroad — to decide exactly what to do about it.