https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/20/world/asia/south-koreans-vote-in-closely-fought-presidential-race.html
Park Geun-hye Is Elected South Korea’s First Female President - The New York Times
Elections,South Korea,Park Geun-hye,Women and Girls,Moon Jae-in
Dec. 19, 2012
3477
SEOUL, South Korea — With the election of Park Geun-hye as president on Wednesday, South Korea extended the tenure of its staunchly pro-American governing party and handed power to the daughter of South Korea’s longest-ruling dictator, the first woman to win the post in a deeply patriarchal part of Asia.Voters appeared to prefer stability over her opponent’s calls for radical change in how one of the world’s strongest economies addresses the new problems of slowing growth and a growing wealth gap, as well as perennial military threats from North Korea.With all of the votes counted, according to the National Election Commission, the conservative Ms. Park won 51.6 percent of the vote compared with 48 percent for Moon Jae-in, a liberal stalwart.“This is a victory for the people’s wish to overcome crises and revive the economy,” Ms. Park, 60, told her cheering supporters, who gathered in freezing weather in downtown Seoul to celebrate a woman whose steeliness in the face of adversity is legend.According to her memoir, when told her father, Park Chung-hee, was assassinated in 1979, she responded, “Is everything all right along the border with North Korea?”In its starkest terms, this election was about South Korea’s continuing confrontation with its authoritarian past, and confusion over whether a conservative or liberal approach would best serve the country as it tries to stop North Korea’s excesses and to handle growing frustration over economic inequality without derailing the country’s economic miracle. Mr. Moon, a former human rights lawyer who was once imprisoned for opposing the authoritarian rule of Ms. Park’s father, campaigned on restoring key liberal policies from the early 2000s, including a warm embrace of North Korea as a way of trying to curb its aggression.While Ms. Park’s run for president was pioneering in one important way, because of her gender, few see her win as likely to significantly change the lot of women anytime soon in a traditional society where, despite some strong inroads in business and government, women’s most important job is still considered to be raising children. In an assessment echoed by voters, analysts said the clearest indication that little was changing was that Ms. Park won in good part on the appeal that a man — her father — still holds for many in a country still deeply divided over his legacy.“Her election was less to do with her gender and more to do with the fact that she was her father’s daughter,” said Kim Ji-yoon, research fellow at the Asan Institute for Policy Studies in Seoul. Her father’s 18-year iron-fisted rule is remembered by many with bitterness; his government jailed and tortured many dissidents — whom he painted as Communist sympathizers helping North Korea — and even banned rock music and miniskirts.But he is consistently voted the most popular former president in polls for his role in birthing the vibrant South Korean economy, a rapid rise from the ruins of the Korean War that has built a thriving middle class, made South Korean companies feared competitors and restored the nation’s dignity.Still, Ms. Park will have to contend with the fallout from that success, and her father’s role in it. One of the abiding themes of the campaign was the clamor for more economic equality and a reining in of the chaebol, or family-controlled conglomerates like Samsung, that Mr. Park helped build with government largess. Those companies power the economy, but their unruly expansion in recent years is blamed for aggravating the gap between rich and poor.In the end, South Koreans appeared to prefer Ms. Park’s calls to overhaul the chaebol over time to the more aggressive approach suggested by her rival, Mr. Moon. Indeed, what appeared to separate the two candidates throughout the election was how far they would go in implementing change.Mr. Moon campaigned on a return to the Sunshine Policy, a combination of investments and aid to the North. Although Ms. Park criticized the “inflexible” hard-line policy of the incumbent, President Lee Myung-bak, for failing to tame North Korea, she prefers a cautious rapprochement. She said she would decouple humanitarian aid from politics and try to meet the new North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un. But she insisted, like Mr. Lee, that any large-scale investments be conditional on progress in ending North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.While Ms. Park’s stance may pose something of a challenge to the Obama administration’s policy on North Korea — which had been in lock step with Mr. Lee’s — analysts say it will be much easier for the United States to work with her on the issue than with Mr. Moon.On Wednesday, President Obama congratulated Ms. Park in a statement, while noting “admiration for all President Lee has done to strengthen relations” between the United States and South Korea. Mr. Lee could not run again for president because of term limits.Ms. Park’s political career was born in family tragedy. Her mother was killed by a Communist agent in 1974 when Ms. Park was 22 and a student in Paris; she abandoned her studies to return to Seoul and serve as acting first lady. Five years later, her father was assassinated by his disgruntled spy chief.Ms. Park retired from public view, as the country eventually turned from authoritarianism in the late 1980s, with many vilifying her father as a dictator. She returned to political life only in 1998 with a vow to “save the country,” which was struggling with the Asian financial crisis. Voters who remembered her father’s charismatic leadership elected her to a seat in Parliament by a landslide margin, and she has held on to that seat ever since, building a reputation as a principled and tough-minded leader.“Her image among her supporters is a stable leader, calm during crises, strong and dependable,” said Choi Jin, head of the Institute of Presidential Leadership.Throughout the campaign, Ms. Park, who never married, said that her gender would be an asset in leading the nation in difficult times. “I have no family to take care of,” she said. “I have no child to inherit my properties. You, the people, are my only family, and to make you happy is the reason I do politics.”But in a sign of how little her victory might do for other women, analysts like Mr. Choi said she was viewed as something of an anomaly. “She is a woman, yet not a woman,” he said.Women’s lives have changed significantly in recent years. Older people remember a time when women in traditional families served the meal to their husbands and sons, and ate afterward. Women are now a big presence at universities and at some companies, and the barriers to women keeping their jobs after marriage are disappearing.But women still account for only 3 percent of senior government officials, and the rare “flowers” in corporate boardrooms are usually daughters of the chairmen.For South Korea’s beleaguered liberals, having a woman lead the country will not automatically change that and is little compensation for what they see as a turn backward, given her policies on the North and on conglomerates. (In fact, analysts considered Mr. Moon and his party more pro-woman.)To those critics, she is known as “Princess Geun-hye” for her privileged upbringing. Early this year, her estranged former spokeswoman complained of having been forced to put the hood of a raincoat over Ms. Park’s head.She also claimed that when Ms. Park was eating a hamburger, she never used her hands, relying instead on a knife and fork.And they say her apologies for her father’s cruelties came reluctantly and halfheartedly, only after she decided to run for the presidency.“I wonder what the rest of the world will think of Korea; we now have a dictator’s child as leader, both in North and South Korea,” said Kim Min-jin, 31, an office worker in Seoul.