https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/02/us/gov-doug-ducey-of-arizona-signs-abortion-drug-bill-that-skirts-new-fda-protocol.html
Gov. Doug Ducey of Arizona Signs Abortion Drug Bill That Skirts New F.D.A. Protocol - The New York Times
Arizona,Abortion,Ducey  Doug (1964- ),Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Food and Drug Administration,Abortion Drugs,Law and Legislation
April 1, 2016
6396
One day after the Food and Drug Administration relaxed its guidelines for use of an abortion-inducing drug, Arizona’s Republican governor, Doug Ducey, signed a bill on Thursday requiring abortion clinics to follow the earlier protocol, which medical experts have described as outdated, overly restrictive and less healthy for women.The bill to restrict so-called medication abortions had passed the Arizona Legislature before it was known that the F.D.A. would issue new guidelines for the drug, mifepristone. But the bill specified that Arizona doctors must abide by the federal guidelines as they existed on Dec. 31, 2015.Mr. Ducey, a businessman who took office last year, signed the legislation despite the altered federal recommendations. “Some changes may need to be made in a later bill” because of the F.D.A.’s action, the governor said. The law is not scheduled to take effect until this summer, 90 days after the legislative session ends.Mifepristone is used in combination with other drugs to induce a miscarriage. Because it does not require surgery, the method is increasingly selected by women seeking abortions early in their pregnancies, and it now accounts for about one in four abortions nationally.The F.D.A.’s previous guidelines for the safe use of mifepristone were issued when the drug was approved in 2000, based on international studies in the 1990s. But doctors are generally not required to follow the F.D.A. recommendations on a drug’s label, and over time medical researchers found that women could safely take lower doses of mifepristone, make fewer visits to clinics and induce abortions at up to 10 weeks of pregnancy, rather than up to seven weeks.Anti-abortion groups, alarmed by the growing use of the method, began pushing for laws that would restrict medication-induced abortions to the seven-week limit, arguing that adherence to the published F.D.A. label would protect women’s health.Opponents of the Arizona law said that Mr. Ducey’s decision to sign it, even after the F.D.A. revisions, called into question the motives of the law’s proponents.“What it tells me is that the state of Arizona has no reasonable justification for this law,” said Janet Crepps, a lawyer with the Center for Reproductive Rights, which had fought an earlier, similar Arizona law in court. “They are clearly not acting in the best interests of the health of the women in Arizona.”Before the new legislation signed by Mr. Ducey, six states — Arizona, Arkansas, Ohio, Oklahoma, North Dakota and Texas — had passed laws requiring adherence to the F.D.A. protocol rather than the prevailing medical practice. The earlier Arizona law and those in Arkansas and Oklahoma were blocked by the courts as unconstitutional burdens on abortion rights.The laws in Ohio, North Dakota and Texas require doctors to follow the F.D.A. labeling, and, now that it has been revised, clinics in those states have already begun to offer the procedure an additional three weeks into pregnancy, with the lower dosages, Ms. Crepps said.But Arizona legislators took an unusual step to overcome a technical objection that had doomed the previous law in state court: the specification that doctors must follow F.D.A. labeling as it existed at the end of 2015.Mr. Ducey, in a letter on Thursday notifying the Arizona secretary of state that he had signed the bill, emphasized, “I will always stand with those advocating life.”“I recognize,” he continued, “that given the unexpected actions by the F.D.A., some changes may need to be made in a later bill, and I stand ready to consider those changes when they reach my desk.”The Center for Arizona Policy, a conservative Christian group that promoted the legislation, said it “will be working with legislative leaders to respond appropriately.” It also called the F.D.A.’s decision to update its medical guidelines an “outrageous action.”