https://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/30/washington/30immig.html
Bush Takes On Conservatives Over Immigration - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
May 30, 2007
5051
GLYNCO, Ga., May 29 — President Bush took on parts of his conservative base on Tuesday by accusing opponents of his proposed immigration measure of fear-mongering to defeat its passage in Congress.“If you want to scare the American people, what you say is the bill’s an amnesty bill,” Mr. Bush said at a training center for customs  protection agents and other federal agents here in southeastern Georgia. “That’s empty political rhetoric trying to frighten our citizens.”It was some of Mr. Bush’s toughest language as he started an intensified effort to build support for the compromise bill in the Senate.The measure hews to Mr. Bush’s long-sought goal of a new system with a path to citizenship for 12 million illegal immigrants, a guest-worker program for noncitizens and tighter borders.The compromise, which leaders of both parties struck almost two weeks ago, has met stiff resistance from the left and right of both parties. Liberals tend to oppose the section that would add emphasis on admitting immigrants with education and job skills and less on family reunification. Conservatives tend to dismiss the plan as an amnesty bill.It was the conservative opponents to whom Mr. Bush seemed to speak most forcefully here.“If you want to kill the bill,” he said, “if you don’t want to do what’s right for America, you can pick one little aspect out of it. You can use it to frighten people.”A senior official said later, “In no way was he questioning anyone’s patriotism or desire to do what’s right.”It was a rare case of the president’s taking on the coalition that helped him win and keep the Oval Office, the same conservative radio hosts, bloggers, writers and members of Congress who contributed significantly to the defeat of immigration measures last year.Mr. Bush spoke at a critical time, as lawmakers return home to hear from constituents on a 10-day break.In the late spring recess last year, grass-roots opponents of an immigration bill barraged their representatives with complaints that it would amount to amnesty for lawbreakers, effectively killing its chance for passage.Unlike the circumstances last year, when the White House was willing to put party unity above a controversial presidential initiative in an election year, Mr. Bush is determined to head off a similar result this time.Lawmakers already saw echoes of last year. In California, two conservative talk show hosts urged listeners to bombard the telephone lines of Senator Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat, to register their opposition.In South Carolina, Senator Jim DeMint, a Republican critic of the proposal, said that on a walk in downtown Spartanburg and lunch with more than 100 people at Wade’s restaurant on Tuesday he was hard pressed to find anyone who backed the Senate plan. Concern centered on whether promised enforcement would materialize, Mr. DeMint said.“This is not playing well in South Carolina,” he said.But like the president, business groups, advocates for immigrants, and religious and civil rights organizations urged Congress to keep working to shape a comprehensive immigration bill.In Phoenix, the Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry praised the  bill and said it “provides the proper framework for restructuring the flawed U.S. immigration system.”The chief Republican architect of the bill, Senator Jon Kyl of Arizona, has been criticized by some in his state party who object to offering legal status to illegal immigrants.Glenn E. Hamer, president of the Arizona Chamber of Commerce, praised Mr. Kyl as “demonstrating tremendous leadership on this critical issue.”Mr. Hamer said a spokesman for his organization conveyed this message on Spanish-language radio and television stations: “The Senate bill has all the necessary ingredients. It’s a huge step forward.”An umbrella group, the Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform, reached out this week to members of Congress in 23 states and urged them to act on the question.“Congress has a historic opportunity to fix our immigration system and must not waste it,” said Clarissa Martinez, campaign manager of the coalition, which is holding rallies and vigils, making telephone calls and sending letters and postcards to lawmakers.Ms. Martinez said her group, whose 43 members include the Center for Community Change, the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, the National Council of La Raza and the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, sought substantial changes in the Senate bill to promote the reunification of families and to change the guest worker program so that temporary workers would not have to leave for 12 months between two-year stays.Mr. Bush’s visit to the training center here was primarily meant to demonstrate that he has imposed strong measures to improve border security lapses, a problem that conservatives have loudly complained about.Now, he said, it is time to relieve pressure on the border by creating a “rationalized” system.“People in Congress need the courage to go back to their districts and explain exactly what this bill is all about,” Mr. Bush said. “The fundamental question is will elected officials have the courage necessary to put a comprehensive immigration plan in place that makes it more likely we can enforce our border and, at the same time, uphold the great traditions of immigrant traditions of the United States of America?”The address, given under a blazing sun before several hundred trainees and instructors, was his most direct attempt to brush back critics from both sides who the administration says have distorted the details of the bill.The appearance followed nearly two weeks in which officials have given dozens of interviews to radio hosts, editorial pages and newspapers pushing for the plan.Mr. Bush and his allies have faced an important rhetorical disadvantage, particularly from the right. Conservative opponents can use one word, amnesty, against the bill.Supporters, the president included, are forced into the complex weeds of policy and the nuances of legislative language. Mr. Bush tried to offset the difference by discrediting the amnesty accusation.“Amnesty is forgiveness for being here without any penalties,” Mr. Bush said. “That’s what amnesty is. I oppose it. The authors, many of the authors, of this bill oppose it. This bill is not an amnesty bill.”Under the Senate bill, illegal immigrants who want to become citizens would have to pay back taxes and pay thousands of dollars in fines.