http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/13/business/the-corridor-from-goldman-to-washington-is-well-traveled.html
The Corridor From Goldman To Washington Is Well Traveled - The New York Times
LOWER MANHATTAN DEVELOPMENT CORP,GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP,REAGAN  RONALD WILSON,RUBIN  ROBERT E,CLINTON  BILL,WHITEHEAD  JOHN C,NIXON  RICHARD MILHOUS,BUSH  GEORGE W,PAULSON  HENRY M JR,FRIEDMAN  STEPHEN,CORZINE  JON S,APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES,UNITED STATES ECONOMY,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
Dec. 13, 2002
6845
Stephen Friedman, named yesterday to serve as the White House's chief economic adviser, is only the latest in a long line of well-known alumni of Goldman Sachs who have found life after Wall Street in powerful Washington positions.In the early 1990's, Mr. Friedman served as co-chairman of Goldman Sachs, perhaps the most prestigious investment bank in New York. Now, he is following the same path from 85 Broad Street to Pennsylvania Avenue taken by the other co-chairman at that time, Robert E. Rubin, who left Goldman in 1992 to join the Clinton administration. After taking the same White House position Mr. Friedman is about to assume, Mr. Rubin went on to become Treasury secretary two years later.The Goldman-Washington relationship comes in many forms. Jon Corzine, who succeeded Mr. Rubin and Mr. Friedman, is a Democratic Senator representing New Jersey. Mr. Corzine's co-head at Goldman, Henry M. Paulson Jr., served in the Nixon White House. John C. Whitehead left the top position at Goldman in 1985 to become deputy secretary of state in the Reagan administration before returning to New York, where he is chairman of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.What is it about Goldman that makes it such a popular feeding ground for Democratic and Republican administrations alike?There are several reasons, but many insiders attribute the firm's stature in Washington largely to a Goldman culture that values teamwork over individual self-gratification. In a city where politicians often elbow each other to grab the limelight, Goldman alumni have been trained to stand in the back and let their bosses shine.Senator Corzine, who took the more unconventional route of running for high public office, said: ''At Goldman, you work as a team. It's not about individuals as much as about a group of people being successful. That was part and parcel of the partner's culture.''He continued: ''It's not about ego gratification. It was the hallmark of the Rubin era and it was the way with Whitehead, too. They were willing to work hard to make the president look good and take on tasks that were not necessarily the most glamorous, but were important contributions.''In the Bush administration, Mr. Friedman will see some familiar faces. Josh Bolten, who worked with Mr. Friedman at Goldman, is White House deputy chief of staff and an architect of the Bush economic plan. Reuben Jeffery left Goldman earlier this year to coordinate the Bush administration's efforts to rebuild Lower Manhattan after the Sept. 11 attacks.In the Clinton administration, a Goldman partner, Kenneth D. Brody, was named chairman of the Export-Import Bank, while Gary Gensler, a Goldman partner who retired from the firm at the age of 39, was assistant secretary for financial markets under Mr. Rubin.''You must say that eyebrows go up when you hear of another Goldman person going to such a senior position in Washington,'' said Kenneth Gross, a Washington lawyer who has represented several Goldman partners. ''They have a phenomenal number of people rotating out of the firm at an early age, looking to do something good for their country. You don't see that at other firms.''To be sure, many people have shuttled between Wall Street and Washington. Over the years, executives at every place from Merrill Lynch to Lehman Brothers, from Dillon Read to Credit Suisse First Boston, have taken top positions in the executive branch. Just this week, William H. Donaldson, a founding partner of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, was named to be chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, after having served in the Nixon and Ford administrations.But no firm, in a tradition that dates back to World War II, appears to have been as consistent a source of high-level government talent as Goldman. Moreover, the Goldman-to-government transplants have a good track record. No Goldman reputations have been sullied by the taint of scandal. Nor have they exhibited the tin ear for politics that have tripped up some other Wall Streeters.Mr. Gensler, the former Goldman partner who served in the Clinton administration, recalls that all Goldman employees are issued a plastic wallet card outlining the firm's core values: client first, team second and the individual last. Despite all the public preening, the same values, he insisted, work well in Washington, too.''What Whitehead had, or Bob and Steve, or myself, is years of training in putting the team ahead of the individual,'' Mr. Gensler said.''To rise up at Goldman, individuals generally need to keep their ego in check. If they don't know how, they learn it.''There are practical reasons for this trend, too. Goldman has a lot of extremely wealthy partners who retire in their 40's or 50's -- far younger than at other firms -- and are looking for a second career. At any given time, there are about 200 Goldman partners. The expectation is that most will remain at Goldman for about 10 years and then leave to make way for new partners.With their intelligence, ambition and riches, these financiers can enter public service without crimping their lifestyle. At the low end, Goldman partners walk away with $20 million to $40 million. For people at the level of Mr. Rubin, Mr. Friedman or Senator Corzine, the sum can be hundreds of millions of dollars.''You have a lot of talented guys who are still young and looking for important things to do,'' said Roy Smith, a former Goldman partner and finance professor at New York University. ''They could start another business. But that's not as interesting as getting your arms around something the scale of the national economy.''The road to Washington was first paved by Sidney Weinberg, the father of the modern Goldman firm and a senior partner for 39 years. Mr. Weinberg served as vice chairman of the War Production Board in the Roosevelt and Truman administrations, recruiting business executives to unsalaried positions. Since then, community service -- along with landing big and profitable deals -- is one way for Goldman partners to rise in the organization.''There was always an expectation at Goldman that people would give back to their communities,'' Senator Corzine said. ''There was a general expectation that Goldman people had a responsibility to serve on boards, participate in philanthropy.''In taking government positions, Mr. Weinberg and, later Mr. Whitehead, became role models for others.''When you see other people at Goldman, like Whitehead, doing something different, you say, 'I can do that. I can give back that way,'  '' Mr. Brody, the former Export-Import Bank chairman, said.Indeed, Mr. Gensler said the first person he went to when considering a job in Washington was Mr. Whitehead. ''He sat down with me and said to me, 'You have to do this,' '' Mr. Gensler remembered. ''He said it was the best experience of his life.''