https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/us/politics/trump-clinton-fact-check.html
Classified Emails and the Iraq War: Fact-Checking the Forum - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,MSNBC
Sept. 7, 2016
2823
During an NBC forum on Wednesday night, Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump were questioned on their foreign policy positions and related matters. This is an examination of how truthful some of the responses were.Donald Trump asserted during the forum that “I was totally against the war in Iraq.”But Mr. Trump said in a 2002 interview with the radio host Howard Stern that he favored the invasion.“Are you for invading Iraq?” Mr. Stern asked in the interview, according to audio  discovered by the website BuzzFeed.“Yeah, I guess so,” Mr. Trump replied, adding, “I wish the first time it was done correctly,” in reference to the initial Persian Gulf invasion led by the elder President George Bush.MAGGIE HABERMAN_____At one point, Mrs. Clinton became involved in a pointed discussion with Matt Lauer, the moderator, over her handling of classified emails. Mrs. Clinton defended herself by saying, “None of the emails sent or received by me had such a header” marking them as classified.In saying this, Mrs. Clinton offered a variation on the explanation she has repeatedly given about whether classified information passed through her private email server. Rather than saying she never “sent or received” classified information, Mrs. Clinton was making a distinction about how they were marked classified, with a small notation of a “C” on them, or with a larger, more visible header marking them as such.The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, declared in a July 5 news conference that a “very small number” of Mrs. Clinton’s correspondence bore the markings indicating classified information, contradicting Mrs. Clinton’s earlier claim. But Mr. Comey said in his testimony to the House Oversight Committee that those emails were not properly labeled with the header Mrs. Clinton made reference to on Wednesday.AMY CHOZICK_____Mr. Trump claimed during the forum that he had forced the resignation of the Mexican finance minister.“If you look at what happened, look at the aftermath today, the people who arranged the trip in Mexico have been forced out of government,” he said. “That’s how well we did, and that’s how well we’re going to do have to do.”The resignation of the minister, Luis Videgaray, on Wednesday did seem related to widespread criticism of President Enrique Peña Nieto after Mr. Trump’s visit to Mexico City last week. Mr. Videgaray, a longtime ally of Mr. Peña Nieto, had been a strong proponent of extending an invitation to Mr. Trump, according to Mexican news reports. Although the president did not give a reason for Mr. Videgaray’s departure, analysts speculated that he wanted to deflect the barrage of scorn that has been directed at him since Mr. Trump left Mexico.But the Trump visit might not be the only reason for Mr. Videgaray’s exit from the cabinet. The Mexican economy has slowed and the peso has weakened on his watch. He also came under scrutiny after it was reported that he had bought a home at a golf resort from a government contractor.JOHN HARNEY_____Defending his past praise of Russia’s leader, Mr. Trump at one point asserted that President Vladimir V. Putin had the support of 82 percent of Russians.Mr. Trump appears to be basing that on a July poll by the Levada Center in Russia. Another poll taken by Levada in March put his approval rating at 73 percent, a 10 percentage point drop from a year before. During the annexation of Crimea, his approval ratings hit a high of 89 percent.The Levada Center is Russia’s only independent pollster, and just days ago was declared a “foreign agent” by the government, meaning it will probably have to shut its polling operation.GERRY MULLANY