https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/19/travel/hotel-review-les-sources-de-caudalie-in-bordeaux.html
Hotel Review: Les Sources de Caudalie in Bordeaux - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Les Sources de Caudalie (Martillac  France  Hotel),Martillac (France),Hotels and Travel Lodgings,Bordeaux (France),France
July 16, 2015
9578
From 280 euros, $300 at $1.07 to the euro.For the last 25 years, Les Sources de Caudalie, a five-star family-owned Bordeaux wine country inn with 61 rooms and suites, three notable restaurants and a spa, has offered a discreet paean to the Gallic good life. Since last summer, a 12-suite outbuilding, an airy fitness center with pool, and Rouge, a casual tapas bar with high-end grocery, have added village-like approachability to this bucolic haven of French art de vivre.A 20-minute drive south from Bordeaux, the hotel’s rough-hewed exterior builds on its rural setting, where wine has been made since the 14th century.Each room is different. My basic room, Vintage, evoked the romance of Victorian-era travel. Gleaming wooden floors, an antique Chinese cabinet, sepia-toned prints of clipper ships on the walls and the balcony terrace had a calming effect. The bed, covered with a snowy quilted throw, and a “chair-and-a-half” sofa, in plum-toned linen, both invited napping.The spacious, marble-lined bathroom had a deep tub, two pedestal sinks, monogrammed white towels on a warmer and a selection of Caudalie-brand products, including a fragrant candle burning when I arrived. But the walk-in shower faced the toilet and, without a curtain, water sprayed onto the floor despite the rain shower head.If a glass of wine overlooking vineyards or a wildflower-fringed pond doesn’t calm you, there’s the original Caudalie Vinothérapie spa, with 15 treatment rooms and a host of wine-based options like the Cabernet Crush exfoliation (88 euros). I chose a dip in the outdoor “wine barrel” hot tub before heading to the winery, where hotel guests can reserve a free visit and tasting. My guide, Lise, gave one of the best-run tours I’ve had in a decade of touring such properties. Other activities include cooking and wine-tasting classes (105 euros, with lunch), and there are an indoor and outdoor pool, a tennis court, a three-hole golf course, a fitness trail and bicycles; all free to guests.My continental breakfast (26 euros) arrived in 13 minutes, on a wooden tray. It included artfully mismatched china and weighty silver cutlery on Basque linen, fresh-squeezed orange juice, a pot of hot coffee, croissants with toasted country bread (still warm) in a basket accompanied by Bordier butter and Alain Milliat jam plus a jar of fruit yogurt from Normandy.The opening of Rouge in June 2014 — a casual bar and upscale grocery with dozens of picnic-ready items (like jars of duck foie gras terrine, 16 euros) and an excellent selection of over 70 bottles of regional wines for sale — has complemented the Michelin-starred La Grand’Vigne and La Table du Lavoir, a farm-to-table country bistro (all overseen by the chef Nicolas Masse). At Rouge, each bite of the tapas-style “bar food” was sublime, from the half-puck of creamy goat milk cheese with cherry jam (5 euros) to a slice of artisanal Bordeaux “gratton” pâté spiked with fresh chile peppers (7 euros). Add a glass of wine and you may find that you’re hard pressed to leave the low rattan chairs on the bar’s parasol-shaded stone front porch.Before I departed, a porter pressed a bottle of water “for the road” into my hand, one of many thoughtful staff gestures I experienced there. This bling-free country retreat is in the vanguard of a more approachable style taking hold in the Bordeaux region.