http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/us/politics/jill-stein-green-party-candidate-is-charged-over-role-in-protest.html
Jill Stein, Green Party Candidate, Is Charged Over Role in Pipeline Protest - The New York Times
Stein  Jill,Baraka  Ajamu (1953- ),Presidential Election of 2016,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Pipelines,North Dakota,Green Party of the United States
Sept. 7, 2016
6430
Jill Stein, the Green Party presidential candidate, is facing misdemeanor criminal charges in North Dakota after she spray-painted a bulldozer at a rally protesting the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline, law enforcement officials said on Wednesday.Warrants charging Ms. Stein, 66, and her running mate, Ajamu Baraka, with criminal trespass and criminal mischief were issued after several Caterpillar bulldozers were found to have been defaced at the protest, which was held on Tuesday, according to an affidavit prepared by the Morton County Sheriff’s Department.“Officers were alerted to video that displayed presidential candidate Jill Stein painting the front of one of the Caterpillars with the message ‘I approve this message,’ ” the affidavit said.The warrants are valid only in North Dakota, said Rob Keller, a spokesman for the Sheriff’s Department, adding that Ms. Stein and Mr. Baraka would be arrested only if they returned to the state.Ms. Stein’s campaign confirmed in a statement that she had spray-painted a bulldozer. It did not acknowledge the charges against Mr. Baraka.Meleiza Figueroa, a spokeswoman for the Stein campaign, clarified that Ms. Stein had not planned to spray-paint the equipment going into the event, and that it was something she had been “invited by activists to do when we were on site.”“We did spend quite a bit of time there talking with people,” she added.The pipeline project has met with resistance from many who say that it will destroy sacred Native American sites and potentially threaten the quality of the drinking water at a nearby reservation.About 150 to 200 people protested against the pipeline at the Tuesday rally, which was held near St. Anthony, N.D., Mr. Keller said, with, some of the protesters on horses and some carrying hatchets and knives. Law enforcement officials pulled back from the area “because it was determined that it was unsafe for them to go into that type of situation,” he said.The protest on Tuesday followed another against the pipeline on Saturday at a different site, where video showed that private security personnel threatened protesters with dogs. Mr. Keller said that some protesters had reported being injured by the dogs on Saturday, but that he had not heard of anyone being hospitalized and that no arrests had been made after either protest.The Stein campaign’s statement said that it “supports the courageous Indigenous leaders who are taking a stand to protect future generations from the deadly greed of the fossil fuel industry.”“Donald Trump, on the other hand, will support the pillage of the planet as his energy advisor’s company intends to run oil through the destructive pipeline; and Hillary Clinton’s silence on the Dakota Access Pipeline represents tacit approval of the continued assault on Mother Earth,” it said.Ms. Stein, who was also the Green Party presidential candidate in 2012, has garnered some attention this campaign cycle, as young voters look for alternatives to Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump. But in a CNN/ORC poll released this week, Ms. Stein, with 2 percent of the vote, was trailing well behind both major-party candidates, as well as the Libertarian nominee, Gary Johnson.