https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/15/us/politics/democrats-balk-at-sparing-only-military-spending-from-mandated-cuts.html
Democrats Balk at Sparing Only Military Spending From Mandated Cuts  - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),United States Politics and Government,United States Defense and Military Forces,Boehner  John A,Pelosi  Nancy
May 14, 2015
5780
WASHINGTON —  Key Democrats on Thursday said they opposed Republican efforts to circumvent broad, congressionally mandated cuts in military spending as lawmakers considered the annual Pentagon budget.As the House began voting on amendments to the National Defense Authorization Act, members debated whether to dedicate about $39 billion to go into a fund insulated from the across-the-board spending cuts known as sequestration, which took effect in 2013. That fund, the Overseas Contingency Operations account, is intended to be used for emergency military operations.Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, said Republicans were willing to let nonmilitary spending bear the brunt of the cuts.“Republicans are trying to use war funding as a virtual slush fund for one part of the budget while letting the ax fall on everything else, leaving priorities essential to the strength of our country — the veterans’ budget, infrastructure, education, innovation — grievously underfunded,” she said. “The Republican defense authorization bill is not only disingenuous, it is dangerous.”Republicans responded that the military spending bill — which, at $604.2 billion in the House version, matches President Obama’s budget request, excluding the contingency fund — was not the proper vehicle for debating sequestration. Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio slammed Democratic leaders for backing away from the legislation since it passed out of the House Armed Services Committee in a 60-to-2 vote.“I think it’s downright shameful that they’re even contemplating turning their backs on American troops,” he said.Democrats were quick to note that Mr. Boehner had twice voted against the defense bill, in 2009 and 2010, when his party was in the minority. In the midst of the heated argument was one point of agreement: Sequestration, originally intended to resolve a stalemate over deficit reduction that began in 2011, continues to be an approach that pleases no one.Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, was one of four Democrats Thursday who opposed moving the Senate military spending bill out of committee in a 22-to-4 vote. He offered an amendment that would set aside the contingency funding until changes were made to offer equivalent relief from the budget cuts to military and nonmilitary spending.“People on both sides say with great sincerity we’ve got to get rid of the Budget Control Act because it is hampering our ability to respond to so many different issues,” Mr. Reed said, referring to the sequestration law.The fund was one of several issues Thursday as House members waded into an already reduced docket of 135 amendments to the bill. That debate allowed a fight over immigration to spill out into the open, coming to a culmination when the House voted to strip out a pro-immigration provision from the legislation.The problem for Republicans started in the House Armed Services Committee, when Representative Ruben Gallego, Democrat of Arizona and a Marine Corps veteran, inserted language into the bill that would allow Congress to encourage the Pentagon to consider allowing young undocumented immigrants to serve in the military. Mr. Gallego’s provision passed out of committee, with bipartisan support, 33 to 30.But roughly two dozen House Republicans said that including Mr. Gallego’s provision in the final legislation could threaten the defense bill’s passage. Representative Mo Brooks, Republican of Alabama, offered his own amendment to strip out Mr. Gallego’s language.“This bill, in no manner or shape, is amnesty,” Mr. Gallego said. “I just think it shows really how radical a party the Republican Party has become on immigration.”Republicans, even those who privately supported Mr. Gallego’s amendment, worried that failure to strip it out could harm the military spending bill’s passage. The House is expected to vote Friday on final passage of the bill. Once both chambers have approved their versions, they will need to be reconciled, possibly as soon as this summer.On Thursday, the House also overwhelmingly approved a measure that would give Congress a say in any nuclear agreement between major world powers and Iran. The measure, which passed 400 to 25, followed an equally overwhelming vote in the Senate last week, after intense negotiations between Republicans and Democrats. It was seen as a significant expression by Congress of its desire to regain some authority over issues of war in an era of increasing executive power.After initial resistance, President Obama is expected to sign the bill.