https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/magazine/diddy-doesnt-like-to-get-hot.html
Diddy Doesn’t Like to Get Hot - The New York Times
Rap and Hip-Hop,Rock the Vote,Combs  Sean,Music,Trump  Donald J
July 6, 2017
7284
Last month, you released a documentary called ‘‘Can’t Stop, Won’t Stop’’ about your label, Bad Boy, putting together a reunion tour. A lot of music movies these days have been biopics. Why did you choose to make a documentary instead? I mean, without disrespect, it’s not a documentary. It started out as a documentary, and then it turned into a feature film. You wouldn’t say Madonna’s ‘‘Truth or Dare’’ is a documentary.One moment in the movie I enjoyed was Mase talking about how he’d resisted wearing a shiny suit back in the ’90s. But you told him you had a plan and a vision. Do you think that the shiny suits were important to Bad Boy’s success? Yeah. I think it showed that we were trying to have fun, we were trying to entertain and we were trying to take risks. I love my shiny suit.You have a reputation for hosting incredible parties: the White Party, Daddy’s House. What’s the craziest thing that ever happened at one of your parties? The night we made ‘‘Hypnotize,’’ which I don’t remember a lot of. That was the craziest night. Imagine hearing ‘‘Hypnotize’’ for the first time after, like, two bottles of Cristal. That was so good!A lot of people have made the leap from artist to record executive, but it’s much rarer to do the reverse. You released an album in 1997 after running Bad Boy for a few years. Was that hard? We all have our dreams. I was Biggie’s hype man, and I would perform with him, and he would tell me I need to start making music. Nobody knows this, but Biggie was my manager.Really? We made a deal. I was supposed to be on the ‘‘Player’s Anthem’’ remix in 1995, but then I got nervous. I just wasn’t ready yet. When ‘‘Can’t Nobody Hold Me Down’’ and ‘‘It’s All About the Benjamins’’ came around, I felt ready.In the music video for ‘‘Been Around the World,’’ you played a character based in part on James Bond and in part on the villain from ‘‘Face/Off.’’ That’s not the only rap video from that era to reference that movie. Bro! Bro, bro, bro, bro, hold on. ‘‘Been Around the World’’ is on a whole nother level, baby! Jennifer Lopez was in ‘‘Been Around the World’’! Wyclef Jean! Like, we was jumping out of planes! I was a big fan of Guns N’ Roses, and I found out what their budgets were, and I was like, That’s what’s got to be the budget of my video.I was surprised to see the L.O.X. in the film, because the last I heard from them, they were on Hot 97 saying they were thinking about dropping a refrigerator off a roof onto you because of a contract dispute. I never really had no problem with them. I told them to come to my office, and we straightened it out. Anybody that didn’t want to be on Bad Boy, I released.Have you seen that picture of you online, when you’re at a basketball game and you have all this money out and it looks like you’re confused by the fact that you have a $1 bill? Yeah. I love a $1 bill! I just make weird faces sometimes.Whatever happened to your manservant Fonzworth Bentley? He was never a manservant. He had a very respectable job, and when he held up an umbrella for me, that was his idea, because it’s entertainment. And he knows I don’t like to get hot.You were heavily involved with Rock the Vote in the early aughts. Did you take a step back from activism in the most recent election? Yeah. There was nobody I wanted to support. Nobody understands the state of emergency that’s going on in black America. I just really got turned off about politics.You and President Trump go back a little bit. Have you kept in touch at all? I haven’t spoken to him lately, but I don’t have a problem with Trump. I’m not his enemy or nothing like that, but I’m not expecting Trump to come save my people.I read that he gave you a necktie that you wear sometimes. Do you have to tie it in a special knot? Is it way too long? You know, I don’t really remember the necktie thing.