https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/03/world/middleeast/muhammad-dahlan-palestinian-mahmoud-abbas.html
In Muhammad Dahlan’s Ascent, a Proxy Battle for Legitimacy - The New York Times
Dahlan  Muhammad,Abbas  Mahmoud,Palestinians,Palestinian Authority,West Bank,Gaza Strip,Israel,Fatah  Al
Nov. 2, 2016
7070
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates — Muhammad Dahlan lives 1,300 miles from his Palestinian brethren in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. His spacious home here in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates, features plush sofas, vaulted ceilings and chandeliers. The infinity pool in the back seems to spill into the glistening waterway beyond.It has been five years since Mr. Dahlan, 55, set foot in the territory Palestinians envision as their future state. But this onetime strongman turned millionaire in exile is the focus of intrigue across the region as Arab leaders seek to force changes over the objections of Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority.With each passing day, the Israeli-occupied West Bank feels increasingly at war with itself as Mr. Abbas, 81, with heart trouble and no designated successor, lashes out at anyone perceived to support Mr. Dahlan. Arrests, purges, protests and even gunfire mark a proxy battle pitting an old guard struggling for legitimacy against a new generation of leadership with its own checkered history.“I know that Abu Mazen is scared, and others are scared, that Dahlan comes back,” Mr. Dahlan said, using Mr. Abbas’s nickname and referring to himself in the third person. “Why scared? Because he knows himself what he has done the last 10 years. And because he knows that I know.”Mr. Dahlan himself was accused of oppressive rule when he ran security in Gaza, blamed by some Palestinians when Hamas seized control in 2007, and is viewed by some as a tool of Israel. But he has become a favorite of the so-called Arab Quartet — Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — which is pressuring Mr. Abbas to allow Mr. Dahlan to return home.With dark hair, an easy smile and the trim physique of a man who exercises 90 minutes a day, Mr. Dahlan exuded vigor and charm in a recent interview here. He dismissed his reputation as a ruthless former security chief — “Do I look dangerous?” — but was ruthless in condemning his rival.Unemployment is rampant, Mr. Dahlan said. Schools and hospitals are in desperate shape. Corruption flourishes. Mr. Abbas has failed to end Israel’s occupation, he said, and increasingly runs “a dictatorship” squelching dissent.“These are signals of a regime that’s like the Assad regime or the Saddam regime,” Mr. Dahlan said, referring to Bashar al-Assad of Syria and Saddam Hussein of Iraq. “What Abu Mazen has done is turned all of what remains of the authority into a security machine.”Realizing that Mr. Dahlan’s reputation and Gaza roots may make it difficult for him to win popular support in the West Bank, Arab leaders have been quietly advancing a power-sharing arrangement. Another figure, like Nasser al-Kidwa, a nephew of Yasir Arafat, would be the next president, with Mr. Dahlan and others as part of his leadership team. Another possibility could be Marwan Barghouti, a popular figure who is now in an Israeli prison for murder and someone Mr. Dahlan has said he could support.“Quote me: I don’t want to run in the presidential election,” Mr. Dahlan said, puffing on a small pipe and toggling between English and Arabic during a two-hour conversation. “Is it clear?”But, he added: “I’m ready to be part of any team. I’m ready to be a soldier. I’m ready to be anything. But with vision and plans and real leadership.”Still, that does not mean Mr. Kidwa or a similar figure would accept such a deal. In a separate interview, Mr. Kidwa, who has served in a variety of diplomatic positions, including foreign minister, dismissed Mr. Dahlan. “I think the possibility of him returning is not that high, at least in the current stage,” he said. “When bridges are burned, it’s probably hard to be rebuilt.”For now, there is no presidential election to run in. Even municipal ones have been delayed. Hoping to deflect pressure from the Arab Quartet, Mr. Abbas in recent days visited more supportive regional powers, Turkey and Qatar. He also sat down with Hamas leaders to outmaneuver Mr. Dahlan.“Abbas has such an iron grip that none of his rivals really stands a chance against him right now,” said Grant Rumley, a fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, based in Washington, and co-author of a forthcoming biography of Mr. Abbas. “Here he is in the twilight years of his reign, and he is easily one of the most cunning politicians in the region in terms of cutting the knees out from his opponents.”Mr. Abbas has in recent weeks expelled rivals from his Fatah party and arrested others. On Tuesday, he announced a party conference later this month in a move interpreted as an effort to push out Dahlan allies.The tension has turned violent at times. Last month, unknown gunmen shot up the family house of Fadi Elsalameen, a critic, with 60 bullets. Mr. Elsalameen, who maintains a Facebook page highly critical of Mr. Abbas, said he worked with Mr. Dahlan on an international initiative but did not belong to his coterie. “I’m not part of Dahlan’s work in Palestine at all,” he said. But Mr. Abbas “is calling all opposition ‘Dahlan.’ ”That does not mean Mr. Dahlan can rally Palestinians. Yousef Munayyer, executive director of the U.S. Campaign for Palestinian Rights, said Mr. Dahlan had little street credibility. “This guy is a shady character who foreign governments have looked to to do dirty work quietly, and he has often been willing,” he said.Mr. Dahlan was born in a Gaza refugee camp and joined the violent fight against Israel as a teenager. Arrested 11 times, he learned Hebrew during five years in Israeli prison and later became Palestinian security chief in Gaza.He was at Camp David in 2000 when President Bill Clinton tried to broker peace. In his memoir, Mr. Clinton said Mr. Dahlan was among the “most forward-leaning” Palestinian negotiators.But Martin S. Indyk, the vice president of the Brookings Institution and a diplomat who worked for Mr. Clinton, said Mr. Dahlan played the Americans off Mr. Abbas to marginalize him. “He’s charismatic, smart, manipulative and a clear threat to the old Fatah guard in Ramallah,” he said.In Gaza, Mr. Dahlan presided over a force accused of torturing detainees and establishing what some called “Dahlanistan.” But when Hamas took control, he was overseas, leading some to say he abandoned the fight. He moved to the West Bank and served as Mr. Abbas’s interior minister until 2011, when the two exchanged corruption charges and Mr. Dahlan fled to Abu Dhabi.He became close to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, helping crush his Muslim Brotherhood opposition and conducting diplomatic missions like negotiating a Nile River dam project between Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. He is also said to have a constructive relationship with Israelis, including the hard-line defense minister, Avigdor Lieberman.Israeli officials refuse to discuss Mr. Dahlan, knowing any positive comments would discredit him among Palestinians. But Amos Yadlin, the director of the Institute for National Security Studies and a former Israeli military intelligence chief, said the government was watching Mr. Dahlan’s maneuvering.“As we look into the time after Abu Mazen, he seems like an interesting option,” Mr. Yadlin said, “not so much because of himself but because of the very good connections he has in the Arab world.”Mr. Dahlan said he had never even met Mr. Lieberman and rejected accusations of corruption, though he did not deny using brutal tactics in Gaza.“I wasn’t head of the Red Cross,” he said. “No one was killed, no one lost his life. But of course there were mistakes.”He also admitted to making money. “Two things that I’m not denying,” he said. “That I’m rich, I will not deny it. Ever. And that I’m strong, I will not deny.” He added, “But I work hard to increase my level of life.”He has used some of his money, and funds from his Arab patrons, to finance charitable activities in Gaza and the West Bank. Some Gazans have used the hashtag #Dahlan in Twitter messages seeking help for sick relatives.Married and a father of four, Mr. Dahlan describes himself as a workaholic who never vacations; he showed me the backyard garden, where he says he never spends time except to show it off to guests.“I love achievement,” he said. “It’s my addiction.”