https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/us/politics/congress-shifts-attention-to-americas-role-in-the-world.html
Mass Shootings Stoke Ideological Fighting in Congress - The New York Times
Paris Attacks (November 2015),Refugees and Displaced Persons,San Bernardino  Calif  Shooting (2015),Gun Control,Terrorism,Muslims and Islam,United States Politics and Government,Visas,Colorado Springs (Colo),House of Representatives,Senate,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Law and Legislation,San Bernardino (Calif)
Dec. 3, 2015
5964
WASHINGTON —  The recent mass shootings from California to Paris stoked fierce debate Thursday between Republicans who argued that the killings should intensify the focus on Islamist terrorism and Democrats who again pushed and then failed to pass gun control measures.Violence at home and abroad, rather than uniting the country, is escalating the ideological fights over gun control, immigration, foreign policy and religion. Partisans did not hesitate to try and frame the shooting Wednesday in San Bernardino, Calif., through their ideological lens, even though investigators had not yet reached a conclusion about the motivation of the killers.Republicans seized on the Muslim heritage of the couple identified as the assailants by the police as proof that stopping the flow of refugees and fighting Islamic extremism must be the top priority, just as many Democrats seized on the shooting in a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado last week as proof that the harsh criticism of the group had set off deadly violence.On Thursday, House Republicans pushed ahead with legislation that would impose new visa restrictions on foreign visitors to the United States who have traveled to Syria, Iraq, Iran or Sudan. “This bill will become law,” Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the majority leader, said at a news conference Thursday. A vote on the measure is expected early next week; the Senate has its own version.Mr. McCarthy added that a House terrorism task force would possibly investigate the incident in San Bernardino.For their part, Democrats said they need to draw some lessons from Republican tactics. “We need to learn from the other side’s playbook,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, who with several of his colleagues pressed Thursday for the revival of a bill calling for more rigorous background checks for gun purchasers and to deny firearms and explosives licenses to suspected terrorists. “They have been much more adept than we have on organizing on a raft of issues,” he said. “I think we ought to be prepared to do anything within our rights.”“Curious to hear the Democrat talking points for today after this act of terrorism,” Representative Jeff Duncan, Republican of South Carolina, said in a post on Twitter. “Will they say ‘Workplace violence.’ Blame 2nd Amendment?”The episodes have touched off a debate even over the appropriateness of offering prayers for victims of shootings, which some Democrats argued is a way of avoiding talking about gun control. “Members don’t get elected to send out sympathy tweets,” said Senator Chris Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut.A measure to prevent people on a terrorist watch list from getting guns failed to get support on the Senate floor Thursday, as did a Republican amendment that would have guaranteed those on the watch list due process from federal agencies before being denied the right to buy a gun. A bill that has previously failed in the Senate — a bipartisan measure to enhance background checks — also went nowhere but attracted a short and contentious floor debate.The events in California, coming on the heels of the escalation of military action in Syria, have added to a rising legislative movement on Capitol Hill around national security issues, pushing aside domestic issues that dominated for years.Lawmakers are considering measures to address the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, domestic surveillance and the power of Congress to authorize war.“The issues drive what we do here,” said Senator Johnny Isakson, Republican of Georgia. “Americans are legitimately afraid for their own security and the security of the United States. Most people in Congress feel we need a coordinated plan.”The politics of national security remain difficult. The shadow of the Iraq war hangs over bipartisan efforts to authorize the use of military force against the Islamic State. Since World War II, such authorizations have largely been pursued in concert with the White House, but Republican antipathy toward President Obama has made many congressional efforts confrontational.Republicans are working to balance their hawkish policy inclinations with their distrust of Mr. Obama, while Democrats are weighing their desire to support the president against a liberal base and nervous voters hostile toward more military conflict.“Politics no longer stop at the water’s edge,” said Representative Adam Schiff of California, the top Democrat on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and a member of the Benghazi Select Committee. “Now they just begin with a new ferocity.”Not all divisions are cleanly partisan. Military hawks in both parties are squaring off against privacy advocates, both Republican and Democratic.“There has been much more conflict between Congress and the president historically than working in concert,” said Donald A. Ritchie, the historian emeritus of the Senate, citing the fight over treaties like John Jay’s Treaty of the late 1700s, which was designed to settle outstanding issues between America and Britain.“During the 1930s the isolationists and interventionists fought over Europe, and Congress gave President Roosevelt a very hard time,” Mr. Ritchie said, “although that was snuffed out by the attack on Pearl Harbor.”That attack established a pattern of Congress supporting the president when it came to foreign policy with national security implications, he said, that lasted until the Vietnam War.Congress’s engagement with the brutal civil war in Syria — both against the Islamic State and the government of President Bashar al-Assad — has been episodic at best. When pressed to take actual votes, members in both parties have resisted.In the fall of 2013, Mr. Obama sought congressional authorization to launch airstrikes against the Assad government to punish it for using chemical weapons against civilians. Opposition was bipartisan, and the resolution was pulled before it could be defeated.A year later, after the Islamic State’s high-profile beheadings of American hostages, lawmakers clamored for a military response but again demurred on accepting a role.Proponents of a formal authorization of military force got nowhere because Republicans said Mr. Obama’s version of a force resolution was too constrained, and that they could not trust him with a broader declaration of war.Many Democrats, still smarting from votes to authorize the war in Iraq over a decade ago, feared any authorization would escalate into another war in the Middle East.The result was a limited measure to train and arm Syrian rebels, tucked into a bill to keep the government funded.The focus on national security is likely to continue on Capitol Hill throughout next year, and spill into the presidential campaign.“External events have precipitated this focus on national security,” said Robert Litwak, the director of International Security Studies at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. “But underlying these events are big questions about America’s role in the world and what is within our ability to control.”