https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/nyregion/de-blasio-says-stick-to-subway-but-dont-blame-him-if-you-run-late.html
De Blasio Says Stick to Subway (but Don’t Blame Him if You Run Late) - The New York Times
Subways,Delays (Transportation),Cuomo  Andrew M,de Blasio  Bill,New York City
May 17, 2017
7702
Mayor Bill de Blasio has a message for New Yorkers fed up with subway delays, crowded train cars and the general sense that the aging system is edging closer to meltdown.It could be worse. You could be driving.“Even though there are problems in the subway system, I think they pale in comparison to the problems on our roads,” Mr. de Blasio said.Mr. de Blasio repeatedly said during a news conference on Wednesday that he was not responsible for subway problems; that was Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s headache. However, Mr. de Blasio reserved his harshest comments for the state of the city’s roadways.“Avoid driving whenever humanly possible,” he said. “For our subways — look, there’s work that has to be done. But they’re still a hell of a lot more reliable than driving on the streets.”Critics of the mayor have been quick to point out one reason that he may be more attuned to the conditions aboveground than below: He is not known as a regular straphanger.The mayor has said that his regular morning commute from Gracie Mansion to the Y.M.C.A. in the Park Slope area of Brooklyn and then to City Hall is too complicated for mass transit, even after the opening of the Second Avenue subway, and he prefers being driven.But he has said he rides the subway when it makes sense.“I like taking the subway,” he said in January. “I have throughout my life, so I’ll keep doing that.”That Mr. De Blasio is now being asked regularly about the subways is a sign of the increasingly dire situation.The Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s statistics show delays have skyrocketed. In January, there were more than 60,000 weekday subway delays, with 24,595 late trains — or about 40 percent of all delays — attributed to overcrowding.Another top cause of delays was the subway’s antiquated signal system, some of which dates to the 1930s. There were also 2,644 delays because of faulty car equipment, and 2,584 because of sick passengers.In response to the record number of delays, Mr. Cuomo directed the authority to come up with an emergency plan to alleviate the burden on riders, which the authority announced on Monday.Asked about the plan, Mr. de Blasio said it was “a step in the right direction.”“I haven’t seen the details,” he said.The plan aims to make immediate fixes to improve service in the short term, including adding rapid response teams to repair tracks and improving signage to direct riders to less crowded parts of the stations.On Wednesday, the mayor was quick to lay the continuing problems squarely at Mr. Cuomo’s feet.“I think the M.T.A. needs to recognize that they’ve got to do something quick here,” he said. “Now I will do my disclaimer upfront: The M.T.A. is run by the State of New York and the governor.”He added: “If you take responsibility, it’s yours. I’m responsible for the schools. I’m responsible for policing. I’m responsible for a lot of things. Hold me accountable. But these M.T.A. issues — it’s not like they don’t have money. They are making decisions with their money.”Albany disagreed.Aides to Mr. Cuomo noted that when Michael R. Bloomberg was mayor, he took an active role in setting the agenda of the authority, even using $2.4 billion in city funds to expand service on the 7 line to the Far West Side of Manhattan.Mr. Cuomo’s aides also took issue with the mayor’s characterization that he ran the schools, for which the city must seek funding each year in Albany.Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo have quarreled about the authority’s budget and priorities before, most notably in 2015 when they fought over the agency’s five-year capital improvement plan.Mr. Cuomo pledged $8 billion for the $29.5 billion plan and urged Mr. de Blasio to increase the city’s contribution. Mr. de Blasio eventually agreed to pay $2.5 billion for the plan.In a statement, the transportation authority said the mayor could be doing more to help.“The mayor made it clear just how big of a priority the M.T.A. is to him when he wouldn’t even contribute his fair share to the capital plan,” the spokeswoman Beth DeFalco said.The capital plan addresses many long-term priorities, including upgrading subway signals and building the next phase of the Second Avenue subway.