http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/30/business/media/intrusion-on-sony-unit-prompts-a-shutdown-of-messaging-systems.html
Intrusion on Sony Unit Prompts a Shutdown of Messaging Systems - The New York Times
Sony Pictures Entertainment,Cyberattacks and Hackers,North Korea,Movies,Rogen  Seth,Franco  James,United States,The Interview (Movie),Interview  The (Movie)
Nov. 29, 2014
9920
LOS ANGELES —  While rivals focused on the holiday box office, Sony Pictures Entertainment spent Thanksgiving weekend coping with the continuing effects of a cyberattack — and investigating what provoked the onslaught, including whether there were any ties to a coming comedy that has elicited the ire of North Korea.On Monday, a hacker group that self-identified on the company’s computer screens as “#GOP,” for “The Guardians of Peace,” hijacked accounts, posted unflattering images of Sony’s top two executives and claimed to have taken files with confidential information about the studio and celebrities who work with it.The intrusion prompted Sony’s motion picture group to immediately shut down certain computer systems, leaving the group without email or voice mail, functions that were still offline as of Saturday, according to people with knowledge of the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Still, Sony’s information technology experts told participants in a Saturday in-house conference call that they were making inroads and that systems were likely to be back online by Monday.A studio spokeswoman, reached by text message, declined to comment.Several Sony executives reached on Saturday were similarly tight-lipped, though one said the studio was exploring multiple causes and had no direct information to support a theory that surfaced on the technology news site ReCode on Friday: that the attack may have been retribution by North Korea for Sony’s planned Christmas release of “The Interview,” an R-rated comedy about two American journalists who are recruited by the C.I.A. to kill the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.Representatives for the Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Department of Homeland Security, all of which sometimes investigate digital crime, declined to comment.One person with knowledge of the situation said a Hollywood executive from a company other than Sony had contacted Homeland Security to suggest that the attack might be related to a piracy investigation involving a movie that was not even made by Sony. But the department was not mobilized as a result of the query.The attack apparently did not use sophisticated techniques that might be expected from a hostile government. Rather, it employed a common form of so-called ransomware,  according to a security researcher with knowledge of the breach, who did not have permission to speak publicly about the findings.In “The Interview,” a blundering television host played by James Franco and his equally idiotic producer (Seth Rogen) are recruited to assassinate Mr. Kim. This year, apparently after seeing a trailer, a spokesman for North Korea’s Foreign Ministry called the film “the most undisguised terrorism and a war action.”He added: “If the U.S. administration connives at and patronizes the screening of the film, it will invite a strong and merciless countermeasure.”Originally scheduled for release in October, the film has undergone changes in postproduction that some Hollywood trade publications have interpreted as caution in response to North Korea’s statements. Sony executives have privately said the edits were entirely intended to make the movie funnier.On Friday, a North Korean government website, Uriminzokkiri, called “The Interview” an “evil act of provocation.”Mr. Kim has lately inspired an increasing number of professional and amateur entertainers, to the ire of North Korean authorities. In July, an online video that affixed Mr. Kim’s head to dancing bodies went viral in China, prompting takedown attempts by North Korean officials, according to South Korean media outlets.In September, North Korea took issue with a British television drama, “Opposite Number,” that cast a negative light on the country’s nuclear program. Officials called the program “malignantly slandering” and “despicable burlesque” orchestrated with the “tacit connivance” of the British government.Mr. Rogen, who helped direct “The Interview” and has a writing credit on its script, has seized the country’s displeasure as a publicity tool. “People don’t usually wanna kill me for one of my movies until after they’ve paid 12 bucks for it,” he wrote on Twitter, in a message that was reposted by 7,600 people.But Sony executives have pointedly sidestepped any attempt to connect the film with the intrusion.Hackers have repeatedly targeted Sony over the years, although the major attacks, until now, have been aimed at the technology and entertainment conglomerate’s PlayStation video game network. In 2011, hackers stole data belonging to 77 million PlayStation users; in August, a group calling itself the Lizard Squad crashed the network with a more modest “denial of service” attack.The disruption came at a relatively quiet time for Sony. The studio’s last movie, “Fury,” was released on Oct. 17, and its next film, a remake of “Annie,” does not arrive until Dec. 19.Sony also operates a substantial television business from its lot in Culver City, Calif. Its programs include chestnuts like “Jeopardy” and “Wheel of Fortune,” along with “The Goldbergs,” a comedy on ABC, and “The Blacklist,” the hit NBC drama. The attack did not affect Sony’s music divisions.Many Sony employees simply shifted to personal email accounts or began relying on smartphones. On Saturday morning, for instance, a publicist distributed the studio’s standard weekend box office report to news outlets using a Gmail address.“As always, please call with questions,” the note concluded.