https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/arts/a-washington-hollywood-schmooze-a-thon-and-how-it-grew.html
A Washington-Hollywood Schmooze-a-Thon, and How It Grew - The New York Times
News and News Media,United States Politics and Government,White House Correspondents Assn,Celebrities
Jan. 30, 2017
7850
The annual dinner hosted by the White House Correspondents’ Association is often referred to as a “nerd prom,” but it’s really a way for the Washington complex of journalists and power brokers to coat themselves with gaudiness and glamour by mingling for a night with Hollywood celebrities.That coziness has sometimes been criticized, but this year’s dinner, scheduled for April 29, may be even more controversial, if the Trump administration continues to throw grenades — false facts, threats, insults — in the news media’s direction. Samantha Bee’s decision to counterprogram on that night won’t make it any easier. (The New York Times does not attend the event.)How did this bizarre event — mixing the likes last year of Joseph R. Biden Jr., Aretha Franklin and Damian Lewis — ever come to be? The answer is that it seems, like the universe, to be ever expanding. Here, a history.On May 7, 1921, 50 men congregated at the Arlington Hotel in Washington for the first White House Correspondents’ Dinner. Not in attendance: the new president, Warren G. Harding, a former newspaper publisher. But some of his top aides were, including the guest of honor that night, George B. Christian, Mr. Harding’s secretary and close friend.In 1924, the dinner had landed its first sitting president, Calvin Coolidge. Every president has since appeared at least once.Helen Thomas, the pioneering reporter, had forced more than a few doors open on her way to covering the Kennedy White House. But in 1962, the correspondents’ dinner was closed to women. She pressured President Kennedy, who then threatened to boycott the dinner. She got an invite.The ban was lifted.Over the decades, the guest list grew. In 1944, Bob Hope became one of the first performers, telling jokes at the Statler Hotel. Afterward, Richard Wilson, a syndicated columnist, wrote that Mr. Hope would be “another Will Rogers.”In 1953, Mr. Hope said he had met President Dwight D. Eisenhower a decade earlier — “when he was a four-star general and had some power.” (Mr. Eisenhower clapped.) Other performers over the years have included Frank Sinatra, Milton Berle and Jimmy Durante.In 1987, the party that Washington has come to know began to take shape. A writer for The Baltimore Sun, Michael Kelly, invited Fawn Hall, the secretary for Oliver North, the former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel, to the dinner. Ms. Hall, considered glamorous, and Mr. North were integral figures in the Iran-contra affair.This helped spur the tradition of news organizations’ inviting celebrities to the dinner as “dates,” for lack of a better term. And the appeal for A-listers only increased when Vanity Fair, in the early ’90s, started hosting an annual after-party geared toward celebrities. In 1993, C-Span started televising the dinners.Barbra Streisand is the rare star to have witnessed the evolution of the dinner over 50 years. In 1963, she performed at the dinner for Kennedy. She returned 30 years later in 1993 and was spotted discussing gays in the military with the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of staff at the time, Colin L. Powell, according to a report in The Washington Post, at a time when Hollywood stars weren’t the norm. In 2013, Ms. Streisand attended the gala alongside Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City. By then, top-flight celebrities, including Sofia Vergara and Steven Spielberg, filled the audience.Starting in the ’80s, the headliners would mostly be comedians. Al Franken — a former writer and cast member for “Saturday Night Live,” and today a Democratic United States senator for Minnesota — performed in 1994 and 1996. He is the only keynote speaker to eventually have been elected to Congress. Ray Romano, Jon Stewart, Seth Meyers and Joel McHale have all led the festivities.And sometimes the comedians have caused controversy. In 2006, Stephen Colbert, who was hosting the satirical “The Colbert Report” on Comedy Central, offered biting criticism in his keynote speech of President George W. Bush. Mr. Colbert did his mock-conservative shtick from “The Colbert Report” and teased Mr. Bush, saying, “Guys like us, we’re not some brainiacs on the nerd patrol.” Sitting mere feet away, the president did not seem amused. Mr. Colbert also ribbed the news media: “Over the last five years, you people were so good over tax cuts, W.M.D. intelligence, the effect of global warming. We Americans didn’t want to know, and you had the courtesy not to try to find out.”At last year’s dinner, Larry Wilmore, an African American comedian, invoked a racial epithet to refer to President Obama — part of a heartfelt thank-you to the first black president.In 2011, President Trump was the focus of cutting jokes by President Obama and the host for the evening, Mr. Meyers. Mr. Trump was publicly teasing a run for president — and Mr. Obama mocked his qualifications, his public questioning of Mr. Obama’s birth certificate and his television show, “The Celebrity Apprentice.”Mr. Meyers delivered a set equally as piercing. Mr. Trump barely smiled, and at least outwardly, did not seem to appreciate being the butt of the jokes, although he told The New York Times last year, “I loved that dinner.”There have been suggestions that the dinner may have spurred Mr. Trump to put together a serious campaign for president in 2016. Mr. Trump has denied this.