http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/06/learning/civil-conversation-challenge-for-teenagers-issue-4-race-gender-and-identity.html
Civil Conversation Challenge for Teenagers | Issue 4: Race, Gender and Identity - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Race and Ethnicity,Women's Rights,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Democratic Party,Republican Party
Oct. 6, 2016
6673
As part of our Civil Conversation Challenge, we have opened student forums on some of the biggest issues dividing Americans this campaign season.Below, a place to have a conversation about race, gender and identity, but you can also find forums on immigration, guns, climate change, and an open forum where you can post about the issue of your choice.We invite teenagers from around the country and the world to practice the skills of respectful, informed conversation across ideological and demographic divides not only by posting their own thoughts on these issues, but also by reading the responses of others and replying to them.As we moderate, we’ll be looking for exchanges between students that...1. Follow Times commenting standards and are civil and respectful.2. Advance the conversation about an issue, whether by introducing a new idea or perspective, asking useful questions, making connections to other issues, finding themes or commonalities among comments, presenting new evidence or anything else.3. Are grounded in fact and buttressed by sources. This is not to say that everything you post must be footnoted sentence by sentence, but commenters should provide reliable sources for any controversial claims.4. Show evidence of “listening” and trying to understand other points of view.Learn more about the Challenge, which continues through Nov. 7, and find a lesson plan to help._________Some background on the issues:As a recent Op-Ed points out, “People of color have grown to 38 percent of the population today from 12 percent in 1966, and that metamorphosis paved the path to electing the first African-American president.” But, as this article reports, racial tensions are clearly rising.A June survey by the Pew Research Center found that only 46 percent of whites surveyed thought that race relations were generally good, a sharp drop from the 66 percent who held that opinion in June 2009, shortly after Mr. Obama took office. For blacks, the corresponding decline — to 34 percent last month from 59 percent in 2009 — was even steeper.Police accountability and racial bias have been at the center of the civic debate since August 2014, when a black teenager was killed by a white officer in Ferguson, Mo. In July, the country saw the killings of two black men by Louisiana and Minnesota police officers and the retaliatory murders of five Dallas officers in the space of three days. An article that week noted, “police officers and sociologists alike say that racial tension is approaching a point last seen during the street riots that swept urban American in the late 1960s.” At the same time, after Hillary Clinton’s historic nomination, another poll found that, while women think more progress has been made toward ending sexism than racism in society, there are still challenges. Women think sexual harassment is a significant issue in the workplace, and feel the greatest problem facing American women is inequality in pay and career opportunities. And on issues of gender and sexuality, the two party positions are starkly at odds, as clashes over transgender bathrooms and gay rights have shown.Both presidential candidates, The Times writes, are increasingly staking their fortunes on these cultural issues that are “convulsing the nation.” The article, written just before the first debate, notes that “Even in other times of social unrest, few if any presidential candidates have constructed their political arguments around themes of race, gender and cultural diversity as much as Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump.”The article continues:What do you think? Why are issues of race, gender, sexuality and identity — issues that are roiling high school and college campuses as well as the nation at large — so central to this election? What, as a nation, can or should we do to heal those divides?We hope you’ll use this forum as a place to have a respectful discussion about these sensitive issues, and raise related topics and questions beyond the scope of this brief overview._________Where to learn more:• Hillary Clinton’s position on racial justice, on women’s rights and opportunities and on L.G.B.T. rights and equality• The Republican Party platform on “Great American Families, Education, Health Care and Criminal Justice”• ProCon’s 2016 issues page, which puts the candidates’ positions side by side.• A Times article from September, “First Clinton-Trump Debate Is Framed by Rifts Over Race and Gender.”• A 2015 Times Magazine piece, “The Year We Obsessed Over Identity”• Our lesson plan, “Equality Under the Law? Investigating Race and the Justice System”• A winner of our 2016 Summer Reading Contest on “Gender, Race and Shifting Perceptions of Identity”• A collection from our 2016 Student Council: “Gender Studies | 25 Teenagers Recommend Readings for Women’s History Month”_________Possible questions to address:— Why do these topics interest you? How have your experiences shaped your opinions? What questions or concerns do the issues raise for you?— Over all, as a society, do you think we talk about issues of race, gender, identity and diversity enough? Or, do you think we talk about them too much, and that these kinds of “identity politics” breed “suspicion, cynicism and distrust”?—Mrs. Clinton has cast herself as a champion of diversity and inclusion, The Times writes. She spoke out quickly after the fatal police shooting of a black man in Tulsa, Okla., to denounce “systemic racism” against blacks. And after the bombings in New York and New Jersey, she rushed to make the case that Mr. Trump had endangered the country with his oratorical attacks on Muslims. She also gave a speech criticizing Mr. Trump for having shown disrespect to people with disabilities. Her commercial about Mr. Trump and women ends with a powerful question: “Is this the president we want for our daughters?” And at the first debate, in response to a question about race and policing, she said, “I think implicit bias is a problem for everyone, not just police. I think, unfortunately, too many of us in our great country jump to conclusions about each other.”Do you believe, like Mrs. Clinton, that there is systemic racism and sexism that foster inequality? Do you believe that implicit bias is a problem for us all? If so, where and how do you see these issues in our world? What can we do about them?— In contrast to Mrs. Clinton, as this July article sums up, “Defying modern conventions of political civility and language, Mr. Trump has breached the boundaries that have long constrained Americans’ public discussion of race. Mr. Trump has attacked Mexicans as criminals. He has called for a ban on Muslim immigrants. He has wondered aloud why the United States is not ‘letting people in from Europe.’ ” The article goes on to note that “In a country where the wealthiest and most influential citizens are still mostly white, Mr. Trump is voicing the bewilderment and anger of whites who do not feel at all powerful or privileged.”Do you agree with Mr. Trump that we are too “politically correct” and should all be freer to say what we feel? Or, do you think Mr. Trump has “opened the door to assertions of white identity and resentment” that are “mainstreaming hate” in dangerous ways?— Do you agree that, as many have speculated, our nation’s demographics help explain why Mr. Trump appeals to many white, working-class male voters? That is, as an article from May on “the anxiety of American white males” put its, “Mrs. Clinton wins majorities of groups that have seen their freedoms and share of the nation’s resources grow in recent decades — women, African-Americans, Hispanics. Mr. Trump wins majorities of groups that have experienced a relative decline — whites and men.” The article posits that there is “a feeling among many white men of being shoved aside: A sense that society is growing more feminine, increasing numbers of people speak a different language, immigrants are pouring in unchecked, and the government is more concerned about other demographic groups.” Do you think this is true?— Our national debate over race and policing has come up over and over this election season, and this summer the Black Lives Matter movement began spurring fierce opposition under banners like All Lives Matter, White Lives Matter and Blue Lives Matter. In response to a question about the issue during the vice-presidential debate, Gov. Mike Pence, the Republican running mate, said “I just think what we ought to do is we ought to stop seizing on these moments of tragedy... Enough of this seeking every opportunity to demean law enforcement broadly by making the accusation of implicit bias every time tragedy occurs.” Do you think that is what the Obama administration and others on the left are doing? The Republican Party platform on the issue states:— In contrast, the Democratic Party’s platform states, “We will push for a societal transformation to make it clear that black lives matter and that there is no place for racism in our country.” It also says:— Where do you stand on the role of police in our society? On racial profiling? The Black Lives Matter movement?— On gender and sexuality issues, the two parties also frame the issues differently. The Democratic platform states:It continues:— The Republican party, by contrast, states that “Our laws and our government’s regulations should recognize marriage as the union of one man and one woman and actively promote married family life as the basis of a stable and prosperous society.” It continues:— What do you think? Where do you stand on the role of women in the world and the family? On same-sex marriage and other gay rights issues? On transgender bathrooms?— What more would you like to say? What issues did we miss? Start a conversation, or join one, by posting a comment.Please Note: Students 13 and older are invited to comment. We ask that adults respect the intent of the Student Opinion question and refrain from posting here. There are many other places on NYTimes.com for adults to post, while this is the only place that explicitly invites the voices of young people.