http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/22/us/justices-appear-divided-on-challenge-to-public-unions.html
Justices Appear Divided on a Sweeping Challenge to Public Workers’ Unions - The New York Times
Organized Labor,Government Employees,Supreme Court (US),Illinois,National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation
Jan. 21, 2014
5700
WASHINGTON —  A broad challenge to public sector unions was met with a mixed response on Tuesday at the Supreme Court.The case, brought by Illinois workers who provide home health care to Medicaid recipients, could have been argued on narrow grounds. But the workers’ lawyer decided to go big.The lawyer, William L. Messenger of the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation, asked the Supreme Court to overrule a foundational 1977 decision and to declare that government workers may not be forced to pay dues to unions to represent them in collective bargaining negotiations if they disagree with the positions the unions take.Justice Elena Kagan said that was quite a request.“It is a radical argument,” she said of Mr. Messenger’s position. “It would radically restructure the way workplaces across this country are run.”The question of how to treat public sector unions is one for lawmakers, she added, not judges.“It raises considerable heat and passion and tension, as we recently saw in Wisconsin,” Justice Kagan said. “But, you know, these are public policy choices that states make.”Other justices seemed receptive to Mr. Messenger’s argument, saying that the First Amendment limits what government workers may be forced to do to support bargaining positions they differ with.“Your position,” Justice Anthony M. Kennedy told Paul M. Smith, the lawyer for the health care workers’ union, “is that the public employees must surrender a substantial amount of First Amendment rights to work for the government.”In 1977, in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, the Supreme Court said that teachers who declined to join a union could nevertheless be required to help pay for the union’s collective bargaining efforts to prevent freeloading and ensure “labor peace.”But workers may not be forced to help pay for a union’s purely political activities, the court said.On Tuesday, Justice Stephen G. Breyer said there was no good reason to overturn the balance struck in 1977. He said he feared that “the courts of the United States are going to fashion, using the First Amendment as their weapon, a new special labor law for government employees.”The justices’ questions generally hewed to their broader ideological views, with the court’s more liberal members supporting the union and its more conservative ones receptive to the dissenting workers’ First Amendment argument.The exception was Justice Antonin Scalia, who asked a series of questions sympathetic to the union. He was dismissive of the argument that compelled dues frustrate workers’ ability to petition the government and was open to the possibility that eliminating the requirement to pay dues could destroy public sector unions as a practical matter.“What our cases say,” Justice Scalia said, is “you can be compelled not to be a free rider, to pay for those items of bargaining that benefit you as well as everybody else.”Justice Kennedy, on the other hand, pressed hard on the harm that may be done to workers’ First Amendment rights in the collective bargaining process. Imagine, he said, workers who are committed to shrinking the size of the government while their unions push to expand the work force.Mr. Smith responded that the Abood decision had resolved where to draw the line, but Justice Kennedy said the legitimacy of that decision was now in question.“I’m talking about whether or not a union can take money from an employee who objects to the union’s position on fundamental political grounds,” Justice Kennedy said.That argument, Mr. Smith suggested, would lead to the destruction of public sector unions. “Any outcome of a negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement involving public employees will involve the expenditure of public money in a variety of ways,” he said.Solicitor General Donald B. Verrilli Jr., arguing on behalf of the federal government in support of the union and Illinois, said government workers have diminished First Amendment rights “when the government can show that the obligation it is imposing is in furtherance of the government’s legitimate interests as manager of its own operations.”Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. expressed skepticism about the trustworthiness of the government in such matters, noting that Illinois’s disgraced former governor, Rod R. Blagojevich, had played a role in helping the union.“I thought the situation was that Governor Blagojevich got a huge campaign contribution from the union and virtually as soon as he got into office he took out his pen and signed an executive order that had the effect of putting, what was it, $3.6 million into the union coffers,” Justice Alito said.There was almost no discussion of a narrower way to rule in the case, Harris v. Quinn, No. 11-681. The workers may be said to be jointly employed by the Medicaid recipients who hired them and by the state, which paid for their work. That could be enough to distinguish them from public school teachers, firefighters and the like.