https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/media/trumps-urging-that-comey-jail-reporters-denounced-as-an-act-of-intimidation.html
Trump’s Urging That Comey Jail Reporters Denounced as an ‘Act of Intimidation’ - The New York Times
Classified Information and State Secrets,News Sources  Confidential Status of,News and News Media,Freedom of Speech and Expression,Washington Post,New York Times,Trump  Donald J
May 17, 2017
8016
During a private meeting in February with the former F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, President Trump floated a proposal that, even by the standards of a leader who routinely advertises his disdain for the news media, brought editors and reporters up short.You should consider, Mr. Trump told Mr. Comey, jailing journalists who publish classified information.Presidents are rarely afraid to wrangle and bully reporters, and Mr. Trump’s predecessor, President Barack Obama, was pilloried by news organizations for aggressively prosecuting leakers. But Mr. Trump’s suggestion, first reported by The New York Times, breached new territory for political reporters who already consider their profession under siege.“Suggesting that the government should prosecute journalists for the publication of classified information is very menacing, and I think that’s exactly what they intend,” said Martin Baron, The Washington Post’s executive editor. “It’s an act of intimidation.”The White House did not respond on Wednesday when asked if Mr. Trump supported imprisoning reporters who publish stories based on leaked material. The president’s press secretary, Sean Spicer, told reporters on Air Force One that Mr. Trump did not believe the Times article “was an accurate representation of that meeting.”Mr. Trump often derides the coverage of him and his administration, even as he submits to interviews with a variety of journalists, including from news organizations that he attacks. He told graduates at the Coast Guard Academy on Wednesday that “no politician in history has been treated worse or more unfairly” by the media.But while Mr. Trump’s proposal to Mr. Comey could be construed as a private fit of pique, journalists and press freedom groups said Wednesday that they were alarmed by the possibility that he considered, even casually, enlisting the Justice Department to quash reporting he disliked.“We’ve been saying there’s a big gap between the president’s rhetoric and actions he can take to undermine the work of the media,” said Joel Simon, executive director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, which often works to aid reporters in countries with autocratic regimes. “That gap has now been closed.”At the Feb. 14 meeting, Mr. Trump was fixated on a series of damaging leaks about his administration, according to one of Mr. Comey’s associates, who conveyed to The Times the contents of a memo Mr. Comey wrote after the meeting. The topic led Mr. Trump to suggest that Mr. Comey consider putting reporters in prison for disseminating classified information, the associate said.Among right-wing media outlets, Mr. Trump’s frustration with leaks has been embraced as an overdue condemnation of a left-leaning news media intent on sabotaging the president. This week, media organizations like Breitbart News and Fox News responded to damaging stories about the president by attacking The Times and The Post for relying on anonymous leakers.Previous presidents, of both political parties, have pursued suspects in leaks of sensitive government information, often invoking the Espionage Age of 1917, which made it a crime to disclose to unauthorized persons classified information that could adversely affect national security.A determination to stop leaks can often put federal officials at odds with issues of press freedom and the First Amendment. The Obama administration faced significant opposition from reporters, especially after a Fox News journalist, James Rosen, was ensnared in a Justice Department investigation seeking access to his email account.“Jailing reporters would put us on par with nations like Turkey and China,” said Robert J. Byers, executive editor of The Charleston Gazette-Mail in West Virginia, who echoed other journalists’ alarm at the president’s remarks.Open hostility toward the news media is more common in other countries, and despite the recent challenges to American reporters, journalists elsewhere can face far tougher conditions that sometimes spill into violence.In Mexico since 2000, at least 104 journalists have been murdered and 25 others have disappeared, according to the press freedom organization Article 19; this week, gunmen killed a prominent Mexican journalist who covered drug cartels.Turkey, whose president visited the White House this week, has cracked down on journalists since a failed coup attempt in July, throwing scores in jail in an aggressive effort to curb free speech. In Russia, journalists have been threatened, maimed, imprisoned and killed.Lawyers and journalism specialists have generally argued that the Espionage Act applies to leakers, not to publishers or journalists. In theory, though, the act is written broadly enough that it could conceivably be applied to the news media.The American government has never charged a reporter under the act. But previous administrations have flirted with the idea.After The Times exposed the National Security Agency’s warrantless surveillance program during President George W. Bush’s administration, Alberto Gonzales, the attorney general at the time, publicly raised the possibility of prosecution. Though the Justice Department launched an aggressive investigation into that leak, no one was ever charged.That increased focus on leaks carried over into the Obama administration, which brought about nine cases against leakers, depending on how they are counted — about twice as many as all previous administrations combined. The administration never charged journalists, but its aggressive investigative tactics in several cases attracted a backlash.In 2013, the Justice Department identified Mr. Rosen, the Fox News reporter, “as an aider, abettor and/or co-conspirator” in a leak by State Department officials of information about North Korea.Justice Department officials said they never contemplated charging Mr. Rosen, and merely wanted access to his email account. But Congress and news organizations protested, prompting Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. to revise the Justice Department’s rules for leak investigations and to add protections for reporters.Mr. Holder also fought all the way to the Supreme Court to try to force a Times reporter, James Risen, to testify as a witness in the trial of a former C.I.A. official accused of leaking classified information to him about Iran’s nuclear program.Mr. Risen vowed to go to prison for contempt rather than provide information. In the end, the Justice Department did not carry out its threat.“We believe strongly that it is in the public interest to have a vigorous media committed to publishing truthful information about the government,” Joseph Kahn, the managing editor of The Times, said in a statement. “The First Amendment clearly protects the right of the press to publish such information, and The Times regards fair, unfettered coverage of those who hold power as a core part of its mission.”Mr. Baron, of The Post, drew a bright line between the actions of past presidents and the more draconian measure that Mr. Trump outlined to Mr. Comey.“What happened during the Obama administration was an investigation of leaks and leakers,” Mr. Baron said. “This is of a different order, because what he’s talking about here is actually prosecuting journalists directly for receiving and publishing information that is confidential and in some instances classified.”