http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/voters-reaction-diversity-trump.html
Level of Outrage Over Donald Trump Tape Is Linked to Another Issue: Race - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016
Oct. 9, 2016
6494
As the backlash increases over a recording of Donald J. Trump speaking of women in vulgar sexual terms, some have said the fury may be particularly intense because Mr. Trump, who has previously offended a number of minorities, is now being perceived as demeaning a target historically more valued in American society: white women.Mr. Trump has been accused of belittling women before. He has battled the Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly and publicly feuded with Rosie O’Donnell. But in the recording released on Friday, Mr. Trump says he can have access to any woman’s body because of his fame and moments later is shown arm in arm with a white actress, Arianne Zucker. That seemed to resonate powerfully with Republican leaders, who perhaps could imagine Ms. Zucker as one of their own family members.Many of the Republicans who withdrew their support from Mr. Trump or increased their criticism released statements citing their daughters, wives and mothers in explaining why the comments were so objectionable.“As the grandfather of two precious girls, I find that no apology can excuse away Donald Trump’s reprehensible comments degrading women,” Jeb Bush said on Twitter.Senator Dan Sullivan of Alaska said he was “inspired by my three wonderful teenage daughters, and my wise and gracious wife” as he called on Mr. Trump to “step aside.”Representative Jason Chaffetz of Utah withdrew support from Mr. Trump by telling a local television station, “My wife and I, we have a 15-year-old daughter, and if I can’t look her in the eye and tell her these things, I can’t endorse this person.”But some activists, experts and party strategists say that display of empathy illustrates that the lives of minorities are not as valued as those of white women.Hours after the release of the video, Symone Sanders, the former national press secretary for the presidential campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, took to Twitter: “You apparently can say whatever you want about Mexicans, Hispanics & Black people, but the Republican Party draws the line on white women,” she said on Friday night.In an interview on Saturday, Ms. Sanders said many Republicans asking for Mr. Trump to withdraw from the race and referring to their families were illustrating that they could not empathize when others were targeted.“We are still measuring folks by standards of whiteness, and it took for Donald Trump to essentially speak poorly about white women in this country en masse — it took Donald Trump to do something and say something where white people could put themselves in that position to say, ‘Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You’ve gone too far, buddy. This is too much,’” she said.Many of the Republicans calling on Mr. Trump to step aside  or withdrawing their support are in tight races of their own, and the political motivations for the outcry are clear, with many leaders focused on saving down-ballot races and on pushing back against recordings that condone sexual harassment.But some say the political reasons for the reaction do not explain why previous comments from Mr. Trump were not met with the same response. Mr. Trump has faced criticism in varying degrees throughout his campaign from Republicans over his comments that some Mexican immigrants are rapists and criminals, for his initial proposal to bar Muslims from entering the United States and for his attacks on a former Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, for gaining weight. But those incidents did not prompt the same kind of widespread and intense condemnation.Alida Garcia, the coalitions and policy director at FWD.us, an immigration overhaul group, said she was as angry the day Mr. Trump began his campaign by describing undocumented Mexican immigrants as criminals as she was about the recording on Friday.“As a Mexican-American woman, the very first day of Donald Trump’s campaign crossed a line, and it did not feel like the broader political community took that seriously,” Ms. Garcia said. “I do feel that this country still looks at Mexicans and Latinos as an invisible work force in the United States that is not deserving of the same humanization as white people.”Johnetta Elzie, 27, a Black Lives Matter activist based in St. Louis, echoed the sentiment.“It’s like everything is to save and protect white women. And it’s like, what about everyone else?” Ms. Elzie said.“It makes me wonder: Do you not have any Muslim friends? Do you not know any black people? Do you not know any Mexicans? Why is it this thing where you can look inside your household, like why do you have to make that kind of connection to have empathy for someone?”For Angela Rye, chief executive of Impact Strategies, a political advocacy firm in Washington, the responses come down to implicit bias, the idea that everyone filters situations and events through their own experiences, race and gender.“Sometimes you don’t realize how bad something is until it hits you really close to home,” she said. “And this time it hit them in their homes instead of next door to their homes because he is literally talking about groping a white woman and then goes up and gives her a hug on the video.”Whatever the prime motivation for the outcry from Republican officials, Ms. Sanders said she thought it was about more than their wives and daughters.“White women are part of a strategic base in the Republican Party, and folks, I don’t think they felt this offended just because they have daughters and mothers,” Ms. Sanders said. “I have to believe, as a strategist, that folks thought this is absolutely bad for the party and we can’t win down-ballot races if he’s out here speaking like this and there are more tapes that surface. We have to distance ourselves to save what’s left of our party.”