https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/05/realestate/22-million-homes-in-barnard-vermont-aiken-south-carolina-and-ottsville-pennsylvania.html
$2.2 Million Homes in Vermont, South Carolina and Pennsylvania - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Barnard (Vt),Aiken (SC),Ottsville (Pa)
July 5, 2017
9998
WHAT A house with four bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms from about 1800, moved and rebuilt in 1991HOW MUCH $2.195 millionSIZE 3,088 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $711SETTING This house is perched on a knoll in a picturesque landscape of farmland and forest, with views of the Green Mountains. It is about 13 miles from the charming town of Woodstock, with its restaurants, boutiques and galleries, and about 30 miles from the Killington ski resort.INDOORS A timber-frame house with clapboard siding, it originally stood in East Berkshire, Vt., but was carefully disassembled, moved and rebuilt on its current site in 1991, on a new foundation with new mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems. Many of the original features — including windows with antique glass, wide-plank pine floors and old doors and hardware — remain, and the house is organized around a central chimney. Double front doors open into a central foyer, with a living room to one side and a den to the other, both with exposed beams and a wood-burning fireplace. The kitchen is at the back of the house and has locally crafted cabinets with a distressed finish, an island and wood counters. It is open to a sunny dining area with another fireplace.All the bedrooms are upstairs, including the master, which has exposed beams, a fireplace and an en-suite bathroom. The concrete basement is partially finished and has room for a home office.OUTDOOR SPACE The 180-acre lot is made up of open fields, pasture, forest and a pond, and is entered via a long gravel driveway. There is also a series of flower gardens around the house. A second timber-frame building was rebuilt on the property to serve as an attached three-car garage. There is a separate barn with room for two cars, a dog kennel and a workshop.TAXES About $29,500 a yearCONTACT John Snyder, Snyder Donegan Real Estate Group, 802-280-5406; snyderdonegan.com•WHAT An 1815 house with five bedrooms and four full and two half bathroomsHOW MUCH $2.2 millionSIZE 5,165 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $426SETTING This house is near the center of Aiken, a small city with many live oak trees that is popular with equestrians for its polo fields, racetracks and fox hunts, as well as the 70 miles of trails in Hitchcock Woods, a 2,100-acre urban forest. The nearest big city is Augusta, Ga., about 20 miles to the west.INDOORS The Greek Revival house, known as Crossways, is on the National Register of Historic Places. It was renovated in 2007, but retains many early details including distinctive trim, wainscoting and crown molding. There are seven wood-burning fireplaces. A front door with sidelights and a transom window opens into a central foyer with hardwood floors painted in a diamond pattern. The living room is to one side, and a den with grasscloth wallpaper is to the other. Both have 15-foot ceilings, French doors that open onto the porch, and oversized windows that extend nearly to the floor. A 33-foot-long dining room, large enough to seat two dozen people, is toward the back of the house, along with an eat-in kitchen that connects to a keeping room through French doors. The kitchen has an island, white marble and black granite counters, and Sub-Zero and Viking appliances. There is a separate butler’s pantry with a sink, marble counters and an ice maker.A curved staircase leads from the foyer to a second-floor landing, where French doors open onto a balcony. The master suite includes a large walk-in closet as well as an expanded bathroom with marble floors, a soaking tub and a separate shower. There are four additional bedrooms upstairs. There is also a separate two-bedroom apartment with a kitchen and bathroom above a detached two-car garage, as well as a 1,500-square-foot caretaker’s cottage.OUTDOOR SPACE The house is reached by a gated driveway and sits on a 4.7-acre lot (the current owners bought several neighboring properties and demolished a number of smaller homes on them). There is a pool and extensive landscaping, including a fountain, brick walkways, walls and arches, live oak trees and boxwood gardens.TAXES $5,350 a yearCONTACT Tom Bossard, Carolina Real Estate Company, 803-640-2845; carolinahorseproperties.com•WHAT A 1967 house with three bedrooms and three and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $2.2 millionSIZE About 5,000 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT About $440SETTING This house is in a rural area of rolling hills, farms and fields in Bucks County. It is less than two miles from Lake Nockamixon, and about three miles away from Kimberton Whole Foods, which has a cafe and grocery store with local and organic products. Doylestown and Frenchtown, N.J., are about 12 miles away and offer more restaurants and stores.INDOORS The house was extensively renovated and expanded by its current owners, Laura Bohn, an interior designer, and Richard Fiore, a contractor. From the driveway, stone steps lead down to a blue Dutch door, which opens into a tiled foyer. To one side is a family room with a polished concrete floor, wood-burning fireplace and reclaimed mahogany wall paneling under a vaulted ceiling with exposed steel-tie rods. To the other side is the living room, which also has a concrete floor and fireplace, as well as large windows looking out over the landscape. A dining area open to the living room has built-in cabinetry and another fireplace elevated to eye level. An office area has built-in desks and a floor-to-ceiling installation of sculptural tree trunks.The enormous kitchen has a floor of irregularly shaped bluestone, a large island with movable counter-height table, Corian and stainless-steel counters, Italian lacquered cabinets and premium appliances. A commercial refrigerator is tucked into a walk-in pantry. Adjacent to the kitchen is a screened porch with a spiral staircase that leads to a games room and a studio. The three bedrooms are in a separate wing, off a hallway with a wet bar and a laundry room. All have carpeted floors, vaulted ceilings, skylights and en-suite bathrooms. The master bedroom also opens onto a private deck.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 13.23-acre lot of grass, trees and gardens, with its own pond. There is a pebbled terrace accessible from the kitchen and dining area at the back of the house and an attached three-car garage.TAXES $11,219CONTACT Charlotte Morrison, Kurfiss Sotheby’s International Realty, 215-896-4167; kurfiss.com