http://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/26/books/review/26NEWM01.html
'American Soldier': Man With a Plan, Sort Of - The New York Times
MCCONNELL  MALCOLM,FRANKS  TOMMY R,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE,AMERICAN SOLDIER (BOOK)
Sept. 26, 2004
8759
AMERICAN SOLDIER   By Tommy Franks with Malcolm McConnell.   Illustrated. 590 pp.   ReganBooks. $27.95.LIKE his plan for the Iraq war, Tommy Franks's book begins better than it ends. "American Soldier" traces his roots in Oklahoma and Texas, follows him to Vietnam, spends some time at Army bases on three continents and then settles down to its final 373 pages in Tampa, Fla., often in windowless air-conditioned rooms filled with plasma screens and acronyms.Tampa is home to the headquarters of the United States Central Command, which Franks headed from July 2000 to July 2003, and which is responsible for United States military operations in most of the Middle East. The book is popular -- it displaced Bill Clinton's from the top of many best-seller lists -- partly because Franks is the four-star general who commanded American troops in Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2003. The real value of "American Soldier," however, is not what it says about the war on terror, but what it reveals about Tommy Franks.Franks is a profane, impatient man, too fond of caffeine and hyperbole, whose talents are better suited to telling stories than to explaining military strategy. Anyone looking for insight or even new information about the operational plan for the Iraq war -- "an Oplan unique in military history," he writes -- is likely to be disappointed or just plain bored. At one point he describes a meeting "in the J-2 conference room in the S.C.I.F." to present "the first iteration of my Commander's Concept to Rumsfeld and J.C.S. chairman Dick Myers in the Pentagon via secure VTC." (Thankfully, the book includes a glossary of acronyms.)About the final phase of that plan, labeled "posthostility operations," Franks's argument is suspiciously convenient. Yes, he says, it was the most important aspect of the strategy. But it is also the part he had the least control over. The postwar period, he writes, is a time for "wingtips on the ground," not boots, but Tommy Franks is a boots-on-the-ground kind of guy. And glad of it, especially when he encounters a pool of raw sewage in the men's room of Kabul's presidential palace. "It's going to be a long time before these people have the basic necessities for a decent life," he tells his wife as they walk to their S.U.V.Some people might have realized that a little sooner than Franks did. His candor, moreover, seems a bit of an act. He admits he has little use for the news media, and says, "I had learned over the years that sometimes it's useful to operate behind a self-deprecating facade." When he does venture an opinion, it is not notable for its outspokenness.His reports of war-planning meetings with President Bush and high-level cabinet members, for example, read as if scripted by the Fox News Channel ("We will do what we have to do to protect America," he quotes the president saying grimly after one meeting). His military colleagues are uniformly superlative. The general in charge of air operations in Iraq is "the best airman alive." Gen. Anthony Zinni, his predecessor at Centcom, is "one of the friendliest senior officers I'd encountered in 35 years in the military -- and also one of the smartest." Even his spokesman is "probably the best public affairs director I'd ever seen." One of his few insults, a decidedly unfavorable assessment of an under secretary of defense, Douglas Feith, was first reported by Bob Woodward -- who gets points for accuracy, right down to the adjectival modifier.If Franks lives up to his reputation for honesty in this book, it is in the early chapters. The adopted son of an itinerant mechanic and his loyal wife ("my mother always supported my dad in whatever new venture he chose"), Franks spent his childhood in Oklahoma hunting frogs, riding horses and engaging in occasional acts of petty vandalism. "The special love of adoptive parents did not prevent them from disciplining me when I needed it," Franks writes. "And, looking back, I needed it pretty often." In one episode, his father takes his Boy Scout troop on a visit to a state penitentiary and sits each of them down in the electric chair.Franks's adolescence reads like the diary of a pre-Nascar good old boy. The summer before fifth grade he moved to Midland, Tex., then one of the richest cities in America. His father found work, his mother was closer to her family, and Tommy was able to cultivate his interests in chasing girls and racing cars. "I was definitely living the American dream," he writes. Soon enough he was off to college (the University of Texas), where he duly joined a fraternity and began drinking heavily. When the inevitable happened and he flunked out, Franks enlisted in the Army, became an officer and was sent to Vietnam.The chapter on Vietnam, where Franks spent a year in brutal combat as a field artillery officer, is a cleareyed, mordant memoir. Franks's descriptions of battles are riveting, and the day-to-day details of the life of a soldier are more vivid than anything else in the book: the ever-present haze of orange dust and diesel exhaust, the morning cup of coffee heated with a small piece of C-4 explosive, the leeches that had to be burned off with lighted cigarettes, the desperate, homesick letters written in a drunken stupor.Equally powerful is Franks's defense of the imperfections of memory. "Some veterans of the Vietnam War were foresighted enough to keep diaries of their experiences," he writes of an endeavor he views with suspicion if not disdain. "I couldn't sit down today with a calendar and a map of the Mekong Delta and produce a precise chronology of the months I spent in combat." At the same time, he has no patience for anyone who would question a Vietnam veteran's service. "I have only the dates on my award and service citations to stir my recollection," he says, and blurry as it may be, it is his alone, and it is enough.In researching his book, Franks writes, he reviewed "thousands of pages of classified messages, transcripts of VTC's, operational orders and after-action reports" from the last three years. His concern for accuracy is admirable. But he might have relied less on the official record and more on his own experience and memories. In "American Soldier," it is the story of Tommy Franks's Vietnam, not Iraq, that has the ring of truth.Michael Newman is a staff editor for The Times's Op-Ed page.