https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/22/upshot/change-in-health-care-law-would-take-aim-at-consumer-inertia.html
Change in Health Care Law Would Take Aim at Consumer Inertia - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),Health and Human Services Department,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry
Nov. 21, 2014
9279
People who bought Affordable Care Act health plans for 2014 but who don’t go back to shop again for 2015 will automatically keep the plan they first chose, even if its price goes way up.Now the federal government is proposing that when people sign up, they should get a choice of defaults for future years: to stay in the same plan, or switch to a cheaper one in the same category if theirs gets too pricey.The proposed regulation, published Friday, suggests phasing in the additional choice, first giving states with their own exchanges the option of offering it.By 2017, if the proposal becomes final, everyone who buys a plan through the federal system will be subject to such a policy of having a choice of defaults.Of course, customers who shop every year will get to pick whatever plan they want. And The Upshot has been recommending that everyone buying insurance through the system do just that, because there are big price differences in many markets between the most popular plan from 2014 and the cheapest possible alternative plan in 2015.The proposal highlights a key feature of the Affordable Care Act’s marketplaces, which has both benefits and drawbacks. It relies on competition between private health plans to keep prices low. That means that shoppers in many markets can find good deals, but only if they’re willing to stomach the disruption of switching insurance every year.Some people will want to stay in a particular plan, even if the premium goes up, because they prefer its network of doctors or structure of deductibles and co-payments. Others will be more concerned about the price.The downside to the current policy is that people who do nothing could get stuck with big bills. The downside to the new option is that people who do nothing could lose access to the doctors and drugs they rely on. There will surely be a lot of discussion about these trade-offs before the proposed rule becomes final. (If you want to read the fine print, here’s the full proposed regulation; here’s a shorter fact sheet summarizing its provisions.)The potential impact is large. We don’t know exactly how many people will go the auto-renew route each year, but historical evidence from other government programs suggests the preponderance will. Shopping for health insurance is hard and time-consuming, and inertia tends to take over. A recent Gallup poll found that 68 percent of customers who were surveyed say they plan to renew their current plan. That means that whatever default policy the government chooses will have a big effect. There are a lot of people who might experience sticker shock under the current policy — or unexpected changes under the new one.