https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/10/sports/sailing/sweden-japan-americas-cub.html
Artemis Racing of Sweden Advances in America’s Cup - The New York Times
Sailboats and Sailing,America's Cup,Artemis Racing,SoftBank Team Japan,Baseball (College),Ohio State University,Soccer,Baseball,Colorado Rockies,Chicago Cubs,Golf,Automobile Racing,Olympic Games (2016)
June 10, 2017
9010
Artemis Racing of Sweden clinched a spot in the America’s Cup challenger finals by beating SoftBank Team Japan on Friday for the fourth straight time.Owned by the Swedish billionaire Torbjorn Tornqvist and led by the Olympic gold medalists Nathan Outteridge of Australia and Iain Percy of Britain, Artemis beat SoftBank Team Japan by 13 seconds on Bermuda’s Great Sound to clinch the series at 5-3.Artemis had been down by 3-1 before winning three straight races against Team Japan on Thursday to reach the deciding point.Artemis will face Emirates Team New Zealand in the best-of-nine finals starting Saturday for the right to meet the two-time defending champion Oracle Team USA in the 35th America’s Cup match starting June 17.Ohio State has hired Chris Holtmann away from Butler to be its next head coach.Holtmann, 45, has been at Butler the past three years and took the team to the N.C.A.A. tournament each year, with the Bulldogs reaching the round of 16 last season. He led the Bulldogs to a 70-31 record in his three seasons as head coach, including a 25-9 mark in 2016-17.An error by the French goalkeeper Hugo Lloris handed Sweden’s Ola Toivonen a last-gasp goal to secure a 2-1 win in their World Cup qualifier in Stockholm.Lloris’s poor clearance fell straight to Toivonen, who lobbed the ball over the keeper. France had led after a superb left-foot strike by forward Olivier Giroud after 37 minutes, but that was canceled out by a precise low finish from Sweden’s Jimmy Durmaz in the 43rd.  (REUTERS)ANDORRA ENDS 13-YEAR WINLESS STREAK Andorra stunned visiting Hungary, 1-0, in their World Cup qualifier to end a 66-match winless run in competitive internationals stretching back nearly 13 years. Marc Rebes scored in the 26th minute with a looping header that caught Hungary goalkeeper Peter Gulacsi off guard. The defeat effectively ended Hungary’s hopes of reaching the World Cup next year in Russia.  (REUTERS)MILESTONE FOR DUTCH PLAYER Wesley Sneijder became the Netherlands’ leader in international match appearances on his 33rd birthday, marking his 131st appearance for his country with a goal in a 5-0 victory over Luxembourg in a World Cup qualifier in Rotterdam.BELGIUM TOPS ESTONIA Dries Mertens led Belgium to a 2-0 victory over host Estonia to give it a dominant position in its World Cup qualifying group after its closest challengers, Greece and Bosnia-Herzegovina, played to a 0-0 draw.Rockies closer Greg Holland walked the bases loaded in the ninth inning before escaping, and Colorado held off the Cubs, 5-3, in Chicago for its sixth win in a row.After three straight one-out walks, Holland retired Ben Zobrist on a short fly ball and struck out a swinging Jason Heyward for his major-league-best 23rd save.Shortstop Addison Russell returned to the Cubs a day after the club told him not to come to Wrigley Field while Major League Baseball investigates a domestic abuse claim. Russell, who did not play, had been accused in a social media post of hitting his wife that has since been deleted. Russell denied the allegation.RAYS 13, ATHLETICS 4 Tampa Bay tied a season high with five home runs, Alex Cobb pitched six solid innings, and the Rays trounced visiting Oakland. Steven Souza Jr., Mallex Smith, Logan Morrison, Tim Beckham and Corey Dickerson all homered for Tampa Bay, which has hit four or more home runs in a game six times this season.CARDINALS 3, PHILLIES 2 Aledmys Diaz hit a solo home run, Michael Wacha pitched six strong innings, and St. Louis halted a seven-game skid by edging visiting Philadelphia.RED SOX 5, TIGERS 3 Jackie Bradley Jr. hit a two-run homer in the eighth, and host Boston rallied for three runs in the inning to beat Detroit.RANGERS 5, NATIONALS 2 In Washington, Andrew Cashner quieted the National League’s top-hitting lineup, Jonathan Lucroy and Rougned Odor homered, and Texas took advantage of three errors to win for just the fourth time in 15 games.COLLEGE PITCHER BOWS OUT Oregon State’s top pitcher, who as a teenager pleaded guilty to molesting a 6-year-old girl, released a statement saying he has asked to be excused from playing.Luke Heimlich, 21, said in the statement that he did not want to be a distraction to the team, which begins play in the N.C.A.A. super regionals on Friday evening against Vanderbilt. “I understand many people now see me differently,” Heimlich said in the statement, “but I hope I can eventually be judged by the person I am today.”Bernhard Langer, Kevin Sutherland and Glen Day each shot a six-under-par 66 to share the opening-round lead at the PGA Tour Champions event in Des Moines. Langer won the last two senior circuit events, both majors, and is seeking to become the first player on the 50-and-over tour with wins in three straight starts since Fred Couples in 2010.ST. JUDE CLASSIC Chez Reavie shot a five-under 65 to move to nine-under 131 and share the lead with Charl Schwartzel and Sebastian Munoz after two rounds in Memphis. Stewart Cink was one stroke back after his 68 at the PGA Tour’s final event before the United States Open.MANULIFE L.P.G.A. CLASSIC Alena Sharp shot her second straight 66 to move into a share of the lead at 12-under 132 after the second round in Cambridge, Ontario. Sharp was tied with Lexi Thompson (65) and Hyo Joo Kim (68).Jimmie Johnson said he was ready to race this weekend at Pocono Raceway in Long Pond, Pa., after having skin cancer removed this week from his right shoulder.Johnson, a seven-time Nascar champion, had the procedure in New York on Monday, one day after winning a race in Dover, Del. He said the cancer had not spread.Two brothers under investigation for sexual misconduct were allowed to take part in the Rio Olympics last summer, USA Today reported.The newspaper said that USA Taekwondo began investigating claims against Steven and Jean Lopez more than two years ago after multiple women said the brothers sexually assaulted them.USA Taekwondo consulted with the United States Olympic Committee and agreed to halt the investigation before the Olympics. That meant that Steven Lopez — a 38-year-old three-time Olympic medalist — and Jean Lopez, at 43 a veteran coach, could participate.The newspaper obtained a March 22 letter from the investigating lawyer Donald Alperstein to one of the women in which he said he had notified the F.B.I. “because so much of the misconduct occurred in multiple jurisdictions” and added that he “felt the Lopez brothers needed to be removed from the sport.”The brothers denied the sexual assault allegations.