http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/juanita-broaddrick.html
Donald Trump Highlights Breitbart Interview With Clinton Accuser - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Sex Crimes,Breitbart News Network LLC,Broaddrick  Juanita,Clinton  Bill,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J
Oct. 9, 2016
7325
Donald J. Trump posted a tweet on Sunday morning highlighting a new interview with a woman who claimed in 1999 that she was raped by Bill Clinton, signaling that he may bring up the accusation at Sunday’s debate in an effort to counter criticism after the release of a recording showing him speaking of women in vulgar sexual terms.A video clip of the interview, which runs for about eight and a half minutes, was posted as an exclusive on Breitbart News, the website that was run by Steve Bannon before he became Mr. Trump’s chief strategist. In it, the woman, Juanita Broaddrick, recounts her story, which was first televised in an interview with the NBC newsmagazine show “Dateline,” several months after impeachment proceedings against Mr. Clinton had begun.Mr. Trump’s promotion of the video followed the Friday release of a recording from 2005 in which he made vulgar sexual comments, causing many prominent Republicans to say they could not support his candidacy and  upsetting his campaign.Ms. Broaddrick has said that the rape occurred in an Arkansas hotel room in 1978. Twenty years later, she told F.B.I. investigators working on behalf of the former independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr that Mr. Clinton had raped her, recanting an affidavit that she had signed the previous year in which she said that the incident had not taken place.At the end of the video that was published Sunday morning, Ms. Broaddrick accuses Hillary Clinton of being a knowing enabler of her husband.She says that Mrs. Clinton had at first thanked her kindly for helping with Mr. Clinton’s campaign for governor, before changing her attitude, and “with this very angry look on her face” asking Ms. Broaddrick if she understood the impact of her actions.“And that frightened me,” Ms. Broaddrick says.Aaron Klein, the Breitbart reporter who interviewed Ms. Broaddrick, asks her if she thinks Mrs. Clinton knew what Ms. Broaddrick says she had experienced.“At that moment, and I have to go by what I felt then and the look that she gave me, I felt like she knew,” Ms. Broaddrick says. “And that she was telling me to keep quiet.”About an hour after he posted the video, Mr. Trump’s mood seemed bolstered at the effect that the clip had had on his supporters, whose messages of encouragement he had been steadily posting.“So many self-righteous hypocrites,” he wrote about his Republican critics in another Twitter post. “Watch their poll numbers — and elections — go down!”