https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/nyregion/new-york-police-department-body-cameras.html
New York’s First Police Body Cameras Take to Streets in Upper Manhattan - The New York Times
Cameras,Police Department (NYC),O'Neill  James P,de Blasio  Bill,Washington Heights (Manhattan  NY)
April 27, 2017
8436
More than three years after a federal judge ruled that the Police Department’s stop-and-frisk tactics were unconstitutional and ordered New York City to test body cameras as a remedy, the first group of officers equipped with the devices went on patrol in Manhattan on Thursday.Years of litigation, and lengthy deliberations over which company would supply the cameras and how the program would be carried out, culminated with a ceremonial rollout at the 34th Precinct in Washington Heights.About a dozen officers wearing the cameras walked down the station steps after roll call, heading out for their evening shifts just before Mayor Bill de Blasio and Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill spoke to reporters.The moment reflected a turnabout for the Police Department, which had initially resisted the order. Mr. O’Neill, a career police officer, said he had been skeptical of the cameras when they first came into use but had changed his mind in the past few years.“I’m totally convinced now that this is the way forward,” he said. “I truly believe that these cameras have the great potential to de-escalate, and the footage captured will benefit everyone involved.”The pilot program starting at the 34th Precinct comes after a year when civilian complaints against officers fell to their lowest level in 15 years. The city’s Civilian Complaint Review Board received 4,282 complaints against officers in 2016, the fewest since 2001, when it received 4,251.While overall complaints have been falling since 2009, according to the review board, the agency has raised concerns about a rise in substantiated accusations against officers for actions such as making false statements, conducting improper searches and using excessive force.Officials hope the yearlong pilot program in America’s largest city will establish whether wearing the cameras improves officers’ interactions with the public. Mr. de Blasio has pledged to have all 23,000 of the city’s patrol officers wearing cameras by 2019.“This is the first day of the era of body-worn cameras,” the mayor said on Thursday. “And that means we are on a pathway to transparency and accountability that would benefit everyone.”Not everyone believes the program is ready for the city’s streets.In an op-ed article published by The New York Times on Thursday, two lawyers for the plaintiffs in the lawsuit that led to the court order predicted that the city’s guidelines would give “police officers and their supervisors too much discretion as to when to turn the cameras on” and would make it “easy for them to tailor their statements and reports to match videos.” Last week, the lawyers asked the judge overseeing the litigation to order changes to the policy. She dismissed the request as premature.Nancy Hoppock, the assistant deputy commissioner in charge of the Police Department’s Risk Management Bureau, said that a test run on Wednesday had allayed concerns over whether crucial moments might be lost when low-level encounters escalated rapidly.“Based on the video that I saw last night, I’m not worried at all because these officers are doing exactly what they are trained to do, which is, when in doubt, you turn it on,” she said of the cameras.Officers trained for two days on how to use the cameras at the Police Academy in Queens, sitting through lectures, watching video of common situations and practicing with the devices, said Benjamin Tucker, the first deputy police commissioner. The classroom training, which officials are still refining, will be followed by 90 days of field training in the precinct, which stretches north into Inwood.Fifty-eight officers from the 34th Precinct are part of the pilot program, which will include 1,200 officers in 20 precincts by the end of the year.After a year, officers equipped with cameras will be measured against an equal number of officers at 20 precincts that do not have cameras in areas such as job performance, citizen complaints and arrests. The pilot program is designed to allow officials to determine with a high degree of certainty that any differences they observe can be attribute to the cameras and not to other factors, such as leadership changes.Still, questions persist about how the mayor and the Police Department will handle challenges that may arise from requests for footage from episodes that range from routine to headline-grabbing.Other departments that use body cameras have encountered various technical, operational and policy issues. Houston suspended its program over problems with batteries in its WatchGuard cameras. The Los Angeles Police Commission is seeking public input on when to release footage from police shootings after public outcries in places like Chicago and Charlotte, N.C., over the release of footage in high-profile episodes in those cities.Mr. de Blasio’s administration fought for two years against releasing body camera footage from a smaller pilot program that ended in 2015. A judge recently ruled that the Police Department must review 190 hours of footage from that program and turn over to the local cable television channel NY1 anything that is not exempt under the state freedom of information law. NY1 sued for access to the footage, which covers five weeks from late 2014 to early 2015 after the department sought to charge the channel $36,000 to review it.The department has not said how it plans to discipline officers who fail to use the cameras properly or who conduct unwarranted stops. Officials said they needed to give officers time to get used to the new equipment.It is already nearly impossible to learn what punishments officer receive. Mr. de Blasio and the Police Department have declined to disclose that information, invoking a state statute known as 50-a that prohibits the release of officers’ personnel records.