http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/24/us/annenberg-estate-sunnylands-to-open-to-the-public.html
Annenberg Estate, Sunnylands, to Open to the Public - The New York Times
Annenberg Foundation,Annenberg  Walter H,Annenberg  Leonore,California,Palm Springs (Calif),Architecture,Rancho Mirage (Calif),Sunnylands (Rancho Mirage  Calif)
Jan. 23, 2012
4908
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Few places in the world have drawn guests like those who made it behind the pink walls of Sunnylands, the Walter H. Annenberg estate here in the desert.Ronald Reagan celebrated New Year’s Eve here 18 times, one of seven presidents who signed the Annenberg guest book. Richard M. Nixon retreated to Sunnylands after his resignation. It was the place to go for celebrities luxuriating in nearby Palm Springs: Frank Sinatra married his fourth wife here. Even Queen Elizabeth II was a regular.Now Sunnylands, built by Walter and Leonore Annenberg 46 years ago, is about to lift its veil. In February, under the terms of a trust set by the Annenbergs in 2002, Sunnylands will open as what is being heralded as a Camp David of the West Coast, a place for national and foreign dignitaries and diplomats to gather for summit meetings and retreats.And in March, the estate — a striking example of midcentury modern architecture, hidden in a stunning setting in the desert and ringed by mountains — will for the first time be open for public viewing. A 17,000-square-foot visitor center, built to accommodate this new public chapter of a once-private oasis, has risen as part of the transformation envisioned by Mr. Annenberg, an ambassador to England under Nixon who made much of his fortune as the publisher of TV Guide.“I suppose we could have opened Sunnylands as some sort of museum or mausoleum,” said Wallis Annenberg, who is Mr. Annenberg’s daughter and the president of the Annenberg Foundation. “But I thought that would be a terrible waste.”The extent to which the ambitious public policy goals of the Annenbergs will come to life — think visiting presidents sleeping in the Annenbergs’ canary yellow master bedroom, with its floor-to-ceiling windows and speakers piping in bird chirps from the feeder outside — will become clear in the months ahead. The Annenbergs’ considerable connections (not to mention the $300 million endowment) bodes well for its success, and three summit meetings have been scheduled for the spring, including one on relations between the United States and Mexico that involves 22 policy leaders and officials from both countries.“We have had a number of discussions with the White House, State Department and Congressional leadership,” said Geoffrey Cowan, the president of the Annenberg Foundation Trust at Sunnylands, emphasizing that the estate will be made available to leaders from all political parties.At the same time, the public is going to be able to get a glimpse of a world that was once shut off from all but the most high-powered of world leaders and the cream of Palm Springs celebrity society — Bing Crosby, Sammy Davis Jr., Bob Hope, Truman Capote, Gregory Peck, Ginger Rogers, Fred Astaire and Clark Gable — and the titans, most of them Republican, who were part of the Annenberg world.Sunnylands is about 10 miles from Palm Springs here in the Coachella Valley, a place better known these days for its annual music festival, in a neighborhood of streets that hark back to its Rat Pack past: Bob Hope Drive, Gerald Ford Drive, Frank Sinatra Drive and Dinah Shore Drive.During a tour of the property that included guest cottages, the art collection and archival material from the glory years, the bustle of construction and last-minute tidying-up suggested the imminence of the official opening. It was late afternoon, and the sun was setting over the San Jacinto Mountains, casting the grounds in shadows and ever-changing desert hues.“Now you are going behind the pink wall,” Mr. Cowan said as a golf cart bounced along a dirt road and over the hills of the nine-hole golf course that surrounds the home. At that moment, passing the gates to the grounds, the rest of the world disappears. There is no sign of life or development, “just lush green lawns stretching to the desert in the east, and the stunning San Jacinto Mountains in the west,” Ms. Annenberg noted.The estate fills 200 acres, its golf course spotted with 850 olive trees, 11 artificial lakes and a scattering of sculptures. There are precisely two palms, a reluctant ambassadorial bow to the iconic tree of Southern California. As for the estate’s first couple, well, they never really left: their remains rest in a pink mausoleum on a hillside. Mr. Annenberg died in 2002, and Mrs. Annenberg died seven years later.The 25,000-square-foot house, designed by A. Quincy Jones, includes soaring ceilings and clean lines and a vast open living room where every window seems to spill onto the lawn and gardens. There are 22 bedrooms for guests, plus the Annenberg suite, reserved for visiting presidents and heads of state. Most of the art collection that lavished the walls of this home — works by Picasso, Van Gogh, Andrew Wyeth, Monet — was donated to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York upon Mr. Annenberg’s death. Digital reproductions now hang in their place.The estate fairly glows with history, as was evident during a leisurely tour of the rooms of the main house, the guest wings and other cottages. President George Bush used to leave a fishing pole by his bedroom window for early morning excursions to a lake, stocked with bass, outside his room. “The reason he liked to stay in this room is because he liked to fish,” said Mary Perry, who heads community relations for Sunnylands.Reagan used to play golf on his weekends. “My first memories of going there was for their New Year’s Eve parties: I played golf with President Reagan there on the 31st of December,” said George P. Shultz, the former secretary of state, who will be here for the opening. “It was fantastic. That became an annual event.”“The guest list was really exciting and lots of fun — listening to Bob Hope tell jokes and Dolores Hope sing,” Mr. Shultz said. “The Annenbergs made a point of somehow causing interesting conversations to take place.”A wall in the Room of Memories — it will be on the tour — is dedicated to a collection of Christmas cards from Queen Elizabeth. Next stop: the Game Room. “Walter and Frank Sinatra would share movies that came in from Hollywood with their friends here,” said Geoffrey Baum, Sunnylands’ communications director, motioning to an old-fashioned projector behind a wall. “The screen would come down in front of the window.”Nixon, who appointed Mr. Annenberg to the Court of St. James, came here in disgrace, escaping the reporters who followed him after he left Washington. His sentiments about Sunnylands and its owner were clear in the notation that he wrote in the guest book: “When you’re down,” he wrote, “you find out who your real friends are.”