https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/books/review/debut-novel-struggle-kathleen-flynn.html
How Is a Debut Novel Like Lizzy Bennet? - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Writing and Writers,A. Flynn  Kathleen
June 2, 2017
2204
Jane Austen has been dead for nearly 200 years, yet retains an astonishing relevance in topics as far-flung as game theory and economics. She also has much to teach the debut novelist — but not for the reasons you’d expect.After I completed my first novel (inspired by Austen), found an agent and sold it to a publisher, I enjoyed a brief moment of euphoria before realizing the hardest part still lay ahead. Writing a novel is all very well — to succeed, though, it must attract readers. But how?The debut novelist’s struggle resembles nothing so much as a Regency-era husband hunt. Even “debut,” with its mothball-y whiff of elitism, of white gloves and corsages, points to how novelists exist in a sphere at once privileged and perilous, like an Austen heroine.“Wife and mother” was the only acceptable job for a woman of that class at that time, yet as Austen observed, there were not so many men of large fortune as there were pretty women to deserve them. The custom of primogeniture meant everything went to the oldest son, while it could take years for a younger son to establish himself in a profession to support a wife. The long war with France removed many suitable candidates, meaning a large pool of women competed for an even smaller group of eligible men.Doesn’t this sound like publishing? Thousands of first novels come out every year, jockeying for media attention, bookshop space and public notice. They compete not only with each other, but also with everything else: from the “Odyssey” to last year’s National Book Award winner — not to mention Netflix, social media, reality television and life itself.Every debut novelist is like Catherine Morland of “Northanger Abbey” in her first outing to the Upper Rooms: crushed in a crowd, effectively invisible. Striving desperately for notice, affecting not to try at all, enduring the sting of humiliation at the public’s indifference. In-house publicity help is a huge advantage, but ultimately like Catherine’s having Mrs. Allen as her chaperone in Bath: essential to the success of the project, yet no guarantee of it.So how do some books rise above the fray? The assets a young lady of 1815 might deploy are strikingly like those of a debut novelist: beauty, money, connections and wit. And bringing up the rear as always, the tricky question of merit.Beauty is currency in every market, marriage or otherwise. It ought not to matter for novelists — it’s their words we’re interested in — but the existence of the author photo proves otherwise. The good-looking writer will always be welcome on television and popular at parties; her story will seem more piquant, her emotional depths deeper.There is money. A well-off family in Austen could provide a daughter with some capital, attracting the notice of a potential husband just the way a seven-figure advance assures its recipient of media attention. Newspapers and literary blogs will cover her; stores will feature her book on a front table, where the curious might pick it up, wondering what the fuss is about.Not everyone is endowed with beauty; few get huge advances. But connections also mean a lot — arguably even more. In Austen’s time, it was crucial to be from a good family; one could not just come from nowhere, knowing no one (it’s the aspect of her world that I think might be hardest for American readers to grasp). Yet it informs every one of her stories — just as it does for debut novelists. Someone with an M.F.A. from the University of Iowa or a job in the New York publishing field knows people who might invite her to be on a panel or write a piece for a publication, conferring crucial visibility and gravitas. More important, she can call on them for a blurb — a process I had never fully understood, vaguely supposing writers composed them as they lounged in some writers’ Arcadia: herding sheep, strumming lyres, spontaneously praising one another’s work. That was before I had to solicit my own. I called in favors, twisted arms, wrote fan letters and was greeted mostly with silence, sometimes with a polite rejection.Then there is wit. One of the charms of “Pride and Prejudice” is that Darcy is drawn to Elizabeth’s quicksilver mind as much as to her fine eyes. Wit is a specialized form of verbal intelligence that all novelists possess to some degree. But a select few can translate it to Twitter or to writing droll personal essays or charming useful and powerful people. Their wit lures in potential readers.But could it be that some debut novels are just really good — and will rise to the top on their own? I can’t deny that this happens, but there’s a reason I mention it last. Fanny Price is a good woman but she spends much of “Mansfield Park” quivering in a corner, bullied or ignored by the book’s more self-confident characters. Merit is not always obvious and generally requires some measure of beauty, money, connections or wit to bring it to light.The logic of the marriage plot usually assures a happy ending for the heroine, whatever difficulties she faces along the way. But “Pride and Prejudice” is a fairy tale; that’s one reason we love it so. In the world of debut novelists, there are few Elizabeth Bennets.