https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/us/politics/trump-birth-control-climate.html
What Will President Trump Do on Birth Control, Climate and Immigration? - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,United States Politics and Government,North American Free Trade Agreement,North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Nov. 11, 2016
6994
“The irony is that after 20 months of watching and listening to Donald Trump every day in the news, we now face this moment where it feels like we are staring into kind of a black hole.”That was Evan Osnos, a correspondent for The New Yorker, describing how difficult it is to anticipate what Mr. Trump’s presidency might look like, given how unconventional his campaign was.For a recent article, published before the election, Mr. Osnos spoke to more than 50 experts in an attempt to understand the actions that Mr. Trump could take in his first term.In a phone interview on Wednesday, Mr. Osnos detailed some of his conclusions. We supplemented his reporting with our own to try to anticipate what Mr. Trump is likely to do once he takes office.Mr. Osnos said that taking Mr. Trump’s campaign promises seriously makes more sense than the alternative.“There are two options to how you want to anticipate and prepare for a Trump presidency,” he said. “One is to declare that nothing he says is useful and reliable, and we should do nothing. The other is to invest heavily in trying to understand what the history of the presidency tells us.”“Even if a president doesn’t intend to follow through on a promise,” he continued, “the nature of the presidency compels him to make a good-faith effort to do so because his credibility once in office rests partly on whether he is showing a serious commitment to follow through on the things he does.”Are U.S. military alliances in trouble? In July, the night before he accepted the Republican nomination for president, Mr. Trump spoke about America’s commitment to its NATO allies.If the Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania — were to be attacked by Russia, Mr. Trump said, he would review whether those nations had “fulfilled their obligations to us” before deciding whether to come to their aid.The New York Times reporters David E. Sanger and Maggie Haberman wrote at the time that “Mr. Trump’s statement appeared to be the first time that a major candidate for president had suggested conditioning the United States’ defense of its major allies.”Mr. Osnos pointed out that even making statements along the lines of Mr. Trump’s comments in July could make for troubled alliances, because “the strength of NATO is built on the notion of credibility.”“It’s a little bit like talking about whether you’re going to repay your debt,” he said. “Even talking about it in language that departs from 70 years of American national security strategy can have the effect of altering it in fact.”Will women have to pay for birth control again?With a Republican-controlled Congress, Mr. Trump will be empowered to do what he and his party have long promised: repeal the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s signature domestic legislation.In late October, Mr. Trump repeated his dislike for the law and said, “Repealing Obamacare and stopping Hillary’s health care takeover is one of the single most important reasons that we must win on Nov. 8.”The health care law gave 47 million women access to preventive health services. It also required insurers to make birth control available at no cost to women, eliminating costly co-payments that in many cases ran to hundreds of dollars a year or more. After Mr. Trump’s win on Tuesday, women on social media announced plans to obtain intrauterine devices, a form of contraception that can last as long as 12 years but that was prohibitively expensive for many before Obamacare.Margot Sanger-Katz, writing for the Upshot, said that repealing the law would mean that “about 22 million fewer Americans would have health insurance, according to an estimate from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office.”However, on Friday, Mr. Trump said that he might be willing to leave parts of the law in place.Will he deport more undocumented immigrants?The Times’s immigration correspondent, Julia Preston, put together a comprehensive look at Mr. Trump’s plans on immigration: “Mr. Trump has said he will initiate a campaign to deport, within the first year of his presidency, what he described as up to two million undocumented immigrants with criminal records,” she wrote, “although he has not explained how he reached that estimate.”Immigration is “one area on which a president has a lot more power and legal authority than I think your average American assumes,” Mr. Osnos said. “He could accomplish a lot of the goals he has, even with the resistance of the courts and Congress, by using the powers of the executive. On immigration, we’re in a brand-new era where he has both the will and the legal authority to rewrite the rules in ways that I think most people would have found hard to imagine.”Will the Paris climate agreement stand?Mr. Trump has called human-caused climate change a “hoax” and has said he will “cancel” the Paris climate agreement, the landmark 2015 deal under which 195 nations agreed to take steps to lower their greenhouse gas emissions.Coral Davenport, a Times reporter, writes that Mr. Trump “can, as president, choose not to carry out the Paris plan in the United States,” an action that “could doom the Paris agreement’s goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions enough to stave off an atmospheric warming of at least 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit.”Furthermore, if the United States were to withdraw from the Paris accord, Ms. Davenport writes, “other governments are less likely to carry out their pledged emissions cuts.”What will happen to U.S. trade agreements?In the first presidential debate, Mr. Trump criticized Hillary Clinton for changing her stance on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, an accord between the United States and 11 Pacific Rim nations that, in the end, both candidates opposed.In the debate, he also generally condemned America’s position on trade over the last several decades, and he called the North American Free Trade Agreement, which President Bill Clinton had navigated through Congress, “the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country.”Mr. Osnos said that the future looked bleak for both of those deals.“I think the TPP is dead,” he said. “I think he will follow through on his way to renegotiate Nafta in some way.”He also said he thought that Mr. Trump might seriously consider withdrawing the United States from the World Trade Organization, and that Mr. Trump might threaten sanctions against China, citing conversations with the president-elect’s advisers.“They have said to me in multiple moments that an earnest threat delivered with the kind of credibility that a President Trump would carry would, in their view, force the Chinese to change their nature,” Mr. Osnos said.