http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/01/nyregion/trumps-instinct-for-racially-charged-rhetoric-before-his-presidential-bid.html
Donald Trump’s Instinct for Racially Charged Rhetoric, Before His Presidential Bid - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Political Advertising,Blacks,Minorities,Race and Ethnicity,New York Institute for Law and Society,Native Americans,Catskills (NYS Area),Central Park Jogger Case (1989),Unification Church,Palm Beach (Fla)
July 31, 2015
1523
Under a dark photograph showing hypodermic needles and drug paraphernalia, the newspaper advertisement warned in dire terms that violent criminals were coming to town. “Are these the new neighbors we want?” the paid message asked. “The St. Regis Mohawk Indian record of criminal activity is well documented.”The ad, part of an advocacy campaign meant to stop a casino from being built in New York’s Catskill region, drew an indignant response from the tribe, which called it a naked appeal to racism. The incendiary ads, which ran in upstate newspapers in February 2000, were the work of the New York Institute for Law and Society, an opaque interest group that described itself as opposed to casino gambling.It was only later that the man who bankrolled the ads identified himself: Donald J. Trump.Long before Mr. Trump announced his bid for the Republican presidential nomination, roiling the 2016 election with his pugnacious style and speeches in which he has branded many undocumented immigrants as rapists and murderers, he had proved himself in New York as an expert political provocateur with an instinct for racially charged rhetoric.To communities that have clashed with Mr. Trump in the past, his current strategy is entirely familiar. The slash-and-burn offensive against casino gambling in New York was a revealing foray into local politics, but it was only one of several episodes that seem to foreshadow the tone of his presidential campaign.In 1989, amid a citywide panic in New York prompted by the assault of a white female jogger in Central Park, Mr. Trump ran advertising that called for a return of the death penalty.Later, during negotiations with the town of Palm Beach, Fla., his associates threatened through the media to sell a beachfront estate owned by Mr. Trump to the Unification Church, a Christian sect founded in South Korea and known for the practice of holding mass weddings.Mr. Trump acknowledged that his style can be offensive to some, but he defended it as essential for communicating his message.“It would be nice to be somewhat gentler,” he said in an interview this week, “but at the same time, I don’t think I would be able to make the point nearly as well, whether it’s the death penalty or other things, totally unrelated.”Mr. Trump said it was “not my intention” to speak in racially provocative terms, but expressed little interest in softening his language. “It’s very time-consuming to be politically correct,” he said, “and I don’t like wasting a lot of time.”He has used divisive rhetoric to advance his business interests: His drive against the St. Regis Mohawks was intended to protect his investments in Atlantic City at the time, by blocking casino development in a competing market. Mr. Trump, who stood by the content of the newspaper and television ads he paid for, said he had made a “tremendous amount of money in Atlantic City” and did not want to see gamblers migrating elsewhere.“I wasn’t knocking the Mohawks; I was knocking their record,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s not because they’re Mohawks. That’s because their record is bad and was proved to be bad at the time.”The ads shocked local tribal leaders, who took out their own newspaper ad in response to denounce the “racist and inflammatory rhetoric of this sham Institute.”“How dare they smear a nation and brand us all as criminals,” the ad said.The anti-St. Regis ads drew the scrutiny of New York’s lobbying commission, and Mr. Trump acknowledged that he was the New York Institute for Law and Society’s primary sponsor. In a settlement with the state, he and his advisers agreed to pay a fine and run a set of ads apologizing, not for the content of the anti-Mohawk ads, but for evading state disclosure rules related to lobbying and political advocacy.The new ads expressed regret “if anyone was misled concerning the production and funding of the lobbying effort,” according to settlement documents obtained through a state records request.Rowena General, who was chief of staff for the St. Regis Mohawks in 2000, said Mr. Trump’s ad campaign was a cynical attempt to use fear about race and crime to protect his business investments. The tenor of his presidential campaign, she said, was “not surprising at all, considering our experience with him.”Eleven years earlier, Mr. Trump had financed what was perhaps an even more charged advertisement days after the brutal assault on the jogger in Central Park. The ad, in the form of an open letter from Mr. Trump, was topped with two sentences that blared: “Bring Back the Death Penalty. Bring Back Our Police!”The message, which appeared in four publications, including The New York Times, channeled widespread anger and fear about violent crime. Invoking the image of “roving bands of wild criminals” wreaking havoc on the streets, Mr. Trump’s letter rebuked Mayor Edward I. Koch, a Democrat who supported the death penalty, for urging New Yorkers not to turn to hate in the aftermath of the Central Park assault.“I want to hate these muggers and murderers,” Mr. Trump wrote in the ad. “They should be forced to suffer and, when they kill, they should be executed for their crimes.”The rape and near-murder in Central Park rocked New York in the midst of the 1989 mayoral race, becoming a chilling symbol of a city seemingly out of control. Over time, it also came to represent the flaws in the criminal justice system. Five teenagers, four of them black, one Latino, were arrested and imprisoned for carrying out the attack. Known as the Central Park Five, they had their convictions vacated years later after another man, Matias Reyes, confessed to the crime.State Senator Bill Perkins, a Democrat who at the time was president of the tenants’ association at Schomburg Plaza, the Manhattan apartment complex where several of the defendants lived, said he was horrified to see Mr. Trump emerge as a contender for the presidency. A framed copy of Mr. Trump’s 1989 newspaper ad hangs in Mr. Perkins’s Harlem office as a reminder, he said, of an ugly moment in the city’s recent past.“This was taking a moment, a very unfortunate and one might say racially tense moment in our city, and fueling a lynch mob,” Mr. Perkins, who is black, said of the ad. “This is the Donald Trump that we have to remember as we pay attention to his ranting, his continuous ranting and carrying on.”Mr. Trump said that the ad was motivated purely by his support for reinstituting the death penalty and that it did not have a racial component. He said he remained a strong proponent of capital punishment and called it a necessary deterrent to violent crime.“This had nothing to do with race,” he said. “I have always been a big believer, and continue to be, of the death penalty for horrendous crime.”He added that he had no regrets about the ad, though he noted that because the victim of the assault had survived, the death penalty would not have been appropriate.New York City last year settled a lawsuit brought by the five defendants for $41 million, without acknowledging wrongdoing.Jonathan C. Moore, a lawyer who represents four of the men, said Mr. Trump had shown an “incredible lack of judgment” in the Central Park case. His clients, Mr. Moore said, had been in the park on the night of the attack but had committed no crime.“Donald Trump was an example of how, mostly white people, rushed to judgment about what happened there,” said Mr. Moore, who is white. Describing the victim and her alleged attackers, he added, “It was a young white investment banker, and all these young black kids who looked like they were guilty.”Even now, Mr. Trump refuses to completely back down. He criticized the city’s settlement, arguing that the young men had been convicted by a jury and had probably been involved in some kind of criminal activity on the night of the assault.“They walked away with $41 million and the best thing they had going for them was they were wilding in other parts of the park, beating the hell out of people,” Mr. Trump said, using a term, popularized after the Central Park assault, for young men going on a crime spree.Two years after running the ads about the Central Park case, Mr. Trump drew accusations of racism during a lobbying effort in Palm Beach, where he was seeking to subdivide the palatial estate known as Mar-a-Lago. As he faced considerable opposition from the town, articles appeared almost simultaneously in both The New York Post and The Palm Beach Daily News reporting, based on anonymous sources, that he might sell the property to the Unification Church.The church, which was founded by the Rev. Sun Myung Moon and viewed by many at the time as a cult, roundly denied any interest in the property and accused Mr. Trump of using the faith as a racial and religious cudgel against officials in the Florida town. Dr. James A. Baughman, who led the church’s branch in the United States at the time, said then that the church had no interest in the property. Mr. Trump, he said, was using “the Unification Church as a scare tactic in an attempt to compel Palm Beach officials to submit to the will of Mr. Trump.”The town ultimately rejected Mr. Trump’s bid to subdivide the estate, and he converted it to a private club instead. He said this week that any suggestion the property would be sold to the Unification Church “certainly wasn’t intended” to be racial in nature.Indeed, Mr. Trump sounded incredulous at the notion. “That’s Korean,” he said of the church. “So now I’m against the Koreans, too, you mean?”In the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump has discussed crime and immigration in explicitly alarmist terms. He has highlighted murders committed by undocumented immigrants, and has repeatedly referred to an undocumented Mexican immigrant who has been charged with killing a young woman in San Francisco as “this animal.”The furor over his comments led NBC to sever its ties with him: He will no longer be associated with the “Apprentice” franchise, and NBC’s parent, NBCUniversal, said the network would no longer carry the Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants, part of a joint venture with Mr. Trump.He said that there might be some value in speaking with greater restraint, but that that would exact its own price: “I might not get my point across nearly as well.”“The interesting thing is,” he said, “I am probably the least racist person that you will ever speak to.”