https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/02/business/procter-gamble-to-drop-up-to-100-brands.html
Procter & Gamble to Streamline Offerings, Dropping Up to 100 Brands  - The New York Times
Procter & Gamble Company,Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Cleansers  Detergents and Soaps
Aug. 1, 2014
4658
After years of expansion into areas like pet food and beauty products, Procter & Gamble announced on Friday that it would cut as many as 100 brands from its arsenal to focus on others, like Tide, that made the company a powerhouse over the decades.The move is part of a strategy to improve the company’s financial performance by doubling down on about 80 brands that generate 95 percent of the profits and 90 percent of sales, according to A. G. Lafley, the firm’s chief executive. The company, and the industry at large, have faced pressure as consumers continue to spend less than they did before the financial crisis.“This new streamlined P.&G. should continue to grow faster and more sustainably, and reliably create more value,” he said in a telephone call with reporters and analysts to discuss the firm’s fourth-quarter results. “Importantly, this will be a much simpler, much less complex company of leading brands that’s easier to manage and operate.”While Mr. Lafley did not say which of the estimated 100 brands would either be discontinued or sold off, he said that taken together they had aggregate sales declines of 3 percent a year over the last three years. The cuts would leave about 70 to 80 more lucrative products remaining.Ali Dibadj, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, speculated that Procter & Gamble would probably keep mainstay products like Pampers, Gillette and Tide. But he speculated that lesser-known brands like Zooth, a children’s oral care brand, the beauty brand Graham Webb and the Southeast Asian laundry detergent Trojan could be cut.But Mr. Dibadj said that Procter & Gamble might not just be considering sales.“It’s not just big or small,” he said. “A strategic fit is also going to be important.”Mr. Dibadj speculated that Procter & Gamble could also choose to divest itself of brands that did not necessarily fit in with its traditional baby and family products, like the battery maker Duracell or the Braun line of small electronic appliances.Beauty, too, has been a trouble spot for the company. Excluding certain currency adjustments and one-time events, the company reported that sales in the unit declined 3 percent in the fourth quarter, in contrast to the corporate average for beauty products of 2 percent growth, according to Nik Modi, an analyst with RBC Capital Markets.While Olay, Pantene and Cover Girl were on Mr. Dibadj’s list of companies Procter & Gamble was likely to keep, he speculated that the company might divest itself of a number of other beauty lines, including Naomi Campbell’s line of perfumes and colognes and the hair care line Frederic Fekkai.“It’s not just by chance that P.&G.'s beauty business has underperformed for such a long period of time,” Mr. Modi said. “Maybe they just don’t have what it takes to be in the beauty business.”Mr. Modi said that part of Procter & Gamble’s challenge was that it relied on a global strategy, whereas beauty is a more “nuanced” business.“Women in China want something different than women in the U.S.,” Mr. Modi said. “That changes the way you actually manufacture, go to market, how you advertise the product.”Consumers are still spending less five years after the financial crisis, and Procter & Gamble, like other manufacturers, have been under pressure to improve sales and cut costs. Last year, it also faced pressure from one of its main investors, the hedge fund manager William A. Ackman, who helped push the board to oust the previous chief executive, Robert A. McDonald.Mr. Lafley, who served as chief executive and president from 2000 to 2009, appears determined to streamline the company’s core operations. In April, Procter & Gamble agreed to sell its pet food brands Iams and Eukanuba to the candy maker Mars for $2.9 billion.Procter & Gamble has already been focusing on some of its core products to try to bolster sales.Taking cues from the success of single-use dishwasher detergents, for example, Procter & Gamble has been pushing the same idea with Tide Pods, individually wrapped doses of detergent.On Friday, the company reported that overall net sales fell 1 percent to $20 billion in the quarter ending June 30, while cost savings helped increase profit by 38 percent, to $2.6 billion.“We could have and should have done better,” Mr. Lafley said.For the year, net income rose to $11.6 billion, up from $11.3 billion the same period a year ago. That translates to $4.01 a share, an increase from $3.86 a share last year. Shares of Procter & Gamble rose 3 percent on Friday to close at $79.65.