https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/us/politics/bruce-springsteen-donald-trump.html
In Bruce Springsteen’s America, Many Turn Toward Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Music,Polls and Public Opinion,Springsteen  Bruce,Youngstown (Ohio),Atlantic City (NJ),Badlands National Park (SD),Johnstown (Pa),Amarillo (Tex),Darlington County (SC),Charlotte County (Fla),Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Sept. 29, 2016
8390
Bruce Springsteen is often called the troubadour of white, working-class America, a landscape he explores  in his autobiography released this week. But this election, the Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, has captured many of those blue-collar voters’ hearts, with his denunciation of trade deals and promises to bring back manufacturing.Take a tour of signature Springsteen spots to see which are turning toward Mr. Trump.Song: “Youngstown”Album: “The Ghost of Tom Joad”State of the race: Northeastern Ohio favors Mrs. Clinton“Youngstown” traces the long history of steel and iron production that has defined this working-class city.Mr. Trump has visited Youngstown and made revival of the steel industry a focus of his campaign, pledging to rebuild American cities’ infrastructure with steel produced in the United States. Still, he trails the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, 46 percent to 33 percent, in northeastern Ohio, home to Youngstown and Cleveland, though he holds a slight edge statewide, according to a recent Suffolk University poll._____Song: “Atlantic City”Album: “Nebraska”State of the race: Southern New Jersey favors Mrs. ClintonThis is one of many Springsteen songs tinted by the economic anxieties of the Carter-Reagan recession. In the 34 years since the song’s release, the area has grown more distressed, largely because of the closings of casinos.But Mr. Trump has little traction here; Atlantic County, home to Atlantic City, is more ethnically diverse and economically depressed than most of the Jersey Shore, and appears to be leaning Democratic again this year._____Song: “Badlands”Album: “Darkness on the Edge of Town”In this song, the dry, craggy terrain of the badlands becomes a symbol of hard living and perseverance in the American West. Most of the badlands states, shaped by a frontier politics, vote reliably Republican, and Mr. Trump is ahead of Mrs. Clinton among likely voters here in the Dakotas and nearby Plains states, 43 percent to 36 percent, according to the most recent New York Times/CBS News poll.But many young adults here have been energized by the Libertarian candidate, Gary Johnson, who is drawing 13 percent, which may prevent Mr. Trump from running up a big victory margin._____Song: “The River”Album: “The River”State of the race: Mrs. Clinton has an edge in southwestern PennsylvaniaThe sense of malaise that Mr. Springsteen noted in blue-collar communities across America at the turn of the 1980s is still strongly felt in places like western Pennsylvania, where manufacturing jobs have largely vanished. White voters without a college degree are among Mr. Trump’s strongest supporters there, as they are nationwide: 56 percent of these likely voters support him in a two-way race, versus 37 percent for Mrs. Clinton, according to this month’s Quinnipiac University poll of Pennsylvania.But Mrs. Clinton is making that up with support from nonwhites — three-quarters of whom say they will vote for her — and more educated white voters. The poll gives her a five-point advantage over Mr. Trump statewide._____Song: “Cadillac Ranch”Album: “The River”State of the race: Northwestern Texas favors Mr. Trump“Cadillac Ranch” is a carefree, borderline-nonsensical salute to one of Mr. Springsteen’s favorite themes: the joys of a good, shiny sedan. It is also a homage to the famed tourist attraction in Amarillo.The city’s thriving economy revolves around meatpacking and defense contracting.A recent Texas Lyceum poll shows Mr. Trump leading Mrs. Clinton by just six points in Texas, and if that holds, he would win the state by a narrower margin than any Republican candidate since Bob Dole. But his fate seems secure in Amarillo, which is in the state’s northwestern quadrant, where no statewide Republican candidate since 2010 has taken less than 70 percent._____Song: “Darlington County”Album: “Born in the U.S.A.”State of the race: South Carolina favors Mr. TrumpLocation: “Darlington County” tells the lighthearted story of two men who have left New York City behind and are cruising down Interstate 95, searching for work — presumably escaping some unsavory business back home.The area is friendly to Mr. Trump, who trounced the field in South Carolina, including in Darlington County, where he defeated Senator Ted Cruz of Texas by roughly 10 points. No reliable general election polls have been published in South Carolina, but Mr. Trump should coast to victory here. No Democratic presidential nominee has won the state since 1976, two election cycles before Mr. Springsteen recorded this song._____Song: “Working on the Highway”Album: “Born in the U.S.A.”State of the race: The Florida Gulf Coast favors Mr. TrumpThis song’s narrator finds himself arrested and enlisted in a prison gang doing highway construction in Charlotte County, along Florida’s Gulf Coast.The area is a conservative stronghold dominated by retirees and white-collar professionals. Ninety percent of county residents are white, and white Floridians overwhelmingly favor Trump, according to a recent Monmouth University poll. A separate poll by CNN/ORC gave him a lead of 49 percent to 33 percent in the central Gulf Coast region.Mr. Trump feels a special connection to Florida, which he calls his second home, and barely a week goes by that the candidate does not visit what his campaign considers one of the most important states in the general election.