http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/06/business/a-top-target-executive-resigns.html
Target Executive Resigns After Breach - The New York Times
Appointments and Executive Changes,Target Corporation,Steinhafel  Gregg W,Jacob  Beth M,Cyberattacks and Hackers
March 5, 2014
9925
The highest-ranking technology executive at Target has resigned, the company said on Wednesday, just one week after it revealed how badly its profits had been hurt during the holiday season by an enormous breach of its system that exposed customer information.Beth M. Jacob, who held the title of chief information officer and executive vice president for technology services, is the first high-level executive to depart after a series of computer hacking episodes that may have also affected more than half a dozen other retailers in recent months.The company said it would name an interim information officer from outside the company while it searched for Ms. Jacob’s replacement, in what Gregg Steinhafel, Target’s chief executive, described as an “overhaul” of how the company protects sensitive information.“While we are still in the process of an ongoing investigation, we recognize that the information security environment is evolving rapidly,” Mr. Steinhafel said.In her resignation letter, Ms. Jacob said she was stepping down “effective immediately,” but she made no mention of the data breach.“This is a difficult decision after 12 rewarding years with the company I love,” she said. “But this is a good time for a change.”While it is unclear how involved Ms. Jacob was in day-to-day protection, online security officials at the company ultimately reported to her. Target has declined to provide details on her training, but according to the Target website, Ms. Jacob does not appear to have a computer science background. She holds a degree in retail merchandising and a master’s in business administration. She first joined Target in 1984 as an assistant buyer, left the company for a time and then returned in 2002 to run its call centers. She had been vice president of Target Technology Services and chief information officer since 2008.Target also said on Wednesday that it would create a high-level position to focus on web security. A company spokeswoman said the responsibility had been shared by several people in the past, and would now be centralized.On Dec. 19, during the final days of the holiday shopping season, the company publicly confirmed that credit and debit card information for 40 million of its customers had been compromised. A few weeks later, the company announced that another batch of data, personal information on some 70 million customers, had been stolen as well.The breach at Target was believed to have been perpetrated by a group of criminals in Eastern Europe who installed malware on the company’s system to siphon away customer information, according to two people involved in the investigation who were not authorized to speak publicly. One law enforcement official said the criminals were believed to have gained access to Target’s system using the login credentials of one of the retailer’s vendors, a company based in Pennsylvania that provided air-conditioning, heating and refrigeration services.Since the Target breach became public, several other retailers have acknowledged the theft of customer information, including Neiman Marcus and Michaels arts and craft stores. On Wednesday, Sally Beauty, which sells beauty products at 2,600 stores throughout the United States, said it was investigating a possible breach.The breaches at Target, Neiman and Michaels are believed to have been perpetrated by the same group of criminals, who targeted as many as six other retailers. But so far, the Target breach appears to have affected the most people.For Target, news of the breach could not have surfaced at a worse time, and it had a significant impact on its performance during the all-important holiday season. Last week, Target said that its fourth-quarter profit was down 46 percent from the same period the year before, partly because of a steep drop in sales and traffic after the breach became public.To lure back jittery shoppers, Target was forced to offer unplanned discounts, like 10 percent off purchases in its stores during the last weekend before Christmas, which also took a bite out of its profit. The company spent $61 million on expenses related to the breach during the fourth quarter, and said it expected to receive $44 million in insurance payments.Hemu Nigam, founder of SSP Blue, a security consulting firm that also does corporate reputation development, said Ms. Jacob’s departure was an important step for Target in rebuilding both its image and its approach to security.“When Wall Street and your consumers are so significantly impacted by an event like this, you have to do what people expect, which is to make significant changes,” Mr. Nigam said.In the past, Target has been fond of hiring internally, but on Wednesday it announced a third external search, for a new chief compliance officer. Ann Scovil, who oversees compliance and risk assurance at the company, will retire at the end of the month, a spokeswoman said, and her position will be split between two people.Mr. Nigam said that understanding and defending against online attacks required a particular skill set.“I think what Target is showcasing is that the time has come to focus energy and resources in that unique space,” he said. “It’s the only way for businesses to thrive in the future.”