https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/30/us/politics/a-coalition-in-which-some-do-more-than-others-to-fight-isis.html
A Coalition in Which Some Do More Than Others to Fight ISIS - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),United States International Relations,Russia,United States Defense and Military Forces,Defense and Military Forces,Terrorism,Assad  Bashar al-
Nov. 29, 2015
5845
WASHINGTON — In the aftermath of the terrorist attack on Paris, President Obama wanted to make clear that much of the world was with the United States in fighting the Islamic State.“We have mobilized 65 countries to go after ISIL,” Mr. Obama told reporters while on a trip to Turkey, using an acronym for the group. “The United States has built and led a broad coalition against ISIL of some 65 nations,” he said several days later.“The United States, France and our coalition of some 65 nations have been united in one mission — to destroy these ISIL terrorists,” he added a few days after that.The president has sought to evoke the sort of grand coalition the United States led in World War II. But when it comes to the war part of the war against the Islamic State, the 65-member coalition begins to shrink rapidly down to a coalition of just a handful.As of Nov. 19, the United States had conducted 6,471 of the 8,289 airstrikes against the Islamic State, according to the Pentagon. American warplanes carried out about two-thirds of the strikes on Iraqi territory and 95 percent of those on Syrian territory. Australia, Canada, France and Jordan have conducted strikes in both countries. Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Britain have participated just in Iraq, while Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates have participated just in Syria.That leaves more than 50 other coalition members that have never been directly involved in the air campaign. Some early participants, like Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Jordan and the U.A.E., have not conducted a strike in months. While France has stepped up its strikes since the Paris attacks, Canada’s new prime minister is sticking to his vow to pull its six CF-18 fighter jets out of the bombing campaign, although Canadian surveillance and refueling aircraft may stay with the mission.“Presidents want to assure the American people that they are not alone in fighting the enemy and won’t have to bear the costs alone,” said Bruce O. Riedel, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who advised Mr. Obama on Afghanistan. “The striking note about this coalition is that not one of the 65 members is ready to put boots on the ground.”The Obama administration considers just 24 of the countries to be part of the core group that meets quarterly. The Italians are training Iraqi police officers, the Germans and Emiratis are working with 20 countries to stabilize war-torn areas, and 18 countries are training Iraqi and Kurdish military.But many others seem included in the membership rolls because they have adopted policies protecting their own security. Countries like Kuwait and Tunisia have broken up Islamist cells. Sweden is speeding up legislation to curb the abuse of Swedish passports and to criminalize foreign fighters. Albania approved a national strategy to combat violent extremism. Other members include Luxembourg, Montenegro, Iceland, Taiwan, Singapore, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Latvia, and Kosovo.“I don’t know why the White House has put as much emphasis on the coalition as it has, because it’s been fairly transparent for a long time that the overwhelming majority of those nations have sent in their $25 contributions and not done much more,” said Daniel Benjamin, Mr. Obama’s former State Department counterterrorism coordinator, now at Dartmouth College.James F. Jeffrey, a former ambassador to Iraq under Mr. Obama who is now at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, said that given America’s overwhelming military power, allies are helpful mainly for political reasons and in stabilization phases.“These coalitions are always useful for international legitimacy and U.S. domestic support, but traditionally have significant military potential only when doing low intensity ‘day after’ or ‘day before’ defensive or holding missions,” he said.One reason Mr. Obama has emphasized the size of the coalition lately has been to isolate Russia, which has begun its own military operations in Syria, independent of the United States and its allies, to bolster the government of President Bashar al-Assad.“We’ve got a coalition of 65 countries who’ve been active in pushing back against ISIL for quite some time,” Mr. Obama said last week. “Russia right now is a coalition of two — Iran and Russia, supporting Assad.”At a briefing this month, John Kirby, the State Department spokesman, defended the coalition when a reporter suggested Russia was doing more than many members.“It’s a coalition of the willing, which means every nation has to be willing to contribute what they can,” Mr. Kirby said. Not everyone can conduct airstrikes, he added, “but that doesn’t mean that other nations’ contributions aren’t important.”Gen. John R. Allen, the retired Marine who traveled to 30 capitals assembling the coalition, enlisting Nigeria, Tunisia and Malaysia in September, said its significance went beyond its military activities.“While it is the coalition’s kinetic actions that often receive the most attention, it is the aggregate effect of the coalition’s activities across multiple lines of effort that will in the end determine the coalition’s success,” he said in a speech last month before stepping down as special envoy.Mr. Obama’s coalition of the willing is reminiscent of President George W. Bush’s own coalition of the willing in the Iraq war kicked off by the invasion in 2003. Much like Mr. Obama, Mr. Bush regularly talked about his coalition, numbered at 49 shortly after the invasion, in his case to counter assertions that he waged war unilaterally over the objections of the international community.Mr. Bush’s coalition included more allies with actual forces on the ground than today’s. Shortly after the invasion, American partners had about 25,000 troops in Iraq. But the Bush coalition was also inflated by such global players as the Dominican Republic, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Solomon Islands and Tonga.At the time, Democrats mocked Mr. Bush’s coalition. Few were more caustic than John Kerry, then a senator from Massachusetts, who would challenge Mr. Bush in the 2004 election. At various points, Mr. Kerry dismissed Mr. Bush’s coalition as just “window dressing,” “the phoniest thing I ever heard” and the “coalition of the bribed, the coerced, the bought and the extorted.”Now Mr. Obama’s secretary of state, Mr. Kerry sees more virtues in the current coalition as it fights the Islamic State, also called Daesh. Just before the Paris attacks, he declared in a speech: “The coalition has already made a huge difference in reversing Daesh’s momentum and in saving people’s lives.”Even if not all 65 of them.