https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/opinion/diplomats-decry-muslim-ban.html
Diplomats Decry Muslim Ban - The New York Times
United States International Relations,United States Politics and Government,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,State Department,Trump  Donald J,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Immigration and Emigration,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Muslims and Islam
Jan. 30, 2017
8442
More than 100 State Department employees have indicated they will sign a memorandum in coming days registering their opposition to President Trump’s travel ban through the department’s “dissent cable” system, an official mechanism created to voice dissent to policies.A draft of the memo, written by a midlevel officer in the State Department’s consular bureau, predicted that the ban on citizens of seven nations, and the indefinite suspension of the resettlement of Syrian refugees, would be “counterproductive” to its stated goal of enhancing national security.“This ban stands in opposition to the core American and constitutional values that we, as federal employees, took an oath to uphold,” the memo said, warning that the ban has the potential to increase anti-American sentiment among Muslims worldwide. The acting attorney general, Sally Yates, an Obama administration holdover, backed that view in a letter Monday to Justice Department lawyers, instructing them not to defend the order in court. Hours later, Mr. Trump fired Ms. Yates.“We have a special obligation,” the draft memo said, “to maintain an immigration system that is as free as possible from discrimination, that does not have an implied or actual religious tests, and that views individuals as individuals, not as part of stereotyped groups.”The memo warned that the ban would also alienate key allies in the Middle East, which could result in the United States losing access to “the intelligence and resources need[ed] to fight the root causes of terror abroad, before an attack occurs within our borders.” The writer noted that there were alternative ways to make traveler screening more comprehensive by strengthening existing protocols and information-sharing systems.The administration would be reckless to dismiss this warning from public servants who have spent their careers safeguarding American interests abroad. Their concerns are shared by lawmakers from both parties, several European leaders and top United Nations officials.In just a few days, the misguided order has disrupted the lives of hundreds of refugees, scholars and professionals, while providing jihadist groups with a propaganda bonanza. The members of the administration who set this initiative in motion may have thought it would make the country safer. By now, it has to have become apparent even to them that it is having the opposite effect.