https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/19/nyregion/cuomo-bronx-sheridan-expressway.html
Cuomo Plots Demise of Bronx’s Unloved Sheridan Expressway - The New York Times
Sheridan Expressway (Bronx  NY),Cuomo  Andrew M,Hunts Point Market,Roads and Traffic,Moses  Robert,Diaz  Ruben Jr,Bronx (NYC),South Bronx (Bronx  NY),New York State,Bronx River (Bronx  NY)
March 19, 2017
9563
More than 50 years ago, Robert Moses designed a freeway that sliced through the South Bronx, cutting many residents off from the riverfront. On Sunday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York endorsed a plan to tear down that road, the Sheridan Expressway, and replace it with a tree-lined boulevard that could stitch the community back together.Mr. Cuomo said he intended to include nearly $700 million in the state budget for the first phase of the project, which would involve the rare step of decommissioning the expressway, also known as Interstate 895. That would be the first significant funding of a plan that community activists and some local elected officials have championed for more than 15 years.“This is transformative,” said Ruben Diaz Jr., the Bronx borough president. “You cannot put any dollar figure on the amount of quality time that families are going to be able to spend along the river.”He was referring to the Bronx River, which was once one of the most polluted waterways in the country. Now, Mr. Diaz said, the river not only supports fish again but is also home to beavers.He said the Sheridan Expressway was among the “major fumbles and errors” of Mr. Moses, the highway-enamored city planner who designed the Cross Bronx Expressway and the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway. “He was considered the great planner of his day, but he didn’t necessarily do it with consideration of the community,” Mr. Diaz said.Mr. Moses originally intended the Sheridan, which is just over a mile long, to extend farther, plowing through the Bronx Zoo and connecting to the New England Thruway. But that plan failed to gain public support, leaving the Sheridan as an underused stub that links the Cross-Bronx to the Bruckner Expressway.“The Sheridan Expressway was Robert Moses at his worst,” said Mitchell Moss, director of the New York University’s Rudin Center for Transportation Policy and Management.Large trucks still use the expressway to get to and from the produce market at Hunts Point. But those trucks exit the Sheridan and rumble through local streets to reach the market.David R. Shuffler, a community activist, lives on one of those streets and said he feared for the safety of his 1-year-old son. “I hear trucks barreling through my street every single night and all day long,” said Mr. Shuffler, who is the executive director of Youth Ministries for Peace and Justice.Mr. Shuffler’s organization is a member of the South Bronx River Watershed Alliance, which has been campaigning for changes to the Sheridan since 1999. The group derailed a state plan to extend the Sheridan to the Hunts Point market and has pressed for alternatives that would be less disruptive to the community. That pressure led to a federally funded study by city planners in 2013 that recommended transforming the Sheridan by installing traffic lights and crosswalks.Mr. Cuomo said his plan would strike a balance between the community’s demands for a safer roadway that offers access to the parks along the river and the needs of the merchants in the market. He said it would also help to bring down the persistently high rates of asthma among children who grow up around Hunts Point.“It’s a line of trucks and it’s loud and it’s ugly,” Mr. Cuomo said in a phone interview, describing the traffic through Hunts Point. But he said that the market is a critical part of the economy of the Bronx, employing about 3,500 workers, many of whom live in the surrounding neighborhoods.Getting the various community groups to agree on a comprehensive solution was complicated, Mr. Cuomo said. But, he added, “This was always a money problem.”Mr. Cuomo said he would allocate $600 million, in addition to a previous allocation of $97 million, toward the first phase of what would ultimately be a $1.8 billion project. It would turn the Sheridan from an interstate highway into Sheridan Boulevard, with landscaped medians and at least two crosswalks.“That is what makes it a boulevard,” Mr. Cuomo said. “There’s no turning back on that. Otherwise, you’re not doing a boulevard.”Later phases of the plan call for new ramps, including one that would carry trucks over the Bruckner Expressway and onto Edgewater Road, which leads directly to the Hunts Point market. The project was also designed to eliminate a notorious bottleneck at the interchange of the Sheridan and the Bruckner by adding a lane to the Bruckner and relocating ramps to the Sheridan.All of those changes should reduce travel time for trucks going to and from the market, about one-fifth of which use the Sheridan, state officials said. The less time the trucks spend idling, the less exhaust they will spew into an area once known as “asthma alley,” officials said.This is the latest of several ambitious infrastructure projects that Mr. Cuomo has announced. He pushed for a more comprehensive overhaul of La Guardia Airport, including a rail link, and has proposed significant changes to Kennedy International Airport and the highways in Queens that connect to it.Elena Conte, the director of policy at the Pratt Center for Community Development, which is part of the community group alliance, called the governor’s commitment laudable but said she was awaiting the details of his plan. “It’s an encouraging start, and a lot of very important details need to be worked out,” Ms. Conte said.“To the extent that the proposal the governor is investing in seeks to address the legacy of Robert Moses’ top-down planning, it is a visionary step forward,” Ms. Conte said. ”If Governor Cuomo wants credit for undoing the legacy of Robert Moses in the South Bronx, he will do that not just by making physical changes but also by listening to a community that Moses pointedly ignored.”