https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/07/us/politics/yemen-luqman-freed.html
Marine Veteran Held by Yemeni Rebels Since 2015 Is Freed - The New York Times
Luqman  Wallead Yusuf Pitts,Kidnapping and Hostages,Houthis,Mohamed  Jihan,Yemen
Nov. 6, 2016
9033
WASHINGTON — A Marine veteran detained in Yemen for more than a year was released Sunday after diplomatic negotiations, the State Department announced.The detainee, Wallead Yusuf Pitts Luqman, 37, was abducted in April 2015 as he tried to leave the country after having taught English there for two years. He was then held in secret by the Houthis, a Shiite rebel group.Secretary of State John Kerry, who was involved in the negotiations to free Mr. Luqman and was in touch with his family, announced the news of his release in a statement.Mr. Kerry also thanked the government of Oman for its assistance and said, “We also recognize this positive gesture by the Houthis.”A senior American official said the Houthis had cleared Mr. Luqman of wrongdoing in August before finally acknowledging that they were holding him, a key step in getting him home. He was flown to Oman after negotiations.Last month, Mr. Luqman’s wife, Jihan Mohamed, went public with her husband’s abduction, hoping the move would help free him. She said members of the Houthi political security organization, one of Yemen’s two security agencies, had been holding her husband.“They had no reason to take him, and there are no charges,” Ms. Mohamed said in a Facebook posting. “After months of not knowing his condition or where he was, I finally received proof of life this year.”She pleaded with the Houthis to release her husband. “He is a good family man, good Muslim, and he should be returned to his wife and children,” she said.Mr. Luqman, an American citizen, served in the Marines and the Army, according to his LinkedIn profile. He had previously lived in Minnesota, Georgia and the Milwaukee area.Officials with the interagency Hostage Recovery Fusion Cell and the State Department worked to free Mr. Luqman, whose condition was not immediately known.After the American-backed government in Yemen fell last year, the Houthis seized power in parts of the country and detained several Americans.Oman was instrumental in the release of at least four Americans. Another died last year while in the custody of the Houthis. An autopsy showed that he had been tortured.