http://www.nytimes.com/2002/12/19/international/liberal-wins-south-koreas-presidential-election.html
Liberal Wins South Korea's Presidential Election - The New York Times
South Korea,Kim Dae Jung,Elections,International Relations
Dec. 19, 2002
3487
SEOUL, South Korea, Dec. 19 — Roh Moo Hyun, a liberal lawyer who campaigned urging continued engagement with North Korea and greater autonomy from the United States narrowly won election today after a campaign so tumultuous that it defied forecast.The victory of Mr. Roh, the candidate of the ruling Grand Millennium Party, sets South Korea and the United States on the most divergent diplomatic paths they have followed in a half century of close military and economic alliance.With about 86 percent of the votes counted, Mr. Roh held a lead of 48.9 percent to 46.6 percent over Lee Hoi Chang, a staunchly conservative former supreme court justice who lost even more narrowly to the outgoing President Kim Dae Jung five years ago.The Bush administration has spent the last three months pressing traditional friends like Japan and newer ones, like Russia and China, to heavily ratchet up the pressure on North Korea to force that country to abandon a once-secret nuclear weapons program and to end its missile sales in the Middle East and elsewhere.Mr. Roh, however, clearly staked his campaign on continued engagement with North Korea and has forcefully ruled out deadlines for compliance or economic sanctions to force South KoreaTMs impoverished communist neighbor to respect its international engagements.By contrast, Mr. Lee Hoi Chang had said that South Korea should suspend its assistance to the North until Pyongyang cooperates on a host of issues, from arms control to family reunifications.Mr. Roh's commitment to engagement with North Korea, the most important legacy of his political mentor, President Kim, has been so pronounced at times that it produced a stunning last minute turn of events that many here thought may have cost him the election.In the final day of campaigning on Wednesday, Mr. Roh's comments about North Korea shocked a former rival candidate and 11th hour supporter, Chung Mong Joon, scion of the Hyundai empire, causing him to drop their painstakingly arranged alliance.In that pre-election speech, with Mr. Chung standing nearby, Mr. Roh said "If the U.S. and North Korea start a war, we will stop it." Some took his comments to imply that South Korea would take a neutral position in any dispute between the United States and North Korea. Later that evening, through a spokesman, Mr. Chung denounced his former partner's speech, saying, "The United States is our ally and our view is that the U.S. has no reason to fight North Korea."Mr. Chung's abrupt withdrawal of support was featured on the front pages of all of the country's newspapers this morning, and most commentators here assumed it would have a devastating impact on Mr. Roh's chances, especially since its left him with no time to recover.The two men forged their alliance only last month after a hastily arranged primary election aimed at producing a candidacy that could defeat the conservative Mr. Lee who opinion surveys had until then consistently ranked as the frontrunner. Mr. Roh, who had always placed third in the polls, defeated Mr. Chung in the primary and was immediately catapulted into the frontrunner's position.This afternoon, Mr. Roh, who is 56, restated the assertive diplomatic position he has taken throughout the three week campaign."We must have dialogue with the North and with the U.S.," he told a crowd in downtown Seoul. "In this way, we must make sure that the North-U.S. dispute does not escalate into a war. Now the Republic of Korea must take a central role. We cannot have a war."South Korean politics have a long history of treacherous twists and bold dirty tricks. In the last election, the national intelligence service reportedly sought to pay North Korea to stage a border incident in order to boost the conservative candidate. So alternative theories abounded today about Mr. Chung's motives, with people invoking everything from a fear of a vendetta against Hyundai if Mr. Lee won to heavy backstage lobbying by Washington."Almost everyone expected that Chung's move would do a lot more damage," said Yim Young Soon, a political scientist at Sungkyunkwan University. "In the end, the fact that Chung defaulted seemed to solidify Roh's support. On the North Korean nuclear threat, the conventional wisdom said it would help Lee Hoi Chang, but people who live close to a demilitarized zone turned out to prefer Roh's more peaceful approach."If relations with North Korea have been at the center of the campaign from the very start, South Korea's ties with the United States have been its barely concealed subtext. In recent weeks, the country has seen some if the biggest demonstrations in a generation as huge crowds have massed in Seoul and other cities to protest the recent acquittal of two United States Army personnel in the accidental death of two schoolgirls who were crushed by their armored vehicle last June.The outpouring of anti-American sentiment appeared to give a strong boost to the candidacy of Mr. Roh who once advocated the outright withdrawal of the United States' 37,000 troops from South Korea when he was a labor lawyer in the 1980's.The protests appeared to be put Mr. Lee, whose diplomatic views are close to those of the Bush administration, on the defensive. He appeared awkward expressing sympathy for some of the demonstrators demands, such as the need for a revision of the status of forces agreement, the legal framework governing the rights of American troops here.Already assured of strong support from the young and the working classes, Mr. Roh edged toward the center, repeatedly stating that his opposition to American bases was mistaken, adding that he valued the country's alliance with the United States. He also reportedly told a visiting American diplomat that he had "grown more realistic."Often asked during the campaign why he had never been to the United States, Mr. Roh was quick to flash his diffident side, replying pointedly that he was interested in going to Washington "just for the sake of a photo-op."Mr. Roh's difficult challenge now is to reconcile the dual yearnings of South Korea's sophisticated and increasingly affluent younger generations for more autonomy from the United States and reduced tensions with North Korea with his country's continued heavy reliance on American security guarantees."The challenge will be between accommodating popular aspirations and meeting the demands of the Bush administration," said Scott Snyder, Korea representative of the Asia Society. "The new president is going to face critical decisions in three areas, redefining the relationship with the U.S., managing relations with North Korea, and reorienting Korea's relations in the regional context."