https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/us/politics/donald-trump-transition.html
Intelligence Chief’s Olive Branch to Trump Gets Twisted in Translation - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,United States,Trump  Donald J,Clapper  James R Jr,Sessions  Jefferson B III
Jan. 12, 2017
6454
■ James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, offered a public olive branch to President-elect Donald J. Trump on Wednesday night, which Mr. Trump appears to have twisted.■ Mr. Trump appoints Rudolph W. Giuliani to head his cybersecurity review.■ L.L. Bean finds itself in the middle of a Trump storm.■ Team Trump went to war with the news media after Mr. Trump’s contentious news conference.In an extraordinary statement on Wednesday night, James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, said he had reached out to Mr. Trump, a man who compared the intelligence agencies to Nazis, to try to ease the president-elect’s concerns.Mr. Clapper said he had expressed his “profound dismay” at leaks that have emerged since the intelligence chiefs briefed Mr. Trump last Friday on Russia’s efforts to help elect him president. And he disavowed any authorship of the dossier of unsubstantiated compromising material that Russia is reported to have on the incoming president:Mr. Trump returned the favor with his own Twitter post Thursday morning:Someone is lying here. Mr. Clapper’s statement was explicit: The intelligence community “has not made any judgment that the information in this document is reliable” — a far cry from a “false and fictitious” denunciation.Of course, Mr. Clapper will soon be heading to the exits, replaced by former Senator Dan Coats, assuming Senate confirmation. So whether peacemaking at the top will ease the ill will in the rank and file of the Trump White House and the intelligence agencies has yet to be determined.Mr. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York and one of Mr. Trump’s most stalwart loyalists, finally has a job in the administration: heading Mr. Trump’s promised effort to combat cyberattacks.Mr. Giuliani, as chairman of the global cybersecurity practice at the law firm Greenberg Traurig, brings expertise, but his experience in complex communications policy is checkered. His tenure as mayor is still haunted by the decision to place an emergency command center at the World Trade Center over the opposition of the New York Police Department. The command center, of course, was destroyed by the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.L.L. Bean, known for its preppy sportswear, rubbery boots and New England reserve, finds itself in an unexpected position: the crossfire of the Trump wars.When it came to light that Linda Bean, the granddaughter and heir of the company founder Leon Leonwood Bean, bankrolled a pro-Trump political action committee, opponents vowed to boycott. A group called Grab Your Wallet led the charge, nevermind that Ms. Bean’s real empire is in lobsters, not Bean boots.It’s all of a piece now — especially once the president-elect inserted himself into the fray on Twitter.The company very much does not want to be part of this fight. In a Facebook post, Shawn Gorman, L.L. Bean’s executive chairman, said:There is another problem with Mr. Trump’s intervention. It could contravene ethics rules that prohibit government endorsements of privately made products.It’s hard to know which of Mr. Trump’s relationships is worse: with the intelligence agencies or with the news media.After the president-elect’s contentious news conference on Wednesday, his first as president-elect, indeed his first since July, Mr. Trump graciously posted on Twitter on Thursday morning:The soon-to-be White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, seemed to revel in the cage match that is Mr. Trump’s interaction with the news media.Mr. Spicer’s toughest words were aimed at CNN’s Jim Acosta, who stood at the news conference to demand a question after Mr. Trump attacked his network as “fake news.”Of course, in the Trump era, both sides can get mileage out of the spectacle.Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, plans to announce on Thursday that he will oppose a fellow senator, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, when his nomination as attorney general comes to a vote, saying he is not confident that Mr. Sessions would “serve as an independent check on the incoming administration.”Questioning Mr. Sessions’s commitment to the nation’s most vulnerable citizens, Mr. Schumer’s statement reads:The decision does not leave Mr. Sessions’s ultimate confirmation in doubt. No Republican has come out against him, and more conservative Democrats, such as Senators Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, may well support him.But it does mean that the final Sessions vote is likely to be split largely along party lines.