http://www.nytimes.com/2000/09/13/us/new-treatment-offers-promise-against-kidney-cancer.html
New Treatment Offers Promise Against Kidney Cancer - The New York Times
NATIONAL HEART  LUNG AND BLOOD INSTITUTE,CHILDS  RICHARD W,BONE MARROW,CANCER,KIDNEYS
Sept. 13, 2000
9420
An experimental treatment for advanced kidney cancer has shrunk tumors or wiped them out completely and prolonged life in some patients for whom conventional therapy failed, doctors are reporting.Although the doctors are reporting only the first test of the procedure, and although their findings are considered preliminary, researchers not connected with the work say the results are encouraging enough to warrant testing the treatment in more patients with kidney cancer or certain other types of tumors.There are 30,000 cases of kidney cancer a year in the United States, a third of them attributed to smoking, and 12,000 deaths.The new procedure, a modified version of bone marrow transplantation, was developed at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute by a team led by Dr. Richard W. Childs. In a paper to be published tomorrow in The New England Journal of Medicine, he and his colleagues describe the first 19 patients they treated, from one to three years ago.Before treatment, few of the 19 patients were expected to live more than a year, Dr. Childs said. But nine, all of whom got their treatment more than a year ago, are still alive, including four in whom all traces of the cancer have disappeared. In the five others still alive, tumors have shrunk by more than half.Eight patients died of their cancer, and two died of complications from the treatment. The tumors had shrunk in one of these two patients.''We've taken the worst of the worst kidney-cancer patients, who had no other treatment option available, and cancers regressed in a majority,'' Dr. Childs said in an interview. ''We're making tumors shrink, and making people live longer.''But, he said, it is impossible to tell how long the remissions will last. ''We don't want to use the word 'cure' until it's five years,'' he said, adding that cancer patients sometimes relapsed even after 10-year remissions.All the patients in the study had advanced kidney cancer that had spread to other organs and that had not improved after conventional treatment with interleukin-2 or interferon alfa, drugs meant to stimulate the patient's immune system to fight  the tumor.Those drugs help only about 19 percent of kidney-cancer patients. And standard chemotherapy with drugs meant to kill tumor cells outright is ineffective against kidney cancer, in part because the kidneys are designed to remove harmful substances from the body without being affected by them.Once kidney cancer has begun to spread, half of patients die in less than a year.Bone marrow transplantation, in which cells from a donor are given to a cancer patient, has not previously been used to treat kidney cancer. It is most often used to treat leukemia and other cancers that affect the blood and the immune system.In those diseases, the patient is given huge doses of chemotherapy and radiation to kill the cancer. But that treatment also destroys the patient's immune system and blood-forming cells, and if they are not reconstituted, the patient will die. So the donor's bone marrow, which contains stem cells that can create a whole new blood supply and immune system, is used to ''rescue'' the patient from the chemotherapy.In the patients with kidney cancer, Dr. Childs and his colleagues used the donor cells in a radically different way. Rather than using them to rescue the patient from chemotherapy, they reasoned that the donor cells themselves could fight the patient's cancer.Since chemotherapy does not fight kidney cancer, the patients in the study were not given big doses of it, or radiation. But they were given drugs to destroy their immune systems, so that their bodies would not reject the stem cells that they then received from donors.The donors were siblings who had matching cell types; patients whose siblings did not match could not enter the study. The stem cells were collected from the donors' bloodstream, with no need for the painful bone punctures used in the past to harvest stem cells from marrow.The greatest risk of the procedure was that the donor cells would attack not just the tumors but also the patient's own tissues, in a potentially fatal reaction called graft-versus-host disease. Two patients did die as a result of that disorder.The team gave patients additional drugs to try to prevent the disorder, but also began withdrawing these drugs as quickly as possible in order to allow the donors' marrow to fight the cancer cells.In some cases, it took months for the donor cells to begin working against the tumors. Dr. Childs said one patient had ''explosive'' tumor growth in his lungs 100 days after treatment, and the doctors worried that he would die. But they gave him some more cells from the donor, and a month later the tumors had shrunk dramatically. Four months later, they were gone completely. The patient is now working full time.Dr. Robert J. Motzer of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who was not involved in the study, said: ''This is a novel treatment strategy that has produced encouraging results, in a cancer that is highly refractory to conventional therapy. But it will have to be reproduced by other cancer centers. And it has the potential for a high degree of toxicity.''