https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/us/kellyanne-conway-anti-abortion-march.html
Kellyanne Conway, Who Managed Trump to Win, Will Speak at Anti-Abortion March - The New York Times
Abortion,United States Politics and Government,Roe v Wade (Supreme Court Decision),Naral Pro-Choice America,March for Life,Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Republican Party,Conway  Kellyanne,Gingrich  Newt,Trump  Donald J,United States
Jan. 11, 2017
6379
WASHINGTON — In a sign of abortion opponents’ newfound clout in the capital, Kellyanne Conway, the Republican strategist who led Donald J. Trump to victory and will serve as his White House counselor, will speak at a major anti-abortion march here the week after his inaugural.Ms. Conway, 49, made history in November as the first woman to manage a successful presidential campaign. She has long been an outspoken foe of abortion, and she could become the first sitting White House official to address the annual march in person, though both Mr. Trump and Vice President-elect Mike Pence have been invited.“It’s an incredible gesture for pro-life Americans,” said Marilyn Musgrave, a Republican former congresswoman from Colorado, now the top lobbyist for Susan B. Anthony List, an anti-abortion group here. Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life of America, said of Ms. Conway: “She’s one of us.”This will be the 44th year of the march, which organizers say is typically attended by tens of thousands of anti-abortion activists. The annual event, often held on Jan. 22 but pushed back to Jan. 27 this year because of the inaugural, marks the anniversary of Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision establishing a national right to abortion.Neither Ms. Conway nor Trump transition officials responded to requests for comment on Wednesday. But Jeanne Mancini, the March for Life president, hinted in an interview Wednesday that Mr. Trump or Mr. Pence, or both, might attend.“Stay tuned,” she said.No president or vice president has attended the march, though Ronald Reagan sent a video in 1988, and George W. Bush addressed marchers from the East Room of the White House in 2008.Quick-witted, confident and comfortable on television, Ms. Conway, a mother of four, was a powerful force in driving women to vote for Mr. Trump; in one election surprise, 53 percent of white women did, according to exit polls. As the highest-ranking woman in the new administration, she holds powerful appeal for Republicans in general, and women especially.“I don’t think it can be underestimated how significant her presence on the Trump campaign was in terms of motivating and mobilizing the pro-life vote,” said Charmaine Yoest, a longtime anti-abortion advocate here, in an interview.Abortion foes are looking to make big policy gains in Washington under Mr. Trump, who as a candidate signed a letter agreeing to four of the movement’s central demands, including appointing conservative Supreme Court justices and enacting a permanent ban on taxpayer-financed abortions. Already, states like Ohio are rolling back abortion rights.Ilyse Hogue, the president of Naral Pro-Choice America, said in a recent interview that abortion rights advocates see themselves “standing on the edge of a very dark time.” Ms. Musgrave happily agreed; she said she spent Wednesday on Capitol Hill, at a closed-door conference with Republican leaders who are planning strategy, including stripping funding from Planned Parenthood.“It’s a great time to be pro-life,” Ms. Musgrave said.Ms. Conway will not be the only speaker. Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan, archbishop of New York, is also scheduled to attend, as is Benjamin Watson, a tight end for the Baltimore Ravens, Karyme Lozano, a Mexican TV star and Abby Johnson, a former clinic director at Planned Parenthood who later became an anti-abortion activist.But, short of Mr. Trump or Mr. Pence, Ms. Conway is the march’s biggest “get.” She is a well-known figure here in Washington who tends to arouse the ire of liberal women who consider themselves feminists — and has been caricatured on “Saturday Night Live” — which is one reason anti-abortion women like Ms. Yoest find her both sympathetic and effective.During the 2012 presidential primary season, while advising Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker then running for the Republican nomination, she ripped into Mitt Romney, who eventually became the party’s nominee, for waffling on the issue, saying in an interview that he did not “seem comfortable in his own skin.”At the time, Mr. Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, was promising a “pro-life presidency.” But in 1994, while running for Senate, he said he thought abortion should be “safe and legal,” and in 2002, as a candidate for governor, he had sought the backing of abortion rights advocates. Ms. Conway wasted little time in calling him out on the inconsistencies.“The emperor has no policy clothes,” she warned, “and it’s costing him on this issue.”