https://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/14/us/politics/for-skeptical-lawmaker-doubts-on-attack-were-sown-in-whirlwind-trip-to-libya.html
For Skeptical Lawmaker, Doubts on Attack Were Sown in Whirlwind Trip to Libya - The New York Times
Chaffetz  Jason,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Benghazi (Libya),State Department,Obama  Barack,Mills  Cheryl D,Hicks  Gregory N,Libya,Nuland  Victoria J,Benghazi Attack (2012)
May 13, 2013
5726
WASHINGTON — On Oct. 6, 2012, an Air Force Gulfstream jet landed in Tripoli, Libya, carrying a four-star Army general, a brash Republican congressman from Utah, and a young State Department lawyer — an unlikely group there to investigate a harrowing tragedy.Less than a month earlier, militants had overrun and burned the American diplomatic compound in Libya’s second city, Benghazi, killing four Americans, including Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens. Diplomats at the embassy in Tripoli were still traumatized by the death of their colleagues and fearful for their own safety.But Representative Jason Chaffetz, a member of the House Committee on Government Oversight and Reform, wanted answers on what he believed was an increasingly spurious account by the Obama administration of what happened in Benghazi the night of Sept. 11.By the time Mr. Chaffetz left Tripoli, eight hours after he arrived, the lines were drawn between the State Department and House Republicans, a mutual suspicion that played out vividly at a Congressional hearing last week. “That’s where my passion for this story really grew,” Mr. Chaffetz said in an interview last week. “What we were hearing, and what we were seeing were two different things.”From the beginning, Mr. Chaffetz’s visit raised concerns in the State Department that Republicans were looking to use Benghazi as a political club against President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.Worried about interviews Mr. Chaffetz wanted to conduct with its personnel, the State Department insisted that a lawyer be present during any conversations. The lawyer’s exclusion from one meeting on the ground that he did not have adequate security clearance prompted an angry phone call from Cheryl D. Mills, Mrs. Clinton’s chief of staff, to the embassy’s top diplomat, Gregory Hicks.“This was not an ordinary Congressional delegation but part of an announced Congressional investigation,” a spokesman for the State Department, Patrick H. Ventrell, said Monday.Similar concerns were reflected in the revisions that Mr. Ventrell’s boss, Victoria Nuland, had made to talking points about the attack in the week after it happened. Saying it could be used against the department by lawmakers, Ms. Nuland pushed to delete references to other potential terrorist threats by the Central Intelligence Agency, which drafted the talking points.At a news conference Monday, Mr. Obama also questioned the intentions of his Republican critics, saying the drumbeat of accusations about a cover-up of Benghazi “defies logic.”“And the fact that this keeps on getting churned out, frankly, has a lot to do with political motivations,” he said. Republicans, the president said, were using the dispute to question his and Mrs. Clinton’s integrity, even raising political donations from it.Mr. Chaffetz dismisses that critique, saying the talking points and the testimony of Mr. Hicks reveal an administration that first mishandled security at the post in Benghazi and then sought to airbrush its account of the attack.“We always get blamed that it’s all politics,” he said, “but we’re seeing smoke at every step.”Accounts of the congressman’s visit to Libya differ in many respects, but Mr. Chaffetz and current and former State Department officials agree on one thing: the timing was tough. The F.B.I.’s investigators had not even been able to get into Benghazi when Mr. Chaffetz told the State Department that he wanted to go on a fact-finding mission.After initially resisting a visit on the grounds that it would use too many embassy resources, the State Department reluctantly decided to accommodate Mr. Chaffetz. But Democratic lawmakers complained that he deliberately excluded them from the trip by informing them of it only 24 hours beforehand. And State Department officials questioned his motives, given that he was bringing along an investigator from the oversight committee, James Lewis, a former Army officer and C.I.A. operative.The State Department insisted on sending along a lawyer, Jeremy Freeman, who had served at the American Embassy in Baghdad and is an expert in Congressional subpoenas. The department said it was standard practice to have a lawyer present at meetings that could later be the subject of a Congressional investigation.But Mr. Chaffetz bridled, viewing him as a “baby sitter” sent to suppress his exchanges. Mr. Freeman had to find his own way to Stuttgart, Germany, where he met up with Mr. Chaffetz and Gen. Carter F. Ham, until recently the commander of the military’s Africa Command, which has responsibility for Libya.The two men flew to Tripoli on General Ham’s plane. Once on the ground, Mr. Chaffetz and General Ham took part in a group meeting with the embassy’s staff that began with an overview of the political situation in Libya. After a few minutes, Mr. Chaffetz interrupted, saying he was there to talk about Benghazi.“I wanted to ‘walk and talk,’ ” he said, saying at one point he clambered into a building turret to talk to an embassy guard.Embassy officials, who had been advised not to talk without Mr. Freeman present, were wary, according to a person who was in the room. When Mr. Chaffetz walked to an adjacent C.I.A. annex for a classified briefing, Mr. Freeman was excluded by the agency, which said he did not have the proper security clearance.Mr. Chaffetz said he did not have Mr. Freeman barred from any meetings, but added, “I didn’t want to limit the information I was going to get because some yahoo from the State Department didn’t have the proper clearance.” State Department officials insisted that Mr. Freeman had the clearance he needed.In his testimony, Mr. Hicks said he had been instructed by the State Department not to agree to be “personally interviewed by Congressman Chaffetz,” and to extend that prohibition to his acting deputy chief of mission and the embassy’s regional security officer.But on Friday, the ranking Democratic member of the House Committee on Government Oversight and Reform, Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland, accused Republicans of distorting Mr. Hicks’ testimony by omitting parts of it from the record. In a previous interview with the committee’s staff, Mr. Cummings said, Mr. Hicks said he had not been instructed to withhold information from Mr. Chaffetz.“The committee was not prevented from talking to department employees at post and did, in fact, speak to them,” Mr. Ventrell said.The role of Ms. Mills proved equally contentious. Shortly after Mr. Chaffetz left, she called to ask Mr. Hicks how the visit had gone. Mr. Hicks told her it had gone fine — a message she passed on to Mrs. Clinton.But by all accounts, the tone of the call was tense. In his testimony, Mr. Hicks said Ms. Mills “demanded a report on the visit” and he described her as “upset” that Mr. Freeman had been excluded.Representative Jim Jordan, Republican of Ohio, made much of Ms. Mills’s proximity to Mrs. Clinton. “She’s the fixture for the secretary of state,” he said, “She’s as close as you can get to Secretary Clinton.”Whatever her ties to Mrs. Clinton, friends said she also functioned as a crisis manager in the State Department, handling the Keystone pipeline, the Haiti earthquake and the leak of diplomatic cables.“Cheryl was upset to hear that State Department personnel in Tripoli were left unsettled by the visit,” said Philippe Reines, a senior adviser to Mrs. Clinton, “and wanted to make sure they were O.K. and knew that no matter how far away they were from home, they weren’t alone and that the secretary was concerned for them.”