https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/28/world/middleeast/baghdad-abduction-of-sunni-figure-displays-gangland-edge-of-iraqi-politics-with-intimidation-and-violence.html
Abduction of Sunni Displays Gangland Edge of Iraqi Politics - The New York Times
Iraq,Adhadh  Riyadh al-,Kidnapping,Sunni Muslims,Terrorism,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Baghdad (Iraq),Shiite Muslims,Jubouri  Salim al-
July 27, 2014
8785
BAGHDAD —  Just before midnight on Friday, Shiite militiamen in eight black S.U.V.’s rolled up to the Baghdad home of an important Sunni politician and abducted him and four of his bodyguards, a brazen move that threatened to further convulse a country already in the grip of a political crisis.For hours at a secret location on Baghdad’s southeastern edge, the bodyguards said, they were beaten with a lead pipe, their tormentors demanding that they admit that their boss, Riyadh al-Adhadh, the president of Baghdad’s provincial council, was preparing to support an invasion of the capital by Sunni militants fighting under the banner of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, who are in control of large amounts of territory in the north and west of Iraq. The episode, which ended with the eventual release of the five men, was a vivid portrayal of what Iraqi politics looks like up close, playing out like a gangster movie and defined by its currencies of intimidation and violence.The United States and other foreign powers have pressed for a political solution to Iraq’s growing crisis, and President Obama has suggested that more military help, and possibly American airstrikes against the militants, will come only with the formation of a new, inclusive government with meaningful roles for the Sunnis and Kurds, Iraq’s two main minority groups.Iraq’s international supporters have praised recent political steps — the naming of a Sunni, Salim al-Jubouri, as the new speaker of Parliament, and the selection of a Kurd, Fouad Massoum, as president — and have pushed the government to quickly decide on a new prime minister, a position held by the Shiite majority. Yet the abductions are another sign that American demands for political reconciliation seem divorced from the reality of Iraqi politics.After a harrowing ordeal, the abducted men were returned to their homes on Saturday afternoon. The bodyguards were bruised and in tears as they were helped from vehicles, but they were alive, and the potential political crisis the episode could have set off seemed to have been averted for the moment. To celebrate their return, a sheep was slaughtered, women threw candies in the air and men fired long bursts of celebratory gunfire across the roofs of the densely packed Sunni neighborhood of Adhamiya.“We are living in a jungle,” Mr. Adhadh said in an interview at his home shortly after his release.A portion of Iraq — Mosul in the north and much of Anbar Province in the west — is under control of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or ISIS. There are contested areas to the north and east of the capital, near Tikrit and Samarra and in Diyala Province, where fighting rages and where a brutal sectarian war seems to be unfolding. On Saturday, all five members of a Shiite family, including children, were found beheaded in the town of Taji. On Sunday, Shiite militiamen hung the bodies of at least six Sunni militants from streetlights and a bridge in Baquba, the capital of Diyala Province.In Baghdad, though, where political leaders are struggling to keep the country together, a different picture has emerged. The wholesale sectarian slaughter that nearly tore the country apart in 2006 and 2007 has not yet returned, but militias, loyal to a sect or sometimes to just a man, are back. And the mass arrests of Sunni men, at the heart of grievances that allowed the insurgency to gain support within the Sunni community, have continued. It is a gangland culture deeply intertwined with the culture of Iraqi politics.The effort to win Mr. Adhadh’s release involved the new speaker of Parliament and Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, as well as pressure on Iraqi leaders from Western diplomats who feared that the episode would further destabilize the political situation and heighten sectarian tensions.But it was the direct intervention of a powerful militia leader that ultimately secured Mr. Adhadh’s freedom: Qais al-Khazali, the leader of Asaib Ahl al-Haq, a Shiite militant and political group with close ties to Iran. The group once fought the Americans, and more recently has fought in Syria’s civil war on the side of the government of President Bashar al-Assad.Now the group, along with other Shiite militias aligned with Iran, has been given wide authority by Mr. Maliki to provide security in Baghdad, and root out so-called sleeper cells of Sunni insurgents inside the capital that government officials believe are working to help ISIS advance on Baghdad.Mr. Adhadh’s abduction appeared to be one of these operations.In the interview, Mr. Adhadh was careful to say that the men who had kidnapped him were not fighters for Asaib Ahl al-Haq, but that it was Mr. Khazali’s influence over other groups that secured his release. But it is widely assumed here that Mr. Adhadh’s abduction was actually the work of Asaib Ahl al-Haq.On Saturday afternoon, a chaotic scene played out in front of Mr. Adhadh’s home, as family members tried to find out what had happened to him. A telephone rang, and the person on the other end said the group was safe and would soon be coming home.Mr. Adhadh’s son, Mohammed, grabbed the phone, and was soon speaking to his father. “Dad, tell me where you are! I want to come pick you up!” Then he asked, “Who took you? The sheikh? Sheikh Qais al-Khazali?”Having received word of the abductees’ imminent release, men with guns began shouting and moving through the streets near the home, taking up positions on the corner and up higher in a nearby building. A couple of hours later a convoy of S.U.V.’s entered the street, and Mr. Adhadh emerged from one of the vehicles, accompanied by Mr. Jubouri, the new speaker of Parliament. Mr. Jubouri had spoken directly to Mr. Khazali, who arranged Mr. Adhadh’s release.Mr. Adhadh said that he had not been harmed, but that his bodyguards were severely beaten. One of them, covered in bruises and in tears, said, “They beat me from midnight until the sun rose” as they demanded that he detail Mr. Adhadh’s involvement in the insurgency. “I said, ‘I know nothing bad about him, believe me.’ ”Mr. Adhadh said that his abductors told him that they believed he had connections to ISIS and that, he said, “when they come to Baghdad I will help them.”Mr. Maliki’s government has frequently singled out Sunni lawmakers using the pretense of terrorism charges, and Mr. Adhadh spent months in jail in 2012 over accusations that he was funding terrorism. He denied the allegations and was later released, apparently for lack of evidence. In late 2011, the government accused the Sunni vice president, Tariq al-Hashemi, of terrorism and later went after the Sunni finance minister, Rafi al-Essawi. Mr. Hashemi, who now lives in Turkey, was sentenced to death in absentia. Mr. Essawi also fled the country.As the events played out near Mr. Adhadh’s home on Saturday, two young men sat in their furniture shop around the corner. They recalled the days when one man had a monopoly on violence, a situation they said differed from today, when myriad militias and armed men have the power to kill and intimidate with impunity.One of the men, Abu Abdullah, said, “I think Iraq requires another leader like Saddam Hussein, who’s like an official murderer.”The other man, Abu Mohammed, also said the prescription for Iraq’s chaos was to revert to the past, when, as he explained it, the power to kill was in one man’s hands.“Someone like Saddam has to bring law and order quickly to Iraq,” he said.