http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/us/politics/colorado-presidential-race.html
In Colorado, Hillary Clinton Leads Donald Trump in Polls and Presence - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Colorado,Pence  Mike,Polls and Public Opinion,United States Politics and Government
Aug. 3, 2016
6508
COMMERCE CITY, Colo. — With polls showing Colorado slipping from the grasp of Donald J. Trump, Hillary Clinton sought to close and bolt the door on him Wednesday, campaigning in a heavily Hispanic community, while the Trump campaign dispatched Mike Pence, to rally the state’s bloc of social conservatives.In a sign of growing confidence in what it calls its “Sun Belt states” electoral path, the Clinton campaign pulled its television ads in Colorado last week, shifting resources elsewhere, as polls show Mrs. Clinton running stronger in the diverse Rocky Mountain battleground than President Obama did in his 2012 re-election race.Mrs. Clinton’s visit to Commerce City, a blue-collar community outside Denver whose population is nearly 50 percent Hispanic, was strategically chosen. It is in a vulnerable Republican congressional district, whose incumbent, Representative Mike Coffman, has gone out of his way to distance himself from Mr. Trump.Mr. Coffman’s efforts to reach out to Hispanics — including learning Spanish as an adult and participating in a Spanish-language debate — contrast with Mr. Trump’s pledge of a “deportation force” targeting illegal immigrants.“Trump’s a walking get-out-the-vote billboard” for Hispanics who oppose him, said David Flaherty, a Republican pollster and strategist in Colorado. He predicted the Hispanic vote could be as high as 18 percent of the state’s voters, surpassing the turnout in 2012.A relaxed Mrs. Clinton was regularly drowned out by nearly delirious supporters as she checked off her priorities in a high school gym, with a heavy emphasis on spending for education and infrastructure, including “a modern electric grid.”She also received a huge applause for praising Denver’s transit system, not the usual campaign red meat.Trump supporters still see a path for him here, because of wide desire for change in Washington and because many Coloradans tell pollsters that they are undecided.“If you can bring 100,000 voters in Colorado who feel disaffected by both political parties, a candidate like Trump who promises to pull down the pillars might really resonate,” said Ryan Call, a former chairman of the state Republican Party.Mr. Pence, Mr. Trump’s running mate, spoke in Denver, where he mocked the rush by Democrats and the news media to declare Mr. Trump down for the count after each day’s gaffe.“The party in power seems helpless to figure our nominee out,” he said, clarifying that he meant Democrats and the news media. “They keep saying that, you know, now we got him. They think the usual methods are going to work against him.”“Then you get up the next morning, and Donald Trump is still standing tall and fighting for the American people,” he added.Mrs. Clinton got her own licks in at her opponent. She announced a new website that lists American companies where Mr. Trump could have manufactured his branded ties, suits and barware rather than outsourcing the work.Mrs. Clinton pulled ahead of Mr. Trump in polls of Colorado in July. A recent NBC News survey gave her an 8-percentagepoint lead, but 21 percent of registered voters said they were undecided or would not support either major party candidate.Demographically, Mr. Trump is bucking the tide of younger voters who first registered to support Mr. Obama during his two campaigns. Since 2004, Republicans have had almost a 10-point drop among registered voters under 45.Mr. Call, who is advising a pro-Trump “super PAC,” worried that the Trump campaign is being badly outhustled by Democrats in grassroots organizing. The Clinton campaign and the state Democratic Party are opening their 14th field office in the state this week. Mr. Trump is almost completely reliant on the local Republican Party for a ground game, and races like Mr. Coffman’s will receive more priority.At one point, Mrs. Clinton announced that the campaign was still hiring organizers in the state. She can afford to. On Tuesday night, she attended a fund-raising dinner in Aspen, where about 65 guests contributed $10,000 each, according to a campaign aide.Colorado’s most crucial swing voters are independent women 45 and older. “Those ladies decide our elections,” Mr. Flaherty said. “They’re reluctant right now to support Hillary, but the Democratic convention was a step in the right direction.”Jenny Howard, 44, an accountant in the Denver suburb of Englewood, is one of those independents. She called herself “a Republican at heart,” but is frightened of Mr. Trump’s temper and shoot-from-the-hip outbursts.“He spreads more fear than hope,” she said. “I will probably be voting for Hillary. It will be under duress and not something I will be proud of, but I feel a vote for Trump will definitely further divide our country.”