http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/19/realestate/1200000-homes-in-los-angeles-philadelphia-and-kansas-city.html
$1.2 Million Homes in Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Kansas City - The New York Times
Kansas City (Mo),Los Angeles (Calif),Philadelphia (Pa),Real Estate and Housing (Residential)
March 18, 2015
3252
KANSAS CITY, MO.WHAT: A loft with three bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH: $1,195,000SIZE: Approximately 4,500 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $266SETTING: This condominium apartment is in River Market, a mixed-use neighborhood just north of downtown, on the Missouri River. Named for a farmers’ market in operation since the mid-1800s, the neighborhood has become a loft district, its old warehouses and commercial buildings converted to condos and restaurants complemented by newer development and an incoming streetcar line. Florists, antiques shops, cafes and clothiers line nearby streets. This unit is in a boxy brick building built in 2002, but designed to blend in with the neighborhood’s older conversions.INDOORS: The unit is on the building’s fourth and top floor. It was originally built as two separate apartments and later combined. There are polished concrete floors and exposed wood-beam ceilings and duct work throughout, giving the place an industrial look. Bedrooms take up about a third of the space, while the rest, about 3,000 square feet, is an open living area punctuated by partial walls with built-in storage. There are intersecting walls of glass on the south and east sides, and about 1,500 square feet of window in total, with views of the Missouri River and the Kansas City skyline. Kitchen appliances are stainless steel, countertops are granite and cabinets are clean-looking white laminate. The master bedroom has a skylight, and its bathroom has a jetted tile-sided tub. Three parking spots in a basement lot convey with sale.OUTDOOR SPACE: Balconies are on the north and south sides.TAXES: $5,821 a year, plus $1,200 a month in condo feesCONTACT: Joe Schloegel, Re/Max State Line, (913) 568-6485; schloege.remax-mindstates.com•LOS ANGELESWHAT: A contemporary with two bedrooms and two bathroomsHOW MUCH: $1,200,000SIZE: 1,815 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $661SETTING: This single-story contemporary is at the intersection of Hancock Park, a pocket of old-money elegance developed in the 1920s, and Miracle Mile, a district of high-rises and commercial buildings that is also home to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Petersen Automotive Museum, among others. Miracle Mile is also a magnet for galleries, including the Ace Gallery, the David Kordansky Gallery and Lab Art.INDOORS: The house, a long, wedgelike structure clad in corrugated metal, was built in 2002. Designed to buffer its owners from the busy intersection outside, it has 23-inch-thick walls with heavy insulation, and slotlike horizontal windows that turn the traffic into a kind of movie. The house was designed by Linda Pollari and Robert E. Somol Jr. as their residence and office; she serves as the chairwoman of the architecture/landscape/interiors program at Otis College of Art and Design in Los Angeles; he is the director of the school of architecture at the University of Illinois at Chicago.Rooms are arranged single-file, leading into one another. Floors are polished concrete with radiant heat. Wood and stone walls in the living area provide contrast.The living area has sliding glass doors that open to the backyard and pool, creating an indoor-outdoor space. Kitchen appliances are stainless steel, as is a wall next to the cooking area with long horizontal windows, a look calling to mind an Airstream trailer. One of the bedrooms is used as the office; the other, the master, has intersecting walls of glass that open to the yard, which is screened from the street by bamboo and tall grass. With the exception of the bathrooms, the house has no interior doors. There is also a two-car garage.OUTDOOR SPACE: The house is on about a fifth of an acre.TAXES: Approximately $15,000 a yearCONTACT: Brian Linder and Scott King, Deasy/Penner & Partners, the Value of Architecture, (310) 592-5417 / (323) 828-2049; deasypenner.com•PHILADELPHIAWHAT: A brick rowhouse with five bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH: $1,200,000SIZE: 3,060 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $392SETTING: Society Hill is a neighborhood and historic district in Center City, Philadelphia. Though known primarily for its 19th-century brick rowhouses, the area is also home to townhouse and tower projects by architects including I. M. Pei and Louis Sauer, built in the 1960s and ’70s during a wave of urban resuscitation. Cafes, restaurants and supermarkets are within a few blocks, as is Pennsylvania Hospital. Most of the city’s postcard monuments, including the Liberty Bell and Independence Hall, are also within a few blocks.INDOORS: The four-story rowhouse was built in 1815 and updated most recently over the last 15 years. Original features include pine floors and fireplace mantels throughout, as well as high ceilings in the common areas. French doors in the living room open to a glass conservatory overlooking a garden. The conservatory is used as a dining area and was built by Amdega, an English company in business since the 1870s. Granite countertops and stainless-steel kitchen appliances including a Sub-Zero refrigerator were installed during renovations. The house is at the end of a row, giving it more light than others on the block.One of the bedrooms is on the second floor, as is a den; the other bedrooms are on the third and fourth floors. The second-floor master bedroom has built-in cabinetry and clothes storage. The bathrooms have been updated with marble. The basement is finished.OUTDOOR SPACE: A landscaped garden behind the house.TAXES: $10,532 a yearCONTACT: Deborah Solo, Solo Real Estate, (215) 564-7704; solorealty.com