https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/25/upshot/health-secretary-says-theres-no-backup-plan-if-court-rules-against-health-law.html
Health Secretary Says There’s No Backup Plan if Supreme Court Rules Against Law - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Burwell  Sylvia Mathews,Supreme Court (US),United States Politics and Government
Feb. 24, 2015
5258
Next week, the Supreme Court hears arguments in a case that could upend Obamacare insurance coverage for millions of people. Tuesday, the Secretary of Health and Human Services said there was little the administration could do to limit the impact of such a ruling.“We know of no administrative actions that could, and therefore we have no plans that would, undo the massive damage to our health care system that would be caused by an adverse decision,” wrote Sylvia Mathews Burwell in a series of identical letters to Republican leaders in Congress.The message represented a shift in tone from Ms. Burwell, who has been asked repeatedly by reporters and members of Congress what the administration would do in the aftermath of such a decision. In the past, her strategy has been to change the subject. We’re confident we’ll win the case, she’s said, and we’re focused on signing people up for insurance, not planning for a possible loss.The new message is consistent with her previous stance, but considerably more alarmist in tone. The letter describes the consequences of a court ruling for the case’s plaintiffs: the loss of insurance subsidies for millions of people in a majority of the states, followed by increases in the number of uninsured Americans and instability in insurance markets.The case, called King v. Burwell, is about whether the health law allows the government to provide subsidies to middle-income people who buy their own insurance on state marketplaces. Some states are managing their own markets; others have let the federal government do it for them. The plaintiffs in the case argue that language in the law says subsidies can only be given to people in states running their own marketplaces. About three dozen states are in the federal system, meaning that about six million people would lose their subsidies if the court agreed.Ms. Burwell’s shift in tone is partly explained by her schedule. She’ll be testifying before Congress for the next two days, and she expects repeated questions about the case. But two other facts probably go further toward explaining the changeFirst, the open enrollment period for this year has just closed, meaning that few people can sign up for insurance anymore. While enrollment was open, the department was focused on maximizing sign-ups, and didn’t want to discourage people from obtaining health coverage with warnings that their tax subsidies might be yanked away.And the Supreme Court will be hearing oral arguments in the case next week. Ms. Burwell’s letter is a strong way of communicating to the justices that their actions in the case will have substantial consequences that will go unblunted by administrative action. (Congress, of course, could make the case moot by changing the language of the law, though there is little current interest in doing so.)Still, the letter chooses its words carefully. Ms. Burwell writes that the administration can’t “undo” a finding of the court through regulation. That’s true. The central question of the case is whether the Treasury Department had the legal authority to give out the subsidies.“The secretary is exactly right,” said Nicholas Bagley, an assistant professor of law at the University of Michigan, who has written about the case extensively, and supports the government’s position. “There is no magic wand she can wave to fix this problem.”Jonathan Adler, a professor of law at Case Western Reserve University, who helped develop the legal strategy behind the case, described the rhetoric as “simplistic.”“Of course, it’s generally agreed that the administration could not effectively reverse or return a decision for the plaintiffs,” he said. “But there are certain avenues the administration, if it wanted to, could explore that could ease the transition or ameliorate the transition.”That doesn’t mean there would be nothing the administration would do in the aftermath of a ruling to try and contain the chaos. There are some actions the department may take to help motivated states set up marketplaces and preserve the tax subsidies for their residents. Such actions would probably have limited impact, especially if state governors and legislators aren’t able to participate in state marketplace-building. But they might make a difference on the margin. Ms. Burwell’s letter doesn’t mention such steps, but it doesn’t rule them out either.