https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/us/in-debate-over-sanctuary-cities-a-divide-on-the-role-of-the-local-police.html
In Debate Over ‘Sanctuary Cities,’ a Divide on the Role of the Local Police - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Illegal Immigration,Police
Sept. 1, 2016
8343
In Donald Trump’s telling, there are places across America that have become dangerous oases for criminals, where foreign lawbreakers roam the streets without fear of the authorities.Using the label “sanctuary cities,” Mr. Trump vowed in his hard-edge immigration speech in Phoenix on Wednesday to force such jurisdictions to abandon their policies protecting undocumented immigrants or face the loss of federal funding.“We will end the sanctuary cities that have caused so many needless deaths,” Mr. Trump said. “No more funds!”With his proposal, Mr. Trump is coming down on one side of a vigorous partisan debate over the degree to which local law enforcement should be involved in enforcing immigration laws. There is a deep split among law enforcement officials, not to mention elected officials. Just last year, after a young woman was shot by an immigrant here illegally with a criminal record who had been released by the authorities in San Francisco, the Republican-led House voted to withhold some federal funding from jurisdictions that shield undocumented immigrants from federal officials. In the Senate, Democrats this summer  blocked a similar bill, which the White House had vowed to veto.In limiting cooperation with the federal immigration authorities, some local law enforcement officials contend that they are making their jurisdictions safer by encouraging undocumented immigrants to take the risk of coming forward to report crimes. But those who see immigration violations as serious offenses contend that such policies lead to criminality.The issue has bedeviled the Obama administration for years. In his first term, President Obama expanded nationwide a program allowing the Department of Homeland Security to receive the fingerprints of every person booked by the state and local police. After many immigrant communities rebelled, the administration canceled some of its efforts in 2014, and replaced them with a single, less intrusive one, hoping to court big cities to cooperate rather than to coerce them.The list of cities, counties and states adopting such approaches is extensive. The State of California passed a law in 2013 limiting cooperation between the police and federal immigration authorities. Cities including Chicago, Philadelphia, New Orleans, New York and nearly 300 other places have adopted similar policies, according to the Center for Immigration Studies, a research group that supports Mr. Trump’s approach.Mr. Trump did not specify which federal funds he would cut off, saying only that “cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars.”While some cities, including New York and San Francisco, embrace the sanctuary label, none of the locales are entirely havens for immigrants in the country illegally. The term refers to jurisdictions that have placed limits on when local police departments will comply with federal requests to hold undocumented immigrants for detention. None of the cities restrain the police from pursuing or prosecuting immigrants who commit crimes.While Mr. Trump said that “countless Americans” had lost their lives to immigrant criminals as a result of sanctuary policies, known cases are few. But a shocking killing happened just as Mr. Trump announced his presidential bid last year. Kathryn Steinle, a tourist, was shot while strolling with her father on a pier in San Francisco. The suspect, Juan Francisco López-Sánchez, was an undocumented immigrant from Mexico with a long criminal record who had been deported five times previously and had just completed a sentence in federal prison.Mr. López-Sánchez confessed to the shooting but said it was an accident. Citing a trail of errors that led to his release by federal prison and immigration authorities and the San Francisco sheriff, Ross Mirkarimi, Ms. Steinle’s frustrated family brought a wrongful-death lawsuit against them and the City of San Francisco in May.Mr. Trump referred to Ms. Steinle in his speech, saying of Mr. López-Sánchez, “They knew he was no good.”But officials in San Francisco have argued that Ms. Steinle’s case was a disastrous exception and did not reflect the results of the city’s sanctuary policy, which has been in place since 1989. City officials broadly reaffirmed the policy.But many county sheriffs support Mr. Trump’s argument that the police have a duty to help deport any immigrant who entered the country illegally.“If you want federal dollars, you have to obey federal law,” said Sam Page, the sheriff of Rockingham County, N.C. “I believe we need to remove all criminal offenders that are in this country illegally.”In 2014, the New York City Council passed a law that sharply limited the cooperation of the police and corrections departments with the federal enforcement authorities. The departments would honor a hold request only from a federal judge, and only if the subject had been convicted of a violent or serious crime.Were it not for that city law, one 33-year-old man might have been sent back to Honduras this summer — for hanging a green pine tree air-freshener on his rearview mirror. In July, the man, who spoke on the condition that only his middle name, Omar, would be used since he does not have legal status, was pulled over while driving in Queens.According to his lawyer, Su Yon Yi, of Queens Law Associates, the police stopped him for a traffic violation — obstructing the view while driving. The police then cited him for not having a driver’s license.Omar pleaded guilty to driving without a license, paid a fine and was immediately released. Ms. Yi said that without the sanctuary policy in effect he might have been turned over to the immigration authorities.“He really did benefit because he was in New York,” Ms. Yi said. “Instead of spending a couple of days in criminal jail and waiting for immigration and perhaps spending countless days in immigration custody — all based on an air-freshener — he was released and could go home to his family.”