https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/17/us/politics/supreme-court-nomination-obama-congress.html
Supreme Court Showdown Could Shape Fall Elections - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Obama  Barack,Garland  Merrick B,Presidential Election of 2016,United States,Senate Committee on the Judiciary,Appointments and Executive Changes,Republican Party,United States Politics and Government
March 16, 2016
5687
WASHINGTON —  President Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland to the Supreme Court has set off a series of head-spinning political calculations extreme even for a capital that feasts on political intrigue.But the escalating fight over filling the court vacancy holds the potential to be a confrontation that could also help determine the winner of the White House race, control of the Senate and the ideological balance of the court. It is that rare Washington fight that washes over all three branches of government with the prospect of damaging each of them.The nomination of Judge Garland, a centrist jurist with proven appeal to Republicans, came just hours after Donald J. Trump edged closer to the Republican presidential nomination, raising new fears among Republicans of a Democratic presidential victory and perhaps even a Senate takeover.That possibility led some jittery Senate Republicans to suggest they might be willing to take up the nomination of Judge Garland in a postelection lame-duck session, preferring the relatively moderate and known commodity of Mr. Garland to the uncertain choice of a future Democratic president.“For those of us who are concerned about the direction of the court and wanting at least a more centrist figure between him and somebody that President Clinton might nominate, I think the choice is clear — in a lame duck,” said Senator Jeff Flake, an Arizona Republican who sits on the Judiciary Committee, referring to the possibility of a November victory by Hillary Clinton.He was not alone. Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the senior Utah Republican who also sits on the panel, said he would be open to taking up the nomination after the election, as did a handful of others. It was not the majority Republican view by any stretch, and Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, stuck fast to his insistence that the next president should fill the vacancy, not Mr. Obama.The lame-duck overtures also demonstrated that Mr. Obama’s choice had paid some dividends as increasing numbers of Senate Republicans were willing to say they would at least meet with Judge Garland after such courtesy visits had previously been declared off limits.Democrats said that the arrival of a “flesh and blood” nominee after weeks of jousting with Republicans over hypotheticals and past contortions on judicial fights would put a fresh charge into their campaign to force a hearing, and that Judge Garland was a strong choice who would be hard to resist and, as important, very hard to demonize. Millions of dollars will be spent on both sides of the argument to try to define him, and also those senators who oppose taking up his nomination.Democrats also made it very clear that Mr. Trump and his possible election would figure prominently into their argument against the Republicans for blocking any consideration of Judge Garland.“You have the confluence of Donald Trump looking like the Republican nominee, and when the American people see they could have this mainstream guy or will have someone Donald Trump puts in there, what do you think they are going to say?” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the No. 3 Senate Democrat.Senate Democrats and administration officials continue to believe their Republican counterparts will eventually relent, and showed scant interest in waiting until after the election to find out if Judge Garland’s nomination stood a chance of approval.“There is absolutely no good reason to wait until the lame duck for the Senate to fulfill their duty to the Constitution and to the American people,” said Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman.At the same time, Mr. McConnell declared yet again that this Senate would never take up the nomination of Judge Garland — a sentiment his staff said he expressed directly to the judge in a phone call on Wednesday afternoon.“The American people are perfectly capable of having their say on this issue. So let’s give them a voice,” Mr. McConnell said in an animated speech on the Senate floor. “The Senate will appropriately revisit the matter when it considers the qualifications of the nominee the next president nominates, whoever that might be.”Some of his fellow Republicans, pressed on the idea of a postelection vote, agreed that considering the nomination immediately after the election would violate their principle of awaiting not just the results of the voting, but the inauguration of a new president.“If you’re going to believe in the principle — which I do — of letting the next president make the nomination, then I’m going to hold to that,” said Senator David Perdue, Republican of Georgia. Others said it was just too far down the road to contemplate yet, but there were hints that a poor election showing could change minds in the Senate.“My position is that we should allow the American people to weigh in, and so I think we should see what the outcome and what direction the people of this country would like to take based on the November election,” said Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, who is in a very competitive race to hold on to her seat and is a main target of Democratic attacks over the court.While she is back home over the coming two-week recess espousing her party’s demand to “let the people decide” when it comes to the court vacancy, she is likely to hear the following phrase a lot: “Do your job.” That is the Democratic rallying cry embraced and promoted by Mr. Schumer, and he believes it is a potent and simple message that could help Democrats win back the Senate.It is often said in Washington that elections have consequences. But both sides are increasingly seeing the court fight as one with consequences for elections.