http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/upshot/is-donald-trump-winning-among-whites-and-men-for-sure.html
Is Donald Trump Winning? Among Whites and Men, for Sure - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Voting and Voters,Trump  Donald J,Sanders  Bernard,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Nevada,Polls and Public Opinion,Hispanic-Americans
July 13, 2016
6568
Each week, Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, based in Washington, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor in New York, discuss the 2016 race and post a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange. This week: Good poll/bad poll; Bernie Sanders’s endorsement; Nevada’s not-so-easy race for Hillary Clinton; and does Mike Pence make sense? But first ... Toni Some people still assume Donald Trump can’t possibly win. But he certainly has a chance, even if it’s not a huge one. Let’s imagine the election were today. I’ll make a few statements, and you contradict me if I’m wrong and chime in as you like.Nate O.K.Toni Donald Trump would be president of the United States if only men voted.Nate I think that’s true.[Note: A Pew poll shows Trump with a 49-43 edge with that group in a head-to-head matchup.]Toni Donald Trump would be president of the United States if only whites voted.Nate Yes. Clinton would trail in the popular vote by a large margin, but she would probably still have a healthy total in the Electoral College — perhaps even winning around 200 electoral votes (need 270 to win) while losing by about 10 percentage points.[Note: Whites are expected to make up about 70 percent of the electorate.]Toni  Donald Trump would be president of the United States if only the South voted.Nate What’s your definition of the South?I guess it doesn’t matter: I don’t have a definition of the South where Clinton could win without Texas.Toni This map of the South, as defined by the census.Nate Yeah, I think it’s very hard for her to win under that definition.Toni Donald Trump would probably be president of the United States if only people 65 and over voted. At worst for him, it would be very close.Nate I think it would be close, but I think you’re right — he would still win.Toni I guess the last one surprises me a bit. Some of them are part of the “greatest generation,” and it’s a generation where manners might have been most important — the stereotype of “Wash your mouth out with soap, young man.” Donald Trump doesn’t quite fit there. But part of the reason they favor Trump is simple demographics, right? Older people tend to be mostly white, and the younger generation is more diverse.Nate The “greatest generation” has been reduced to just a sliver of the electorate. Most older voters are the so-called silent generation, people too young to have served in World War II but distinctly ahead of the boomer generation and all of the cultural shifts that they brought. They’ve been relatively conservative for a while.Toni Let’s play good poll/bad poll. What is your view of the Rasmussen result? It’s the only recent poll that shows Trump ahead of Clinton, by two points. Also, a JMC Analytics poll shows Trump ahead by four points in Florida.On the other hand, a recent Pew poll shows Clinton ahead of Trump by nine.Nate I think the Rasmussen and JMC Analytics polls are dismissively bad. I think the Pew poll is solid.Toni A quick summary of why the first two are poor?Nate Both are automated surveys that have no means to contact voters who don’t have landline telephones. It’s no surprise that both show Trump ahead among Hispanic voters (Rasmussen technically has Trump up by 3 among “other” voters, a category that includes Hispanics and Asians, etc.)The JMC Analytics poll doesn’t appear to be weighted by race, and it has an electorate that has no resemblance to the actual Florida electorate. I suspect it’s even worse on age, but it doesn’t even mention that.I think we’re at the point where landline-only polls can simply be dismissed out of hand.The problems with finding the electorate and dubious results are just additional confirmation that these aren’t high-quality polls.Toni One interesting tidbit in the Pew poll: “Among the smaller group of Hispanic voters (43%) who are English-dominant — those who are more proficient in English than Spanish — just 48% back Clinton (41% would vote for Trump).”Nate Yeah, I thought that was really interesting. And it’s not the first sign that Trump isn’t losing all that much ground among Hispanic voters.Toni Clinton hasn’t been polling as well as expected in Nevada — up by 4 points in Nevada, per the Monmouth poll, for example. Nevada was a state that was expected to fall in line fairly easily for Clinton. It has been trending blue for years, and it has a growing Hispanic population. And, of course, Trump has alienated a lot of Hispanics. So this seeming split — among “English-dominant” Hispanics who have become established in the country and those who tend to be newly arrived — could be having at least some effect.Nate Nevada’s an interesting case. I think it’s clear that, right now, Clinton is underperforming a bit there, and the Clinton ad spending there certainly reflects it.I don’t think the electorate there is quite as diverse as we thought. In the article I wrote on this issue last month, Nevada was the battleground state with the largest gap between the exit poll results and the voter file data. Another issue is that it’s the battleground state where the Republicans are least dependent on college-educated white voters, which has been Trump’s biggest weakness compared with Mitt Romney. There are more white working-class Democrats than you’d think there as well.I’ll have more to say in an article I’m working on.Toni Nevada was also a state where things were tense with Bernie Sanders. But Tuesday the two camps officially came together. And Politico wrote about how “for weeks now, Hillary Clinton’s campaign has been engaged in a project to win over the staunchest — and loudest — of Bernie Sanders’s supporters in the places where they’ll matter most in November” — places where there were tough battles or losses, like Iowa, Michigan, Nevada, Colorado and New Hampshire.I don’t know if you saw this tweet from Trump: “I am somewhat surprised that Bernie Sanders was not true to himself and his supporters. They are not happy that he is selling out!”Nate I didn’t. It’s definitely been interesting to see a few tweets from Sanders supporters about how Bernie was a neoliberal shill all along.Toni The optimistic Clinton view would be that the overwhelming majority of idealistic young voters — most of whom supported Bernie — will align with her in the end. She’s still struggling with that group.Nate I think they’ll either vote for her or stay home. I suspect many will do the latter, given what youth turnout usually is.Toni There are also third-party options (Gary Johnson and Jill Stein), although those tend to fade in the final weeks. I saw that you spotlighted something on Twitter: “Something I didn’t originally notice in Pew poll: Johnson leading Trump among 18-29-year-old voters.”Is it possible that Trump could actually finish third among those voters or at least in a close tie for second?Nate No, I suspect that the people who currently say they’ll vote for Johnson or Stein will ultimately stay home or choose to vote for a more relevant candidate.Toni This will be our last chat before the G.O.P. convention. Harry Enten of FiveThirtyEight said recently: “In some ways, we’re less than two weeks from the most important part of this campaign. Trump needs a convention bump. Otherwise, it’s very bad news.”Nate Yeah, I think there’s some truth there.There aren’t many candidates who make a big comeback if they trail a few weeks after the convention, or don’t lead after their own convention (although this year we won’t have much time to figure out whether that happens because the Democratic convention comes right afterward).Toni Could the Republicans at the convention rebel against Trump’s vice-presidential choice and name their own?Nate In theory, they can. I don’t think that would go very well for them, though: Who would accept that job?Toni It seems that the people who would accept that job are those who are already in the running. Last week you said Mike Pence was an uninspiring choice other than to placate social conservatives. Since that time, he has shot up to to the top of prediction markets. What do you think?Nate  One thing I’ll say is that there’s a difference between being willing to accept the job if Donald Trump offered it and being willing to accept if the convention tried to foist it on you, and you weren’t Trump’s pick. Hard to see who would want to do that.Pence shot up to the top of the betting markets after a few news reports suggested that Trump was leaning in that direction. (Update: Newt Gingrich moved up considerably Tuesday night after he and Fox News cut ties.)I have no idea whether that’s true, and it’s not as though there isn’t a history of some poor scoops with that (remember Kerry/Gephardt!). Generally, this is a place where the people who talk don’t know and the people who know don’t talk. We’ll see what happens.Toni Is there someone who stands out to you who could help him, or at least not hurt him?Nate Not really, though I think there’s a case that Pence is a fairly safe pick, especially compared with someone like Chris Christie or Michael Flynn.Toni Trump keeps going off-script on the states he thinks he can win. The campaign said it was targeting 17 states, the ones you’d expect. But in his first meeting with the House Republican conference, Trump said he would put Oregon, Washington, Connecticut and Michigan in play (Michigan was included in the 17-state plan).Nate I don’t think that Oregon or Michigan are completely insane. If Trump was winning this election, those states might be competitive — and I think that, in general, it’s reasonable to target states like that. Washington and Connecticut? Hard to see that.In recent weeks, Nate and Toni wondered if Bernie Sanders would get a prime-time speaking slot at the convention; questioned whether Donald Trump would concede if he lost; and looked at why Trump wasn’t campaigning in swing states.