https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/realestate/art-dealers-fifth-avenue-co-op-sells-for-55-million.html
Art Dealer’s Fifth Avenue Co-op Sells for $55 Million - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Ellsworth  Robert Hatfield (1929-2014),Fifth Avenue (Manhattan  NY),Central Park (Manhattan  NY)
June 2, 2017
9787
The palatial Fifth Avenue apartment where the prominent dealer of Asian art Robert H. Ellsworth lived for more than three decades, until his death in 2014, was finally sold by his estate last month.The price for the third-floor unit at 960 Fifth, which faces Central Park and is one of the city’s grandest prewar apartment houses, was $55 million, according to property records, making it the priciest closed sale in May.Carlos Alejandro Pérez Dávila, a Colombian financier whose family controlled the brewing giant SABMiller, was listed as the buyer. The sale was done privately.But this sale wasn’t the only one above $50 million. Just a few blocks away, on the other side of the park, a four-bedroom penthouse on the 40th floor of the limestone-clad 15 Central Park West, at 61st Street, sold for $50.55 million. The transaction was done through limited liability companies.Another big sale involved a sponsor unit on the 84th floor of 432 Park Avenue, between 56th and 57th Streets, which was purchased by an unidentified buyer for $44.6 million.In other noteworthy sales over the last month, the Fox News anchor Shepard Smith sold his Greenwich Village condominium; Roy Furman, a prolific Broadway producer, sold a Fifth Avenue co-op; and the estate of the renowned graphic artist Elaine Lustig Cohen sold her Upper East Side townhouse.MR. ELLSWORTH’S RESIDENCE at 960 Fifth Avenue, at 77th Street, has 22 rooms encompassing the entire third floor of the 12-story co-op building designed by Rosario Candela in the late 1920s.This elite structure has been home to numerous well-known residents over the years, such as the longtime chairman of the Seagram Company, Edgar M. Bronfman, and the British socialite Claus von Bülow, who was convicted and later acquitted back in the 1980s of trying to murder his wife, Sunny von Bülow. Mr. Ellsworth adopted Mr. von Bülow’s dog after his neighbor’s arrest.Mr. Ellsworth, who also had a weekend home in Connecticut, called his sprawling Manhattan apartment “the honey pot” and filled it with some of his extensive collection of artwork, which included Chinese paintings and bronzes, Japanese lacquer and Himalayan sculptures. He lived there with his longtime companion, Masahiro Hashiguchi, a Japanese chef who also served as the trustee for his estate.THE APARTMENT OWNED BY MR. SMITH of Fox News, No. 3H, is a loftlike unit on the third floor of the Greenwich, a prewar condominium conversion at 65 West 13th Street. It sold for $4.2 million, which was 14 percent below his initial $4.9 million list price in January.Mr. Smith paid nearly $1.88 million for the apartment in 2004, and then embarked on a full renovation.The home has 2,341 square feet that includes two bedrooms and two baths, as well as a den and a great room with a nearby open kitchen and a dining area, according to the listing with the Corcoran Group. The en-suite master has two walk-in closets and a laundry area. John Dalsheim was listed as the buyer.MR. FURMAN, AN INVESTMENT BANKER who is a vice chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts and a chairman emeritus of the Film Society of Lincoln Center, sold an apartment on the 30th floor of the Sherry Netherland, at 781 Fifth Avenue, near 59th Street. The price was $8.91 million; the buyer’s identity was shielded by an L.L.C.The 2,500-square-foot apartment, listed by Douglas Elliman Real Estate, has two bedrooms and three and a half baths, along with a library and formal living and dining rooms.Mr. Furman has produced a long list of hit Broadway shows, including “The Book of Mormon,” “Cats” and “The Color Purple.”THE ESTATE OF MS. COHEN, the graphic artist, sold her five-story, Italianate-style townhouse at 160 East 70th Street for $9.35 million to an unknown buyer. Her daughter, Tamar Cohen, who is also a graphic artist, was the executor of the estate.The house, which was listed with Brown Harris Stevens, has five bedrooms and six baths over 7,590 square feet, along with ample outdoor space, which features a rear garden, two balconies and a terrace on the fourth level. There is also an art studio on the garden level.Ms. Cohen, who died last fall, was a prolific designer whose vast portfolio included signage for the celebrated Seagram Building in Manhattan, commissioned by Philip Johnson.She did work for General Motors, the Federal Aviation Administration, Rio de Janeiro’s Museum of Modern Art and the 1964 World’s Fair, and designed museum catalogs and furniture.