https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/30/us/politics/missouris-attorney-general-faces-scrutiny.html
Missouri Attorney General May Face Inquiry Over Money From Lobbyists - The New York Times
Attorneys General,Missouri,Koster  Chris (1964- ),Campaign Finance,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Conflicts of Interest,United States Politics and Government
Oct. 29, 2014
4978
WASHINGTON —  The speaker of the Missouri House of Representatives is preparing to create a special bipartisan investigation into the state attorney general, Chris Koster, to examine if money donated to Mr. Koster may have influenced the outcome of consumer fraud cases.“Everyone knows that attorneys general are powerful,” House Speaker Tim Jones, a Republican, said in an interview Wednesday. “But Missourians expect and deserve public officials who will defend their rights and do not use their office in a way that would benefit them politically.”The move came after an article in The New York Times on Wednesday examined the lobbying of state attorneys general nationwide by representatives of corporations, as well as actions by attorneys general like Mr. Koster, a Democrat, that appear to benefit companies that have been campaign contributors.Mr. Koster on Wednesday rejected any suggestion that he had offered special treatment to any companies. The story, he said in a statement to The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, “misrepresents the facts, distorting events to create an appearance of impropriety where none exists.” He did not respond to a request for comment from The Times.The investigation by The Times detailed how Mr. Koster last year directed his staff to drop out of an investigation of 5-Hour Energy, a caffeinated drink, after first being told about the inquiry by an attorney for the company, which has supported him with campaign contributions.Mr. Koster’s office also concluded settlement negotiations in an unrelated consumer fraud case with the pharmaceutical giant Pfizer last year, days after receiving an invitation to be the guest speaker at a breakfast hosted by a Pfizer political action committee, which donated more than $20,000 to his election campaigns — more than to any other attorney general in the United States over the past five years.That settlement, related to allegations of unlawful marketing of two drugs, brought Missouri hundreds of thousands of dollars less than other similar-size states received, The Times investigation showed.Mr. Jones, who is leaving office in January and is considering a run for statewide office in 2016, said he knows his call for a special committee may lead to charges that his actions are motivated by politics. But he said he has the authority and responsibility to appoint the panel.Mr. Koster, in an earlier statement to The Times, said his office accepted a smaller settlement payment from Pfizer because of a mistake made by a staff lawyer that prevented Missouri from joining the so-called multistate investigation of the company.A spokesman for Pfizer said in a statement Wednesday that the company, and a Washington-based law firm representing it, Dickstein Shapiro, did not ask for or receive any special treatment.“The Missouri A.G. was invited solely as a speaker,” the company said in a statement, adding that Pfizer did not cover Mr. Koster’s cost for the trip and calling the negotiations and the political invitation “two separate and appropriate activities that happened independently of each other.”The special investigative committee, Mr. Jones said, would be made up of House lawmakers. The new House leadership could decide to disband the group, Mr. Jones said, but it would carry over into the legislative session that begins in January.In Florida, Attorney General Pam Bondi, whose actions also were a focus of The Times investigation, disputed any suggestion that her office has given special treatment to clients represented by Dickstein Shapiro, which has worked to build a close relationship with Ms. Bondi and her staff.“No lobbyist will ever affect a decision I make regarding the citizens of the state of Florida,” Ms. Bondi told a reporter from The Palm Beach Post as she campaigned for a second term. Her office did not respond to a request from The Times for comment.