http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/us/politics/guantanamo-yunis-abdurrahman-shokuri-morocco-reprieve.html
Ex-Guantánamo Prisoner Said to Be Held by Morocco - The New York Times
Morocco,Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba),Shokuri  Yunis Abdurrahman,Detainees,Obama  Barack,Reparations
Oct. 1, 2015
7414
WASHINGTON —  The Moroccan government is violating the diplomatic assurances it provided to the State Department that it would swiftly release, and not prosecute, a former Guantánamo Bay detainee whom the United States recently repatriated to Morocco, according to a lawyer for the prisoner.The credibility of diplomatic assurances about how prisoners will be treated is a key to the Obama administration’s ability to transfer lower-level detainees out of the prison, which President Obama wants to close before he leaves office in 2017.The lawyer, Cori Crider, of the international human rights group Reprieve, said on Thursday that before the detainee, Yunis Abdurrahman Shokuri, was transferred to Morocco on Sept. 16, State Department officials had conveyed to Reprieve that the Moroccan government had promised to release him within 72 hours and did not intend to charge him with a crime.But Mr. Shokuri remains in custody, and a Moroccan prosecutor has referred him to an investigating judge to consider possible charges, she said. At a hearing last week, the judge declined to release him, setting another hearing Oct. 22 to decide whether to proceed with a prosecution over his suspected conduct before his capture in Afghanistan in 2001.“We are extremely concerned that the government of Morocco’s explicit promises about the way it would treat Yunis have not yet been honored,” said Ms. Crider, who is helping to represent him. She urged the United States to “escalate” discussions with Morocco “to the highest level.”A spokeswoman at the Moroccan Embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Obama administration officials declined to comment specifically on Mr. Shokuri’s case, but suggested that they were talking to the Moroccan government.“We remain in close contact with receiving governments following the transfer of detainees from Guantánamo, and this ongoing dialogue covers a range of issues, including security and humane treatment,” said Ian Moss, a State Department spokesman.A leaked military dossier on Mr. Shokuri, 47, said that in 1999, he helped found an Islamist group for Moroccans that was not a part of Al Qaeda or the Taliban but had ties to them. Reprieve has denied that.Mr. Shokuri was captured by Pakistani forces near the Afghanistan border in December 2001. The United States held him at Guantánamo in law-of-war detention for more than 13 years but did not charge him with a crime. In 2009, a six-agency task force unanimously recommended transferring him if security conditions could be met in the receiving country.Lawyers for detainees usually cannot speak about diplomatic assurances related to the transfers of their clients because of a court-imposed protective order, unless the executive branch grants permission.Reprieve made a sealed filing last week apparently related to discussing diplomatic assurances in public and in Moroccan court. Late Wednesday night, the Justice Department made its own sealed filing in response. On Thursday, Reprieve said it was now permitted to say the following, using an alternate spelling of its client’s name:“On March 12, 2015, the State Department indicated to Reprieve staff at a meeting that their officials had received the following specific assurances about Mr. Chekkouri: that he would not be detained in Morocco for longer than 72 hours; that Morocco had pledged that it had no intention to lodge charges against Petitioner; and that Morocco had heard and accepted the stated view of the State Department that there was no cause to charge Petitioner with an offense.”In public filings, Reprieve is also asking the court to force the government to swiftly declassify certain information about Mr. Shokuri so they can introduce it in Moroccan court. The Justice Department separately made a public filing late Wednesday urging the judge not to issue such an order.The dispute arose as the Republican-controlled Congress this week unveiled the annual National Defense Authorization Act, which contains restrictions on transferring Guantánamo detainees, after the House and Senate armed services committees finished reconciling rival versions.Mr. Obama has threatened to veto that legislation, partly over a spending dispute and partly over the transfer restrictions, which he had asked Congress to lift.Instead, the bill maintains a ban on bringing detainees into the United States for any purpose. The administration’s plan for closing the Guantánamo prison involves bringing those detainees who are not recommended for transfer — there are 61 — to another military prison in the United States.Also, the bill would not just maintain but heighten restrictions on when the executive branch may repatriate or resettle the lower-level detainees who are recommended for transfer. There are 53 such detainees.The administration circulated a statement denouncing the bill’s transfer restriction provisions as “unwise and unnecessary.”