https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/insider/1932-im-not-mrs-putnam-im-amelia-earhart.html
1932 | I’m Not ‘Mrs. Putnam.’ I’m Amelia Earhart. - The New York Times
New York Times,Earhart  Amelia,Sulzberger  Arthur Hays,Michaels  Sheila (1939-2017),Sulzberger  Iphigene Ochs
July 13, 2017
4490
The $500 given to her by The New York Times was a godsend, Amelia Earhart allowed. And the orchids sent by Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, the grande dame of The Times, were simply lovely.But after navigating the Atlantic Ocean alone in May 1932 — to the world’s acclaim — the aviator had a bone to pick with us.Back at the home in Rye, N.Y., that she shared with her husband, the book publisher George Palmer Putnam, Ms. Earhart dispatched a letter to Arthur Hays Sulzberger, the publisher of The Times:“Despite the mild expression of my wishes, and those of G.P.P., I am constantly referred to as ‘Mrs. Putnam’ when the Times mentions me in its columns.”“I admit I have no principle to uphold in asking that I be called by my professional name in print. However, it is for many reasons more convenient for both of us to be simply ‘Amelia Earhart.’ After all (here may be a principle) I believe flyers should be permitted the same privileges as writers or actresses.”Ms. Earhart had been “Miss Earhart” when she crossed the Atlantic in 1928 as a passenger — the first woman to make a transoceanic journey by air. Her personal account of that thrilling adventure was cabled exclusively to The New York Times from Burry Port in Wales.After she married Mr. Putnam in 1931, she became “Mrs. Putnam” in headlines, including the one trumpeting her triumphant solo journey across the ocean.She objected publicly to the practice of being identified by her husband’s name, as The Times itself reported a month later, when she asked journalists please to use her flying name.“Not that I’m rabid about it, at all, nor a Lucy Stoner,” Ms. Earhart said, “but I think women in aviation should have the same privileges as women who write, and my husband doesn’t mind. For social purposes, I think Putnam’s a grand name, though.” (True. The publishing house G. P. Putnam’s Sons dated to 1838 and counted Washington Irving and Theodore Roosevelt among its authors.)Times editors initially seemed deaf to her request.On the morning she felt compelled to write to Mr. Sulzberger, a headline had declared: “Harrison and Rye Hail Mrs. Putnam’s Return / Home Townships of Flier Hold Celebrations — Monument to Her Is Unveiled.”Sometimes, however, writing to a publisher can get results.By July, she was back to being “Miss Earhart” in The Times. On the walls of The Times’s board room, there is a charming photograph showing her and Mr. Putnam at home. Playfully, she signed it:In 1937, it was “Miss Earhart” who was forced down at sea. The circumstances of her disappearance still elude any certain conclusions, though the 80th anniversary has renewed speculation and searches.Here at The Times, the intrigue no longer concerns “Mrs. Putnam” or “Miss Earhart” but “Ms. Earhart” — an honorific that owes its resuscitation to Sheila Michaels, who died June 22.This time, perhaps, Amelia Earhart would not object.