https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/16/world/americas/justin-trudeau-canada-aga-khan-ethics-investigation-mary-dawson.html
Justin Trudeau’s Family Vacation on Aga Khan’s Island Leads to Ethics Inquiry - The New York Times
Trudeau  Justin,Canada,Liberal Party (Canada),Ethics and Official Misconduct,Aga Khan  Karim
Jan. 16, 2017
5378
OTTAWA — Canada’s federal conflict-of-interest and ethics office confirmed on Monday that it is investigating the propriety of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his family’s spending part of the Christmas holidays as guests of the Aga Khan, the billionaire philanthropist and spiritual leader of Ismaili Muslims, on a private island in the Bahamas.Jocelyne Brisebois, a spokeswoman for the ethics commissioner, Mary Dawson, said in an email that an inquiry is being conducted under Canada’s conflict-of-interest act but offered no details about its scope or timing.Ms. Dawson said earlier that she would speak to Mr. Trudeau about separate allegations that he had broken conflict-of-interest laws by attending Liberal Party fund-raising events, where small numbers of people met the prime minister after making donations of 1,500 Canadian dollars apiece, or about $1,100.The two inquires threaten to tarnish the image of Mr. Trudeau, who has long promised to conduct politics in a transparent manner. The penalty of any finding against Mr. Trudeau, however, would be mostly political. Violations of these conflict-of-interest laws are not crimes and bring comparatively small fines in the worst cases.Citing remarks made by Mr. Trudeau on Friday, Cameron Ahmad, his press secretary, wrote in an email that “we are happy to engage with the commissioner and answer any questions she may have.”The latest inquiry appears to have been the result of complaints to Ms. Dawson by two Conservative opposition members of Parliament.In a letter to Blaine Calkins, one of the complainants, Ms. Dawson said she was looking into possible violations of rules barring cabinet ministers from accepting free transportation. Mr. Trudeau and his family traveled to the Aga Khan’s island from Nassau on his private helicopter.According to the letter, the commissioner will also review whether the vacation itself broke the rules because the Aga Khan and his charities have dealings with the government.The government of Canada over decades has donated millions of dollars to foreign aid programs run by charities led by the Aga Khan. The previous Conservative government agreed to match a donation of 30 million Canadian dollars from the Aga Khan to establish a Global Center for Pluralism in Ottawa.The Aga Khan has established several institutions in Canada without the government’s help, including a museum of Muslim art in Toronto.The Aga Khan was a friend of Mr. Trudeau’s father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, a former prime minister.