http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/02/movies/02zomb.html
Zombieland - The New York Times
Movies,Harrelson  Woody,Eisenberg  Jesse,Fleischer  Ruben,Zombieland (Movie)
Oct. 1, 2009
6175
Chomp chomp, spew spew go the zippy ghouls in “Zombieland,” a minor diversion dripping in splatter and groaning with self-amusement. Like most zombie flicks, this addition to an already overstuffed, undernourished subgenre more or less follows the gore-slicked path charted by George A. Romero in his sanguinary 1968 masterwork, “Night of the Living Dead”: the undead chase after the semi-alive. Carnage ensues. But whereas Mr. Romero always has politics on his mind, the filmmakers here — Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick wrote and Ruben Fleischer directed — are strictly in it to bust guts (and heads).Although Woody Harrelson, Jesse Eisenberg, Abigail Breslin, Emma Stone and a modestly funny Bill Murray breeze through, they’re just icing. The real point and, depending on your blood lust, the pleasure of “Zombieland” is its appetite for destruction. Despite its throwaway jokes, a hint of romance and various ridiculous bits of business, some involving Twinkies, the movie is strictly a compendium of all the ways to off zombies, which can be downed with guns, of course, as well as baseball bats, gardening tools, a toilet-bowl lid, even a piano. Sometimes the gonzo antics work, though the piles of bodies at the end did make me flash on the Nazi extermination camps, which, you know, really killed the joke, too.  “Zombieland” is rated R. (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.) Guts galore. ZOMBIELANDOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Ruben Fleischer; written by Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick; director of photography, Michael Bonvillain; edited by Peter Amundson and Alan Baumgarten; music by David Sardy; production designer, Maher Ahmad; produced by Gavin Polone; released by Columbia Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 21 minutes.WITH: Woody Harrelson (Tallahassee), Jesse Eisenberg (Columbus), Emma Stone (Wichita), Abigail Breslin (Little Rock), Amber Heard (406), Bill Murray (himself) and Derek Graf (Clown Zombie).