https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/27/us/couples-personalizing-role-of-religion-in-wedding-ceremonies.html
Couples Personalizing Role of Religion in Wedding Ceremonies - The New York Times
Marriages,Religion and Belief,Universal Life Church,Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships
June 26, 2015
5612
When Evan Wolfson was a high school student in the 1970s, a teenager with a quirky wit and perhaps too much free time, he discovered a mail-order religious organization called the Universal Life Church. He sent an application to an address somewhere out West and duly received a card identifying him as an ordained minister. “I carried it in my wallet and swelled with adolescent pride,” Mr. Wolfson, 58, said recently. “And that was that.”Last year, Mr. Wolfson went online to the church’s website to be ordained once more. This time, his intent was anything but antic. Mr. Wolfson, the founder of the advocacy group Freedom to Marry, needed the credential to officiate at the same-sex wedding of his office colleague Scott Davenport.The distance in time and motive between Mr. Wolfson’s two ordinations from the Universal Life Church tells a story much larger than his own. It exemplifies the serious side of a recent boom in online ordination of wedding officiants, a trend that speaks to deep changes in the American views of marriage and organized religion.Admittedly, it is tempting and even routine to treat the Universal Life Church as a folly. The church pumps out ordinations at an assembly-line pace, almost mocking a process that usually requires years of seminary study. Celebrities like Conan O’Brien, Joan Rivers, Steven Tyler of Aerosmith and Rob Dyrdek of MTV, have all boasted about their ordinations by Universal Life.Yet the church does propound a theology of interfaith coexistence — “We are all children of the same universe” — and its leaders write thoughtful essays on issues of social justice and equality. Those qualities, when combined with the ease of ordination, have helped the Universal Life Church carve out a place in a contemporary America where denominational borders are ever more porous and traditional dogma is increasingly disparaged as divisive.“It shows a very personal, individualistic attitude toward marriage,” said Andrew J. Cherlin, a sociology professor at Johns Hopkins University who specializes in marriage. “Yet even secular Americans still think that a religious presence matters. And having an online-ordained friend gives you more control over the ceremony rather than bowing to the restrictions that a real clergyman would impose.”The upsurge in same-sex marriage — a Gallup survey in April 2015 estimated that the number of legally wed same-sex couples grew by a third in the previous year — accounts for some, but by no means all, of the online ordinations. Along with same-sex marriage, interfaith marriage rates have more than doubled to 39 percent since 1960. A Pew study also documented the increase in so-called “nones,” the 23 percent of survey respondents who claim no religious affiliation.“Since we came into the arena of same-sex marriage, it has also had an effect on heterosexual marriage,” said Brother G. Martin Freeman, the presiding chaplain of the Universal Life Church, which was founded in California and is now based in Seattle. For young Americans, gay and straight, he said, marriage has been “privatized” and taken “out of the control of the state and of the church.” Rather, this generation “wants marriage to be among friends and family.”For each calendar year since 2010, the Universal Life Church has had an average annual increase of 19 percent in ordinations, according to its statistics. In 2014, the church ordained 250,000 individuals, and this year is on pace to authorize 325,000. Heading into June, the most traditional month for weddings, the church ordained almost 30,000 ministers in May.So it would be too simple to assume that couples using a Universal Life minister are doing so as a tacit way of avoiding faith altogether. Nor can the phenomenon be considered an expedient solution to the fact that most states allow only licensed clergy members or elected and appointed governmental officials to perform weddings. Of course, it is a lot quicker and cheaper to become an online minister than a mayor or a judge.“I’ve been to some of these weddings, and they have some of the feel of religion or transcendence, but without the institutionality of religion,” said David Blankenhorn, the president of the Institute for American Values and the author of “The Future of Marriage.” “Maybe this is a way for the religiously nonaffiliated to have a ceremony that has integrity for them but also a spiritual dimension. As humans, we’re seekers after meaning, even if you say you’re agnostic or atheist.”Dr. Cherlin placed the online ordinations in historical context. Since the 1950s, he said, the age of married couples has steadily increased and so has their sense of control over their wedding rites. These recent generations have fueled the proliferation of choices like self-written vows and destination weddings.“The ceremony is now a personal celebration,” Dr. Cherlin said. “Marriage used to be the first step into adulthood. Now it’s the last step. And when people do it, they want to celebrate how well they’re doing in their lives. But that can’t explain it all. There are couples who still want a thin veneer of religion on what’s essentially a secular ceremony. It matters somehow that the officiant has a religious connection. There’s a concept in sociology called ‘symbolic ethnicity.’ This is almost like symbolic religion.”What may feel largely symbolic to the couple, though, has deeper resonance for at least some Universal Life ministers. Meghan Gurley, for instance, studied religion as an undergraduate at Emory University in Atlanta and then earned a master’s degree in theology in 1997 at nearby Columbia Theological Seminary, which is affiliated with the Presbyterian Church.But when it came time to seek ordination, Ms. Gurley realized two things. First, she did not want the 24/7 responsibilities of a congregational minister. Second, she did not agree with all elements of Presbyterian doctrine. So, after more than a decade of work in the nonprofit sector, she received her online ordination from the Universal Life Church in 2009.Since then, she has performed more than 100 weddings, with 80 percent of the ceremonies having some religious or spiritual element. She has done interfaith ceremonies for Protestant-Buddhist, Muslim-Baptist and Jewish-Catholic pairs. She has hiked two miles through the woods to a couple who planned their elopement around her availability.More commonly, Ms. Gurley holds six hours of premarital counseling for most of the people she will unite, charging $800 to $1,000 for the classes and the ceremony. Her approach, however iconoclastic on the surface, touches some very traditional wellsprings.“If you get ordained through a mainline church, you have to follow their rules,” she said. “If you are ordained through Universal Life, then you can do any kind of ministry you want to do. And I felt there was a gap in wedding ceremonies for people who wanted to write their own vows or people from two different faiths.“So as long as they say, ‘I do,’ in front of me, I’m fine with it,” she continued. “I just don’t want to see them again. I always tell the couple, ‘When I marry you, you’re married for life.’ ”