https://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/11/us/11abortion.html
Abortion Rate’s Decline in U.S. Hits Plateau - The New York Times
Abortion,Guttmacher Institute,United States,Medicine and Health,Surgery and Surgeons,Mifeprex (RU-486)
Jan. 10, 2011
1945
The abortion rate in the United States, which has declined steadily since a 1981 peak of more than 29 abortions per 1,000 women, stalled between 2005 and 2008, at slightly less than 20 abortions per 1,000 women, according to a new report from the Guttmacher Institute.While the new report is a statistical survey and does not provide any explanation for why the numbers hit a plateau, Rachel Jones, the lead author, said the economy might have played a role.“Unintended pregnancy is increasingly concentrated among poor and low-income women, and for the 2008 survey, we were collecting data in the midst of a recession,” Ms. Jones said. “So there are more poor women in the survey, women who in better economic times might have decided to carry to term, but since they or their partner lost their job, decided they couldn’t.”In 2008, there were 1.2 million abortions nationwide, a number that has changed little in the three years since the last survey by the Guttmacher Institute, which researches reproductive health issues and compiles the most comprehensive abortion statistics.The report found that more women were turning away from surgical abortion in favor of medication, usually mifepristone, the drug formerly known as RU-486, to end their pregnancies. The report estimates that about 17 percent of all 2008 abortions, and more than a quarter of those performed before nine weeks of gestation, were medication abortions.Randall K. O’Bannon, director of education and research at the National Right to Life Committee, said the trend toward medication abortions had helped keep the abortion numbers steady.“Women were uncomfortable with the idea of surgical abortion,” he said. “They didn’t like the idea of scraping, the gross stuff. So the abortion industry comes along and says, ‘Now it’s just a matter of popping a pill.’ But the truth is it’s nothing like that. There’s lots of side effects.”Mifepristone was introduced in the United Sates in 2000, and according to the report, there were 187,000 medication abortions in 2008, compared with 158,000 the previous year. Many clinics that do not specialize in abortions offer only medication abortions.Ms. Jones sees the increase in medication abortions as good news, because such abortions occur early in pregnancy, when abortion is safest.The new Guttmacher report was the first since 1982 showing no decline in the number of abortion providers, but Guttmacher officials said that was probably not because of any actual increase. Rather, they said, it was affected by the collection of more accurate data, including information from 65 more California hospitals that performed a small number of abortions. Abortion clinics made up 21 percent of the providers in the United States, but performed about 70 percent of all abortions.As in the previous study, 87 percent of United States counties had no abortion provider, and 35 percent of women of reproductive age lived in those counties.The Guttmacher report found an increase in harassment of abortion providers, with clinics in the Midwest and the South the most likely to experience harassment and those in the Northeast and the West the least.