https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/25/books/review/the-stricken-field-martha-gellhorn.html
Martha Gellhorn’s Greatest Novel Is Essential Reading for Today - The New York Times
Books and Literature,A Stricken Field (Book),Gellhorn  Martha
May 25, 2017
7268
If Martha Gellhorn had been alive to see the release of “Hemingway & Gellhorn,” the 2012 HBO film about the writer’s brief and tumultuous romance with Ernest Hemingway while the two were reporting from the world’s hot spots in the 1930s and ’40s, it’s safe to say she would have had a few choice words for whoever placed her second on the bill. “All Cinderella had was a pumpkin,” Clive Owen’s Hemingway drolly remarks, early in the film, when Gellhorn (Nicole Kidman) pulls up at the Hotel Florida in Madrid in a Russian tank. Gellhorn has come to see the Spanish Civil War firsthand — not to play dollface to an international celebrity — and she brushes past the addled Hemingway on her way into the lobby. John Dos Passos is there to support the Republican cause, and a young Robert Capa, and a cast of elegantly dissolute prostitutes, one missing a leg.“Cinderella needs a drink,” Gellhorn replies over her shoulder to the skulking Papa Hemingway, and the film’s mediocrity is sealed.But it does get one thing right about Martha Gellhorn: She cared far more about chasing the story than she ever cared about the men in her life, famous or otherwise. It’s her fidelity to the story and the ordinary people swept up in historical events — particularly victims of the “evil stupidity” of nations at war, the “lies and chicanery” of statecraft and the global propaganda machine — that make Gellhorn’s novel “A Stricken Field” (1940) essential reading for the political moment we’re living through today. Set in Prague at the beginning of the war, a “dead city” in the process of being abandoned to Hitler by the rest of Europe in exchange for “peace in our time,” the novel follows an American journalist named Mary Douglas as she confronts a simmering refugee crisis in the proud, urbane capital of a liberal democracy. The Nazis have annexed the Sudetenland, an ethnic German enclave in the western outskirts of Czechoslovakia, and local Nazis, whipped up by the nativist demagogue Konrad Henlein, are “going through the streets, armed, walking as men could not walk but only as terrible hungry animals moved … to beat and torture and kill.” Prague is already groaning under the weight of refugees from Germany and Austria, Jews, Communists and other dissidents, and the Czech government has issued an expulsion order forcing anyone staying in the country without papers to return home and face torture, imprisonment and almost certain death.Mary joins the other jaded correspondents, all male, as they drink in faded hotel lobbies and lament the stories that their papers kill or that the censors get to first, but her heart isn’t in the banter. She’s still haunted by the fall of Republican Spain and the atrocities she witnessed there, the bombers that “came over faster than wind, so that it would all happen in three unending minutes, but if you saw them they were hanging in the sky not moving, slow and easy, taking their time, you’d think, not worried about anything.” Prague hangs in suspension too, although its ordinance is human: Mary follows a noble German refugee named Rita on a hellish tour of temporary safe houses for the displaced, including an orphanage where the children eat a meager dinner of grapes and black bread and sing in their pajamas before bed. The fear and mistrust of the refugees is palpable — the Gestapo is operating on the streets unfettered, arresting dissidents and hauling them into an unmarked house for interrogations — and suicide is a constant presence. “I must not,” Mary scolds herself after visiting the orphanage, thinking of the child that she had tried to save in Barcelona and the voices of the refugee children as they sang a simple German folk song. “I cannot allow myself so much love.” She is a war correspondent, after all, and not a relief worker — or a saint.Mary and Rita lose track of each other in the ensuing subterfuge, and this is where Gellhorn’s novel achieves its devastating genius. Mary abandons all pretense of journalistic objectivity and plunges herself into Prague to try to find Rita before she’s transported back to Germany and to intervene in Czech affairs and suspend the government’s expulsion order. Both missions end — how else could they end? — in futility. In an afterword to the novel written in 1985, Gellhorn quotes her letters home from Europe at the time and reveals that she had tried the very same gambit with the high commissioner for refugees from the League of Nations, who had come to Prague in 1938 and “didn’t see a single refugee.” Gellhorn voices her anger over the outcome in her letter home, while in her novel, written the next year from the safety of her “bolt-hole” in Cuba — Hemingway’s famous Finca Vigía — this outrage is tempered into anguish.“Is there any place to go,” a haunted Mary thinks near the end of “A Stricken Field,” “where you don’t see or hear or know?”Her answer is a litany: “Kenya, Hawaii, Tahiti, Martinique.”We know better, though.