https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/world/middleeast/police-presence-in-egypt-mutes-most-protests-on-5th-anniversary-of-uprising.html
Police Presence in Egypt Mutes Most Protests on 5th Anniversary of Uprising  - The New York Times
Egypt,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Mubarak  Hosni,Sisi  Abdel Fattah el-,Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt)
Jan. 25, 2016
8989
CAIRO —  The few dozen protesters seemed to emerge from nowhere, surging down a narrow street and waving a four-finger salute that identified them as likely supporters of Egypt’s outlawed Muslim Brotherhood.“Down with the tyrant!” they chanted against President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.After 10 minutes, three bursts of fireworks signaled to the protesters to disperse. “We are being followed,” said one man as he scurried down the street in Cairo’s Shubra al-Kheima neighborhood.Barely a minute later, young men on motorbikes roared down the street, giving chase. They cornered one protester and started beating him.That was how some Egyptians marked the fifth anniversary on Monday of the start of the uprising that toppled President Hosni Mubarak: A handful of flash protests, like the one in Shubra al-Kheima, sought to harness the commitment of the embattled opposition; Mr. Sisi’s government and its strong-arm supporters proved they were even more determined.Thousands of police officers patrolled the streets of Cairo and public squares, and a crackdown by security forces leading up to Monday’s anniversary saw civil society activists rounded up, art houses closed and the administrators of opposition Facebook pages detained.The efforts seemed unnecessary: Since 2013, tens of thousands of Egyptians have been jailed, including journalists and secular activists; the leadership of the Muslim Brotherhood is in exile or in prison; and many ordinary Egyptians say they are too weary, or fearful, to take to the streets again.The only permitted demonstration took place at Tahrir Square, the focal point of the popular uprising against Mr. Mubarak in 2011, where a few hundred government supporters gathered on Monday in chilly winter weather to wave Egyptian flags and cheer for Mr. Sisi, one of Mr. Mubarak’s former generals. Instead of battling the police, as people had done five years ago, they took selfies with officers and presented them with roses.Several people said that, after years of wrenching political turmoil, they were grateful for the stability that Mr. Sisi had brought. “We were sad about the destruction that was taking place,” said Sawsan Hasan, a grandmother who traveled 140 miles from Minya, south of Cairo, to the capital with eight of her family members. “Things are starting to get better.”Other Egyptians in Tahrir Square noted the chaos shaking Arab countries like Syria and neighboring Libya, and railed against perceived Western meddling in Egypt. Several people accused President Obama of secretly supporting the Muslim Brotherhood — a claim that is frequently aired on Egyptian television.(Western human rights groups, for their part, say the Obama administration is too indulgent of Mr. Sisi, and the United States should use the $1.3 billion in annual aid to Egypt to encourage political reforms.)On the fringes of the Tahrir crowd, a small, quiet group had assembled not to celebrate or protest, but to commemorate the bitter disappointments of the 2011 uprising. “I left my flag at home because the demands of the revolution have not been met,” said a man who could only identify himself as Bakr before the police moved him along.There was a small act of protest by one government critic in Tahrir: Sanaa Seif, 21, whose brother is in jail for violating Egypt’s harsh protest laws, walked through the square wearing a sweatshirt that read, “It is still the January revolution.”Despite the government’s anxiety, the anniversary on Monday passed largely without serious violence. Local news media reported that two people had been killed by security forces in a raid on an apartment in a Cairo. Across the country, police broke up several small protests, mostly led by the Muslim Brotherhood, and officials said they had defused a bomb in the port city of Alexandria.Five years after the protests that ended his three-decade long rule, Mr. Mubarak remained in his hospital room at the Maadi Military hospital in a Cairo suburb. The legal basis for his stay there is unclear, with him having completed a three-year prison sentence.Political analysts say Mr. Mubarak’s release could embarrass Mr. Sisi, but the president’s most immediate challenges are economic. Egypt’s weak economy is suffering from inflation, high unemployment and a declining tourist sector crippled by attacks from Islamist insurgents.By midafternoon Monday in Tahrir Square, the police had decided that they had enough and, forming a human chain, they gently cleared the square by calling out in Arabic “Yalla” — “Let’s go.”