http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/09/sports/tennis/andy-murray-picks-amelie-mauresmo-as-his-new-coach.html
Andy Murray Picks Amélie Mauresmo as His New Coach - The New York Times
Murray  Andy (1987- ),Tennis,Mauresmo  Amelie,Coaches and Managers
June 8, 2014
3093
PARIS —  It was the French Open’s best off-court chess match: Andy Murray versus the news media on the topic of his new coach.Murray has been without a coach since parting ways with Ivan Lendl in March. Before and during the French Open, Murray was repeatedly asked about the progress of his coaching search, asked to address rumors that certain people were on his list, asked if the talk was a distraction.It took on comic dimensions when the former players Fabrice Santoro and Cédric Pioline handed Murray business cards during postmatch interviews.Murray faced it all with a mix of humor and skilled evasiveness. After he lost in a semifinal to Rafael Nadal on Friday, Murray said the chances of his naming a new coach before Wimbledon were “50-50 maybe.” Still, it seemed unlikely that Murray would try to defend his Wimbledon title without a coach.In the end, the person he chose was in line with the trend of current champions’ hiring former champions to join their teams — but with a twist.A few hours before the French Open men’s final, between Nadal and Novak Djokovic on Sunday, Murray announced that Amélie Mauresmo would be his coach for the coming grass-court season.She immediately became the highest-profile female coach in tennis but otherwise fit the mold of recent coaching additions for top players. In the past year, Roger Federer has hired Stefan Edberg, Novak Djokovic has hired Boris Becker, and Kei Nishikori has hired Michael Chang.Mauresmo, who turns 35 next month, is a former No. 1 player from France and a two-time Grand Slam event champion. After retiring in 2009, she coached the Frenchman Michael Llodra for the grass-court season in 2010. She is the French Fed Cup captain and had stints on the coaching teams of Marion Bartoli, who won Wimbledon last year under her tutelage, and Victoria Azarenka.Murray, whose mother, Judy, served as his primary coach through his teenage years and has been a frequent presence by his side at the professional level, said the hire felt natural.“For me, it didn’t feel like a strange thing to do just because I grew up with a female coach,” he said in a BBC interview Sunday.After the news spread around social media, Judy Murray wrote on Twitter, “Love it.”Mauresmo said that Andy Murray contacted her about working together a few weeks ago and that she was surprised by the call. The two met before the French Open to discuss the possible arrangement more. They will begin their work this week at the Queen’s Club event in London.“I’m passionate about this sport,” Mauresmo said. “I love challenges. I don’t know; I guess I like to put myself on the line at some point and see what I can do.”It is not unprecedented in tennis for a woman to coach a man. Jimmy Connors was coached by his mother, Gloria. Djokovic’s first coach was a woman, Jelena Gencic. Billie Jean King once coached Tim Mayotte. Andrei Chesnokov, who reached the top 10 in 1991, was coached for his entire career by Tatiana Naumko.While none of the top 30 female players are coached primarily by a woman, 49th-ranked Denis Istomin is coached by his mother, and 54th-ranked Mikhail Kukushkin is coached by his wife.But there are not many examples in other major sports of women coaching men. A few women have been assistant coaches in Division I men’s college basketball. Nancy Lieberman coached in the N.B.A. Development League. Helena Costa was recently hired by Clermont Foot 63, a second-division soccer club in France, becoming the first female manager in one of the top two divisions of Europe’s five major soccer leagues.Mauresmo, though, is not attaching much significance to her new status.“It’s not really interesting for me, this part of the story, to be honest,” Mauresmo said. “All I’m interested in is to be able to help him in his goals.”Murray, 27, won his first two Grand Slam titles under the intense and serious Lendl. But after winning Wimbledon last year, Murray struggled with a lingering back injury that ultimately required surgery. Ranked No. 2 over the summer, he fell to No. 8.Murray, who will rise to No. 5 on Monday, said his needs in a coach had changed.“I found that, you know, with my mum especially, that she listened extremely well,” he told the BBC. “And that was something that I felt right now that I needed, you know. I’ve started to listen to my body a lot more because over the years you start to pick up some things. And I think it’s important that the people you work with respect that and understand and listen to, you know, how you’re feeling as well because you can’t be pushed extremely hard every single day.”Murray has long been among the most vocal supporters on the ATP Tour of women’s tennis. Asked last week whether a man with a female coach would face stigmas, he said, “I don’t really care whether some of the other male players like it or not.”He added: “You know, it’s silly. Everyone is entitled to have the team around them that they want. Everyone works very differently. You know, some men might not work well with a female. Some men might work well with a female coach.”