https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/sports/cycling/tour-de-france-chris-froome-fabio-aru-primoz-roglic.html
Chris Froome Extends Lead in Tour de France; Rookie Wins Stage 17 - The New York Times
Tour de France (Bicycle Race),Bicycles and Bicycling,Aru  Fabio,Froome  Christopher,Roglic  Primoz
July 19, 2017
3077
BRIANCON, France — The Tour de France rookie Primoz Roglic scaled the race’s highest peak and barreled down the other side at 45 miles per hour to hold off the competition on the famed Galibier climb and win Stage 17 on Wednesday.Chris Froome consolidated his overall lead as Fabio Aru lost touch with Froome’s group on the punishing gradients of the Galibier.Froome, a three-time champion, finished just over a minute after Roglic in a group with Rigoberto Uran and Romain Bardet, who climbed to second and third overall. Aru dropped from second to fourth.Aru could not keep up with Froome’s group on the Galibier climb, falling behind as Bardet and the Irish rider Dan Martin accelerated. Mouth open, Aru repeatedly labored his way back to them until a final burst of speed toward the top from Bardet left him behind for good.Bardet said he had hoped to leave Froome behind, too. But Froome showed no signs of difficulty in staying with Bardet on a stage that moved him a big step closer to keeping the leader’s yellow jersey all the way to Paris.“I did my utmost,” Bardet said. “I raced to take the jersey and I came close to dropping them at the top of the Galibier. I attacked. That’s the way I love to race. I have no regrets. I tried everything.”Bardet, Froome, Uran, the French rider Warren Barguil and the Spanish rider Mikel Landa zoomed down the long descent from the top together, never slowing, to prevent Aru from catching them.Aru is now 53 seconds behind Froome. Uran and Bardet trail the leader by 27 seconds.“It was a big day of climbing,” Froome said. “My legs certainly felt a lot better than a week ago in the Pyrenees, which is a good sign.”Froome was greeted at the finish by French President Emmanuel Macron, who followed the stage in a car with the race director.Another tough day of climbing awaits on Thursday with a mountaintop finish on the Col d’Izoard. If the overall standings remain as close as they are now, the final time trial on Saturday could be decisive in determining the podium places at the finish in Paris the next day.“At this stage of the race, everyone’s on their hands and knees, let’s see what happens,” Froome said. “It’s still all to race for.”Roglic, a former ski jumper from Slovenia, sped away from his own four-man group, which included the two-time champion Alberto Contador, with three miles still left to climb on the Galibier. He reached the top, through barren slopes of scree and patchy grass, and raced down alone over the last 17 miles to the finish at the Serre Chevalier ski station.“It’s unbelievable,” Roglic said. “A really crazy stage.”The Tour lost Marcel Kittel, the winner of five stages this year, after he crashed in the first of four ascents on the 114-mile stage from La Mure. With blood running down his right leg and his shoe apparently broken, Kittel pulled up.With a new a new bike and a new shoe, he got going again and was treated while he rode by the Tour’s doctor. But Kittel later abandoned the race.He had been leading the Tour’s green jersey competition, awarded for points collected in sprints during and at the end of stages. He had 373 points. With his departure, Michael Matthews of Australia inherits the jersey. He has 364 points.One of the most active riders on Wednesday was Contador, a 35-year-old Spaniard. Riding with the panache of his glory days, he sped away from Froome’s group on the second and longest climb, the 15-mile ascent to the mountain pass Col de la Croix de Fer. But Contador faded in the Galibier and could not stay with Roglic.“I want people to remember me as a rider who tried things, who was courageous,” Contador said.