https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/business/trump-tweets-mika-brzezinski-joe-scarborough.html
Trump, Mika Brzezinski and Joe Scarborough: A Roller-Coaster Relationship - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,MSNBC,Brzezinski  Mika,Trump  Donald J,Scarborough  Joe,Morning Joe (TV Program)
June 29, 2017
586
President Trump drew widespread condemnation on Thursday for a series of early-morning tweets in which he attacked the television host Mika Brzezinski, calling her “low I.Q. Crazy Mika” and referring to a past meeting during which he claimed “she was bleeding badly from a face-lift.”The tweets were posted shortly before the end of Ms. Brzezinski’s show on MSNBC, “Morning Joe,” and also attacked one of her co-hosts, Joe Scarborough, a former Republican congressman.It was far from the first time the president had criticized the news media or publicly attacked a woman using crude, graphic or demeaning language. It was also far from Mr. Trump’s first entanglement with Ms. Brzezinski and Mr. Scarborough, who are engaged to be married.Until relatively recently, the president had a friendly relationship with the hosts, who were criticized during the campaign for their closeness to the candidate.That seems like a long time ago now. In recent months, the pair have excoriated Mr. Trump on the air, denouncing his behavior and questioning his mental health — criticisms the president views as a personal betrayal, according to a senior administration official.Shortly before he attacked Ms. Brzezinski on Thursday, she told viewers that Mr. Trump was “lying every day and destroying the country.”Here is a brief history of Mr. Trump’s stormy relationship with Ms. Brzezinski and Mr. Scarborough.The friendly relationship between Mr. Scarborough, Ms. Brzezinski and Mr. Trump became a source of concern at NBC, the parent company of MSNBC, as his campaign gathered steam in late 2015 and early 2016.It didn’t help that Mr. Scarborough often praised Mr. Trump, initially declined to rule out running as his vice president and told an audience in Manhattan that he had given Mr. Trump political advice, an admission that drew harsh words from media critics.“You guys have been supporters,” Mr. Trump told the two hosts during an interview the morning after he won the New Hampshire primary. “And I really appreciate it. And not necessarily supporters, but at least believers.”Mr. Scarborough said on the air and in a Washington Post op-ed in May 2016 that he did not think Mr. Trump had what it took to win the election, comments that angered the candidate and drew a rebuke on Twitter.Their relationship got worse that summer, and it all played out on television and Twitter.In June Mr. Trump tweeted that Ms. Brzezinski had “gone wild with hate” and that the pair had “lost their way.” In August, he tweeted a rumor published by the gossip page of The New York Post that the two hosts were romantically involved. (That turned out to be true.)Only in Mr. Trump’s telling, Ms. Brzezinski was “very insecure.” He also called her “a neurotic and not very bright mess.”The personal relationship between Mr. Trump and the two hosts warmed up again after the election. As Mr. Trump said on Thursday, the pair did spend New Year’s Eve at Mar-a-Lago, the president’s Florida estate, although Mr. Scarborough initially said they had gone there to arrange an interview.In May, though, they told Vanity Fair that while they were there the president offered to officiate at their wedding and host it at the White House or Mar-a-Lago. (Ms. Brzezinski said her answer to that was “If it weren’t Trump, it might be something to think about.”)Mr. Trump’s presidency has not been good for his friendship with Ms. Brzezinski and Mr. Scarborough. The two hosts have sharply criticized him, his integrity and his fitness for office as his administration has become mired in scandal, political setbacks and a federal investigation of ties to Russia.They have also hosted multiple discussions on their show about his mental health.This month, while reflecting on several of the president’s tweets, including his criticism of the mayor of London after a terrorist attack there, Mr. Scarborough told viewers, “There is not a sane rational human being who would have tweeted what he tweeted.” Donny Deutsch, a frequent guest on their show, agreed.“I think he clearly has a personality disorder,” Mr. Deutsch said. “And when you have a personality disorder you need to create drama to feel alive.”Mr. Scarborough and Ms. Brzezinski have also been highly critical of Mr. Trump’s advisers, especially Kellyanne Conway, his counselor and campaign manager. After barring her from their show in February (they called her “not credible”) Ms. Brzezinski made the on-air claim in May that Ms. Conway secretly disliked Mr. Trump and had said in the past that she worked for him only because she wanted the money.“She would get off the air, the camera would be turned off, the microphone would be taken off, and she would say ‘Blech, I need to take a shower,’ because she disliked her candidate so much,” Ms. Brzezinski said of Ms. Conway.Ms. Conway denied Ms. Brzezinski’s account, calling it “absurd” and “not true.”