https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/arts/music/martin-shkreli-releases-parts-of-wu-tang-clan-album-after-trump-victory.html
Martin Shkreli Releases Parts of Wu-Tang Clan Album After Trump Victory - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Presidential Election of 2016,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Toxoplasmosis,Coca-Cola Company,Paddle8 Inc,Periscope (Twitter Inc),Turing Pharmaceuticals AG,Wu-Tang Clan,Twitter,Shkreli  Martin (1983- ),Trump  Donald J,Music
Nov. 10, 2016
3252
Martin Shkreli, the pharmaceutical executive who was denounced for raising the price of a prescription drug by more than 5,000 percent, has released music from the only known copy of a Wu-Tang Clan album he owns exclusively. He had promised to do so if Donald J. Trump was elected president.Mr. Shkreli made the initial announcement on Oct. 27 on Twitter. After Tuesday’s election, Mr. Shkreli appeared on the livestream platforms Periscope and Hitbox and said: “I will be releasing this music over a long period of time. But let me play a little bit of it now.”Sipping from a Coca-Cola can, he grinned and bopped his head a few times as he played the introduction of the album, “The Wu — Once Upon a Time in Shaolin.”Mr. Shkreli called Mr. Trump’s victory “fantastic.” He said he was still deciding how to play other portions of the music.“I’ve got to decide how to put out — there’s about 30, 35 tracks,” he said during the livestream. “I actually have a contract with the Wu-Tang Clan where I’m not allowed to do this. Obviously, I own the music and I bought it and I paid a lot of money for it. In many ways, the contract shouldn’t matter that much.”“But I am a man of my word; I had to play a little bit of it,” he said.Mr. Shkreli’s purchase of the Wu-Tang Clan album had initially been a secret. In 2014, the group announced that it would press just one copy of the 31-track double album that it had worked on quietly for six years, and that it would make it available for purchase to only one person.In November 2015, the online auction house, Paddle8, mysteriously announced that it had sold the album for millions but did not name the buyer.At that time, Mr. Shkreli was already in the public spotlight. The company he founded, Turing Pharmaceuticals, set off a furor in September 2015 after it acquired the rights to Daraprim, a treatment for toxoplasmosis, a parasitic infection that can be serious for babies and people with AIDS.He then raised its price overnight to $750 a pill from $13.50.Mr. Shkreli stepped down as chief executive after being arrested on charges of securities fraud and wire fraud related to his time as a hedge fund manager and when he ran his first biopharmaceutical company, Retrophin. Federal officials accused him of a quasi-Ponzi scheme and said he used money from his company to pay off money-losing investors in his hedge funds.Last year, a Bloomberg Business article about the purchase of the Wu-Tang Clan album quoted “someone familiar with the deal” as saying the group had sold Mr. Shkreli the album for $2 million. It also quoted Mr. Shkreli as saying that he was a “little worried that they were going to walk out of the deal” because of outrage over the drug pricing.“But by then we’d closed,” Mr. Shkreli was quoted by Bloomberg Business as saying about the album purchase.“The whole kind of thing since then has been just kind of ‘Well, do we want to announce it’s him? Do we not want to announce it’s him?’”