http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/us/police-redlands-townhouse-san-bernardino-shooting.html
Police Raid Townhouse of Suspect in San Bernardino Shooting - The New York Times
San Bernardino  Calif  Shooting (2015),San Bernardino (Calif),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides
Dec. 3, 2015
7945
REDLANDS, Calif. — As darkness began to envelop the residential streets here, a few miles from the shooting in San Bernardino that left 14 people dead, a SWAT team arrived with two armored trucks, rifles pointed at the small townhouse where Syed Farook apparently lived with his mother.As the armored vehicles towered in front of the home, several officers wearing fatigues stood together. Just before 6 p.m., the officers used a crane to knock out the front window and crash in the door. A few minutes later, a robot rolled into the house, searching for any explosives that might have been left by Mr. Farook, one of the suspects in the shooting. At 6:30, a loud bang rang from inside, a signal that at least one controlled explosion was complete.Dozens of residents stood outside their low-slung apartment buildings, watching the drama play out in what is normally a quiet neighborhood. Initially, the police told them that they would have to be evacuated.“Given what’s already happened today, we have potential for large explosions,” one officer told onlookers crowded around the yellow police tape that cordoned the area.Julie Thomas, 56, a postal worker, returned from work around 10 and asked officers whether she could return to the home she shares with her adult daughter.“She was supposed to be out on a date tonight, and instead she got home and they told her she could not leave,” Ms. Thomas said outside the police tape. “If it’s safe for her in there, it should be safe for me to return.”After the search had gone on for hours, there were no signs of impending danger. By midnight, officers were still combing through the home, although the armored trucks had driven off. The police had begun to let more people living nearby into and out of their residences. The buzzing of helicopters promised to continue through much of the night.Several residents said they had never noticed Mr. Farook. Mostly, they said warily, they could not understand how another mass shooting suspect had lived so close by.“Well, he’s Muslim,” said Aaron Tejeda, 20, whose sister lived across the street from the townhouse. But his mother, Emily Tejeda, quickly jumped in to discourage her son from making any assumptions about motive.“We have no idea what happened yet,” she said. “I know it will be easy for many people to go there. You see what’s happened in France, and the first question is now, Can that happen here?”