https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/world/asia/japan-tokyo-shinzo-abe-election.html
Tokyo Voters’ Rebuke Signals Doubt About Shinzo Abe’s Future - The New York Times
Tokyo (Japan),Abe  Shinzo,Koike  Yuriko,Politics and Government,Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)
July 3, 2017
5450
TOKYO — As recently as this spring, Shinzo Abe looked as if he was on track to become Japan’s longest-serving prime minister, no small feat in a country where the leadership sometimes seems to be equipped with a revolving door.But a local election in Tokyo has put Mr. Abe’s longevity in doubt. Voters for the capital’s metropolitan assembly on Sunday resoundingly rejected candidates from Mr. Abe’s party, the Liberal Democrats, while electing all but one of 50 fielded by an upstart party founded by Tokyo’s popular governor, Yuriko Koike.The victory for Tomin First, the party Ms. Koike established in January, was widely seen as a referendum on Mr. Abe as much as a vote of confidence in Ms. Koike.For several months, Mr. Abe, who has been in office since 2012, has been dogged by influence-peddling scandals, as well as repeated bumbling by some members of his cabinet. He has also drawn criticism for pushing through a legislative vote on an anti-conspiracy bill that many said he had not sufficiently explained. As the prime minister campaigned for his party in Tokyo last Friday, a scrum of protesters shouted, “Abe, resign!”In brief comments to reporters on Monday, Mr. Abe appeared contrite, calling the Tokyo results — in which his party captured less than a fifth of the 127 assembly seats — a “very severe judgment” on his administration.“This is the biggest crisis and the first major setback for Abe,” said Atsuo Ito, a political analyst in Tokyo.Until recently, Mr. Abe and his party behaved with an air of invincibility, shored up by their two-thirds majority in both houses of Parliament. But public frustration with Mr. Abe has grown. He has repeatedly denied involvement in two corruption scandals, in which his administration is accused of providing preferential treatment to schools operated by allies of Mr. Abe, and he has shielded his defense minister, Tomomi Inada, from criticism of her competence.Jiro Yamaguchi, a professor of political science at Hosei University, said Mr. Abe’s “arrogant attitude” had “made people quite anxious.”If Mr. Abe’s support has been strong in recent years, it may have been in part because voters saw few alternatives. Nationally, the public is wary of the leading opposition, the Democratic Party, which is seen as having failed to deliver during more than three years in power before Mr. Abe. The party won just five seats in the Tokyo assembly election.But Ms. Koike’s new party provided a fresh option, at least in the capital.“I just couldn’t vote for them,” said Kayo Mochizuki, 60, a Tokyo resident, referring to the Liberal Democrats. Ms. Mochizuki, who voted for a Tomin First candidate, suggested that problems like Mr. Abe’s were “what happens if someone keeps power for a long time.”According to exit polls by NHK, the public broadcaster, 43 percent of voters in the Tokyo election said they supported the Abe cabinet. In the spring, the cabinet had a 60 percent approval rating in national polls.It is unclear whether public sentiment in Tokyo will translate into national support for Ms. Koike, who is widely believed to have ambitions to become Japan’s first female prime minister. Ms. Koike was a member of the Liberal Democratic Party, but ran for governor as an independent after the party declined to back her; the party accepted her resignation on Monday.As Tokyo’s governor for the past year, Ms. Koike has focused on local issues, including reining in costs for the 2020 Olympic Games and the relocation of the famed Tsukiji fish market.She has avoided talking about national policy, or about her past support from ultraconservative groups that believe women belong in the home and that call for playing down Japan’s World War II atrocities. Ms. Koike has previously supported the revision of Japan’s pacifist Constitution and a stronger role for the country’s military, both signature issues for Mr. Abe as well.Most analysts said Ms. Koike did not expect to challenge Mr. Abe for his job, but perhaps hoped to be his successor. After Sunday’s election, she said she would resign as head of Tomin First to focus on her role as governor.“There’s still the question of what exactly is her message to a national audience — is it just, ‘I’m fresh, I’m new?’” said Tobias Harris, a Japan analyst at Teneo Intelligence, a political risk consultancy based in New York. “Right now there is a ceiling.” He said that Ms. Koike’s “routine plays well in Tokyo” but added that “it is not an easy path to national relevance.”For now, Mr. Abe may face bigger challenges within his own party. “It’s not her that’s the threat,” said Michael Thomas Cucek, an adjunct professor at Waseda University and Temple University in Tokyo. “It’s his other rivals in the party who can take this loss and beat him with it.”Potential contenders within the Liberal Democrats include Shigeru Ishiba, a legislator and former cabinet minister who called the Tokyo election a “historic defeat,” and Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida, who has been quietly waiting in the wings to succeed Mr. Abe.Mr. Abe’s term runs until the end of 2018. But in March, the party voted to change its rules to let a leader serve three consecutive terms, setting the stage for Mr. Abe to govern until 2021.If his popularity continues to erode, it would be an echo of Mr. Abe’s first term as prime minister. He resigned in 2007 after just a year in office, as his administration foundered on a series of blunders and scandals.Since returning to power in 2012 and holding on to it, Mr. Abe has been viewed as having learned lessons and become a much more savvy politician.He could yet be saved by his skills in international diplomacy. He is the rare world leader who has managed to get most of what he wanted from President Trump. With a likely visit by Mr. Trump to Japan in the fall and various upcoming Asian summit meetings, Mr. Abe could try to divert the public’s attention from the recent scandals to Japan’s role in the region.“To promote Japan’s interests internationally, having Mr. Abe is very important, and Japanese people understand this,” said Koji Murata, a professor of international relations at Doshisha University in Kyoto.Advisers to Mr. Abe have indicated that he is also likely to reshuffle his cabinet later this summer, as a way of defusing some of the criticism of his administration. Until now, he has steadfastly supported his most gaffe-prone cabinet minister, Ms. Inada, a longtime close ally whom he once was thought to be grooming as his successor.As recently as last week, Mr. Abe stood by Ms. Inada after she suggested that the Self-Defense Forces, Japan’s military, backed a candidate in the Tokyo elections. Japan’s Constitution prohibits the military from engaging in political activity.Analysts say that kind of support for his friends could be Mr. Abe’s biggest liability. “The people who have been betraying Abe and hobbling his administration are his personal friends,” Mr. Cucek said.By defending Ms. Inada, as well as the school operators he is accused of giving special favors, Mr. Abe has alienated the public, Mr. Cucek said.“He can’t reshuffle his own name out of the cabinet and replace him with someone who is more politically savvy,” Mr. Cucek said. “He can’t get rid of the major problem, which is himself.”