https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/nyregion/summer-reads-new-york-city.html
Set in New York, Fit for the Hammock - The New York Times
Books and Literature,The Gargoyle Hunters (Book),Gill  John Freeman
July 13, 2017
4587
Real New Yorkers are typically defined by their fleet-footedness, but more discerning observers focus on another idiosyncrasy related to our frenetic pace. It’s a trait that Griffin Watts’s estranged father wants to rectify in his 13-year-old.“You, son, are going to learn to look up,” Watts lectures his felicitously christened scamp. “You are not going to be another one of those blinkered goddamn New Yorkers who walk around town staring at their shoes, or worse, have their eyes so fixed on whatever goal they’re hurrying toward that they never see the city around them.”In his gratifying debut novel, “The Gargoyle Hunters” (Alfred A. Knopf, $27.95), John Freeman Gill delivers the same lesson to readers.Mr. Gill’s inventive paean to urban archaeology is one of several transportive books set in New York that make for inviting diversion this summer.Among them are two other debut novels, “Golden Hill,” a romp through the pre-Revolutionary city of 7,000 whose indelible immigrant dreams and moneymaking echo in today’s metropolis, by Francis Spufford, another accomplished author, and “Bed-Stuy Is Burning” by Brian Platzer.Graham Moore’s “The Last Days of Night” fictionalizes the highly charged late-19th-century rivalry between Thomas Edison and George Westinghouse over the respective merits of direct and alternating current. Kim Stanley Robinson’s “New York 2140” is a Venetian vision of melting glaciers and global warming.Then there are “Have I Got a Story for You: More Than a Century of Fiction From The Forward,” an anthology translated from the venerable Yiddish newspaper; “Spotless: Memories of a New York Childhood,” a charming memoir by Sherman Yellen; and “We Were Strangers Once” by Betsy Carter, a novel about refugees from Nazi Germany in Manhattan, to be published in September.New York has inspired an enduring canon by authors including Henry James, Edith Wharton, Dawn Powell, Oscar Hijuelos, Betty Smith, Hubert Selby Jr., John Dos Passos, E. L. Doctorow, Paul Auster, Kevin Baker and Colson Whitehead.While individuals can judge for themselves whether and where the latest novels rank in that pantheon, they won’t regret this latest investment in vacation reading.Mr. Gill, who has contributed to The New York Times and other publications and writes the Edifice Complex column for Avenue magazine, channels Griffin Watts as his exuberant narrator in this coming-of-age novel about an adventurous adolescent and his vibrant city as both reinvent themselves.In this urban Indiana Jones-like escapade, Griffin — Mr. Gill’s alter ego — and his antiques-dealer father explore the brazen theft of an entire cast-iron Manhattan building facade (the subject of a front-page article in The Times in 1974).They scavenge the “self-cannibalizing” city to liberate assorted granite and metal ornaments and to preserve New York as a place “where you could inhabit multiple eras simultaneously.”Gargoyles — those grotesque elongated figures designed as gutter spouts to prevent rainwater from eroding the mortar that glues masonry walls — are Mr. Gill’s metaphor for all sorts of vulnerable terra-cotta and cast-iron architectural gewgaws on the facades of buildings destined for recycling by developers.An Upper East Sider transplanted as an adult to Park Slope, Brooklyn, the author conducted prodigious, eye-opening research into, among other sites, the neo-Gothic Woolworth Building (his favorite, and the setting for the book’s climactic sequence), whose original gargoyles were replaced with what Mr. Gill derides as “glorified aluminum siding.”His marvelously evocative novel begins with a nagging question that New Yorkers who have a choice are beginning to ask again about their impossibly irrepressible city: “Why do we stay?”Ada Louise Huxtable, a former architecture critic of The Times, provides a soaring answer in an epigraph. It’s a reminder that, since the 1970s, when the novel takes place, everyday life for most people in the city, whether they remain blinkered or not, has been looking up.“New York, thy name is irreverence and hyperbole,” Ms. Huxtable wrote abidingly. “And grandeur.”