http://www.nytimes.com/2004/10/22/books/another-updike-trip-to-his-kind-of-suburbia.html
Another Updike Trip to His Kind of Suburbia - The New York Times
UPDIKE  JOHN,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE,VILLAGES (BOOK)
Oct. 22, 2004
3357
Villages  By John Updike  321 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.Two decades ago John Updike observed in an interview that his writing was "limited by my imagination and experience, which are both severely finite." Since then, he has produced a plethora of fiction -- including the estimable "Rabbit at Rest" (1990), the conclusion to his classic Rabbit quartet, and "In the Beauty of the Lilies" (1996), his dazzling four-generation chronicle of an American family -- that has demonstrated just how elastic his talent can be. They are works that not only map the "chunk of the planet" he has claimed as his own, small-town and suburban middle-class America, but that also chart the vicissitudes of recent American history.At the same time, Mr. Updike's self-imposed quota of producing a new book nearly every year has resulted in some cringe-making efforts that attest to what the author himself has called a tendency to think smaller, "more spiteful and timorous thoughts" in recent years. "Toward the End of Time" (1997) was a perfunctory and curdled portrait of a narcissistic old man; "Seek My Face" (2002), a reductive and ham-handed improvisation on the life of Jackson Pollock; and "Licks of Love" (2000), a collection of mostly formulaic stories that rehashed old themes, old plots and old preoccupations.Unfortunately for the reader, his latest novel, "Villages," is very much in the "Licks of Love" mode: it reconnoiters old territory surveyed by Mr. Updike many, many times before. Once again, we are treated to rambling, sometimes lascivious accounts of small-town adultery. Once again, we are given disquisitions on how sexual mores changed from the staid 1950's through the cultural revolution of the 60's and 70's, and into the roaring 90's. And once again, we are provided with a retrospective narrative in which the hero gazes into the rearview mirror of his life, reliving long-ago affairs and missed opportunities from the vertiginous vantage point of late middle age.The hero of "Villages," Owen Mackenzie, is also a familiar figure: one of those quintessentially Updikean men, plagued, at once, by vague existential doubts, frightening intimations of mortality and a hunger for salvation -- someone torn between the comforts of domesticity and the lure of independence, the strict moral codes of the 50's and the heady personal imperatives of the succeeding decades.When we first meet Owen, he is 70 years old, married for 25 years now to his second wife, Julia. Thanks to his early success in the computer business, they have a cozy, cosseted life in the fairy tale New England village of Haskells Crossing, one of those towns where people play lots of golf and swap lots of tips about hotels and museums in distant corners of the world. Julia is continually nagging Owen about his eating habits and his absorption in his work, but Owen and she "cling to each other" in what "has become their dotage." Owen accepts her judgmental disdain, Mr. Updike writes, "as evidence of her wanting him to measure up to the highest standards," but the secret (and sensational) reasons for their labored domesticity are coyly withheld from the reader until the final pages of the book.Intercut with descriptions of Owen's current life with Julia are long, meandering flashbacks chronicling his youth in a small Pennsylvania village (reminiscent in some respects of Mr. Updike's own childhood), his education at M.I.T., his courtship and marriage to his first wife, Phyllis, and their life in the Connecticut village of Middle Falls, a place where the once shy Owen became an accomplished womanizer.Mr. Updike fails to make Owen's metamorphosis from nerd to ladies' man remotely credible, and his account of Owen's philandering has all the spontaneity and immediacy of a paint-by-numbers kit. "Couples" dealt with similar material in a far fresher fashion, and the Maples stories did so with far more eloquence and emotional wisdom. In these pages, the women Owen seduces are basically reduced to physical types: their bodies are described in excruciating detail, while their personalities and lives are only cursorily sketched. Owen is given to thinking things like "there were two kinds of women in the world": "those with whom you have slept and those, a cruelly disproportionate but reducible number, with whom you haven't."To make matters even worse, Mr. Updike seeds the narrative with smugly reductive generalizations about men and women: "Husbands are superfluous, dutiful adjuncts to the busy interaction of women." Or: "Women's natures are very large, he early sensed, to seek sex amid the world's perils, in the face of so many wise societal discouragements." The Rabbit books, featuring a hero not unlike Owen in temperament, unfolded to disclose a panorama of American society in the second half of the 20th century, charting both the small and seismic changes in politics, business and culture, while depicting one man's struggles to come to terms with his own dreams and yearnings.This novel, in contrast, focuses almost exclusively on Owen's sexual high jinks -- bedroom conquests so devoid of genuine emotional connection that they never lead Owen to greater self-knowledge or insight. As for the big public events of the day -- like Vietnam, the rise of the counterculture, the women's movement and the digital revolution -- they are lazily relegated to listlike inserts or passing asides.In the end, this all makes for a narrow, claustrophobic novel -- a novel that amounts to little more than a weary exercise in the recycling of frayed and shop-worn material.