https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/realestate/james-monroe-iglehart-new-hamilton-cast-member-at-home.html
James Monroe Iglehart, New ‘Hamilton’ Cast Member, at Home - The New York Times
Theater,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Iglehart  James Monroe
April 7, 2017
8798
James Monroe Iglehart is really happy living in New Jersey. Wait, that’s not quite right. Actually, Mr. Iglehart, a 2014 Tony Award winner for his bravura performance as Genie in the musical “Aladdin,” is really, really happy living in New Jersey. He loves the ease of jumping in his car and driving to places like Target and Bed Bath & Beyond, loves that he gets more space for less money.When people express incredulity at his decision to bunk in the Garden State — and they do that a lot — he has an answer ready: “I tell them: ‘I have a better view. I get to look at New York, and you have to look at New Jersey,’” said Mr. Iglehart, 42, who will be joining the cast of “Hamilton” as Marquis de Lafayette/Thomas Jefferson next week.He and his wife, Dawn, are on their third rental in a West New York, N.J., waterfront complex since beginning a series of cross-country jaunts from their native California nine years ago.“I got lucky with a Broadway show,” Mr. Iglehart said, referring to his 2007 stint in “The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee,” during which time he sublet in New York City. “Then I thought, ‘O.K., this was great. Now I’ll go back to California.’”In 2009, he got another Broadway musical, “Memphis,” the occasion for the first rental in West New York. Once again, back to California. In 2014, he returned to Broadway in “Aladdin.” On to apartment No. 2.After the Tony win, Ms. Iglehart, who works in biotech, put her foot down. “We’re staying in New Jersey,” she said.Each bump up in salary and billing has translated into a larger, more attractively appointed apartment. “Memphis” was a one-bedroom and little more than a mattress on the floor. Early “Aladdin” meant a two-bedroom, and the granting of Ms. Iglehart’s wish for some “real furniture.” Later “Aladdin”: a two-bedroom with a view of the Hudson River that the ebullient Mr. Iglehart finds calming.“My favorite building in New York is the Empire State, and I can see it from my couch,” he said. “It’s a wonderful sight in the daytime and a glorious sight at night.”The constant in every apartment is photographs of the couple’s nieces and nephews, several of whom they helped raise.In their approach to home décor, the Igleharts have come up with an arrangement that would warm the hearts of Raymour & Flanigan, and maybe Dr. Phil, too. “We alternate choosing the furniture every three years,” said Mr. Iglehart, who, during his recent turn, selected a black leather sofa and two matching recliners. “It’s very man cave-looking, in an adult way,” he added, flipping some cushions to show the LED-illuminated cup holders and USB ports. “My wife has three years to deal with it. And then, when this set dies, she gets to pick her set.”Mr. Iglehart’s passions are professional wrestling, comic books and toys. Ms. Iglehart’s passions are abetting and enabling her husband’s passions. Shelves in the guest bedroom are home to “Road Warrior” action figures in their original packaging and multiple stacks of Tsum Tsums, colorful stuffed rectangular figures based on Disney characters. A glass-fronted cabinet near the entryway holds Mr. Iglehart’s large and meticulously arranged collection of the pop culture-themed Pop! vinyl figurines, among them, Apollo Creed from “Rocky,” Morpheus from “The Matrix” franchise and Slimer from “Ghostbusters.”“I put them in a specific order because I’m crazy,” Mr. Iglehart said, pointing. “Here are all the comic book characters. Here are the professional wrestlers: Big E Langston, Xavier Woods, Kofi Kingston.”Two Mickey Mouse ear hats — his and hers — sit atop the wall unit in the living room. Recent acquisitions from Disney World, where the Igleharts have season passes, the caps keep company with replicas of Lumière and Cogsworth from “Beauty and the Beast” and a Disney snow globe with Genie inside.“I love this,” Mr. Iglehart said, beaming. “The first time I saw it, I was like, ‘I’m in a snow globe — I am in a snow globe — and it looks like me.’” But even that pales next to the enameled metal Genie paved in Swarovski crystals.The lamp dweller was a long time in joining the household. Soon after Mr. Iglehart auditioned for “Aladdin,” he and his wife were at Disneyland, where they spied the blue figurine in a store. Ms. Iglehart was all for laying down a credit card then and there, but her husband demurred. After all, he hadn’t yet been cast, and the Genie was too expensive.He got the part, the show did well, and the couple went back to Disneyland on vacation. Again, they saw Genie. Again, Ms. Iglehart pressed her husband. But his response was the same, “I don’t feel I deserve it.”Then came the Tony, followed by a visit to Disney World, where they eyed the figurine again.“Now?” Ms. Iglehart asked.“No,” Mr. Iglehart said. “I was like, ‘I don’t deserve it.’” Could Uriah Heep have been more humble?Nearly three years passed, and the couple returned to Disney World just before Mr. Iglehart left “Aladdin.”“We’re walking down Main Street, and I went into the store and asked if they still had the Swarovski Genie, because I didn’t see it on display, and they said, ‘It’s right here,’” he recalled.“I started tearing up, and I said: ‘I’ve done everything I can do with the character. I feel I deserve it now.’ And I bought it that night.”