http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/09/world/asia/hong-kong-occupy-protests-china-arrests.html
Guangzhou Activists Sentenced to Jail After Backing Hong Kong Protests - The New York Times
China,Hong Kong,Wang Mo,Xie Fengxia,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Wong  Joshua (1996- ),Guangzhou (China),Freedom of Speech and Expression,Decisions and Verdicts,Liang Qinhui,Zhang Rongping,Southern Street Movement
April 8, 2016
6644
On the night of Oct. 3, 2014, the teenage Joshua Wong stood on a platform high above a crowd of thousands in the heart of Hong Kong, urging them to continue pro-democracy demonstrations that had taken over major thoroughfares in the city and brought him international fame as the leader of a burgeoning student movement.That same day, about 70 miles to the north in the Chinese city of Guangzhou, five men, in a show of support for those protesters, unfurled a blue banner whose 13 Chinese characters read: “Freedom Is Priceless! Support Hong Kong’s Fight for Freedom.”On Friday, as Mr. Wong, now 19, prepared to formally unveil a new political party in Hong Kong that will seek to win seats in the city’s legislature in elections this year, the fate of some of those who held up the banner was decided in a Guangzhou courtroom.Two of them, Wang Mo, 43, and Xie Fengxia, 39, were sentenced to four and a half years in prison for “incitement to subvert state power.”The two cities, Hong Kong and Guangzhou, are neighbors, closer together than Los Angeles and San Diego. Both fly the red-and-gold flag of the People’s Republic of China. But civil rights in Hong Kong are protected by the city’s mini-constitution until 2047, part of a legacy of British colonial rule, allowing Mr. Wong to plan a future in politics.Guangzhou is ruled from Beijing, whose leaders in 2014, fearing that the demonstrations in Hong Kong might spread to the mainland, detained more than 100 people who had voiced support for the Hong Kong protests.Mr. Wang and Mr. Xie, who goes by the name Xie Wenfei, have been in custody since the day they unfurled their sign and were among the last to be prosecuted. Many others were released after a period of detention.Lawyers for the men both said on Friday that they would appeal the verdicts. Another man, Liang Qinhui, was sentenced to a year and a half in prison, Mr. Wang’s lawyer, Qin Chenshou, said by telephone. A fourth man, Zhang Rongping, who uses the name Zhang Shengyu, was sentenced to four years, several Chinese-language news services, including Duowei News, reported.“They did nothing else besides express their views,” said William Nee, a China researcher at Amnesty International in Hong Kong. “They’re being punished for exercising their freedom of expression.”The written verdict against Mr. Wang and Mr. Xie was posted online by Weiquan Wang, a website with an emphasis on civil and political rights in China, and it focuses on their activities that day, including holding up the banner.Mr. Wang and Mr. Xie were key members of what was called the “Southern Street Movement,” a group of political activists who participated in highly visible street demonstrations, including pushing officials to disclose their families’ assets. That prominence and outspokenness may explain the harshness of their sentences, Mr. Nee said.On Friday morning in court, Mr. Xie chanted “Abolish the one-party dictatorship” and “Build a democratic China,” his lawyer, Wang Xun, said by telephone. During his trial in November, Wang Mo declared that voicing support for democracy did not amount to a movement to subvert the Chinese state.“From afar in Guangzhou I held a banner to express my support for the Hong Kongers, and you are telling me that’s inciting subversion of state power?” Mr. Wang said in an account verified by Mr. Qin and posted on the website of ChinaChange.org, a group based in the United States that focuses on civil rights and the rule of law in China. “If this act of mine counts as inciting subversion of state power, then what crime are the hundreds of thousands of Hong Kongers guilty of?”The gap between political rights in Hong Kong and in the mainland helped lead to the 2014 movement, known variously as Occupy Central or the Umbrella Revolution.Leaders of the movement feared that Beijing was encroaching on Hong Kong’s freedoms, especially after China’s legislature in late August of that year put strict guidelines on proposed elections for Hong Kong’s top leader that effectively gave the central government control over the nominating process.Many people on the mainland expressed disdain for the Hong Kong protests, but some, like Mr. Wang and Mr. Xie, who were already prominent, actively expressed their approval.“Their show of support encouraged us,” Mr. Wong said by telephone on Friday. “Even though they lived directly under authoritarian rule, they voiced their support for us and risked imprisonment.”On Sunday, Mr. Wong plans to announce the founding of a new party, Demosisto, to bring his advocacy for a referendum on Hong Kong’s political future into the legislature, which is set to have elections in September.The proposed vote would include options such as a continuation of the current “one country, two systems” governing principle after 2047 — the year when China’s promise of 50 years of semi-autonomy is to expire — and independence, an increasingly popular call among young people as they perceive an erosion of civil liberties and local culture under mainland control.Mr. Wong is too young to run himself. His party will field candidates including Oscar Lai and Nathan Law, core members of two student protest groups, Scholarism and the Hong Kong Federation of Students. Mr. Wong has been charged with unlawful assembly and other offenses related to the 2014 protests.“It really shows how different Hong Kong is from mainland China,” he said. “At least Hong Kong still has judicial independence, and we still have the freedom of speech, even though it’s declining.”