http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/04/us/the-2000-campaign-the-texas-governor-attacks-grow-sharp-as-time-dwindles.html
THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR; Attacks Grow Sharp as Time Dwindles - The New York Times
MICHIGAN,MAINE,LIEBERMAN  JOSEPH I,CLINTON  BILL,BUSH  GEORGE W,GORE  AL,ROADS AND TRAFFIC,ELECTION ISSUES,PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000,DRUNKEN AND RECKLESS DRIVING,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Nov. 4, 2000
2044
Gov. George W. Bush pushed across two more battleground states today, accusing the Clinton administration of leaving America ''undefended against missile attack,'' and mocking Vice President Al Gore and President Clinton for failing to lock up their home states, Tennessee and Arkansas, for the Democrats.Just four days before Election Day, Mr. Bush drew some of his largest, most enthusiastic crowds yet in Michigan, where the candidates are in a dead heat. There were scattered boos when he said he welcomed the support of Democrats and roars when he taunted Mr. Gore by noting how he had been trying to escape the shadow of the president.''Well, guess what?'' Mr. Bush said. ''The shadow is back. The president will be flying into Arkansas tomorrow to try a last-minute rescue mission. But you need to know something. I'm not worried. I'm flattered.''But while Mr. Bush was courting the crowds, his campaign staff spent much of the day dealing with an  onslaught of questions about Mr. Bush's admission the day before that he had been convicted 24 years ago for driving while intoxicated in Kennebunkport, Me. Mr. Bush dealt with the matter at his day's first rally at Cornerstone College, in Grand Rapids, Mich., where a crowd of 7,000 or more spilled out of the hall.''It's become clear to America over the course of this campaign that I've made mistakes in my life,'' he said. ''But I'm proud to tell you I've learned from those mistakes.''''That's the role of a leader,'' Mr. Bush said, ''to share wisdom, to share experience, with people who are looking for somebody to lead.'' At that point he stepped into his usual pledge to restore ''honor and integrity'' to the White House.Mr. Bush later accused Democrats of publicizing his 1976 arrest, calling it ''dirty politics'' in an interview with Fox News. Officials of the Gore campaign denied any responsibility.Maintaining a slight lead in national polls, Mr. Bush campaigned in different corners of Michigan before flying tonight into West Virginia, usually a Democratic stronghold.Mr. Bush, who has been hitting a new issue each day in the final week of the campaign, turned to military themes today, accusing the Clinton administration of leaving a ''military in decline'' for the next president. ''But if the next president is George W. Bush,'' he said, ''the days of decline will be over.''To back up his criticism, he quoted a Democratic senator who wrote to the White House that cuts in military research were ''real and dangerous, and have slowed the development of a number of capabilities that will be needed by our war fighters in their near future.''''This senator wasn't running down the military when he wrote the letter,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He was pointing out a mistaken policy and failed leadership. And who was that worried senator? Well, it was Joe Lieberman.''Mr. Bush said the Democratic nominee for vice president ''was right then and his running mate is wrong now.''He also wrapped himself in the mantle of a Republican icon, Ronald Reagan, saying that Mr. Reagan was another governor who saw a decline in the military.''We needed the leadership of Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His leadership not only prepared for the victory in the cold war but gave us the force that won the gulf war.''The governor called for the deployment of a robust missile defense system and said, ''This administration left America undefended from missile attack.''Throughout the day, the Republicans continued to stress character. Gov. John Engler introduced Mr. Bush to a rally in Saginaw, Mich., as a man who would restore ''honor'' to the White House. And State Senator Mike Goschka, who was warming up the crowd, called Mr. Bush a ''man of character.''But the character question was also turned against Mr. Bush over disclosure by two Maine television stations on Thursday that Mr. Bush had been arrested in September 1976 for drinking and driving. Mr. Bush pleaded guilty, paid a $150 fine and had his license suspended briefly.While Mr. Gore himself remained mute on the topic, Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, who appeared with the vice president at a rally in Ames, Iowa, said that Mr. Bush had ''covered up'' his arrest record and should be held accountable for not revealing it previously.''The relevance here is one of character, one of trust, one of honesty and openness,'' Mr. Harkin said. ''We want a president that's going to be open and honest with us, and the fact that he felt compelled to cover this up and not talk about it and lay it on the record, I think, says a lot.''For their part, Bush aides sought to turn the issue against the Democrats. Karen P. Hughes, Bush's communications director, seized on the admission by Thomas Connolly, a Democratic candidate for governor of Maine two years ago, that he had released the information.''I think the American people are tired of this kind of politics, are tired of this kind of last-minute dirty tricks, and I think the Democrats owe the American people an explanation,'' Ms. Hughes said.A few hours later, in an interview with Fox News, Mr. Bush said he knew from news reports that a Democrat had been involved in publicizing his arrest and said, ''I believe most Americans are going to come to the conclusion that this is dirty politics, last-minute politics.''In an interview today in Portland, Me., Mr. Connolly said he had no contact with the Gore campaign about the release, but freely acknowledge that he was motivated by partisanship.Aides to Mr. Gore flatly denied any involvement.''Just a few minutes ago, Governor Bush said that a leader's responsibility is to speak plainly,'' said the chairman, William M. Daley. ''As a leader he should tell his campaign to stop making false charges.''Playing off of Mr. Bush's frequent calls for a ''responsibility era'' in which he urges people to take responsibility for their actions, Mr. Daley said, ''It is time for Governor Bush to stop hurling charges, and start accepting responsibility. Whatever questions remain unanswered are the responsibility of Governor Bush and his campaign not ours.''Until this week Mr. Bush had spoken only in general terms about past problems with alcohol and said he had once been ''young and irresponsible.'' He had also talked about his decision after his 40th birthday to stop drinking. He was grilled in the summer of 1999 when he was fresh on the campaign trail.Ms. Hughes, in an impromptu news conference, said that the one time that Governor Bush had been asked whether he had ever been arrested for drinking was in October of 1996, and he replied, ''I do not have a perfect record as a youth.'' For a second day, she said he had not been more explicit because he wanted to be a role model for his daughters.During the news conference at the airport in Grand Rapids, Mich., Ms. Hughes several times repeated that Mr. Bush's arrest was an episode from his youth. She was asked if 30 years old, which was Mr. Bush's age at the time, qualified as young.The news of Mr. Bush's troubles reverberated in Texas today. At the request of news organizations, an Austin judge, David Crain, ordered the release of a jury questionnaire filled out by an aide to Mr. Bush in October 1996 when Mr. Bush was called for jury duty. On the form, several questions were left blank, including one that reads: ''Have you ever been accused in a criminal case?'' There was a space next to the word ''accused'' that was to be checked if the answer was ''yes.''Dan Bartlett, a Bush campaign spokesman, said the questionnaire was filled out by the governor's personal assistant, Israel Hernandez. He said Mr. Hernandez left questions, including Mr. Bush's Social Security number, blank because he did not know the answers and handed the form to the governor shortly before he arrived for jury duty.Mr. Bush was excused from serving on the jury after his lawyer, Alberto R. Gonzales, argued that the governor could be asked someday to pardon the defendant.Even at the end of the long day, Mr. Bush appeared unbowed at a boisterous rally here in Morgantown, summoning a fiery voice to tell West Virginia residents that he was on a path to victory even here, a state that traditionally votes Democratic in presidential elections.''Who would have thought, five days to go, that the Republican candidate for president would be able to say this -- I'm going to carry West Virginia,'' he thundered.As the crowd chanted ''No More Gore,'' Mr. Bush told supporters, ''I want to thank you and urge you to keep going for the next five days. Work as hard as you can.''