https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/15/nyregion/under-indictment-grimm-fights-to-keep-his-congressional-seat.html
Under Indictment, Grimm Fights to Keep His Congressional Seat - The New York Times
New York State,Grimm  Michael G,Recchia  Domenic M Jr,Political Advertising,Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  House of Representatives,Elections  House of Representatives
Oct. 14, 2014
7755
This question Michael G. Grimm liked.Representative Grimm, a two-term Republican known by many for threatening to throw an inquiring NY1 reporter off a Capitol balcony, was asked during a sparsely attended news conference on Staten Island last week whether his challenger’s emphasis on personal issues — like, say, the 20-count federal indictment against Mr. Grimm — was distracting voters from more substantive ones.“National Democrats have spent millions upon millions of dollars to make it about anything but the issues,” Mr. Grimm said as he stood at the St. George ferry terminal, where he received the endorsement of the Marine Engineers’ Beneficial Association.A former agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, he proceeded to accuse his Democratic rival, Domenic M. Recchia Jr., a former New York City councilman from Brooklyn, of “nickel-and-diming” the middle class, of being a member of the “far liberal left” who “represents that de Blasio-Obama mentality” and of being an outsider whose failed job search in Brooklyn led him to Staten Island.“You know, the forgotten borough doesn’t need to be the borough of last resort for Domenic Recchia, and that’s what it is,” Mr. Grimm said.Issues, maritime and otherwise, have become somewhat beside the point in a nasty, no-holds-barred and now exceedingly close race for Mr. Grimm’s seat in New York’s 11th Congressional District. On Saturday, the Recchia campaign began closing out the contest with “20 Counts for 20 Days” news releases (“Count One: Tax Evasion,” “Count Two: Perjury”), and on Sunday, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, at whose chairman Mr. Grimm once flashed a butter knife, released another ad, attacking the Republican over his legal travails.(In April, Mr. Grimm was indicted on federal charges that he hired undocumented immigrants at Healthalicious, the Manhattan health-food restaurant he used to own, and then lied about it to federal investigators. His lawyers have said he is the target of a witch hunt.)Mr. Recchia had drawn about even in the polls with Mr. Grimm, whose base on Staten Island, a Republican redoubt in a liberal city, seems mostly unbothered by his legal problems.But the Democratic campaign committee believes many voters simply do not know about the indictment. To educate them, the committee has spent $1.3 million on cable television ads since Aug. 12, and may spend more, said its chairman, Representative Steve Israel, Democrat of Long Island. In an increasingly bleak climate for Democrats in closely contested races, Mr. Israel sees the race as a “tossup” but also as the best chance in New York for a pickup.“We have an offensive opportunity with Grimm,” he said.Mr. Recchia seems to think his Washington benefactors could spend their money better. “People know,” he said of the indictment.At least Mr. Recchia has a party apparatus with which to try to coordinate messages. Mr. Grimm has been almost entirely abandoned by Republican campaign committees and fund-raisers.But some outside help, including about $100,000 from Defending Main Street, a Republican “super PAC” that aids moderate Republicans in tough races, has helped Mr. Grimm with field operations and allowed him to air commercials calling Mr. Recchia a “puppet” of the Rev. Al Sharpton, and to print fliers showing Mr. Recchia next to a stock-footage image of a man with face paint, a red ball nose and oversized bow tie. “Which one of these clowns raised property taxes 18 percent and voted to hike our tolls $8?” the flier asks.Every element of the race has turned toxic. Mr. Grimm criticized Mr. Recchia’s endorsement by the League of Conservation Voters because the group had advocated to keep Staten Island’s landfills open. Asked about the Humane Society Legislative Fund’s endorsement of Mr. Grimm, who rescued his Yorkshire terrier, Sebastian, from a Missouri puppy mill, Mr. Recchia spoke tenderly about Lexi, his own miniature dachshund.The final lap of the race began during an Oct. 1 debate at the Fort Hamilton Senior Center in Brooklyn, where Mr. Recchia called Mr. Grimm a liar and Mr. Grimm did his best to transform Mr. Recchia into Mr. Sharpton. Reminded about his recent past as a would-be reporter-tosser, Mr. Grimm replied, “As a Staten Islander, sometimes I get my Italian up.”Blunt as Mr. Grimm can be, he does evince far greater fluency than Mr. Recchia when policy enters the picture. Some of Mr. Recchia’s recent discussions of foreign affairs have induced Democratic cringes.At a news conference last month, Mr. Recchia stood next to Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and sought to demonstrate his “great knowledge” of the world by pointing to his trips to Italy, Israel and “many, many countries.”Mr. Recchia had previously demonstrated a knowledge somewhere south of great when he struggled to explain what the letters TPP stood for even as he publicly opposed a proposed TPP trade agreement. (The Trans-Pacific Partnership is a trade agreement being negotiated between the United States, Australia, and Asian and South American countries.)But at the news conference, Mr. Recchia had an ace in the hole.What Mr. Grimm did not know, Mr. Recchia said jovially, was that as a local school board member, “I ran a student exchange program with Japan for the students of his district that he represents.”Mr. Schumer looked as if he needed an Alka-Seltzer.Last week, Mr. Grimm was still savoring that one.“Someone says they are ready and they have a ton of foreign-policy experience,” Mr. Grimm said at the ferry terminal. “And it’s based on running some type of children’s exchange program for Japanese students?”Some Democrats have wondered if Mr. Grimm’s aggressive campaign is not more rooted in his desire to stay out of prison than to serve a third term. Mr. Grimm has asked that his trial, set to begin in December, be delayed out of fear that negative ads could taint the jury pool. But re-election could furnish him with the bargaining chip of his own resignation, which other politicians facing federal prosecution have traded for lighter sentences.Mr. Grimm, in an unorthodox sales pitch, says voters should stick by him if only so that they will get a fresh slate of candidates should he have to leave office.“If things don’t go my way, right? And I had to step down in January, then there will be a special election, and at least the people of Staten Island and Brooklyn can then have qualified candidates to choose from,” Mr. Grimm told the radio talk-show host Geraldo Rivera this month.The Staten Island Advance reported last week that Republicans had begun floating the name of the borough’s district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr., as a potential special-election candidate in 2015.But Mr. Recchia, who was forced out of the race for city comptroller last year by the Democratic machine, is focused on November and campaigning as if his career depends on a victory. In the 11th District’s sliver of southern Brooklyn, which amounts to his natural base, he handed out fliers at night between a man selling $2 boxes of “red, very sweet, very sweet” strawberries and the elevated Avenue X station.“We have momentum,” Mr. Recchia said to one woman.“I hope so,” she responded.Momentum is Mr. Recchia’s watchword, and the talking point of his Washington backers. When asked if he was in a dead heat, Mr. Recchia said, “Yeah, dead,” and then stopped himself. “We have momentum.” He attributed Mr. Grimm’s remarks tying him to Mr. Sharpton to “what happens when a campaign is desperate. They know that I am connecting with people. They see that we have momentum.”The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee says it has registered more than 6,000 new voters who it believes are likely to vote for Mr. Recchia. He put the number above 7,500, and said voters “want someone who is not going to throw people off a balcony, who is not going to go into a bathroom and have an affair with somebody.”Mr. Grimm, who is unmarried and has denied reports that he had a tryst with a woman in a wine bar bathroom, showed up a little late to the ferry terminal for the marine engineers’ endorsement. Emerging from a Buick Regal, he strode across the terminal, his arms never brushing his torso. He greeted his two endorsers and then contrasted his efforts to keep jobs in the maritime industry (“We started a maritime caucus”) with Mr. Recchia’s “trite phrases” and inexperience.“I know how to work with the federal agencies,” Mr. Grimm said.As he spoke, one of the three reporters present, a colleague of the NY1 correspondent Mr. Grimm had threatened to toss, crept closer.“Just back up a little bit,” he said sternly. “I feel like you’re on top of me.”She did as he asked.