https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-pothos.html
Letter of Recommendation: Pothos - The New York Times
Flowers and Plants,Brooklyn Botanic Garden,Gardens and Gardening
June 8, 2017
8974
Last August, freshly broken up, I sobbed my way from my bathtub to the Q train to my favorite plant store in Chinatown, where, I’d pledged, I would find something to reinsert meaning into my life — or at the very least, my weekend. I chose a plum-colored rubber tree that came up to my armpit, handed over $50 and lugged it down Canal Street, dreaming of the years we would have together, this plant and I. Maybe it would greet me when I brought home my first newborn, I said to myself, or someday slide around in the back of a U-Haul, as I drove to a new city. The plant would bring new life into my apartment, which was, at the time, half-empty and thick with sorrow. It looked strong — it was heavy, in fact, and the walk to the train took longer than I remembered — and I would be strong, too, both in mind and upper body. Inspired, I named it Michelle Obama.Two months later, I had killed Michelle because of some combination of root rot (as per the Brooklyn Botanic Garden help hotline), overwatering (guessed my grandmother) and (in hindsight) a subconscious desire to redirect all the effort I had put into my relationship toward this plant. (After Michelle’s death, I decided to stop naming my plants.) In the meantime, a friend asked me to care for a pothos while he was traveling. He dropped it off at my apartment, I hung it in front of a sheer window curtain and then mostly forgot about it.You have seen a pothos before. It has glossy, vaguely heart-shaped leaves that drip off stringy vines. Often, people hang them up or sit them on windowsills, letting the tendrils spill down to the floor. It is among the hardiest houseplants and thus one of the most common: My bodega has one, my laundromat has two and my own home, I am somewhat ashamed to confess, now has three. A pothos is an undemanding plant, capable of thriving in various light strengths (bright, indirect, low) and hosts (sitting water, soil). They are easy to find — you can get them in a grocery store — easy to pot, easy to prune and near-impossible to kill. It is the perfect plant to lend to a mildly depressed spinster with a black thumb, a black heart and nothing else to do.I kept buying plants, drunk on the pride of being able to keep a single one alive. As my depression nursery grew, exactly five friends sent me the same article on Nylon.com, titled “Why Are Millennials Obsessed With Houseplants?” I am not, I learned, alone in my love of horticulture: Five million Americans between 18 and 34 took up gardening for the first time in 2015; in all, 37 percent of millennials are growing plants and herbs indoors, placing the pastime somewhere between “vaping” and “drowning in student debt” in terms of popularity.Part of this is our fascination with whatever “wellness” is; perhaps we also want to add a dash of greenery to the disgusting railroad apartments so many of us call home. But a leading theory is that plants make us feel like grown-ups. When the traditional signs of adulthood — marriage, homeownership, children — are delayed or otherwise out of reach, it’s comforting to come home to something that depends on you.A plant, then, is fertile ground to act out the trial and error inherent to emerging adulthood, a low-risk investment in discovering the type of person you are: It feels safe and permissible to try out authority and ownership on a being that it’s legal to kill. In return, plants politely and quietly let you know when you’re doing something wrong: a drooping leaf, a yellowing stem, a smattering of bugs. But for those dark moments when a horticultural rebuke is too hard to bear, you need some plants that will withstand your neglect. Under conditions that would murder most living things, a pothos is liable to reach between six and 10 feet if kept in its container, and over 40 feet if grown in its native tropical habitat. If adulthood is measured in goal posts, then a fitting proxy should, too, display signs of progress.At this point, I’ve collected roughly 26 proxies. They all have benefits. My monstera is the large, leafy beauty that visitors tend to marvel at; my geranium provides my living room with color; my African violets and my calathea and a prayer plant or two are crispy proof that I am still capable of killing a plant, that I still have a lot to learn. For example, I should probably know how to care for a plant before shelling out the equivalent of a week’s worth of lunches on it.Even with all my knowledge — from the help line, from hindsight, from 25 other plants — I’ve still managed to occasionally fail at proper pothos husbandry. Once, I draped her vines too closely to my radiator, charring half of her bottom leaves. I’ve returned from vacations to find her top layer of soil cracked and dehydrated. I’ve placed her in front of the wrong window and turned her wilted and sallow.Every Tuesday morning, I fill up an old wine bottle with water and make the rounds, finding that my pothos have always survived. A pothos gives the gift of forgiveness: It grows so quickly that it seems almost regenerative. If you damage one vine, there’s another one already sprouting up — another chance to get it right.