https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/us/politics/town-hall-meetings-.html
Critics at Town Halls Confront Republicans Over Health Care - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,House of Representatives,United States,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
May 9, 2017
2805
United States representatives often hold town halls with constituents in their home districts during a congressional recess. But this week, with the House on a break, few of the 217 Republicans who approved legislation to repeal and replace critical parts of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, chose to defend their votes at public meetings.Those who did were, in several cases, greeted by shouts and criticism.The representatives who have not hosted gatherings in their home districts have not been immune from backlash, however. Protesters have rallied outside congressional offices and confronted representatives at events. Liberal critics say they intend to keep the heat on as the bill is debated in the Senate.A party that controls the House avoiding constituents upset about health care legislation? You might have heard this one before.The Republicans’ current situation is similar to that of Democrats in 2009 and 2010, when they controlled the House and faced opposition to health care legislation. Then, like now, the few town halls that were held were marked by voter rage.This time around, instead of Republicans lamenting the passage of Obamacare, Democrats are lamenting the House passage of its replacement, the American Health Care Act. Several of the Republican representatives who have held events since the vote on Thursday have said they appreciated the opportunity to explain their decision, but the raucous reception they have endured shows the political risk they still face.Here are critical moments from some of town halls already held.A high school student asked, looking for a yes-or-no, one-word answer: Is rape considered a pre-existing condition?Tom MacArthur, who created the amendment that could undermine protections for patients with pre-existing conditions, thereby securing the support of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, preferred to speak in more detail. But his lack of a one-word answer angered hundreds of constituents in Willingboro, N.J., on Wednesday.The bill does not define rape as a pre-existing condition, though sexual assault victims could face higher insurance costs because of resulting trauma or sexually transmitted diseases.Mr. MacArthur vowed to take every question, and stayed for more than four hours.The shouts erupted just as soon as the words left Raúl R. Labrador’s mouth.Mr. Labrador, a Republican, was hosting a town hall in Lewiston, Idaho, on Friday when a woman argued that the health care bill passed by the House would force people on Medicaid to “accept dying.”The congressman called her premise a lie. “Nobody dies because they don’t have access to health care,” he said. The audience jeered.Blowback since then has been swift. While there is no clear consensus on the number of lives risked or saved by changes to health care policy, Medicaid expansions and improved access to insurance have been linked to lower mortality rates in numerous studies.Tom Reed, a Republican from New York, faced a mixed response that included booing and interruptions as he conducted three town hall meetings on Saturday. At one in Hinsdale, N.Y., a woman cited a Quinnipiac poll that found that only 17 percent of the American population supported the Republican health plan as it stood in mid-to-late March, before the vote.“How can you say you’re representing your constituency when only 17 percent of the U.S. population is supporting this?” she asked, to applause.Other recent polls support the idea that most Americans do not back the House bill.Results released by Gallup in April found that for the first time, a majority of Americans approve of the Affordable Care Act. And a YouGov survey of 1,000 adults this month found that only 31 percent favored the House bill at least somewhat.Rod Blum, a Republican from Iowa, faced combative audiences in Dubuque on Monday.The crowd laughed and jeered after he assured people who were struggling with the federal government that, “We will go fight for you.”That happened shortly after he walked out of a live television interview with a local news station, KCRG-TV9. The reporter, Josh Scheinblum, had pressed the congressman on why his town hall was open only to residents of the district. Mr. Scheinblum also asked whether Mr. Blum had accepted donations from people who lived elsewhere.“This is ridiculous,” Mr. Blum said as he disconnected his microphone and stood up to leave. “Like he’s going to sit here and just badger me.”Also on Monday, Greg Walden, a Republican from Oregon, angered attendees at a town hall in Baker City, Ore., when he said he could not predict how many people would lose health care under the House bill, The East Oregonian newspaper reported.Though he was short on details, Mr. Walden tried to reassure the crowd about his intentions. “I care deeply about people with pre-existing conditions. I care deeply about people with disabilities,” Mr. Walden said. “This bill will take care of them.”Similar episodes had been taking place across the country even before the House passed its bill on Thursday. An earlier version of the House health care plan failed to come to a vote in March after the Congressional Budget Office estimated that, had it been implemented, 24 million fewer Americans would have health care in 2026.“How could you have supported a bill that takes health care away from so many people that voted for you in good faith?” asked one woman at a March town hall meeting with Chris Stewart, a Utah Republican, The Salt Lake Tribune reported.Also in March, Andy Harris, a Maryland republican, was booed repeatedly at a town hall in Wye Mills, Md. “Don’t treat us like children,” yelled one man as the congressman attempted to explain his position.In February, one teacher was cheered when she challenged Diane Black, a Tennessee Republican, arguing that high risk insurance pools would be “effectively punishing our sickest people.”All three representatives went on to vote for the House bill that passed last week.