https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/podcasts/debating-wonder-woman-and-summer-jams.html
Debating ‘Wonder Woman’ and Summer Jams - The New York Times
Podcasts
June 8, 2017
4192
Summer is here, and even though categorizing your culture by season feels completely artificial, Americans do it anyway. Last week we got our annual reminder that those artificial demarcations can bring up some real issues. For instance: How does the release of a female-driven action movie become a national political event? Still?“Wonder Woman,” the first female-fronted (and female-directed) superhero blockbuster, is this year’s entry: a movie too important not to see, whether or not it’s any good. We went, saw and mostly enjoyed. We talk about this movie’s politics: Does “Wonder Woman” say anything interesting about women? Does it need to? Or might a feminist message be antithetical to what seems to be the movie’s primary goal: to get enough people to see it so that the studio will keep cranking out women-centered movies?The hunt for the song of the summer is only slightly less fraught. It’s dangerous to go looking at the beginning of June, since we’ve got more than a month for a winner to declare itself. And then there’s the question of how to define a summer jam. We break it down while listening to some of the candidates. Our goal isn’t to name a winner — we’ll discuss a victor in late August, like normal people. The conversation is an excuse to think about what qualities we’re listening for.But again, this is completely artificial! America’s current No. 1 song — Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee’s “Despacito,” featuring Justin Bieber — is going to sound just as good in January as it will in July, with Mr. Bieber tagging along or preferably in the original, all-Spanish version that doesn’t know he exists.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.