https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/world/middleeast/online-egypts-internet-activists-mourn-their-stifled-revolt.html
Online, Egypt’s Internet Activists Mourn Their Stifled Revolt - The New York Times
Egypt,Fattah  Alaa Abd el-,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Political Prisoners,Social Media
Jan. 25, 2016
8018
As my colleague Declan Walsh reports from Cairo, a crackdown by Egypt’s security forces managed to suppress even the slightest echo of the massive street protests that began on this date in 2011 and led, 18 days later, to the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak.Online, the fifth anniversary of the Jan. 25 revolution was commemorated quietly, with nostalgia, despair and puckish humor, by some of the young bloggers and activists who helped drive millions of Egyptians to the streets in 2011.Gigi Ibrahim, who explained the aims of the uprising to The New York Times via Skype during the first week of the 2011 revolution, shared video of the first night of protests, along with bitter reflections on the state of the demoralized opposition to President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.Other activists, including Wael Eskandar, suggested that the spirit of the uprising was still alive, even though many of its young leaders were now jailed or in self-imposed exile.Rasha Abdulla, an associate professor of communication at the American University in Cairo, drew attention to a new hashtag on Twitter, discussing what sort of fears might have driven the intense crackdown by the authorities this year.Alaa Abd El Fattah, an activist blogger who was jailed for opposing the new government’s ban on unsanctioned street protests, gave a mournful interview to the independent daily Al-Masry Al-Youm.Asked about how the revolution’s anniversary was marked in prison, he replied: “Every year is different. On Jan. 25, 2014, I was jailed along with my comrades Ahmed Douma, Ahmed Maher and Mohamed Adel. We partied and listened to music. Back then, we still had the energy to share memories with both pride and sarcasm. However, on Jan. 25, 2015, I was separated from my colleagues, which turned me melancholic and nostalgic. As for this year’s Jan. 25, I just want it to pass.”In a letter from prison, published in The Guardian and the Cairene news site Mada Masr, Mr. Abd El Fattah bemoaned the fact that “the very language of revolution was lost to us, replaced by a dangerous cocktail of nationalist, nativist, collectivist and post-colonialist language, appropriated by both sides of the conflict and used to spin convoluted conspiracy theories and spread paranoia.”However one of the blogger’s sisters, Sanaa Seif, noted the anniversary with more hope.Ms. Seif, who was released from jail in September after serving more than a year for attending a peaceful protest, dared to stage a solitary walk on Monday along the route of one of the most daring protest marches on the first day of the 2011 uprising. She walked across the Qasr el-Nil Bridge into a tightly guarded Tahrir Square, with the slogan “It is still the January revolution” emblazoned on her back.“Since 2011, I have walked in a rally from Mostafa Mahmoud Square to Tahrir Square on 25 January,” she wrote on her Facebook page. “The last time I did it was in 2014, and despite the security crackdown this year I decided to stick to my routine and do it again.”“I am alone but I am sure that next year thousands will return to walk again from Mostafa Mahmoud to Tahrir Square,” Ms. Seif added.The updates on her defiant march were liked by thousands on Facebook, including Wael Ghonim, the former Google executive who had helped organize the Jan. 25 protests on the social network.