http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/22/realestate/a-london-loft-designed-with-a-nod-to-new-york.html
A London Loft Designed With a Nod to New York - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Interior Design and Furnishings,SoHo (Manhattan  NY),London (England),Perlberg  Eric
March 20, 2015
777
When Eric Perlberg, a photographer, decided to retire and renovate his London apartment, he thought about the best attributes of places where he had lived throughout his life: SoHo and Woodstock in New York, and Basel, Switzerland.“When I settled in Switzerland, it was a mind-opening experience to see how organized people actually live,” he said.During the 1960s in Woodstock, Mr. Perlberg, 67, a native of Brooklyn, developed an appreciation for energy-efficient houses, and he had a passive solar home, designed by the architect Alex Wade, built in a private development called Riverby. In the 1980s, he lived in a loft on Spring Street in SoHo, where he loved the high ceilings, big industrial windows, open plan and rustic wabi-sabi character of a former industrial space.Then Mr. Perlberg moved to Switzerland, where he taught information technology and graphics courses. He lived in a glass penthouse overlooking the Rhine River valley, and fell in love with the home’s seamless storage solutions. In 2000 he bought a loft in a 19th-century former tin and zinc factory on Bermondsey Street in South London, where he wanted to meld the design sensibilities that he had picked up in his travels.His first try at making the perfect home didn’t go as planned. Architects looked at the space and convinced Mr. Perlberg to cover up its industrial details. They raised the floors, lowered the ceilings, and put up walls to add another bedroom and bathroom.“I realize now that they just didn’t understand the building as an industrial space. All sense of scale was lost,” Mr. Perlberg said.In 2010, with his Apple stock doing well, he decided to cash in some of it and hire FORM Design Architecture to renovate again. What he wanted was a white and lofty space with as much storage as possible in every room, which came at a price of 240,000 pounds, or about $355,000.The new architects undid all the work of their predecessors, paring back the space to its original bones and removing one bedroom and one bathroom. Together with Mr. Perlberg, they spent a year deciding on finishes and materials. The color white was employed wherever possible to bring unity to the newly open space. They chose wood flooring that the architects reclaimed from a deconsecrated chapel in Wales, and which they decided not to paint white. Window ledges were widened and a long white acrylic desk was built into a wall that spans one end of the apartment. Mr. Perlberg uses it to store his camera equipment and for editing photographs.Picking up on Mr. Perlberg’s Swiss influences, the architects designed and built a large white cube near the bedroom that conceals a bathroom, dozens of storage drawers, a walk-in closet and a utility nook where the washer and dryer and cleaning supplies are kept.The original kitchen was small and tucked away against a wall near the front door. During the renovation, Mr. Perlberg decided to move it to the other side of the apartment and have a long white acrylic island installed. Behind that, on a white brick wall, he fixed a long corrugated steel bar where he hangs pots and pans.When it came time to sort out lighting solutions, he selected low-energy LED Lutron fixtures for the ceilings and had designers recess other lighting behind surfaces around the house. Looking for fixtures for the living room, Mr. Perlberg settled on Zumtobel track lighting designed by David Chipperfield, which the architects discovered during a visit to the Turner Contemporary art gallery in Margate, in southeast England. Every fixture in the house can be individually controlled, a detail that Mr. Perlberg wanted so that he could have soft or dramatic lighting anywhere that suited him.Now the house has the large white expanses and artist’s loft feel that he didn’t quite get right the first time.