https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/05/us/bob-mcdonnell-maureen-mcdonnell-virginia-verdict.html
Former Governor in Virginia Guilty in Bribery Case - The New York Times
McDonnell  Robert F,McDonnell  Maureen Patricia Gardner,Virginia,Gifts to Public Officials,Star Scientific,Williams  Jonnie R Sr,Bribery and Kickbacks
Sept. 4, 2014
6857
RICHMOND, Va. —  Former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia and his wife, Maureen, were convicted of corruption in federal court on Thursday, after a trial that shattered the political career of the onetime Republican star and peeled back the couple’s private life to the bone.As he was pronounced guilty on 11 counts of conspiracy, bribery and extortion, Mr. McDonnell covered his face with his hands and his head fell nearly to the defense table. His wife, convicted on nine counts, looked straight ahead. There were sobs from the seats behind them where their five adult children and other family members sat.The seven-man, five-woman jury returned its findings on the third day of deliberations here in United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. Both McDonnells, who now face years in prison, were acquitted of lesser charges of making false statements on loan applications, while Ms. McDonnell was convicted on a charge she alone faced, of obstructing a grand jury investigation by trying to make a gift of $20,000 worth of designer dresses and shoes appear to have been a loan.The verdict provided an emphatic coda to a trial that began with an investigation of the McDonnells’ acceptance of a Rolex, Armani clothing, free trips and other luxuries, and turned into a cringe-inducing, tabloid drama of marital strife.“This is a difficult, disappointing day for the Commonwealth,” said Dana J. Boente, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia. “When public officials turn to financial gain for official actions, we have little choice but to prosecute the case.”Asked if Mr. McDonnell would appeal, one of his lawyers, Henry W. Asbill, said, “Of course.”Over the nearly six-week trial, Mr. McDonnell, 60, offered a few upbeat words as he entered and left the courthouse each day, expressing faith in God and the jury system, or on Thursday detailing his exercise routine, all of which gave the impression that he was optimistic about an acquittal. His reaction upon the first utterance of “guilty” around 3 p.m. suggested he was stunned.   The McDonnells were indicted on a total of 14 counts stemming from what prosecutors said was a scheme to sell the office of governor for $177,000 in gifts and cash from a dietary supplements executive.Limited by law to one term as governor, Mr. McDonnell, who left office in January, was in the mix as a possible running mate for Mitt Romney in 2012 and was highly popular in Virginia until his career cratered with the corruption investigation. The case rattled the state’s political class, which had never had a governor indicted and prided itself on “the Virginia way,” an acceptance of loose ethics laws in the belief that officials would not put private interests above the public good. “At this point the public is so suspicious of politicians, cutting a politician slack is nothing they can rely on,” said Thomas M. Davis, a former Virginia congressman and a friend of Mr. McDonnell’s. “This is, of course, a tragedy for the family, but it’s a tragedy for the state.”Mr. McDonnell’s former lieutenant governor, Bill Bolling, wrote on his Facebook page, “The public’s trust is hard to gain and easy to lose.”Although other governors around the country have faced corruption charges in recent years, none of those cases unfolded in the national glare like the McDonnell melodrama. That glare was magnified because the unexpected defense of the former governor — elected as a social conservative and an exemplar of traditional family values — was that his picture-perfect marriage had, in fact, been Photoshopped.Mr. McDonnell, who carried his wife over the threshold of the Executive Mansion the day of his inauguration, portrayed her in his testimony as a harridan whose yelling left him “spiritually and mentally exhausted,” and who was so cold that she did not reply to an email pleading to save their marriage.The defense used the self-debasing portrait to argue that the McDonnells were too estranged to conspire criminally to trade favors with the vitamin executive, Jonnie R. Williams Sr.The jury, which heard from 67 witnesses, had to decide whether gifts from Mr. Williams and Mr. McDonnell’s actions on his behalf over two years added up to bribery and extortion.At issue was whether the McDonnells accepted the largess with corrupt intent. They were not forbidden under Virginia ethics laws from taking $120,000 in undocumented loans from Mr. Williams, nor the gifts he bestowed — such as a custom golf bag for the governor, Louis Vuitton shoes for the first lady, and a $15,000 check for their daughter’s wedding at a time the first couple owed $31,000 on their credit cards and were hemorrhaging money on beachfront property.The defense argued that actions Mr. McDonnell took on behalf of Mr. Williams’s company, Star Scientific, the maker of the supplement Anatabloc, were mere political courtesies. The former governor testified that he had given Mr. Williams “the bare, basic, routine access to government and nothing more.”But prosecutors argued that Mr. McDonnell’s actions followed so closely after Mr. Williams’s gifts that they were strong circumstantial evidence of a corrupt bargain. At one point, Mr. McDonnell emailed an aide to see him about “Anatabloc issues” just six minutes after discussing a $50,000 loan with Mr. Williams.The McDonnells were shown to have used Mr. Williams like an A.T.M. In May 2012, Mr. McDonnell texted the executive, suggesting, “per voice mail, would like to see if you could extend another 20k loan.” Mr. Williams replied within minutes: “Done.”The government dismissed the defense strategy of portraying the McDonnell marriage as broken and Ms. McDonnell as a “nutbag” who was smitten with Mr. Williams. The former governor was trying to “throw his wife under the bus,” Michael S. Dry, a prosecutor, said in closing statements.But for the McDonnells, the humiliating portrayal was meant to sow doubt about a criminal bargain by giving jurors an alternate reason for why Ms. McDonnell took Mr. Williams’s gifts. She was “gaga” for the rich executive, her lead lawyer told jurors. They exchanged 1,200 texts and phone calls. Through Mr. Williams, she found emotional solace and a way to spite her penny-pinching husband, her lawyers said.“To Maureen, this was about getting away from Bob,” her lawyer, William A. Burck, told jurors. “You might find the mild obsession with Jonnie a little weird,” he added. “But weird is not a crime.”In the end, jurors did not buy it.The government relied heavily on the testimony of Mr. Williams. On the stand his version of conversations he had with the McDonnells seemed to dot the I’s and cross the T’s on the legal definition of a corrupt, quid pro quo deal. He said, for example, that before he handed over checks for $65,000 in 2011, Ms. McDonnell told him, “The governor says it’s O.K. for me to help you, but I need you to help me with this financial situation.”Mr. Williams said he had reached out to the governor to confirm the arrangement because the governor was “the breadwinner” in the family. Mr. McDonnell, he said, thanked him for his help.When Mr. McDonnell took the stand, he denied that interaction and much else in Mr. Williams’s testimony. He said that he had no advance knowledge of a $50,000 check from Mr. Williams to his wife in 2011, and that he was too beaten down by their marital rows to demand she return the money. “I just needed to pick the battles with my wife,” he said wearily on the stand.Mr. McDonnell apologized for bad judgment in accepting Mr. Williams’s cash in loans he negotiated himself a year later, as well as numerous $300 golf rounds for himself and his sons. But he insisted he had not sold his office. “No, sir, we do not make decisions based on money,” Mr. McDonnell snapped at a prosecutor at one point during cross-examination.To discredit Mr. Williams, the defense hammered on the fact that he was testifying under a promise that he would not be prosecuted. Defense lawyers portrayed him as a super-salesman who had conned the McDonnells and was now trying to con jurors. During cross-examination, a defense lawyer allowed Mr. Williams to ramble on without interruption for 45 minutes about his business career, in which he grandiosely claimed that Anatabloc was a medical breakthrough on a par with penicillin. (It has been withdrawn from the market after a Food and Drug Administration warning.)As suggested in their body language at the defense table, where they never interacted, and in their comings and goings from the courthouse, the McDonnells now move in separate spheres. He said he was living with a Roman Catholic priest, a frequent supporter in court, for the duration of the trial. Their children would hug each parent in the courthouse corridor, or drape arms around their father as he pushed through TV cameras.Leaving court Tuesday after deliberations began, Mr. McDonnell said that the past 18 months had been tough on his family, but that he drew strength from his 38 years of marriage and his children.After the verdicts, the couple got into separate cars that sped away from the courthouse.