http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/07/us/politics/rivals-jab-at-donald-trump-as-gop-debate-becomes-testy.html
Rivals Jab at Donald Trump as Republican Debate Becomes Testy - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Trump  Donald J,Republican Party,Bush  Jeb,Walker  Scott K,Christie  Christopher J,Rubio  Marco,Carson  Benjamin S,Huckabee  Mike,Cruz  Ted,Paul  Rand,Kasich  John R
Aug. 6, 2015
2247
Shedding any pretense of civility and party unity, Donald J. Trump overwhelmed the first Republican presidential debate on Thursday night by ripping into his rivals and the moderators alike, but also drew fire from Jeb Bush and others who are seeking to stop his breathtaking surge.Mr. Trump displayed his trademark pugnacity from the start with a bravura moment: refusing to rule out a third-party run for the presidency if he does not win the party’s nomination. Facing loud boos from audience members in a Cleveland sports arena, he held his hand up in defiance as several other Republicans looked flabbergasted.“I have to respect the person that, if it’s not me, the person that wins,” said Mr. Trump, the billionaire businessman and reality television star who has attracted fans in part by showing a lack of respect for politicians like Mr. Bush, who Mr. Trump has said should not be president. He then quipped, “If I’m the nominee, I will pledge I will not run as an independent.”The much-anticipated meeting was something of a showcase for several candidates who had yet to generate much heat in the Republican primary field. Gov. John Kasich of Ohio fluidly described his fiscal leadership in the state and spoke bigheartedly about the mentally ill and the poor. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida showed a command of policy and an eagerness for the fight with Democrats. And Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin deftly defended an absolutist position against abortion while boasting of his three statewide victories in his own swing state.Others struggled to grab the attention they needed to shore up their fund-raising or broaden their appeal beyond niche constituencies. The retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas both effectively delivered well-honed talking points and one-liners, but did not leave dramatically new impressions.Mr. Trump’s outsize presence in the two-hour debate, shown on Fox News, was an emphatic reminder that, after eight years out of power, Republicans’ quest to regain the presidency will be complicated in the months ahead by their own internal divisions. While Mr. Trump may not ultimately become the nominee, his appeal among some conservatives has underscored how hungry many in the party’s base are for an uncompromising and authentic figure who will challenge the political order.Unpredictable and often rambunctious, the Republican gathering was anything but a tentative affair, unlike so many other first debates of campaign cycles. Mr. Trump repeatedly made the most of his center-stage position, and ensured he would star in weeks of video clips.In addition to refusing to rule out a third-party bid and sparring with the Fox News moderators, he boasted that the Clintons attended his third wedding because he demanded it and said, “Our politicians are stupid” while dismissing President George W. Bush’s tenure as “a catastrophe.”In the first of the debate’s many freewheeling moments, Mr. Trump’s statement drew an instant, contemptuous retort from Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, who nodded to Mr. Trump’s past donations to Hillary Rodham Clinton.“He buys and sells politicians of all stripes,” Mr. Paul said. “So if he doesn’t run as a Republican, maybe he supports Clinton, or maybe he runs as an independent?”Mr. Trump — whose withering put-downs have become legendary, his favorite pejorative being “loser” — was true to form in dismissing Mr. Paul.“Well, I’ve given him plenty of money,” he said.Even as some of the other Republicans showed moments of strength, with Mr. Paul frequently going on the attack, it was little match for the bombast of Mr. Trump.Establishment-oriented Republicans had hoped that two terms of President Obama would make grass-roots activists pragmatic about 2016, perhaps rallying around a well-known, well-financed candidate like Mr. Bush. But the popularity of Mr. Trump’s message suggested that the party’s rank-and-file were just as interested in finding a pugilist.Mr. Trump and Mr. Bush, who have been lashing out at each other for weeks, mostly over tone and fitness to be president, barely tangled at all. But near the end of the debate, in a moment that encapsulated the race, Mr. Bush said that Mr. Trump, who has portrayed some Mexican immigrants as rapists, was a “divisive” figure who would ensure that Republicans continued to lose.“I want to win,” Mr. Bush said, participating in his first debate in 13 years. “We’re not going to win by doing what Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton do each and every day: dividing the country, saying, creating a grievance kind of environment. We’re going to win when we unite people with a hopeful, optimistic message.”Mr. Trump shot back that the threats against the United States were too urgent for such concerns about “tone.”“When you have people that are cutting Christians’ heads off, when you have a world at the border and at so many places that it’s medieval times,” Mr. Trump said, “we don’t have time for tone — we have to go out and get the job done.”The exchange of fire between Mr. Trump and Mr. Bush — the dominant figures in the race, and two American household names — offered a preview of the broader debate to come between Republicans who believe the party must be more inclusive to win the presidency again and those determined to speak to the boiling anger in the conservative grass roots. Few of the fights were over policy, however: Mr. Trump, for one, offered few substantive details about his plans for the country.A trio of Fox News moderators, delving deep into the records of the 10 candidates, posed a series of difficult questions, while also trying, with occasional success, to provoke arguments among them over areas of disagreement. In the first question directly to Mr. Trump, for instance, Megyn Kelly cited his negative comments about some women, whom he has called “fat pigs” and “slobs,” before Mr. Trump cut her off.“Only Rosie O’Donnell,” he said, clearly looking for a laugh.“For the record, it was well beyond Rosie O’Donnell,” Ms. Kelly said.“Yes, I’m sure it was,” Mr. Trump replied, before offering an explanation that reflected his tell-it-like-it-is sensibilities.“I think the big problem this country has is being politically correct,” he said. “I don’t frankly have time for total political correctness. And to be honest with you, this country doesn’t have time either. This country is in big trouble.” He went on to complain about rough treatment by Ms. Kelly.Occasional alliances appeared to form among candidates, intentionally or not. Mr. Rubio and Mr. Kasich each flattered Mr. Trump by saying that he had hit a nerve with his tough talk about illegal immigration and other problems facing the United States. Mr. Trump and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey took turns belittling Mr. Paul, who has been struggling in polls and fund-raising, and who kept on the attack against Mr. Trump and other rivals throughout the debate.In the sharpest exchange of the night between candidates, Mr. Paul and Mr. Christie, who have traded shots from afar over national security for more than two years, exchanged personal insults in a back-and-forth over surveillance and civil liberties.After Mr. Paul said he only wanted to seek the phone records of terrorists, not average citizens, Mr. Christie called that “a completely ridiculous answer” — and then went further.“When you’re sitting in a subcommittee, just blowing hot air about this, you can say things like that,” Mr. Christie said.Mr. Paul, his voice rising, said Mr. Christie misunderstood the Bill of Rights and then offered his own stinging rejoinder.“I don’t trust President Obama with our records,” he said, before lowering the boom with a reference to the embrace between Mr. Obama and Mr. Christie after Hurricane Sandy in 2012, a moment that still haunts Mr. Christie with conservatives: “I know you gave him a big hug.”Boos and cheers from the audience quickly enveloped the exchange on stage. Mr. Christie, seemingly ready for the attack, shot back that the hugs he recalled were with “the families who lost their people on Sept. 11.”The moderators tried to incite a confrontation between Mr. Bush and Mr. Rubio, who were once allies in Florida politics but now hope to bury each other’s candidacies in the March primary there, pressing them over Mr. Bush’s support for the Common Core education standards. But Mr. Rubio went to higher ground and discussed school reform without disparaging Mr. Bush, one of several moments when he struck a positive tone about his fellow Republicans.Mr. Rubio did go on the offensive against Mrs. Clinton, the leading Democratic presidential candidate, painting her as out of touch with the financial struggles of many Americans.“If I’m our nominee, how is Hillary Clinton going to lecture me about living paycheck to paycheck?” Mr. Rubio asked. “I was raised paycheck to paycheck.”Later, he expanded on the hit. “God has blessed the Republican Party with some very good candidates,” he said. “The Democrats can’t even find one.”Mr. Kasich struck one of the most empathetic notes when he was asked what he would say to one of his daughters if she came out as gay, given that he opposes same-sex marriage.“I just went to a wedding of a friend of mine who happens to be gay,” Mr. Kasich said. “Because someone doesn’t think the way I do doesn’t mean that I can’t care about them or can’t love them.” He added, to cheers, that he would say “that of course I would love them. And I would accept them, because you know what, that’s what we’re taught when we have strong faith.”Even though Mr. Trump’s shadow loomed large for much of the two-hour debate, other Republicans on stage demonstrated why many in the party believe they have one of the best presidential fields in decades.Mr. Walker appeared fluent on policy and emerged untouched by rivals. And Mr. Kasich, who had barely made the debate cut, won repeated applause from the home-state crowd and suggested he could be a threat to Mr. Bush.