https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/03/technology/review-nintendo-switch.html
Nintendo Switch Reviews: Here’s What the Critics Say - The New York Times
Consumer Reviews,Nintendo Switch (Video Game System),Computer and Video Games,Nintendo Co Ltd
March 3, 2017
9555
Early reviews of the Nintendo Switch were largely positive, but most of the enthusiasm was tempered by reviewers’ inability to test key aspects of the gaming console, including online play and game downloading.Naturally, there is plenty of disagreement among reviewers about the hybrid system, which will allow gamers to alternate between playing on their home TVs and playing on the go. Several reviewers said the system, released on Friday has enticing potential, but Nintendo has more to prove before it becomes a must-buy for gamers.Brian X. Chen of The New York Times called the Switch “mediocre as a portable gaming device, with short battery life and an O.K. screen.” But he said it “excels as a powerful and compelling home console.”Buying the Switch is “a risk worth taking,” he said, but added that most people would be better off waiting. Gamers may not have a choice but to wait, anyway, if the initial supply is as limited as expected.On Engadget, Devindra Hardawar said the lack of full testing didn’t inspire confidence.That’s the bigger question. Reviews were uniformly positive about The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, the biggest title available right away. But most noted the light catalog of games.Nathan Olivarez-Giles of The Wall Street Journal said that “the Switch’s versatility will make it a must-have console like the legendary original Wii” if it can deliver exciting games. But for now, it’s too early to tell.On The Verge, Ross Miller said that the “Switch has all the makings of something truly great” and that Nintendo “has innovated upon some of its best ideas,” but that the company would still have to prove it would support the console.Does it truly work as a hybrid gaming system?The staff at Polygon said it meets its basic promise “of a platform that will move without fanfare or effort across the hand-held and home console spaces.”At TechCrunch, Devin Coldewey said the Switch “almost immediately felt like something that was missing until now — something midway between a ‘real’ console and a ‘real’ hand-held.” It was “something I didn’t even know I’d wanted,” he said.At Ars Technica, Kyle Orland said the system “seems to pull portable gaming upward more than it drags home console gaming downward.”Vince Ingenito at IGN said the Switch was “an attractive and powerful but oversized portable gaming system that struggles to be a convincing or reliable home console.”Rebekah Valentine of AppTrigger said the system was lacking too many features that had become standard in gaming consoles.Reviewers were split on the Joy-Cons, the new multiuse controllers. Several said the left Joy-Con became unresponsive during play; Nintendo has not indicated whether the problem will be fixed in the wider release.Chris Kohler of Wired said the Joy-Cons “are quite simply the most versatile and clever controllers that it has ever shipped with a machine.”Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku said that they were “a nifty idea,” but were uncomfortable, and that they “don’t always work as well as I would’ve hoped.”At The Guardian, Keith Stuart said the idea of “sitting in a park with a whole bunch of people playing Mario Kart is a really fun proposition.” The Switch is “playing in a very different space” than the Pc, Xbox One and PlayStation 4, he said.