https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/magazine/new-sentences-from-supercut-by-lorde.html
New Sentences: From ‘Supercut,’ by Lorde - The New York Times
English Language,Pop and Rock Music,Lorde
June 27, 2017
8956
People have used the modern English language incessantly, all day and every day, for centuries, and yet we are still constantly assembling sentences that are completely new to the world. This is true even in pop music: It may fixate on a very short list of teenage feelings, well-worn images and obvious rhymes, but it’s forever wrapping them in fresh gestures, finding new facets of the same old emotions, until one generation’s love songs seem bizarre to the next.The sentiment in this Lorde song, for instance, is aggressively nonnew; ditto the phrase ‘‘love we had and lost.’’ It’s a raw-ingredients pop scenario: You sit picturing the heights of a failed love, scenes that now seem impossibly foreign, almost fictional. Years ago you might have compared them to a stack of Polaroids or a film montage — whatever technology was there to mediate between you and images of distant happiness. But Lorde puts them in a format that only got its name in 2008: the supercut, one of those fan-assembled web videos collecting, say, every time David Caruso slid on his sunglasses on ‘‘CSI: Miami’’ or every romantically charged scene between two characters on a sitcom. (The way fans root for two such characters to wind up together is called ‘‘shipping,’’ as in ‘‘relationship’’; Lorde’s supercut is practically shipping herself.)The latest technology to deal in images of distant happiness, after all, is right on our phones, which can convert events into glowy, shareable memories of themselves within moments of their happening. Maybe that’s why the next phrase sticks out: ‘‘All the magic we gave off.’’ This is an old feeling, too — the sense that love can wrap a couple in its force field, making them starlike and heroic. But just imagine it in a moment when our daydreams and memories can take the shape of YouTube edits and Instagram photos, when how we are and how we seem keep bleeding further together. That part feels new.