https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/19/opinion/how-martin-shkreli-the-teen-wolf-of-wall-street-thrived.html
How Martin Shkreli, the Teen Wolf of Wall Street, Thrived - The New York Times
Shkreli  Martin (1983- ),Securities and Commodities Violations,Banking and Financial Institutions,Hedge Funds,MSMB Capital Management LLC,Retrophin Inc,Turing Pharmaceuticals AG,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals)
Dec. 18, 2015
9871
PONDER for a moment the strange case of Martin Shkreli, the 32-year-old former hedge fund manager who was arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation at his Manhattan apartment before dawn on Dec. 17 and charged with securities and wire fraud. Even by the standards of the ego-driven, attention-grabbing, hedge fund industry, Mr. Shkreli’s alleged depravity stands out for its audacity and for his ability to keep the con going long after it should have been stopped dead in its tracks.Mr. Shkreli is best known, of course, as the pharmaceutical entrepreneur who bought orphaned, lifesaving drugs and then jacked up their prices to astronomical levels. But that’s not the behavior that got him arrested. Instead, if the F.B.I., federal prosecutors in Brooklyn and the Securities and Exchange Commission are to be believed, Mr. Shkreli had long been pulling off one scheme after another since his first hedge fund, Elea Capital, collapsed after a bad bet in 2007.In some corners of the business press, however, Mr. Shkreli was seen as something else altogether. In December 2012, Forbes named him to its list of “30 under 30 in Finance,” lionizing him as an activist investor best known for “battling billionaires and entrenched drug industry executives” through his various written screeds on social media. (Forbes provided a more critical take earlier this year.) Alan Geller, a former oil trader who invested with Mr. Shkreli, called him “a genius,” adding, “I’m betting he’s going to make a billion dollars rather than blow up.” Earlier this month, Business Insider praised him for “exposing the critical need for balance between the interests of shareholders and patients.”According to the indictment, the only group that Mr. Shkreli held in greater contempt than patients was shareholders. After his first hedge fund collapsed, he started a second, MSMB Capital, which also lost millions, although he assured investors that it was making them lots of money. Trying to obtain more capital, Mr. Shkreli told one investor in 2010 that MSMB Capital had assets of $35 million. In fact, it had $700.In February 2011, he made another bad bet, losing his investors’ money and another $7 million he had effectively borrowed from Merrill Lynch. To settle with Merrill, he used his investors’ money to pay the firm around $1.5 million, then liquidated his fund, telling investors they had “doubled their money,” and that they could get cash or a combination of cash and shares in a new health care company, Retrophin, he had incorporated. He then started a third hedge fund, MSMB Healthcare, and, based on his misrepresentations of his previous performance, induced 13 people to invest $5 million in it. (It was around this time that the approving Forbes article appeared.),As Mr. Shkreli’s Ponzi scheme began to collapse, in 2013 he and Evan Greebel, an accomplice, according to the indictment, used Retrophin stock to pay back his investors even though the drug company had nothing to do with his hedge-fund losses. When Retrophin’s auditors questioned the legitimacy of those payments, Mr. Shkreli and Mr. Greebel concocted a new scheme to settle with the investors by having Retrophin enter into sham consulting agreements with them. In the end, the indictment alleges, both Mr. Shkreli and Mr. Greebel “caused” Retrophin to pay out more than $7.6 million in cash and stock to settle the claims.Mr. Shkreli did learn one lesson from his hedge fund experience, however: There is no such thing as bad press. He delighted in being the “bad boy” of Wall Street by assuming the role of a hipster Gordon Gekko, taunting his adversaries on Twitter, bathing in the adulation of young fans during bizarre online chats, investing in music labels and buying a rare album by the Wu-Tang Clan for $2 million. After The New York Times reported on Sept. 20 that Mr. Shkreli’s new start-up, Turing Pharmaceuticals, had bought the drug Daraprim — used to cure a life-threatening parasitic disease — and then jacked the price of it to $750 per tablet, from $13.50, Mr. Shkreli was everywhere, defending himself on CNBC, Bloomberg and Fox Business, and delighting in his 15 minutes of fame. He claimed he should have raised the price of Daraprim even higher.By then, of course, he was already in the cross hairs of the S.E.C., the F.B.I. and federal prosecutors. After he pleaded not guilty to the charges of securities fraud and was released on $5 million bail, he tweeted that he was “glad to be home” and “thanks for the support.” But there hadn’t really been much. Instead, there was just scorn for a man who had apparently duped lots of people into thinking he was something he was not.Until Mr. Shkreli has his day in court, we won’t know for certain whether he should join the company of other con artists like Bernie Madoff. The bigger question is whether Wall Street writ large will ever be able to reform itself to prevent acts of fraud and deception. There are encouraging signs, including this aggressive prosecution and a two-year campaign by William C. Dudley, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to rehabilitate Wall Street by focusing “less on the search for bad apples and more on how to improve the apple barrels.” Can Wall Street change or is human nature beyond repair? It’s at moments like this that I wonder.