https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/us/bucks-county-missing.html
What We Know About the Pennsylvania Killings - The New York Times
Bucks County (Pa),Missing Persons,DiNardo  Cosmo,Finocchiaro  Dean,Meo  Tom,Patrick  Jimi Tar,Sturgis  Mark
July 13, 2017
1886
Two Pennsylvania men have been charged in the murder of four young men whose disappearances last week led to a widespread search of a vast farm and other sites north of Philadelphia.The four men were reported missing over a two-day period starting on July 5. On Thursday, the son of the farm’s owner, Cosmo DiNardo, 20, who had been named a “person of interest” in the case, confessed to killing them, his lawyer said.Mr. DiNardo was charged Friday with four counts each of homicide, conspiracy to commit homicide and abuse of a corpse, according to court documents filed in Bucks County Court of Common Pleas. Sean M. Kratz, 20, identified in court papers as a cousin of Mr. DiNardo, was charged with one count each of criminal homicide and conspiracy to commit criminal homicide, along with a host of related charges, including abuse of a corpse, the documents show.• The four young men disappeared last week in Bucks County, a Philadelphia suburb where new construction meets large estates. Jimi Taro Patrick, 19, was last seen around 6 p.m. on July 5 in Newtown Township, Pa.Dean Finocchiaro, 19, was last seen on Friday, July 7, in Middletown Township. Mark Sturgis, 22, and his longtime best friend, Thomas Meo, 21, did not show up for their construction jobs on Saturday.• Police departments and the district attorney’s office in Bucks County cast a wide net in their search. On Saturday, they got a break: Mr. Finocchiaro’s cellphone was tracked to the farm in Solebury Township, where they found Mr. Meo’s car.• On Monday, the police arrested Mr. DiNardo on an unrelated prior felony weapons charge stemming from a February episode in which he was found with a 20-gauge shotgun. He was released from Bucks County jail on Tuesday night after 10 percent of his $1 million bail was paid by his father. On Wednesday, Mr. DiNardo was charged with trying to sell Mr. Meo’s car for $500.• Up to 50 people, including F.B.I. evidence teams, took part in the search at the farm, located about 30 miles north of Philadelphia.• On Friday, the authorities said that they had identified the remains of Mr. Meo and Mr. Sturgis, which, like those of Mr. Finocchiaro, were also found in a grave up to 13 feet deep. A body believed to be that of Mr. Patrick was found in another location on the farm.• The four victims were all shot, and some were burned or crushed with a backhoe, according to an affidavit prepared by the Bucks County district attorney’s office. All were buried. The encounters were set up as drug deals, according to information provided to the authorities.• Mr. DiNardo has had 30 “contacts” with the Bensalem Police Department over the last six years, the department’s director, Frederick Harran, said without elaborating on what they were.• A young man who socialized with Mr. DiNardo and two of the victims said Mr. DiNardo had talked about killing people and having people killed. There were no further details about any such cases.• Mr. Kratz has faced charges three times in eight months. Two of those cases, both in Philadelphia, are still pending: He was arrested in June 2016 and again in February, and each time he was charged with burglary, theft, receiving stolen property and related charges. The third was related to a charge of theft at a shopping center in Abington, Pa., in December. That case is listed as closed, though how it was concluded is not clear.