https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/06/sports/tennis/wimbldeon-venus-williams-semifinals.html
At Wimbledon, Venus Williams Is Back in a Grand Slam Semifinal - The New York Times
Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Tennis,Kerber  Angelique,Williams  Venus,Shvedova  Yaroslava
July 5, 2016
6502
WIMBLEDON, England — After her first-round match at Wimbledon last week, Venus Williams was asked if she ever thought she would still be engaged in tennis at age 36.“I don’t think anyone feels older,” she said. “You have this infinity inside of you that feels like you could go forever. That’s how I feel on the court. As long as I’m halfway decent, can get my racket on the ball, I think I can make something happen.”This year, in her 19th Wimbledon and 71st Grand Slam appearance, the seeming infinity of Williams’s career has been in evidence.In the third round, she beat 19-year-old Daria Kasatkina, who was born the month before Williams played her first Wimbledon, in 1997.In a news conference after her fourth-round victory Monday, Williams spoke of “women’s tennis in the last 20 years,” and it was not an idle reference. She has, in fact, been playing on tour for all 20 of those years.On Tuesday, Williams, a five-time singles champion at the All England Club, was playing in her 12th Wimbledon quarterfinal. Her opponent, 96th-ranked Yaroslava Shvedova, was playing in her first.Williams was more than halfway decent and made something happen, winning, 7-6 (5), 6-2, to reach a Grand Slam semifinal for the first time since the 2010 United States Open.With her sister Serena also winning her quarterfinal match, the Williamses are in the Wimbledon semifinals together for the first time since 2009, when Serena beat Venus in the final. They have not met in a Grand Slam final since, but they could finally do so again Saturday if both beat their semifinal opponents.That, of course, will be an easier assignment for Serena than for Venus. In the last six years, Venus was found to have Sjogren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disease, which kept her off the tour for months and dropped her ranking outside the top 100. She also struggled with a back injury.But in the past two years, she has worked her way back into the top 10, won titles and started to advance further in Grand Slam tournaments.“They go by fast, thankfully,” Williams said of the past six years. “But I’ve been blessed, been really blessed, to have an opportunity to be here, have had an opportunity in the past to do this.“I don’t have any regrets about anything that’s taken place in between. It’s been a journey, but it’s made me stronger.”Three times in this tournament, she has beaten opponents 20 years old or younger. Twice, she has been pushed to three sets and played for more than 2 hours 25 minutes, including a 10-8 third set against Kasatkina. And even with the tournament’s schedule packed because of persistent rain, she has advanced to the quarterfinals in doubles with her sister.“She’s just such, you know, a great fighter,” said Serena, who advanced with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. “With everything she’s been through, I think it’s built a ton of character in her, and in me just by being around her.”Venus Williams’s experience on the Wimbledon grass proved too much for Shvedova, a streaky player who is best known for completing a “golden set” at Wimbledon in 2012 in which she did not lose a point.Williams, seeded No. 8, found herself down by 5-2 in the first-set tiebreaker. But she reeled off five points in a row to take the set, aided by four Shvedova unforced errors.Williams put her stamp on the match with Shvedova serving at 1-3. Williams hit back-to-back backhand winners — one crosscourt and a blistering return down the line — to break Shvedova for the third time in the set.When Shvedova dumped a forehand into the net to end the match, Williams pumped her fist and yelled, “Come on!” As she waved to the Court 1 crowd, she wore a broad smile.“You could see it on her face when she won,” said David Witt, Williams’s coach. “She was absolutely so proud of herself, and excited. And I don’t think she’s looking to stop. I think she’s playing better every match, and I think she sees — with her belief — that she can still play and beat girls. That’s the reason why she’s here: her belief in winning, then going out there and doing it.”Williams is the oldest woman to reach a Grand Slam semifinal since Martina Navratilova was runner-up at Wimbledon at age 37 in 1994.“I always felt like I had the game,” Williams said. “This is always a plus, when you know you have the game. So you just have to keep working until things fall into place.”In Thursday’s semifinals, Williams will face fourth-seeded Angelique Kerber, whose game has also fallen into place at this tournament.Kerber beat Serena Williams to win the Australian Open this year for her first Grand Slam title. But coming into the French Open in May, Kerber said that she put too much pressure on herself to do well at another major. She lost in the first round.When she arrived at Wimbledon, Kerber said, “I was telling myself, just like in Australia, just be relaxed.”Now she is back in the Wimbledon semifinals for the first time since 2012 after defeating No. 5 Simona Halep, 7-5, 7-6 (2). Kerber, a 28-year-old German, is the only woman remaining who has not lost a set in the tournament.After Kerber held at love in the first game of the match, there were eight service breaks in a row, including once when Kerber was serving for the set at 5-3. Kerber got another set point with Halep serving at 5-6, and Halep double-faulted.Halep continued to struggle holding her serve in the second set. But when Kerber served for the match at 5-3, Halep put on a tremendous defensive display to break her. Halep seemed to be frustrating Kerber as they headed to a tiebreaker, but momentum abruptly changed hands, as it had throughout the match.Groundstroke errors by Halep in four straight points gave Kerber a 5-1 lead. With Kerber serving at 5-2, Halep failed to put away an overhead at the net and Kerber’s next shot clipped the net cord, handcuffing Halep. She hit the ball out to give Kerber the only match point she needed.“I think I’m playing like in Australia, like really high-class tennis,” Kerber said.She added: “I know that I have the game to win the big tournament. I know that I know how to do it right now.”Kerber will be in her fourth Grand Slam semifinal in singles, Venus Williams in her 20th and Serena Williams in her 32nd. Elena Vesnina, a three-time Grand Slam doubles champion, will be in her first.Vesnina, a 29-year-old Russian ranked 50th, earned the spot by defeating 19th-seeded Dominika Cibulkova, 6-2, 6-2. The loss means Cibulkova will not have to postpone her wedding, which is scheduled for Saturday.All four semifinalists are 28 and older, and Venus Williams did not think that was a coincidence.“Once one or two players start playing longer, other players realize, oh, wow, I can, too,” she said. “Really it’s an opportunity, because at that point you have the experience, you’ve learned a lot. You really can use that to be better.”NOTESIn a men’s fourth-round match that was suspended by darkness Monday, No. 10 seed Tomas Berdych held off his Czech countryman Jiri Vesely, 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (8), 6-7 (9), 6-3. Berdych will face Lucas Pouille in the quarterfinals Wednesday.