https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/07/books/review/literature-by-degree.html
Literature by Degree - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Writing and Writers
March 7, 2017
9459
About 10 years ago, a literary agent came in to talk to a group of my master’s students in creative writing. She worked for a midsize independent and had roughly 50 writers on her client list, including a couple of best sellers. Here’s what she told us: About 10 percent of her authors made 10,000 pounds (or about $12,550) a year from their writing. In other words, of her 50 clients only five earned what would pass as minimum wage.It was my first year of teaching, and I was glad to have the job — but I had never taken creative writing classes and came to the program with some of the usual skepticism. Britain probably lags a decade behind America in the growth of its literary-industrial complex, but it’s been catching up. Over time, much of my skepticism resolved itself. You can’t teach people to be Kafka, but you can teach them how to write better, and it turns out that this is an interesting thing to learn how to teach. But whether you believe in the business or not is almost beside the point for many writers. I’m not sure that if I hadn’t gotten this job I could still afford to be a novelist.These days I teach mostly undergraduates, and one of my duties is to run admissions. It’s an occasionally boring but also weirdly profound thing to be involved in. Students have to submit a portfolio of work, and then a couple of my colleagues and I go through their stories and poems and mini-plays, and rate them. Then we invite the highest-rated students to come, and lives are shaped, friendships formed, maybe even marriages are made (children, too) because we said yes or no.One of the curious features of this decision is that it is based almost purely on taste: I like a certain kind of writing, my colleagues like others and we argue it out. That argument continues once the students arrive on campus. Sometimes, when we think they’re good enough, we pass them on to agents, or try to sort out internships for them, or encourage them to do a master’s degree. We write references. After three years of working with me, my students have a pretty good sense of the kinds of fiction I like and the sorts of questions I like to ask about any story. I try to make that bias one of the things we can talk about — but it’s still a bias. And there’s a bias built into workshops themselves. A roomful of students discussing someone else’s prose don’t add material — they take it away, and so the general tendency of most workshops, at least in my experience, is to pare back the language and the story, which produces a kind of polish, but not the only kind worth striving for.The argument is also played out at the other end of the faculty corridor. Every year I run a seminar on the Great American Novella, which lets me talk about Bellow and Wharton with my students. And one of the pleasures of the job is that I can imagine some of those students going off to become teachers themselves one day, perhaps adding “Seize the Day” or “Ethan Frome” to a reading list somewhere. This is one of the ways that culture is passed on, because university professors are in a position of real power.Book-page editors and critics and prize judges have a big say in what gets read and remembered, but few of them last as long as professors, who have tenure and more opportunities to revisit old preferences. As a writer who has spent the past 10 years in academia, I’m basically happy to give my smart, serious, thoughtful colleagues this influence. But I have some hesitations, too. In England, for example, there’s an anxiety about treating creative writing as an academic discipline. So writing programs make would-be novelists learn to talk about diegetic narrative and critical context, which shuts out many writers who don’t want to do that. And a guild system is starting to creep into place, so that the people who come through M.F.A. or M.A. or Ph.D. programs have a leg up in getting the jobs that allow them to keep writing.So who are the winners and losers in this game? What kind of writing will come out of it? Workshops aren’t always the easiest places to talk about certain things, and difficult subjects can become more difficult and uncomfortable in a roomful of competitive peers. So there are pressures, which you have to resist, for workshop fiction to become not only stylistically conventional but also intellectually and emotionally “safe.” And English professors tend to prefer the sorts of books that fit neatly into categories: literature of displacement, for example, or psychogeography.And yet there seems to be an opportunity here. Universities can hire people who are outside the system but whose writing they admire. And these writers can bring back to the academy the kinds of conversations that aren’t happening enough — conversations about taste. Because like it or not, when universities hire writers, they are making important decisions not just about who gets to teach (and what they teach), but about who gets to write (and what they write). And their power can be felt in almost every aspect of the business of literature.