https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/24/realestate/lena-halls-500-square-foot-apartment-in-midtown.html
Lena Hall’s 500-Square-Foot Apartment in Midtown - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Hall  Lena,Hedwig and the Angry Inch (Play)
March 24, 2017
8810
The actress Lena Hall has a big, infectious chortle. It would fill a space far larger than the immaculate 500-square-foot alcove studio she rents in the theater district, and a card on a table by the window pays fitting tribute: “You have the best laugh in the history of best laughs.”“I’ve always been really self-conscious about my laugh. I felt I had a witch’s cackle,” said the charmingly giddy Ms. Hall, a 2014 Tony Award winner for “Hedwig and the Angry Inch, ” who is now appearing in the Lincoln Center Theater production “How to Transcend a Happy Marriage.” “And then a friend said, ‘I love your laugh.’ And he found that card, and I framed it because it made me feel so good.”Unlike many space-challenged New Yorkers, Ms. Hall, 37, has no recurring fantasy about opening a cupboard or closet and finding that the apartment, stunningly, has another room. Not for a second does she mourn the huge two-bedroom co-op in Washington Heights thatshe bought in 2000 and sold for a nice profit just before the financial crisis. “It was lovely to live in, but the commute …” said Ms. Hall, who moved for a time to Williamsburg, Brooklyn, then to Long Island City, where she shared an apartment with a boyfriend.When the relationship ended, Ms. Hall voted herself back on the island. “I asked myself, ‘Where have you wanted to live and never lived? Now that I’m single, where can I be by myself and have my own sanctuary?’ So I decided I would try Midtown, to be closer to work.”Good omen No. 1: One rental possibility was down the street from the Al Hirschfeld Theater where, a few years earlier, Ms. Hall, then using her birth name, Celina Carvajal, had done time as a member of the original cast of “Kinky Boots.”Good omen No. 2: The building, while not luxurious, “felt good,” she said.Good omen No. 3: The two sisters who were vacating the premises had somehow managed to carve out two bedrooms in the small space. “I was like, ‘If two people can fit in here, I’ll be fine,’” said Ms. Hall, who moved in a year ago with minimal worldly goods (she’s an acolyte of the decluttering guru Marie Kondo) and a well-considered plan of attack.She had recently been on a music tour with Josh Groban, a tough-but-somebody’s-got-to-do-it gig that involved stays in many swanky places. “There was one in particular, the Four Seasons in Toronto, which was just unbelievable, very modern and Zen,” Ms. Hall recalled. “I wanted to bring that sense of hotel luxury to an apartment in New York.”Floor-to-ceiling drapes shot through with gold thread and silvery white wall-to-wall carpeting accomplished the goal admirably, practicality be damned. “Someone recently asked me what I wanted for my birthday,” Ms. Hall said. “And I asked for someone to come clean my carpet. Honestly, it was like the best gift ever.”The furniture — a bonded leather sectional and a pair of wooden chairs with leather seats and backs — are a similarly soothing white. The palette makes sense for so many reasons. “My spirit animal is a polar bear,” Ms. Hall confided.Foxes, too, are important to her, though she can’t explain why. There’s a framed illustration of the famously sly creature in the kitchen and more images on some of the carefully arranged throw pillows on the bed and a leather easy chair.“I was looking for a dog to adopt, and I was like, ‘You’re my dog because you look just like a fox,’” she said of her Pomeranian, Ziggy.Ms. Hall’s aesthetic of extreme orderliness is largely a reaction to the magpie mind-set of her parents, whose Victorian house in San Francisco is piled high and haphazardly with miscellany dating back five decades. “Some people really like that — they like to feel cocooned and cozy,” Ms. Hall said. “But I need things to be very organized. It helps me stay focused.”Several items from the family manse have found their way to Ms. Hall’s apartment, among them posters heralding shows at the legendary Fillmore and Avalon Ballroom, with performers like Eric Burdon and Big Brother and the Holding Company.They hang on the wall in what she described as a feng shui bagua near a fringed vest worn in the 1960s by Ms. Hall’s father, Carlos Carvajal, a dancer and choreographer. “I think vintage clothing is cool art,” Ms. Hall said. Mr. Carvajal is also represented in a few framed kiosk posters announcing his long-ago performances in Bordeaux.Over the bed: a flag with 48 stars that once belonged to Ms. Hall’s grandfather. “It’s beautiful,” she said simply. “I love it.”Her pad is something of a launching pad. She is hoping to turn the front closet into a tiny recording studio where she can do voice-over work. And for the first time, she is trying to grow something: On the windowsill are four succulents cunningly tucked into planters shaped like prehistoric animals.But the stove is still uncharted territory, and is likely to remain so. Dangling from a hook in the kitchen is an apron that Ms. Hall’s mother made from her grandmother’s tablecloth. Ms. Hall shows off her mom’s handiwork proudly, but would be hard put to remember when she last wore it.She laughs her big laugh. “You know,” she said, “I haven’t yet found my joy of cooking.”