http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/25/nyregion/sheldon-silver-trial-jury.html
Two Hours Into Deliberations, a Juror in the Sheldon Silver Trial Wants Out - The New York Times
Silver  Sheldon,New York State,Bribery and Kickbacks,Caproni  Valerie E (1955- )
Nov. 24, 2015
6849
Not long after jurors convened on Tuesday to decide whether Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, once one of the most powerful politicians in New York State, was guilty of fraud, there were already unmistakable signs that their deliberations had taken a contentious turn.“I am wondering if there is anyway I can be excused from this case, because I have a different opinion/view so far in this case and it is making me feel very, very uncomfortable.”That plea to be excused from the case came in a note from an unidentified juror, sent to the judge, Valerie E. Caproni, less than two hours after deliberations had started in Federal District Court in Manhattan.“I’m feeling pressured, stressed out ... told that I’m not using my common sense, my heart is pounding and my head feels weird,” the juror wrote. “I am so stressed out right now that I can’t even write normally. I don’t feel like I can be myself right now! I need to leave!”A second note came shortly afterward, apparently from a different unidentified juror, stating that one of the jurors — the note did not specify which one — was having difficulty distinguishing whether or not giving New York State funds for “something in return is illegal.”The juror who wrote the first note has not been identified by the court, but the parties made references to her as a female member of the jury of eight women and four men.Deliberations began on Tuesday morning after a three-week trial in which prosecutors sought to prove that Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, had obtained nearly $4 million in illegal payments in exchange for taking official actions that benefited a cancer researcher and two real estate developers.Mr. Silver’s lawyers have argued vigorously that his actions over the years were legal, and that conflicts of interest were unavoidable for lawmakers, especially in a state capital known for its dysfunction.That dysfunction seemed to creep into the jury room on Tuesday; for a juror to ask to be dismissed from a case so soon after deliberations begin is highly unusual. A prosecutor, Carrie H. Cohen, asked by the judge for her opinion, requested that the juror be excused and replaced with an alternate.Stephen F. Molo, a lawyer for Mr. Silver, disagreed. “She has taken an oath,” he said, “and she should continue the process, to work it out. This is what happens in deliberations.”Judge Caproni agreed, saying it seemed “too early for a juror to throw in the towel.”But before the discussion ended, the second note emerged from the jury room. The judge ultimately brought the jury back into the courtroom, responded to the legal questions raised in the second note, and then focused on the concerns from the juror in the first note.Without describing the note’s contents, Judge Caproni talked broadly about how deliberations should take place.“I want to remind you that each juror is entitled to his or her opinion,” she said to the jury, “but you are also required to respectfully exchange views with your fellow jurors. That’s the very essence of jury deliberation.”There had been no hint that the jury was fractured or tense before deliberations began. In the voir dire process, jurors with strong opinions about the case were weeded out, and jurors seemed to talk amicably among themselves during breaks.The jury weighing the case comprises seven residents of the Bronx, three from Manhattan and one each from Westchester and Putnam Counties. They range in age from 28 to 69, with four members in their 50s. Two-thirds of the jurors have college or graduate degrees.The jury includes three people in nursing, a transit employee, a campus recruiter, an employee with the New York City Education Department, a salesman, a preschool teacher, a cabdriver, an office manager and a technician. One unemployed juror had worked in advertising.On Tuesday, there was yet another issue with a juror. Another of Mr. Silver’s lawyers, Joel Cohen, told the judge at a sidebar conference that a male juror on the panel had been observed talking to someone inside an NBC News truck near the courthouse.Judge Caproni questioned the juror in the robing room, a transcript shows. The juror acknowledged having contact with a person in the truck.“I know the one girl from the news,” the juror said. “That’s all I did, was say hello. I watch every morning from 4:30 to 7.”“She said: ‘Really? My family doesn’t even watch me on TV.’ ”“That was the extent of your conversation?” the judge asked.“Yes,” the juror replied.He remained on the jury.As for the juror who asked to be excused, there was no further word from her through the afternoon. But around 5:30 p.m., another note arrived from that juror.“Can I have a meeting with Judge Caproni after everyone is dismissed?” she wrote.The judge told the jury that she had received a note, which would be taken up in the morning.