https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/11/movies/movie-review-linklaters-boyhood-is-a-model-of-cinematic-realism.html
Movie Review: Linklater’s ‘Boyhood’ Is a Model of Cinematic Realism - The New York Times
Movies,Hawke  Ethan,Linklater  Richard,Arquette  Patricia,Coltrane  Ellar,Linklater  Lorelei,Boyhood (Movie)
July 10, 2014
4280
The first shot in “Boyhood,” Richard Linklater’s tender, profound film, is of a cloudy sky. The second is of a boy staring up at that sky, one arm bent under his head, the other flung out straight on the ground. He’s a pretty child with calm eyes, a snub nose and a full mouth. It’s a face that you get to know and love because, even as this child is watching the world, you’re watching him grow. From scene to scene, you see the curve of his jaw change, notice his thickening brows and witness his slender arms opening to embrace the world and its clear and darkening skies.Filmed over 12 consecutive years, “Boyhood” centers on Mason (Ellar Coltrane), who’s 6 when the story opens and 18 when it ends. In between, he goes to school; argues with his sister, Samantha (Lorelei Linklater, the director’s daughter); and watches his mother, Olivia (Patricia Arquette), struggle with work and men while paying the bills, moving from home to home and earning several degrees. Every so often, her ex-husband, Mason Sr. (Ethan Hawke), roars into the children’s lives, initially in a 1968 GTO. It isn’t a dad car (although it does belong to one: Mr. Linklater). It is, rather, the same model of masculine cool that rumbles through “Two-Lane Blacktop,” one of Mr. Linklater’s favorite movies, and which he’s slipped into films like “Slacker” and “Dazed and Confused.”The GTO is a minor authorial marker, and probably helped keep costs down in this relatively inexpensive production. (The movie was heroically bankrolled from the start by its distributor, Jonathan Sehring of IFC Films.) More practically, it works as an expressive emblem to go along with Mason Sr.’s absences, his careless parenting, on-and-off facial hair and earnest bohemian rhapsodies. Unforgiving observers may write Mason Sr. off as a deadbeat, but, like Olivia, who sometimes lobs expletives at her unfazed children, he’s deeply loving. These aren’t movie parents with formulaic arcs and storybook solutions, but characters whose honest, raw hurt and moments of casual grace carry the shock of the real. These are people you know, maybe people like you.The realism is jolting, and so brilliantly realized and understated that it would be easy to overlook. In “Boyhood,” Mr. Linklater’s inspired idea of showing the very thing that most movies either ignore or awkwardly elide — the passage of time — is its impressive, headline-making conceit. Starting in 2002, he gathered his four lead actors each year for a three- to four-day shoot, working on the script as they went along. (The consummate anti-slacker, Mr. Linklater also shot during that period a clutch of shorts and features, including “Before Sunset,” the second in a trilogy of films with Mr. Hawke; a fictional adaptation of “Fast Food Nation”; and a weirdly touching comedy about a murderer, “Bernie.”)What emerged from those dozen years is a series of meticulously textured and structured scenes set to the rhythm of life. The structure is crucial. Mr. Linklater has long experimented with nontraditional narratives, from the baton-relay form of “Slacker,” in which he leaves one character to follow the next, to the peripatetic ramblings of his “Before” trilogy. His films are sometimes mischaracterized as having no plot, perhaps because they may seem so, when compared with aggressively incident-jammed mainstream movies. One of the fascinating things about “Boyhood” is that a lot happens — there are parties and fights, laughter and tears — but all these events take place in a distinctly quotidian register and without the usual filmmaking prodding and cues.Instead, the movie ebbs and flows from year to year, interspersed with temporal signposts like a Britney Spears song or a Nintendo Wii. One minute, Mason is looking quizzically at Olivia while she chats with a professor, Bill (Marco Perella); the next, he’s with his sister and Bill’s children, Mindy (Jamie Howard) and Randy (Andrew Villarreal), in the backyard the two families now share as one. Some of the transitions are imperceptible, especially when Mason is younger, and all are meaningful. Midway through, when he strips off his shirt to go swimming with his father and then asks about girls, you see the last traces of baby fat and true childhood. By the next section, Mason has shot up and slimmed down, and is now talking to girls, not just about them.For a filmmaker known for the loquaciousness of his characters, Mr. Linklater has an almost un-American rejection of overexplanation. When you first meet Mason at 6, gazing at the sky while lying on a patch of grass, he looks a touch beatific. He also looks like a little kid staring into space. Is he happy, sad or bored? And when he gazes at a dead bird, what does he think?; how does he feel? Mr. Linklater doesn’t say. Instead, he fills the frame with a close-up of Mason’s face, letting the silence and weight of death linger. Mr. Linklater’s characters can talk a blue streak, but rarely in his work, and never in “Boyhood,” do you hear the hum of his narrative design under their words.The film’s visual style is precise, unassuming to the point of seeming invisibility and in the service of the characters, with compositions that remain unfussy and uncluttered, even when the rooms are busy. When Mr. Linklater films a landscape, your eye locks not on the camerawork but on the beauty of these spaces and the people in them — the enveloping greenness of the neighborhood in which Mason first rides a bike, for instance, and the tranquillity of the watering hole that, years later, he swims in with his dad. Mr. Linklater is especially fond of showing two people walking and talking, and you learn as much about the characters’ relationships from how they inhabit space — his two-shots speak volumes — as from what they say. He’s a poet-geometrician of intimacy.It’s almost surprising that no one seems to have made a movie like “Boyhood” before. Its closest counterpart is probably the “7 Up” series, Michael Apted’s multipart documentary project that since 1964 has dropped in every seven years on the same, more or less, British women and men, beginning when they were 7. Watching seemingly carefree children thrive and fail as they age — or, more prosaically, turn into dreary, respectable citizens — can be like a knife in your heart. It can also be somewhat eerie, simply because the series compresses decades of a human life into scenes that are, by turns, seamless and jagged — an eeriness that “Boyhood” shares as 12 years of Mason’s life slips by in 165 startlingly fast minutes. We’re here today, gone tomorrow.Radical in its conceit, familiar in its everyday details, “Boyhood” exists at the juncture of classical cinema and the modern art film without being slavishly indebted to either tradition. It’s a model of cinematic realism, and its pleasures are obvious yet mysterious. Even after seeing the film three times, I haven’t fully figured out why it has maintained such a hold on me, and why I’m eager to see it again. There are many reasons to love movies, from the stories they tell, to the beautiful characters who live and die for us. And yet the story in “Boyhood” is blissfully simple: A child grows up. This, along with the modesty of its physical production — its humble rooms, quiet moments, ordinary lives — can obscure Mr. Linklater’s ambitions and the greatness of his achievement.It’s no surprise that watching actors naturally age on camera without latex and digital effects makes for mesmerizing viewing. And at first it may be hard to notice much more than the creases etching Mr. Hawke’s face, the sexy swells of Ms. Arquette’s belly and Mr. Coltrane’s growth spurts. You may see your own face in those faces, your children’s, too. This kind of identification is familiar, as is the idea that movies preserve time. André Bazin wrote that art emerged from our desire to counter the passage of time and the inevitable decay it brings. But in “Boyhood,” Mr. Linklater’s masterpiece, he both captures moments in time and relinquishes them as he moves from year to year. He isn’t fighting time but embracing it in all its glorious and agonizingly fleeting beauty.“Boyhood” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The film contains some familiar expletives and scenes of domestic violence.