https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/28/fashion/an-online-luxury-consignment-house.html
An Online Luxury Consignment House - The New York Times
Luxury Goods and Services,Vestiaire Collective,E-Commerce,Fashion and Apparel,Vestiaire Collective SA,Fabre  Sebastien
May 27, 2015
1220
PARIS — It was the purse’s silver clasp and the Tic Tac size metal plate bolted into the lining that most captivated Victoire Boyer Chammard on a chilly Wednesday afternoon.Ms. Chammard is an authentication expert for the social shopping website Vestiaire Collective. The buttery brown bag was the 100th or so hunk of Hermès to cross her desk that day. An authentic Hermès bag can fetch upward of $15,000 on the site.“The engraving here, you can see ‘Hermès,’ but it’s not very perfect,” she said. “You have a double ‘H’ and double ‘E.’ But it’s not a problem because it’s a vintage item.”Within minutes, she deduced that the bag was made in 1980. “We see 200 items a day,” she said, “so your eye, it perfects.”Ms. Chammard is one of more than a dozen authenticators and quality inspectors employed by Vestiaire to make sure the luxury products it sells are, in fact, luxe. The site is a marketplace for secondhand goods, and its three million members make up a particular echelon of buyers and sellers.While sellers set the price for their Chanel and Céline castoffs, Ms. Chammard and her colleagues examine every item sold before shipping it to the buyer, combing for counterfeits or items that are too threadbare.“We wanted to bring inspiration and also trust: trust on the buyers’ side and probably authority on the sellers’ side,” said Sébastien Fabre, Vestiaire’s chief executive, a former Microsoft executive who in 2009 founded the company with Sophie Hersan.The site, popular for years in France, Britain and Germany, is seeing an increasing amount of traffic from the United States, Mr. Fabre said, particularly from celebrities and influencers in fashion and news media, who are given grand things that they can’t necessarily wear once, let alone twice.“You don’t have to do anything and you don’t have a pile of things sitting at home,” said Kate Foley, a fashion stylist and a Vestiaire V.I.P. who has been such an avid user of the site that the company asked her to assume the role of contributing fashion director next month.The special designation (Vestiaire has about 30 V.I.P.s in the United States and 400 internationally) means that when Ms. Foley has pieces to sell, a representative from the company comes to her home, picks up the products and manages the posting, selling and shipping process. “And then you get the money,” she said.So does Vestiaire, which collects on average a 25 percent commission on the sale of an item. It is one of a number of online companies focused on reselling high-end clothes and accessories.Notable among the competition is the RealReal, a luxury resale marketplace based in San Francisco. But Vestiaire, at least for the moment, seems to be the go-to site among the fashion world’s fickle elite.“It doesn’t feel like secondhand stuff,” Ms. Foley said, “it feels like beautiful luxury goods that you can’t find.”Martha Ward, a Britain-based fashion stylist, has been shopping on Vestiaire for two years. “A lot of the time, it’s super-rich women who have bought too many things and haven’t gotten around to wearing it,” she said. “They’ve still got the labels on. It’s extraordinary. The root of it is, and it’s a cliché, but one girl’s trash is another girl’s treasure.”The company’s name, pronounced “vest-tea-air,” is meant to signify that it is seeking a certain clientele, the founders said.“It means ‘wardrobe,’ ” said Fanny Moizant, the head of Vestiaire’s European division, “but the chic way. We have other words in France, but this is the insiders’ name.”Mr. Fabre added: “And ‘Collective’ brings the community side of the business. We know it’s pretty painful for international expansion, but we assume people realize, you know, we’re French.”