https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/04/world/asia/myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi-peace-talks-ethnic.html
Myanmar Peace Talks End With No Breakthrough but Some Hope - The New York Times
National League for Democracy (Myanmar),Aung San Suu Kyi,Myanmar
Sept. 3, 2016
2545
NAYPYIDAW, Myanmar — A peace conference convened to find a way to end decades of ethnic conflict in Myanmar concluded Saturday without any breakthroughs, but the country’s leader contended that it was a step toward resolving intractable disputes.At the closing ceremony, Myanmar’s leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, expressed optimism about the peace process despite disagreements among delegates at the conference, including ethnic rebel groups and members of the government, political parties and the military.“During the conference, some delegates openly criticized and attacked others,” Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi said. “But we shouldn’t worry about that. We should worry about pretending we don’t have a problem.”The military controlled Myanmar for five decades before some democratic changes were initiated in 2011 by U Thein Sein, then the president. Last year, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, the National League for Democracy, took power after winning national elections.The talks this week, called the 21st Century Panglong Conference, were an effort by Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi to move along a peace process initiated by Mr. Thein Sein’s administration. The process has been hampered by mistrust, especially between the armed forces, known as the Tatmadaw, and ethnic rebels.The conference was broadcast live on television, allowing for an airing of grievances by ethnic groups and minority political parties that are rarely heard in public.There were pleas for more roads and schools in remote areas and for a more equitable distribution of resources, as well as calls for federalism and for the creation of new states within the union. A recurrent demand was institutional reform to loosen the armed forces’ grip on the state.“Don’t take this as a declaration of war!” Maj. Gen. Sumlut Gun Maw, a leader of the Kachin Independence Organization, one of Myanmar’s main ethnic militias, said during the conference. He was referring to a proposal to allow civilian oversight of the armed forces and to reduce their role to that of a strictly professional military, with no hand in politics.“It’s a conference,” he added. “We’re just expressing our policy freely.”But representatives of the armed forces hewed to their longstanding position.“All the parties’ political needs have to be resolved based on the 2008 Constitution,” Maj. Gen. Nay Linn, the deputy chief of air defense and a representative of the military at the talks, said after the conference ended. That statement, echoed by other military representatives, is widely understood to mean that there will be little change in the near future.“I am disappointed but not surprised,” said Pu Thang Ning Kee, a leader of the Chin National Front, a small armed group from one of the poorest areas of the country.The Constitution, drafted by a military junta, gives the armed forces vast powers, including control over three critical ministries and 25 percent of the seats in Parliament. Amendments must be approved by more than 75 percent of Parliament, which means that any proposed changes are subject to the military’s veto.Political parties, including the governing National League for Democracy, and ethnic minorities have long argued for comprehensive revisions to the Constitution. In addition to curtailing the powers of the military, they want more local autonomy and more representation in national institutions.The United Wa State Army, the largest ethnic army in the country, circulated a paper calling for the redistribution of the military’s seats in Parliament to “disadvantaged groups and ethnic minorities.”“All nationalities in Myanmar, large or small, are equal,” the statement said. “No dominant-national chauvinism allowed.”(The group’s delegates walked out of the talks before delivering their paper at the conference, protesting an organizational mix-up that offended them and what they said was the conference’s lack of inclusiveness.)Some participants called for increasing the representation of minority ethnic groups in the military and for other changes in the security sector. The military has insisted that nonstate armed groups must disarm and demobilize first.“There is no sign from the military that they are going to withdraw from political life,” said U Min Zin, the executive director of the Institute for Strategy and Policy — Myanmar, who was invited to give a paper by political groups.“The military used to say they would withdraw once there was peace and some form of stable democracy,” Mr. Min Zin said. “But at this conference, they did not reiterate this view. That’s significant.”