https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/04/movies/for-dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-learning-simian-movement.html
For ‘Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,’ Learning Simian Movement - The New York Times
Movies,Dawn of the Planet of the Apes (Movie),Greer  Judy,Kebbell  Toby,Serkis  Andy,Reeves  Matt,Clarke  Jason,Russell  Keri
May 1, 2014
3799
NEW ORLEANS — The actress Judy Greer was trying to find her animal self. She stood in an awkward crouch, pelvis pitched forward, arms aloft. “No desire to be tall at all,” Terry Notary, a stocky former gymnast, instructed her. “Your power comes from rooting yourself down.”In a graffiti-covered room turned fitness studio here last summer, Ms. Greer, familiar from television comedies and films like “The Descendants,” was learning to walk like a chimp. She was preparing to play Cornelia, wife of Andy Serkis’s Caesar, in “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,” the sequel to the franchise’s 2011 reboot. An hour into the training, she was making high-pitched shrieks and transforming into a quadruped, walking on arm extenders that Mr. Notary had invented. “I’ve never done anything like this,” she said. “I think it will be liberating, when I can learn to shut my brain off” and follow Mr. Notary’s advice to act intuitively, from her primate sense.A co-star, the British actor Toby Kebbell, who plays a hotheaded bonobo named Koba, offered some insight into ape behavior, picked up at zoos and on YouTube. “Their nose is flat, so they don’t scratch up, they tend to brush it down,” he said, demonstrating with the flick of a curved finger. After a few months on set, his simian body language was natural, his bowed stance practiced. “You have to sit and eat your breakfast that way or read your phone that way,” he said. Even the tiniest physical choices would be magnified by high-tech cameras and painstakingly translated by animators onto the screen.Like “Rise of the Planet of the Apes,” its predecessor, “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,” which opens July 11, is a 3-D filmmaking feat. A technical crew of hundreds at Weta Digital studios in New Zealand labored for a year to composite some 1,200 special effects shots just of the apes, far more digitized animals than in the first movie. But with a new director, Matt Reeves (“Cloverfield”), the film also operated like a traditional live-action story: shot outdoors on location, in occasionally difficult conditions, and with some risk to the performers, as Mr. Kebbell soon learned firsthand. Having a human template, “you’re never in danger of breaking the laws of physics,” said Daniel Barrett, an animation supervisor for the film. “You have a much better shot at credibility.” C.G.I. was a necessity, but especially in a sci-fi parable, realism was the payoff.So just outside New Orleans, in the parking lot of an abandoned amusement park, production designers spent five months building a huge ape village, a three-story structure of trees and rocks, draping moss and buried weaponry, with hanging gourds and skeletons. It was like something out of a simian “Lord of the Flies.” The primates — men and women in gray jumpsuits, dotted with tags for the performance-capture cameras — began filming there on a rainy day last July. Climbing and other stunts that had been entirely animated in the last movie were now performed by Parkour experts, trained in ape movement by Mr. Notary, also an actor who specializes in physically demanding motion-capture roles. (He’s in the “Apes” movie as well as “Avatar.”) Mr. Reeves, the director, said, “Every time you had to do something and express the physicality in a simian way but the emotionality in a human way, that became more compelling.”“Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” picks up the story and some of the characters from “Rise,” which starred James Franco as a scientist who helped unleash a genetic virus that made primates smarter and bolder, leading to a human-simian standoff. In the follow-up, 10 years have passed and Mr. Serkis’s Caesar has emerged as a leader, with a colony of 2,000 apes. There are human characters — the cast includes Gary Oldman, Keri Russell and Jason Clarke (“Zero Dark Thirty”) — but much more of the film is about primate life, told from Caesar’s point of view. “I wanted to make it an ape world movie, only to reveal that humans are still around,” Mr. Reeves said.For Mr. Serkis, that meant conceiving of Caesar differently. He originally based the character on Oliver, a real chimpanzee who became a scientific curiosity in the 1970s, when it was discovered that he preferred to walk upright. “He was known as the ‘humanzee,’ ” Mr. Serkis said. “He would come in, sit down, pick up a bottle, pour himself a drink. People thought he was transgenic.” He approached Caesar too, “as a human in ape’s skin.”In the narrative of “Dawn,” Caesar has more of a connection with his own chimp-ness. “He’s quite imperious,” said Mr. Serkis, who has made a career of inhabiting otherworldly creatures, like Gollum in the “Lord of the Rings” films. “He’s aged; he’s got a statesmanlike physicality. He has a teenage son; he has a wife. And he’s created this, in his view, utopian society comprising all the different species of apes, from orangutan to chimp, and found a way to communicate all across those apes.”As a rehearsal, Mr. Reeves filmed the ape actors enacting a day in their lives, expressing themselves through animal grunts, gestures, sign language and, yes, English. “The second generation, they know a little bit of street slang,” Mr. Serkis said. But, he added, the director “didn’t want to leap forward so much that suddenly you had a film where apes were talking freely and philosophizing about the world,” as they did in the original 1968 film.But as in “Rise,” there were nods to the earlier movies, like a scene of apes on horseback, recreated on that first day in the ape village. In this instance, even the horses had motion-capture dots on their bodies. Riding in, Mr. Serkis dismounted in his chimp stance and loped around, gesturing to and at nothing, silently moving his mouth, a bizarre pantomime and a reminder of how unnatural this type of acting can be. Besides their noncostumes, they wore small cameras aimed at their faces at all times, to record their expressions. For Mr. Serkis, who appeared in “King Kong” and other motion-capture movies, it was business as usual. It was the live-action actors, staring at those face-cams, who were thrown for a loop, he said. “But within five to 10 minutes of acclimatizing, once you’re looking into each other’s eyes, you’re just acting with each other.”Mr. Kebbell, who worked in action-adventure films including “The Prince of Persia” and “War Horse,” had never done performance-capture before. But that proved less challenging than walking like an ape — or even practicing how to walk like an ape. He joined in for the demo during Ms. Greer’s training, his day off, expertly maneuvering his 6-foot-2 frame as Koba. Then he donned the metal arm extenders, like hand crutches, galloped on all fours across the room, torqued his body and stumbled. The extent of his injury wasn’t immediately apparent — he plunged his arm into a bucket of ice, then conducted an on-camera interview — but by the next day, he was in a sling and on pain medication. He had fractured and separated his shoulder, leaving him with permanent damage, he said recently. “I’ve lost 7 percent of flexation in my arm. I can’t put my hand to my shoulder anymore. I can’t straighten it.”Production was delayed and rejiggered, at a cost; Mr. Kebbell had to shoot a climactic fight scene three months later, after he’d healed. He laughed about having hurt himself not scaling an ape mountain but in a gym with a rubber floor. “Accidents happen,” he said, adding wryly: “It gives me a story to tell. Otherwise I’m incredibly boring.” (His action career continues; he was next cast in “World of Warcraft.”)For Ms. Greer, the film was a personal milestone of another sort. Her husband of two and a half years, the television producer Dean Johnsen, is an “Apes” obsessive. “At our wedding, we had a porcelain cake topper of a bride and groom chimp,” she said. “We had ‘Rise’ and the original ‘Planet of the Apes’ playing while we had cocktail hour.” So being cast as Cornelia, a role she pursued, was “the ultimate wedding present to my husband,” she said. “When they announced that I got this part, he got more emails of congratulations than I did.”The enduring appeal of the “Apes” series, Mr. Reeves said, is in its clear metaphorical oomph: “The apes are us.” He was inspired at first by the antics of his 2-year-old, so when a crew member brought his kids on set to meet Mr. Serkis, Mr. Reeves simply pulled them into a schoolyard scene in his multimillion-dollar movie. (How’s that for a summer vacation story?) Later he put his own son into a mo-cap suit and turned the cameras on. “We basically spent three hours letting there be utter chaos,” he said. “And then our children were representative apes.”