http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/us/politics/nonprofit-masks-dark-money-ads-backing-marco-rubio.html
Nonprofit Masks Source of Ads Backing Rubio - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Rubio  Marco,Campaign Finance,Political Advertising,Political Action Committees,Conservative Solutions Project
Oct. 11, 2015
9472
DOVER, N.H. —  When Senator Marco Rubio of Florida was confronted by a voter at a New Hampshire town hall meeting this year about the torrent of cash flowing into the presidential election through outside groups, he offered a note of sympathy.“Full disclosure and sunlight into all these expenditures is critical to getting to the root of this problem,” Mr. Rubio told the voter. He added, “As long as you know who’s behind the money and how much they’re giving and where they’re spending it, I think that’s the sunlight that we need.”But as the fall campaign unfolds, voters in states like New Hampshire and Iowa have been left largely in the dark about who is putting the most money behind Mr. Rubio. Of all the television advertisements aired in support of the Florida senator so far this year — $5.5 million worth — none have been paid for by Mr. Rubio’s own campaign. Even the “super PAC” supporting him has not yet spent a dime on ads.Instead, the money has flowed through a political nonprofit group called the Conservative Solutions Project, formed by a former Rubio aide and now overseen in part by a Republican strategist who is close to Mr. Rubio’s campaign manager.Unlike candidates and super PACs, the nonprofit — which has raised more than $18 million — will never be required to disclose anything about its donors.The group’s spending has opened a potentially risky new front in the regulatory battle around outside groups in the presidential campaign, where a cadre of lawyers and strategists have already aggressively pushed the legal boundaries between candidates and the supposedly independent super PACs who support them. While all of Mr. Rubio’s competitors are supported by a super PAC, no one is relying on a secretive nonprofit for the bulk of its advertising.Unlike the super PACs, which are allowed to focus exclusively on elections, groups like the Conservative Solutions Project — known as a 501(c)(4) organizations, after the tax code provisions that govern them — are granted tax exemptions in exchange for devoting themselves to the promotion of “social welfare.” While social welfare groups may spend some of their time and money educating voters, they are not allowed to function as auxiliaries for a particular candidate. Asked how Conservative Solutions was dedicated to promoting public welfare, a spokesman insisted it was not aimed at boosting Mr. Rubio’s prospects.“Conservative Solutions Project was created nearly two years ago to help the conservative movement most effectively communicate with American families so that we win the battle of ideas and are able to enact conservative solutions to the problems they face,” said Jeff Sadosky, the spokesman. All of the advertising, Mr. Sadosky said, counted as tax-exempt activity.But the group’s commercials all focus on Mr. Rubio. The senator’s picture is prominently featured on its website, and a video featuring Mr. Rubio speaking is the first thing shown to the site’s visitors. The group is now run by Pat Shortridge, an adviser on Mr. Rubio’s 2010 Senate campaign. J. Warren Tompkins, a South Carolina-based Republican consultant who was once a business partner with Mr. Rubio’s campaign manager, is on its board. Mr. Tompkins also oversees the super PAC backing Mr. Rubio — which is called Conservative Solutions PAC and which shares fund-raising consultants with the nonprofit.Mr. Rubio’s heavy reliance on the group effectively keeps secret the identities of some of his biggest supporters, making it impossible to know whose agenda the senator may be embracing. Mr. Rubio has avidly courted the casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson, for example, even signing on in June as co-sponsor of an Adelson-backed bill that would restrict Internet gambling.“It doesn’t comport with tax law, but the problem is that the I.R.S. budget has been so constrained that they don’t have a lot of resources in this area,” said Marcus S. Owens, a Washington lawyer who specializes in campaign finance. “So if somebody is comfortable being aggressive, they’re just betting that the audit lottery won’t call their number any time soon, which is probably a safe bet.”Asked in an interview last week if the group ought to disclose its donors — as he said earlier this year that such groups should — Mr. Rubio initially noted that the group is set up as a nonprofit and that he could not coordinate with them. Pressed on whether he believes they should reveal their funding, Mr. Rubio said: “I think they should follow the law. And if people want to change the law to provide disclosures for groups that participate in the political process, I’m open to that idea, but that’s not the law right now.”Republican officials have been increasingly reliant on political nonprofits in recent years, as boycotts, public outrage and shareholder activists put pressure on businesses to avoid donating to super PACs. Jeb Bush supporters have created a nonprofit that has a similar name to the super PAC supporting the former Florida governor. But the nonprofit supporting Mr. Bush has yet to air ads.Democrats have focused more on super PACs to handle their independent expenditures in campaigns, though they also have employed the more secretive 501(c)(4) vehicles. The primary super PAC backing Hillary Rodham Clinton, for example, Priorities USA Action, has not ruled out using its now-dormant nonprofit arm during the 2016 election.Most such groups — wary of run-ins with the Internal Revenue Service — work carefully to create the appearance that they are not focused on elections or designed to support a specific candidate. They tend to operate across multiple election cycles or run ads supporting or attacking a wide swath of candidates, for example.Some other major outside groups have also become more cautious, relying more on affiliated super PACs or other groups. Crossroads Grassroots Policy Strategies, a 501(c)(4) founded in 2010, has been among the largest spenders on behalf of Republican Senate and presidential candidates in the past.But Crossroads has faced difficulty winning I.R.S. recognition, which could make some donors wary. This year, Crossroads officials took over another organization, now known as One Nation, which has spent millions of dollars in advertisements defending vulnerable Republican senators. The difference? One Nation, founded in 2010 by a pair of Republican consultants, already had the I.R.S. seal of approval.Unlike Crossroads, Conservative Solutions has decided not to seek I.R.S. approval in advance, which means its political activities will not face the possibility of agency review until after the group files its next tax return, probably long after the Republican primary season is over. Mr. Sadosky suggested that the group had decided to avoid that step, which it is permitted to do, because it did not trust the agency to treat the group fairly.“After seeing what the I.R.S. has done to conservative groups since 2010, we felt that a (c)(4) with ‘conservative’ in its name could be subject to abuse by the I.R.S.,” Mr. Sadosky said. “So we decided to forgo the application.”