http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/24/arts/24iht-blume.1.14718462.html
France's unsolved mystery of the poisoned bread - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 23, 2008
7071
PARIS — As a kid in Brooklyn Steven L. Kaplan ate pale sliced Wonder Bread like everyone else but had an epiphany in Paris as a Princeton student in 1962 when he happened on a small bakery on the Rue du Cherche-Midi called Poilâne and bought a bâtard  which he filled with cheese and ate in the Luxembourg gardens. "I can still taste that first bite," he says.Kaplan went on to become  a professor of history at Cornell University, always fascinated by bread as one of the principal actors in French  life: it is bread, he says, that seals the social contract in France, the link between the government and the governed.When in the  United States Kaplan, from what he views as necessity, bakes his own bread. In France  he is recognized as the  bread authority, compared recently in  Le Monde  with Robert O. Paxton, the American historian who forced French eyes to open on the subject of Vichy. The occasion of the comparison was Kaplan's new book, "Le Pain Maudit" (Cursed Bread), a study of an unsolved mystery dating back more than half a century but which lingers  even in the memories of those not then born: the affair of the poisoned bread.What became a national disaster began on Aug. 16, 1951, when the inhabitants of the small town of Pont-Saint-Esprit in the Gard region of southern France were suddenly stricken by  frightful hallucinations  of being consumed by fire or giant plants or horrid beasts.A worker tried to drown himself because his belly was being eaten by snakes. A 60-year-old grandmother threw herself against the wall and broke three ribs. A man saw his heart escaping through his feet and beseeched a doctor to put it back in place. Many were taken to the local  asylum in strait jackets. There was no treatment, no cure and only one possible explanation: something in the bread baked the night of Aug. 15-16 had caused the calamity."This made it worse," Kaplan says. "Bread cannot be the vector of madness and death, bread is the body of Christ." Local bakeries were briefly shut down and  the national press followed the grisly story anxiously. "The baker whom we visit every day, the grocer we go to regularly, are they not, after all, maniacs or potential killers of whom we must beware ?" asked Paris-Presse.The local baker most, if not solely, responsible was declared to be Roch Briand, who had unwittingly used contaminated flour. In what Kaplan calls a Soviet-style  distribution system  the government rigidly controlled everything from farmer to miller to where bakers were allowed to buy flour. Bakers of the time had to accept what they were allotted even when adulterated.France's controls of bread production and price would be dismantled over the decades but in 1951 the harm was done: more than 300 people afflicted, 7 to 10 dead, 46 detained in  asylums, and many unable ever to hold jobs or lead normal lives. Kaplan gave a talk at Pont-Saint-Esprit a few months ago, expecting 30 people to attend. Some 400 came:"The atmosphere was electric with anxiety, uncertainty, people who wanted to know how it happened. The mayor for 35 years, whose mother was slightly poisoned by the episode, has spent his entire life trying to disassociate Pont-Saint-Esprit from this stigma."Was the Church implicated (the local priest had not eaten Briand's bread)? Was there a political explanation (the mayor was Socialist, Briand was described, improbably, as a close friend of General De Gaulle)? Was the fact  that the arm of a statue of the Virgin had been torn off during a storm the previous May an omen of divine retribution? No answer was ever found.The government did its best to smooth over the incident and after many inquiries and court cases the affair was finally dropped in 1978. Explanations abound, none of which Kaplan  finds satisfying. The most popular one, poisoning by a form of  ergot fungus, he finds unconvincing. Mercury poisoning caused by Panogen, a cleansing  agent used in wheat containers, was disproved although Kaplan says the government used it as a cover-up."It focused away from flour, away from grain, away from the distribution system and moved the  argument into the realm of safety in transport," he says. Another explanation, contaminated water, he finds just silly because everyone would have been hurt.Kaplan suggests that the question of harmful bleaching agents should have been more closely investigated. Briand was proud of the whiteness of his bread and his closest friend was a pharmacist who could supply the necessary powders. After all, at the end of World War II when the French were asked what they most wanted, the answer was liberty and white bread.This brings Kaplan to his major interest as indicated in the subtitle of his book, "A Return to the France of the Forgotten Years, 1945-58." The period 1945-75 has long been nicknamed "Les Trente Glorieuses," the three decades in which France moved seamlessly into reconstruction and unprecedented economic growth.To Kaplan the immediate postwar period was toxic, poisoned by divisions between classes, between resistance and collaboration, between dirigisme and liberalism, all compounded by poverty and Cold War fears. It was a time of vengeance and distrust."What I have tried to do," Kaplan says, "is talk about this postwar period as being traumatic for most of  the population, using Pont-Saint-Esprit as a metaphor."Indeed, he only reaches the Pont-Saint-Esprit affair on page 349 of his 1,090-page book, which he wrote in French. Despite its footnotes and unleavened prose, the book found a mainstream publisher, Fayard, and has been the subject of long articles in the Le Figaro, Libération and of two pieces in Le Monde, even though in one of them the author, who had made the Paxton comparison, admitted he had not reached the book's end.This unusual interest Kaplan attributes to his dissection of a murky period of history and to  what he calls the particular relationship the French have with bread."There is still a mystique of bread. We don't need bread  -  we have so many calories and so many proteins that we get elsewhere  -  but you can have a French table laden with the most sumptuous meal imaginable and without bread you don't have a meal."In the  book he goes back to the ancien régime's bread laws and discusses the French obsession, sacred and profane, with white bread. "It is not a trivial matter because historically white bread is so identified with upward mobility, with well-being. The bread of the Eucharist was a piece of white wheaten bread until the Church sold out and went for those horrible wafers."The unfortunate baker Briand was giving his customers what they wanted. These days it is so much easier: every  supermarket sells denture-white sliced bread. The  French equivalent of the Wonder Bread that Kaplan so detests.