https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/opinion/hungarys-assault-on-freedom.html
Hungary’s Assault on Freedom - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Soros  George,Hungary
April 7, 2017
8011
After muzzling a free press and shutting down civil society groups, the government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary has trained its repressive sights on academic freedom. On Tuesday, the Parliament approved legislation designed to shut down Central European University, a private Hungarian-American graduate institution that has programs ranked among the top 50 in the world. The measure would require the university to set up a campus in the United States, making it impossible for Central European University to operate. The legislation now goes to President Janos Ader for his signature.This move is yet another rebuke to the European Union, and the rights it guarantees all citizens, from the increasingly autocratic Mr. Orban. It is also an ugly attack against the liberal Hungarian-American billionaire George Soros. Mr. Soros, who has spent some $12 billion through his Open Society Foundations to promote a liberal political and social agenda throughout the world, has become a lightning rod for resentment by Central and Eastern European populists intent on wresting their countries away from democracy.Central European University was founded in 1991 with a generous grant from Mr. Soros. In his weekly interview on Hungarian state radio last Friday, Mr. Orban preposterously called the respected university a “fraud,” and he added a clear jibe at Mr. Soros, saying, “In Hungary, one cannot be above the law — even if you’re a billionaire.” Mr. Orban may believe making a boogeyman out of Mr. Soros, a Holocaust survivor, will help his party win next year’s parliamentary elections by fanning loathsome anti-Semitic and xenophobic fears, but killing off one of Hungary’s most important educational institutions is a spectacularly self-defeating move. Thousands of Hungarians have turned out to protest the legislation.In a statement after Tuesday’s vote, David Kostelancik of the American Embassy in Budapest called the university “an important component of the U.S.-Hungarian relationship for 26 years” and vowed that the “United States will continue to advocate for its independence and unhindered operation in Hungary.” Michael Ignatieff, rector and president of Central European University, vowed the university will fight on. “We’ve done nothing wrong,” he said.It now falls to the European Union, which has responded to Mr. Orban’s attacks on fundamental freedoms with weak verbal protests while continuing to send billions of euros in aid, to salvage what is left of its credibility on citizens’ rights, and take strong action to uphold the union’s core values against attack by a member state. For the sake of democracy and freedom of inquiry in Hungary, Mr. Ader should not sign this dangerously self-destructive legislation into law.