https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/learning/did-delta-air-lines-and-bank-of-america-do-the-right-thing-when-they-pulled-their-funding-of-julius-caesar.html
Did Delta Air Lines and Bank of America Do the Right Thing When They Pulled Their Funding of ‘Julius Caesar’? - The New York Times
Reading and Writing Skills (Education),News and News Media,New York Times,Freedom of Speech and Expression
June 14, 2017
4885
Where do you stand on freedom of expression in the arts, particularly the theater?How important is freedom of expression in the performing arts as a means for public discussion and debate? Who should decide what is allowed to be produced? What criteria and standards should be set, if any, and why?In “Why ‘Julius Caesar’ Speaks to Politics Today. With or Without Trump,” Michael Cooper writes:Students: Read the entire article, then tell us:— Do you think the corporate sponsors were right to pull their funding from the Public Theater’s Shakespeare in the Park program? Why or why not?— Do you agree with the producer Rob Melrose when he said that the act of violence at the play’s center should always be appalling? “When Caesar is killed, it’s horrifying, it’s awful — whether it’s Obama or Trump,” he said. “Trump, Republicans and Democrats should all take heart that what this play says is that killing a political leader, no matter how righteous your views are, is a bad idea — a terrible idea.” Explain your answer.— To what extent should freedom of expression exist in the theater, particularly when staging political plays? Why did you answer the way you did?For more New York Times coverage on the Public Theater’s production, see this Opinion column, this related article on the clash between the theater’s supporters and those who oppose it, and this article on the sponsors’ decisions. For a related Learning Network lesson on Shakespeare see Celebrate Shakespeare on His 450th Birthday: Seven Ideas for Teaching and Learning. Or, consider another classic play that has borne the weight of political relevance worldwide through the ages via this Text to Text on Sophocles' “Antigone.” Students 13 and older are invited to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once your comment is accepted, it will be made public.