https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/04/theater/review-in-red-speedo-a-swimmer-faces-a-moral-quandary.html
Review: In ‘Red Speedo,’ a Swimmer Faces a Moral Quandary - The New York Times
Theater,Hnath  Lucas,New York Theater Workshop,Blain-Cruz  Lileana,Breaux  Alex,Red Speedo (Play)
March 3, 2016
6757
A bright slip of a swimsuit seems a small garment on which to hang a knotty morality play, but the ingenious Lucas Hnath engineers this remarkable feat with “Red Speedo,” a taut, incisive drama at New York Theater Workshop about a swimmer with high Olympic hopes and a waterlogged ethical compass.Ray, played by the terrific Alex Breaux, has spent his life in the water, essentially, and is preparing for the upcoming Olympic trials as the play begins. (The sleek set, by Riccardo Hernandez, is a gym with an actual pool, a slice of which fronts the stage.) But a scandal at the swim club where he trains has the potential to derail his dream. A cooler stocked with performance-enhancing drugs was found in the club refrigerator.Ray has told his coach (Peter Jay Fernandez) that he heard the drugs belonged to a fellow swimmer, but in the tense opening scene, Ray’s brother Peter (Lucas Caleb Rooney), a lawyer who is also his de facto manager, vociferously argues that even a whiff of controversy about doping could damage his brother’s reputation — and potentially ruin the coach’s future, too. He makes the case that the coach serves everyone’s best interests by tossing the drugs in the toilet and hushing the whole episode up.When the coach, whose honorable nature Mr. Fernandez makes nicely transparent, insists that it’s his moral obligation to report the incident to the sport’s authorities, Peter only doubles down on his suasion, implying he will move Ray to another club if the coach doesn’t fall in line. There’s more than a potential Olympic medal at stake, of course; with fame comes a financial windfall, and Peter has already been in talks with the Speedo people about endorsement money.Mr. Hnath, whose previous plays include “The Christians” and “A Public Reading of an Unproduced Screenplay About the Death of Walt Disney,” has a wonderfully inventive theatrical mind. He rewrites the rules of dramaturgy with each play, usually tossing out the naturalistic playbook — and for that matter the playbook he created the last time around.With fragmented dialogue that often comes at you like artillery fire, “Red Speedo” recalls the (good) work of David Mamet, distilled and compressed. (A little more looseness in the direction, by Lileana Blain-Cruz, might make the play’s first scene feel less like fake-Mamet.) In its depiction of ruthless men who will stop at nothing to serve their own ends, one might also discern a nod to Mr. Mamet.But Mr. Hnath’s voice and style are fundamentally his own. There’s an elemental, stylized simplicity to his work that focuses attention on the meanings behind the matters at hand. The characters in “Red Speedo” are palpably, at times movingly, human in their complexity and weakness (“We all do things that are sorta good and sorta not so good,” as Ray puts it), but as the play gathers steam it broadens out to become a subtle indictment of the ethos that insists that winning is everything.As Peter says, “When you go for what you want, when you think about yourself, when you do what’s best for you, everyone benefits.” Could Ayn Rand have put it any better? (Or, say, a current presidential candidate?)Certainly Peter, portrayed with forceful intensity by Mr. Rooney, is not merely looking out for his younger brother from filial affection. He’s disenchanted with his legal firm, and hopes that with Ray’s success he can smoothly move into the lucrative business of “athlete management.”But Ray, who tends to speak in a dopey-sounding monotone — Peter readily admits, in Ray’s presence, that he’s “no scholar” — soon makes a startling revelation that threatens all his brother’s assumptions about the bright future: The drugs in that cooler were actually his, and he doesn’t think that he can perform as well without them.“I definitely need the stuff,” he says when Peter tries to suggest that it’s really his natural talent that has gotten him this far. “I mean, this is like whatdoyoucallit — science.”Ray was on the verge of being dropped by his coach when a sports therapist, Lydia (a sharp Zoë Winters), who was also his girlfriend, suggested that the problem was just a matter of testosterone levels, and that only by artificially boosting those levels would he be able to improve his times. Sure enough, when Ray started doping, he gradually rose to the top of the field. (The probability that a swimmer would be able to enter the Olympic trials without a history of drug testing seems remote, but I’ll grant Mr. Hnath his right to some poetic license.)As Ray, Mr. Breaux gives a performance of remarkable dexterity. It takes a very smart actor to play dumb as well as he does, mining Ray’s inarticulateness for humor that is never cruel. Chomping away at carrots almost throughout the play, seated at the edge of the pool, Ray often stares into the middle distance, his face an inscrutable mask, as his brother and coach wrestle over his fate — and theirs.Once Ray is backed into a corner, however, he reveals a streak of deceptiveness that Mr. Breaux makes equally believable — while still maintaining a sense of forlorn desperation that keeps his character sympathetic. Ray and Peter grew up poor, and Ray, who still depends on his brother for handouts, knows that swimming is his only chance at making a success of himself.“Don’t I deserve a chance?” he pleads. “Isn’t that the American thing?”“Red Speedo” only grows in intensity as the clock winds down on its brief, 80-minute running time. I won’t reveal any of the reversals, compromises, betrayals and threats that ratchet up the tension, but by the play’s ambiguous conclusion it’s become clear that the color of the swimsuit Mr. Breaux wears throughout its duration — a red the color of fresh blood — was not chosen at random.