https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/arts/design/andy-warhol-jamie-wyeth-painters.html
Meet Archie Warhol, the Art World’s Second-Most-Famous Dachshund - The New York Times
Art,Museums,Stamps (Postal),Brandywine River Museum,Basquiat  Jean-Michel,Warhol  Andy,Wyeth  Andrew,Pennsylvania
July 17, 2017
3048
CHADDS FORD, Pa. —  “He’d come down here for the weekend, but I don’t think he was too crazy about the country,” the painter Jamie Wyeth recalled, wryly, of Andy Warhol’s visits to the bucolic southeastern Pennsylvania farm where Mr. Wyeth still lives. By the 1970s, when a joint show saw each man painting a portrait of the other, sparking one of the art world’s unlikeliest friendships, Warhol was famous for many things. Being a nature enthusiast was not one of them.Mr. Wyeth’s meadows and woods — the land that had inspired the artwork of both Jamie and his father, Andrew Wyeth, at whose side he painted through his teenage years — were little match for the pull of “General Hospital.”“Andy would spend most of his time down here watching soaps on TV, because he said the TV reception was better than in New York,” Mr. Wyeth added with a bemused shrug.The pair’s budding simpatico was eyebrow-raising for reasons beyond a lack of shared interests. Each had come to represent a warring camp within the art world: Mr. Wyeth was a proxy for, and inheritor of, his father’s status as the paragon of realist traditions, with their emphasis on technical skill and a reverence for the rural terra firma; Mr. Warhol was the standard-bearer of an urban demimonde, with an aversion to anything smacking of “flyover country.”A walk through the Museum of Modern Art shows the outcome of that ideological rivalry — Mr. Warhol’s work receives prime gallery placement, while Andrew Wyeth’s iconic “Christina’s World” is orphaned in a hallway by the escalators.In this centennial summer of Andrew Wyeth’s birth, with a slew of celebratory events including the Brandywine River Museum of Art’s retrospective featuring his rarely seen works, and the issuing of Wyeth-themed stamps by the United States Postal Service, Mr. Wyeth has returned to Warhol as a portrait subject, plumbing the person behind the persona.Mr. Wyeth relied on his detailed sketches from 1976 (“I even measured the length of his fingers”) for one of these new portraits — done on a screen door in a seeming nod to Mr. Warhol’s own conceptual playfulness — that now hangs in the Brandywine. A study for the same painting hangs in Mr. Wyeth’s living room, looking out at the surrounding sea of canvases by the extended Wyeth family. Unlike the finished version, however, this study shifts its focal point to Mr. Warhol’s beloved dachshund Archie, second only to Pablo Picasso’s Lump in modern art’s dachshund hall of fame.These are edited excerpts from our conversation.Why focus on Archie instead of Andy?JAMIE WYETH Archie meant a huge amount to Andy. He carried that dog everywhere, even to Studio 54! So he became Andy personified, without the makeup and the wig.Did the two begin to act alike?WYETH Archie was a mirror of his boss. He’d sit there and stare at people. And just like Andy, he didn’t say a word. When Andy would be here, people would say, ‘I just had the most interesting conversation with your friend Warhol.’ And I know that his end of the conversation was three words: ‘Hello. Oh? Really?’Given your differences, why did Warhol gravitate toward you?WYETH He wanted young people around. The theory people have is that’s why he let me work with him, and why he later had [Jean-Michel] Basquiat come around. That’s why the kids he worked with called him Drella — part Cinderella, part Dracula. He was getting much more out of you than you were getting out of him.So what did you get, as an artist?WYETH I was fascinated by this creature. Him posing for me and my being able to do all these drawings of him was enough.What did you think of the portrait Warhol painted of you?WYETH It made me look a bit too glamorous. But he told me that as a child his favorite toys were paper dolls. Well, if you look at his portraits, they’re all paper dolls. The eyes are cut out and everybody is made to look pretty. When he did Marilyn Monroe or Elizabeth Taylor, it was out of love for them. It wasn’t being cute or edgy. He wanted to keep reproducing them because he was enamored of them. It’s not the coolness of Koons. Warhol was a fan.