https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/nyregion/grimm-vs-recchia-a-race-to-remember-that-staten-islanders-would-sooner-forget.html
A House Race to Remember That Staten Islanders Would Sooner Forget - The New York Times
New York State,Staten Island (NYC),Recchia  Domenic M Jr,Grimm  Michael G,New York City,Politics and Government,Voting and Voters,Staten Island Advance,Elections  House of Representatives
Nov. 4, 2014
2394
The nadir did not arrive in January, Staten Islanders say, when their congressman threatened to throw a reporter off a Capitol balcony — nor in April, when the 20-count federal indictment was handed up.It cannot be traced to the student exchange program with Japan, which the challenger in the race cited as foreign policy experience, or to the Applebee’s in Coney Island, which he named as a jewel of his legislative legacy.At times, the final debate, at which neither candidate could name the last book they read, seemed to hurtle toward rock bottom, but then, voters reasoned, the election was still a few days off.And so, with a rare national political spotlight trained upon New York City’s “forgotten borough” on Tuesday, residents appeared resigned to the collective epiphany that stings most of all: They had produced a race to remember, in the 11th Congressional District of New York. And they were suffering the consequences.“Staten Island politics,” said Jackie Lotze, 50, from the borough’s North Shore, returning home on the ferry. “It’s the clueless against the criminal.”That would be:  Domenic M. Recchia Jr., the former Democratic city councilman mired in an on-again, off-again relationship with fact recall and sentence syntax, and Representative Michael G. Grimm, the Republican incumbent who might go to prison next year over alleged fraud at his former Manhattan restaurant, Healthalicious.Though the voters chose Mr. Grimm on Tuesday, many in the district — which encompasses Staten Island and a portion of Brooklyn — came to view the options as less of a choice than a taunt, the specter of the campaign appearing to stalk them in recent weeks at every turn: from vacant storefronts stuffed with posters to the paid message boards at Whitehall Terminal, on television ads they have learned to tune out and late-night comedy clips that have rendered the race a national laughingstock.Even the borough’s restaurants were not spared. At J’s on the Bay in Rosebank — where images of non-Staten Island attractions like the Empire State Building, Grand Central Terminal and the New York City subway system decorate the walls — a waiter, Leon Nisnevich, 21, complained of a rival diner on Hylan Boulevard. A sign there says: “For Michael Grimm.”“It’s like, do you guys read?” Mr. Nisnevich said, reaching for the coffee. Yet Mr. Recchia, from Gravesend, Brooklyn, has not earned his vote either, he said. He wondered if there might be a Socialist candidate on the ballot. (There was not.)For many other voters, the period of rationalization had begun, an exercise in intellectual gymnastics that has tested even some longtime partisans.Lonnie Deixler, 43, a police officer who tends to vote Republican, said he preferred Mr. Grimm, a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent and United States Marine, because “I’d like to think, sometime in his life, he did have some integrity.”“It’s like if you’re starting an over-50 football team,” Mr. Deixler added, as his 5-year-old son galloped across a Bay Terrace playground. “I’d rather have the guy who played high school football.”A Staten Island Advance editorial endorsing Mr. Grimm last week seemed to make its authors physically ill. “As distasteful as this contest may be on a number of levels,” they wrote, “we have a choice to make, as do the voters.”Other explanations have careered into the existential. James P. Molinaro, the conservative three-term borough president who left office last year, suggested that life was too unpredictable to prejudge the outcome of Mr. Grimm’s trial, which is scheduled for February.“Let’s represent ourselves for the present, what exists right now,” he said. “A month from now, a meteor might hit New York.”Some residents fear the race has helped fuel the borough’s reputation as a sideshow in local politics, the right-leaning appendage to a left-leaning city. (Two well-chronicled episodes involving Mayor Bill de Blasio and Staten Island — his handiwork with a knife and fork at a pizza shop and his purported role in the death of a beloved groundhog — have not helped this perception.)Even some big-ticket changes in recent years, like the planned construction of the world’s tallest Ferris wheel in St. George, have struck some local residents as more spectacle than substance.“Nothing for nothing, but there’s more problems on Staten Island than building a Ferris wheel,” said Frank Buckley, 56, adding an expletive.Chief among those problems, voters said, were the pace of recovery efforts since Hurricane Sandy — the subject of candidate squabbles during the campaign — and, more generally, the performance of city services across the borough.In Oakwood Beach, where Mr. Grimm attended a ribbon-cutting for a restored home on Wednesday, names and phone numbers were scrawled in spray paint on wooden boards just down the road, establishing ownership of what remained. A deck drooped headlong toward the ground, corkscrewing into the thickets. One plot included a bowl of cat food, but no house.Waiting for a bus on Bay Street, Kristina Akbar, 28, said she and fellow Staten Islanders were often told to “get over yourselves” amid complaints about being overlooked. At last, the political world was watching — but perhaps, she suggested, not closely enough.“Have you looked at this street?” she asked, gesturing toward a corridor pocked with roadbed cracks, commercial vacancies and a staggering number of pizzerias per capita. “Nobody paves here.”She planned to vote Green Party.