https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/briefing/donald-trump-jr-mississippi-wimbledon.html
Donald Trump Jr., Mississippi, Wimbledon: Your Tuesday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 11, 2017
9229
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Trump’s son was told of Russian plans.Before meeting with a Kremlin-connected lawyer who he was told had compromising information about Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump Jr. was informed that the material was part of a Russian government effort to aid his father’s presidential candidacy.The information, sent in an email by a publicist and former British tabloid reporter, was described to The Times by three people who knew about it.A lawyer for Donald Trump Jr. said his client had done nothing wrong: “In my view, this is much ado about nothing.”We also traced the path from the meeting in Trump Tower last year to a beauty pageant in Moscow in 2013.And our columnist explains how Russia’s adoption policy — which Mr. Trump said was the primary subject of the meeting — is inextricably linked with the lifting of sanctions.• Alternative Afghan strategies.President Trump’s advisers recruited two businessmen with ties to military contracting to devise other options to the Pentagon plan to send thousands of additional troops to Afghanistan.• A moment of celebration, and risk.As Iraq’s battle with the Islamic State in Mosul nears an end, other conflicts are flaring, and a threat to the Iraqi state and society remains.• A grim measure of equality.The years between the deaths of two New York City police officers — Irma Lozada in 1984 and Miosotis Familia last week — have shown progress, with limits, for women in the field.• 16 troops killed in Mississippi crash..A Marine Corps transport plane went down north of Jackson on Monday. The cause of the crash was unclear.• “This is only Day 1.”The widely dreaded first day of intensive track repairs at Pennsylvania Station in New York was far less hellish than forecast, but commuters were reluctant to exhale in relief.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we connect the dots on Donald Trump Jr.‘s communications last summer.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• President Trump named Randal Quarles, a former Treasury official who advocates limited regulation, to lead Federal Reserve  oversight of Wall Street.Separately, we looked at the teams leading the administration’s deregulation effort, and their deep ties to industry.• Wall Street could lose billions after the U.S. consumer watchdog adopted a rule that would prohibit financial firms from forcing Americans into arbitration in disputes over bank accounts and credit cards.• Siemens, one of Germany’s biggest companies, said it was an unwitting pawn in a scheme to evade sanctions against Russia and to break a de facto blockade of electricity to the annexed territory of Crimea.• U.S. stocks were mixed on Monday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• You can rewire your brain to crave better habits.• Making a copy of your backup data can provide peace of mind.• Today is Amazon’s Prime Day. Here’s how to make the most of it.• If you’re in the mood for grilling, try spicy lamb sausage with onions and zucchini.• The salty pink pools of the Yucatán.In today’s 360 video, step into Mexican waters that are turned pink by organisms.• A mausoleum for endangered species.Stuffed monkeys, snow-leopard coats and lamps made with hooves.A Colorado museum represents the immense demand for goods made from threatened animals. We sent a photographer to take a look.• Bolshoi denies censorship.The Bolshoi Theater said the Kremlin had nothing to do with the postponement of a ballet about the dance legend Rudolf Nureyev. The production features gay themes and was directed by a divisive figure.• In sports.Major League Baseball’s All-Star Game is tonight, and none of last year’s World Series-winning Chicago Cubs will be there. On Monday, the Yankees’ Aaron Judge won the Home Run Derby.At Wimbledon, Gilles Müller upset Rafael Nadal, and the two American women left in the tournament — Venus Williams and CoCo Vandeweghe — advanced to the quarterfinals.• Best of late-night TV.Most late-night hosts returned on Monday after a week off, pouncing on President Trump’s trip to Europe for a Group of 20 meeting.• Quotation of the day.“Technology cannot hug a repeat guest.”— George Aquino, managing director of AHC+Hospitality, which has run a training program for staff members to improve their hospitality skills.“It was like a Roman candle,” one witness said. “A shower of gold-colored sparks followed by a blue flame with flecks of green and red at its sides.”In 1979, people across the desert of southwestern Australia emerged from their homes to “sonic booms” and the smell of “burned earth” as fiery debris from the 77-ton Skylab, the U.S.’s first space station, rained down. It was July 11 in the U.S., and the early hours of July 12 for the witnesses.Skylab was launched in 1973, two years after the Soviets sent up the first space station, Salyut 1.By 1979, Skylab’s orbit had decayed, and the world obsessed over its coming plunge. People threw parties, bought “crash helmets” and bet on where it would land.Although no deaths or injuries were reported after the crash, President Jimmy Carter still apologized to Australia.Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser responded: “While receiving Skylab is an honor we would have happily forgone, it is the end of a magnificent technological achievement by the United States, and the events of the past few days should not obscure this. If we find the pieces I shall happily trade them for additions to the beef quota.”Tacey Rychter contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.