http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/09/us/politics/back-to-basics-campaign-seems-to-suit-lindsey-graham-just-fine.html
Lindsey Graham’s Old-School Campaign Amid Field of Memes - The New York Times
Graham  Lindsey,Presidential Election of 2016,Republican Party
July 8, 2015
2632
In a presidential election cycle awash in social media and high-tech campaign tactics, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina is proudly, almost defiantly, old-fashioned.Mr. Graham, a Republican presidential hopeful, still carries a flip cellphone.He jokes that Snapchat, the popular messaging app in which photo and video messages disappear moments after they arrive, is “too long-winded.” And he good-naturedly laments his paltry number of Facebook followers.But that has not stopped Mr. Graham, a pragmatic three-term senator and former Air Force judge, from waging a bid for the White House, positioning himself as a foreign policy hawk who is ready, as he puts it, “to be commander in chief on Day 1.” That he is barnstorming the country on his own terms just so happens to be sugar in his already sweet tea.“Here’s what I’ve learned as a politician: The magic of Lindsey Graham is to be Lindsey Graham,” he said in an interview last month on a sun-drenched deck at a Republican donor retreat in Park City, Utah.Former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida said he would run for president only if he could do it “joyfully.” Mr. Graham is actually doing so, taking the lessons he learned while riding alongside his friend and mentor, Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, on his Straight Talk Express in 2008. As his sidekick and comrade, Mr. Graham internalized Mr. McCain’s school of retail politics — from the shake-every-hand town hall to the nothing-to-lose ethos born from barely registering in most national polls.“You know what I like most about running for president? It’s almost like running for sheriff,” said Mr. Graham, who turns 60 on Thursday. “It’s just fun.”In recent weeks, however, Mr. Graham has found himself thrust into the more somber role of consoler-in-chief, after a young white man was charged in the killing of nine black parishioners during a Bible study in Charleston, S.C. Mr. Graham canceled his campaign events and raced home, helping push his state’s political leadership to call for removing the Confederate battle flag — a symbol of racial hatred for many — from the grounds of the State House.And with Congress back in session this week, he has continued his role as an outspoken critic of the public outlines of a possible nuclear deal with Iran. On Wednesday, he gave his first major foreign policy speech, outlining his national security agenda, at the Atlantic Council in Washington.But generally, Mr. Graham offers a departure from Washington’s self-serious culture, a thoughtful man who also happens to be engaged in the jovial pursuit of politics. At the donor retreat, Mr. Graham sipped riesling (another favorite is Baileys over ice) while entertaining reporters with slightly more bawdy quips and one-liners than he routinely offers on the campaign trail.In public, Mr. Graham is a khaki-clad, one-man vaudeville act, interspersing policy prescriptions with a heavy dose of borscht belt comedy. At a recent candidate barbecue in Iowa, Mr. Graham, poking fun at Hillary Rodham Clinton’s refusal to take questions from the news media, joked that “it’s easier to meet the leader of North Korea” than Mrs. Clinton.Moments later, he asked who in the lawn chair crowd had ever visited South Carolina. A smattering of hands went up. “Good!” he said. “Come back, spend money.”And he recently led a group of delighted donors on a predawn trip to a skeet shooting range in Kamas, Utah.“I started out shooting pretty good,” Mr. Graham said, taking a break from aiming at clay pigeons. “Then I started trying too hard.”He might as well be offering his future self some campaign advice.As for now, Mr. Graham has the advantages of a perpetual underdog. He is struggling to crack the top 10 in national polls, a position  that would ensure a spot on the early primary debate stage. And, in some ways, he is liberated from many of the unappealing trappings of a presidential campaign: He has no obvious base to pander to, no establishment middle ground to lurch toward, no billionaire donor to placate.Instead, Lindsey can just be Lindsey: the anti-abortion, pro-military, hawkish Republican who also happens to believe in climate change and a comprehensive approach to immigration, and who asks voters to sacrifice when it comes to overhauling entitlement programs.“I think his motivation is to make national security issues at the forefront of this campaign, and those are certainly issues that he cares deeply about and knows a lot about,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine. (Mr. Graham sits on the Senate Armed Services Committee.)While Mr. Graham’s candidacy may seem far-fetched, many Republicans privately commend his candor, saying his policy positions are rooted in hard truths their party needs to hear.Mr. Graham, for instance, mocks his Republican rivals for their answers when asked about climate change. “Everybody says, ‘Well, I’m no scientist,’” Mr. Graham said. “O.K., well, why don’t you believe 90 percent of the people who are? Why do you only believe the one guy who tells you what you think people want to hear?”On immigration, Mr. Graham helped write the bipartisan overhaul measure that offered a path to citizenship for the 11 million unauthorized immigrants already in the country, which passed the Senate with broad support in 2013. And, unlike Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a Republican and 2016 candidate for president who also helped write the bill, Mr. Graham has not backed away from it.And even though he often speaks in bumper sticker slogans (“Too much debt, too many terrorists — we’re going to reduce both,” he has said), Mr. Graham has outlined the most detailed plan of any of the candidates for combating violent extremism at home and abroad.His path to victory, he says, is simple enough: exceed expectations in Iowa; finish in the top tier in New Hampshire; and then win his home state, South Carolina. “I’m a young stalk of corn that’s going to grow tall,” Mr. Graham said.Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, said she expected Mr. Graham’s national security focus and hands-on campaign style to play well in her state, as it did for Mr. McCain during his 2000 and 2008 presidential campaigns. “Lindsey has a real ability to interact one-on-one with individuals and is not afraid to answer any question,” she said.Friends, colleagues and operatives say they believe Mr. Graham’s goal is to focus the Republican primary discussion on issues he cares about, like foreign policy, and to serve as a firewall against Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, who has taken a more isolationist approach.But to hear Mr. Graham tell it, a successful 2016 bid is even simpler. “That I’m the same guy afterwards as I was before, that I didn’t change who I was,” he said. “If I fall short, it’s because I fell short being Lindsey Graham.”So far, at least, he seems to be doing a good job, even if the joke, at times, seems to be gently on him.“I don’t think we’re going to be calling him President Graham,” Ms. Collins said, with a laugh. “Let me just put it that way.”