https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/world/europe/portugal-wildfires.html
‘Panic Killed Those People’: Portugal Buries Wildfire Victims - The New York Times
vis-photo,Portugal,Wildfires,Deaths (Fatalities),Funerals and Memorials,Fires and Firefighters
June 27, 2017
5568
Mr. Hicks, a photographer for The New York Times, visited the scarred countryside in central Portugal to document the aftermath of the country’s worst wildfires in decades.The funeral smelled like smoke.I visited with mourners last week in the town of Sarzedas de São Pedro as they buried six of their neighbors at once. Blackened trees loomed over the cemetery.More than 60 people were killed when the wildfires whipped and whirled through the once densely forested countryside. The inferno may have been ignited by a lightning strike or perhaps set deliberately.The government has ordered an investigation, but the uncertainty over the cause of the blaze has fueled conspiracy theories and raised doubts about whether the authorities responded quickly enough.I arrived two days after the fires began to photograph their aftermath and document how the people in this poor, neglected part of the country would get on.It was dark when I made it to Pedrógão Grande, at the center of the burn zone. Under the inky night sky, a thick haze of smoke still hung heavy over the charred countryside. I was not entirely sure what to expect when first light came.Burned road signs, leafless trees and the melted carcasses of abandoned automobiles littered the side of N236-1, a winding rural road. That’s where a car making its getaway crashed. The ensuing pileup trapped more than 40 people who were then enveloped by flames and smoke as they tried to flee.“Panic killed those people,” said Caterina Araújo Silva, who came from Lisbon, the capital, to check on her parents’ house in the village of Souto Fundeiro. “They didn’t know what to do.”Luckily, her parents were away when the fire burned through their village, severely damaging their home.Other residents of the towns and hamlets sprinkled through the forests had to decide whether to stay put and protect their homes or escape the flames. Residents said they didn’t receive clear instructions.Many people I spoke to questioned the decision to evacuate some villages, and they criticized the failure to close the narrow, winding roads where most of those who died had been trapped in their cars.“They were alone and didn’t know what to do,” said Diogo Quevedo, 26, whose mother died in the fire. “Those who stayed lived, but those who left died.”Regina Braz and her husband tried to escape on foot when their village, Várzeas, was consumed by the fire. They suffered burns before a local farmer driving by rescued them. “I just ran because I didn’t know what to do,” Ms. Braz said. “If he didn’t come, we would have died.”This part of Portugal is cut with dry gorges and cracked ravines lined with explosively flammable pine and eucalyptus trees. Though people here have grown used to forest fires, which have burned every summer for decades, searing heat this spring increased the danger. And winds drove the flames and acrid smoke in unpredictable directions.“You had all the conditions that went completely wrong,” said Miguel Araújo Silva, Caterina’s brother, who had come with her to check on their parents’ home.Many of the 2,000 firefighters who were sent, with air support, to combat the blaze were also caught by surprise. While I was photographing a volunteer force’s efforts to control a persistent wildfire along a remote tree-lined valley pass, the wind shifted on us.A few steps back and I was out of it, but I had already inhaled a chestful of harsh smoke. It left me nauseated and disoriented and with a severe headache for hours.The most devastating fire near Pedrógão Grande was the convergence of multiple fires burning along different fronts. The blaze seemed selective, as if the flames were coaxed one way or the other by the changing winds.After the fire, residents’ grief was evident. Some people shared with me their anger at the authorities, who they said had not done enough to help those in harm’s way.“Some kind of natural phenomenon may have caused the fire,” said Antonio Ricardo, a millworker from Outão, a town southwest of Ramalho. “But still people think that the Fire Department made mistakes.”Most of the firefighters who battled the blazes were local volunteers. A day after the crowded funerals in Sarzedas de São Pedro, I attended the burial last Wednesday in Castanheira de Pêra for Gonçalo Conceição, a 40-year-old volunteer firefighter. He served “in peace, danger and pain,” as it said on his and his colleagues’ uniforms.