https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/sports/basketball/new-york-knicks-jeff-hornacek-triangle-offense-phil-jackson.html
Jeff Hornacek Tries Being Tactful About the Triangle - The New York Times
Basketball,New York Knicks,Hornacek  Jeff,Jackson  Phil (1945- ),Coaches and Managers
June 29, 2017
3557
WINTER GARDEN, Fla. — The last 10 minutes of Thursday’s practice were open to the news media, and Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek had the players from his summer-league team run through offensive sets. The geometricians among us did our best to answer an important question: Were the Knicks still running the triangle offense?One day removed from Phil Jackson’s exit as team president, Hornacek implemented pieces of his own playbook. Players set screens and threw passes. On occasion, the ball found its way to a big man in the post with two wing players stationed on the perimeter, which kind of, sort of resembled the triangle. Or did it? It was hard to say. How many people on the planet can readily identify the triangle offense, a relic of old-timey basketball that Jackson, in his three-plus turbulent seasons with the Knicks, worked so hard to resuscitate?Once practice ended, Hornacek made his way to the muckraking mob. We asked about the triangle. Hornacek playfully waved several sheets from his playbook in our faces.“There it is!” he said before he lowered those magic sheets to his waist. “We’re probably going to work on different things and add things, find an offense that fits.”Case closed. Actually, not so much, but Hornacek did interrupt his verbal gymnastics long enough to defend the triangle — perhaps as an act of diplomacy in light of Jackson’s departure. Most teams, Hornacek said, run elements of the triangle. He referred to the Golden State Warriors and the San Antonio Spurs. They just do it better than everyone else, he said.“When you look at the triangle and look at what it can do, there are a lot of options,” he said. “There are a lot of things you can do. You can take pieces of it.”He went on: “We’re going to do a lot of things from last year and some new things, and we’ll blend it so it gives us some more space.”For one day at least, no one was dancing on the triangle’s grave. It must have been a disappointment to the team’s long-suffering fans, who were waiting for Hornacek to bust free from triangle purgatory now that Jackson was gone. But Hornacek, whom Jackson hired before the start of last season, was both tactful and evasive.Hornacek did say he wanted the Knicks to play with more tempo. (“We want to try to get the ball up the court,” he said.) He did not rule out incorporating more of the plays he ran when he was coaching the Phoenix Suns. (“That’s possible,” he said.) He also stressed the importance of defense. Lest we forget, the Knicks were horrible defenders last season.“We’ve got to play better defense, simple as that,” Hornacek said. “Our summer league has really been focused more on that, on really getting after guys. And when we get into the regular season, it’s the same thing. If we’re going to win, we have to get much better on defense.”On Thursday, Frank Ntilikina, the team’s first-round pick in last week’s N.B.A. draft, missed practice because of a bruised knee (adding comedy to injury, his name was also misspelled on his jersey). Ntilikina, whom Jackson had drafted in part because of his supposed fit in the triangle, said he had sustained the injury the day after the draft in his final playoff game for Strasbourg, his club team in France.“Bumped knee,” Ntilikina said. “Sore knee. Nothing crazy, but we played a lot of games in France — more than college games — and I was just pretty tired and this happened.”But Ntilikina also delivered some good news when he revealed that he had exchanged text messages with Kristaps Porzingis. Just a week ago, Jackson was dangling Porzingis on the open market to potential trade partners. Now, Jackson is gone and Porzingis is presumably here to stay. Hornacek, too, said he had texted with Porzingis.“He’s working hard,” Hornacek said, adding: “There’s no doubt. I know he’s working.”More uncertain is the future of Carmelo Anthony, whose combustible relationship with Jackson had cast a shadow over the organization for months. Hornacek seemed to offer a tepid response when he was asked whether he wanted to see Anthony on the roster next season.“Carmelo’s a great player,” Hornacek said. “That guy can really score the ball. So that’s — those are management decisions that come. As coaches, we coach what they give us.”Anthony, of course, has that notorious no-trade clause — a remnant from the Jackson era that could affect the team moving forward.Jackson’s presence could continue to be felt in other ways. Clarence Gaines Jr., one of his most trusted advisers, watched Thursday’s practice from the bleachers. Kurt Rambis, the team’s associate head coach and a bespectacled branch of the Jackson coaching tree, stood next to Hornacek and wore a whistle. And we would be remiss to overlook the three remaining years on Joakim Noah’s contract.Hornacek, though, was something of an outsider when Jackson hired him last summer. Hornacek had never played for Jackson, nor had he coached for him. In many ways, then, he is not beholden to Jackson or to his Zen mystique, which was a charade by the end. With two years left on his contract, Hornacek ought to look ahead and leave trigonometry in the past.He now has a chance to shape the Knicks into whatever he wants.