https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/30/world/americas/brazil-lula-petrobras.html
Lula, Brazil’s Ex-President, Will Face Trial on Obstruction Charges - The New York Times
Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Corruption (Institutional),Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras,Rousseff  Dilma,Bribery and Kickbacks,Brazil
July 29, 2016
6949
RIO DE JANEIRO — Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president who has been one of Brazil’s most towering political figures, will stand trial on charges of obstructing the investigation into the colossal bribery scheme at Petrobras, the national oil company, a federal judge said Friday.The decision by Judge Ricardo Augusto Soares Leite adds to the mounting legal problems of Mr. da Silva, who was president from 2003 to 2010, a period of robust economic growth in Brazil.Even as his handpicked successor, Dilma Rousseff, prepares for an impeachment trial and their leftist Workers’ Party reels from graft scandals, Mr. da Silva has emerged as a leading contender in the next presidential race, in 2018.The trial could complicate his ambitions. Mr. da Silva, 70, was already facing a tarnished political legacy as he battled corruption investigations, including a case in which prosecutors in São Paulo tried to have him arrested over his ties to scandal-plagued construction companies.Lawyers for Mr. da Silva said in a statement that he was innocent of the obstruction charges, saying that he had “never interfered” in the Petrobras investigation.The charges stem from testimony by Delcídio do Amaral, a former senator in the Workers’ Party who was arrested in November after he was heard in a secret recording describing an elaborate plan for Nestor Cerveró, a former Petrobras executive ensnared in the scandal, to flee Brazil on a private plane.In his testimony as part of a plea deal, Mr. Amaral said that Mr. da Silva had taken part in a plan to have Mr. Cerveró financially rewarded to ensure that he would limit his revelations of corruption at Petrobras. Five other defendants were named Friday in the case, including André Esteves, a billionaire banker who Mr. Amaral said had been prepared to finance Mr. Cerveró’s escape.The plan to spirit Mr. Cerveró out of Brazil never materialized; instead, Mr. Amaral was stripped of his seat in Congress. And while Mr. da Silva’s other legal problems were intensifying, Ms. Rousseff tried to name him as her chief of staff in March, a move that would have given him legal protections.But that effort backfired when justices on the Supreme Federal Tribunal blocked the nomination. Congress then removed Ms. Rousseff from office to face an impeachment trial over accusations that she had manipulated the budget to hide the depths of Brazil’s economic woes.Her former vice president, Michel Temer, is now the interim president as Ms. Rousseff prepares for her trial in August.Amid the upheaval, Mr. da Silva contends that Sergio Moro, the judge overseeing the Petrobras investigation, unfairly targeted him by releasing intercepts of his telephone conversations. Mr. da Silva filed a petition this week with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, arguing that Mr. Moro had abused his power in the case.