http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/04/nyregion/legislators-reap-benefits-of-part-time-jobs-at-law-firms-filings-show.html
Legislators Reap Benefits of Part-Time Jobs at Law Firms, Filings Show - The New York Times
Legal Profession,New York State,Silver  Sheldon,Conflicts of Interest,State Legislatures
July 3, 2013
6845
Some of the most influential members of the State Legislature earn large paychecks from part-time jobs with law firms, according to financial disclosure filings released on Wednesday under a new state ethics law that requires legislators to reveal their outside income.In one of the most notable revelations, the disclosure filing of the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, showed that he earned $350,000 to $450,000 last year in his part-time job at a Manhattan personal injury law firm, Weitz & Luxenberg.The outside income of legislators had previously been redacted from their filings before they were made available for public inspection. But the new ethics law required them to reveal their income within a limited range without redactions, and the filings were posted online by the state’s Joint Commission on Public Ethics, on Wednesday.Part-time jobs held by sitting legislators have long been a source of concern to government watchdog groups, who have worried about lawmakers profiting from their elected office, through law firms or other jobs whose duties are often nebulous.The disclosure requirement was passed in 2011 as part of a broader ethics overhaul, but it did not immediately take effect, giving lawmakers time to prepare their finances for public view. Still, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who championed the ethics law, described the new filings on Wednesday as offering New York voters “unprecedented disclosure” about their elected officials.“I believe it’s going to go a long way toward making people feel more comfortable about their government, because they’re going to have more information,” Mr. Cuomo said. (Filings for the governor and other statewide elected officials were released in May, but were less illuminating because those officials typically allow reporters to examine their tax returns.)Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat who has been speaker since 1994, has long been known to work at Weitz & Luxenberg, though his actual job and pay have long been shrouded in mystery. His filing said that his job consisted of “general practice of law with emphasis on representation of individual clients and personal injury actions,” and his title is of counsel.He reported an ample fortune on his new filing, including 2012 income for him and his wife of at least $763,000 and potentially more than $1.1 million, including his legislative salary of $121,000.Mr. Silver also has an investment portfolio that was worth $778,000 to $2 million at the end of last year, according to his filing, and included blue chips like Oracle and Disney.Mr. Silver also reported deferred compensation plans and trusts that hold about $1.8 million to $2.3 million. A portion of his income last year came from securities sales, including a sale of Ford stock, which brought income of at least $150,000.He also had an outstanding loan of at least $500,000 that he extended to Counsel Financial, a company to which he has lent money before, which helps finance small law firms that specialize in personal injury lawsuits. Mr. Silver and his wife also earned interest income of at least $100,000 last year from Counsel.Mr. Silver was one of a number of lawmakers who earned outside income practicing law. The Republican leader in the Senate, Dean G. Skelos of Long Island, reported law firm earnings of $150,000 to $250,000. He works for the Long Island law firm Ruskin Moscou Faltischek, and described his work as general law practice that included civil litigation and work related to real estate, health care and corporate matters. Mr. Skelos and his wife also reported a portfolio of more than two dozen stocks and mutual funds.Also reporting law firm income was Senator Jeffrey D. Klein, a Bronx Democrat who leads a breakaway faction of Democrats that formed a ruling coalition with Senate Republicans. Mr. Klein is a partner at the law firm Klein Calderoni & Santucci in the Bronx. He reported income of $57,000 to $106,000 associated with his legal work and a teaching position at Mercy College.The filings also showed limitations of the legislation. It created a new question that asks public officials to reveal the identities of some of their law or consulting clients who have business before the state. But it was written narrowly, and only one member of the Legislature disclosed a client in response to that question in the filings.