http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/09/us/police-request-fbi-help-in-texas-killing.html
Answers Sought in Police Shooting of Unarmed Christian Taylor - The New York Times
Taylor  Christian James (1995-2015),Miller  Brad (1966- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Arlington (Tex),Blacks,Federal Bureau of Investigation
Aug. 8, 2015
4623
The police in Arlington, Tex., asked the F.B.I. to help investigate the shooting death of an unarmed black college student who was killed by a police trainee early Friday morning inside a car dealership.Chief Will Johnson of the Arlington Police Department said that the trainee, Brad Miller, 49, shot and killed Christian Taylor, a 19-year-old football player at Angelo State University in San Angelo, Tex., as he attempted to flee from police officers who had been dispatched to the dealership after reports of a suspected burglary.Chief Johnson pledged “a transparent, thorough and fair investigation,” but warned that it might be “lengthy and at times frustratingly slow.” He said that he had invited Thomas M. Class Sr., the special agent in charge of the F.B.I.’s Dallas division, to participate.“Our pledge is to provide answers in the most thorough and expeditious manner possible,” Chief Johnson said at a news conference on Saturday night. He also included “an acknowledgment that this instance has not occurred in isolation, but rather has occurred as our nation is grappling with the problems of social injustice, inequities, racism and police misconduct.”Officer Miller had been placed on administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation, Chief Johnson said.He said Officer Miller had not yet been interviewed about the incident, a delay that Chief Johnson described as “standard police practice.” He told reporters that the department would release recordings of both the 911 call that preceded the incident and police radio traffic, but that it would not do so until the two officers at the shooting, Officer Miller and his training officer, had submitted statements. He estimated that would take seven to 10 days.Chief Johnson said the police were called to a Classic Buick GMC dealership in Arlington shortly after 1 a.m. Friday, where they found Mr. Taylor “roaming freely” inside the showroom. A Jeep had crashed through the front window.The officers ordered Mr. Taylor to lie down, and when he fled instead, they chased him. He was found trying to get out of the building through a locked glass door. Chief Johnson said that the two officers struggled with Mr. Taylor and that Officer Miller fired four shots.Mr. Taylor was struck multiple times, Chief Johnson said, and was declared dead on the scene. Investigators later determined that he had no weapon.The training officer fired no shots. A Taser was also used against Mr. Taylor, but Chief Johnson said the department had not determined which officer used it or in what sequence the two weapons were used.Officer Miller has been with the Arlington Police Department since September 2014 — his first police job — and has been training in the field under the supervision of a more senior officer since he graduated from the Police Academy in March, according to a police statement. Officer Miller had no history of disciplinary action with the department.The car dealership released security camera footage of Mr. Taylor in its parking lot that prompted a security company to call the police. The video, posted online by an NBC television affiliate, shows Mr. Taylor arriving at the dealership in a Jeep, punching the window of a gray sports car, kicking its windshield and jumping on its roof.Later, Mr. Taylor can be seen driving his car through the parking lot’s closed gate. The police can soon be seen arriving, but the video shows no part of their interaction with Mr. Taylor.In a statement on Friday, the department said that its officers did not wear body cameras, but that it was in the process of starting a pilot program to experiment with their use.Clyde Fuller, Mr. Taylor’s great-uncle, told The Fort Worth Star-Telegram that Mr. Taylor was “a good kid” and that he did not believe the police account that Mr. Taylor had been committing a crime.“I don’t see him stealing no car or nothing like that,” Mr. Fuller said. “They say he’s burglarizing the place by running up in there? Nuh-uh. Something doesn’t sound right.”Mr. Taylor was a supporter of the #BlackLivesMatter movement and an avid user of social media, on which he repeatedly criticized the justice system and expressed fear of the police.In August 2014, he posted on Twitter, “I don’t feel protected by the police.” In December 2014, he wrote, “Police taking black lives as easy as flippin a coin, with no consequences.” Last April, he wrote, “I don’t wanna die too young.”His death immediately became part of the public debate, much of it online, over police use of deadly force in their dealings with African-Americans, especially black men. By Saturday night, Mr. Taylor’s name had been transformed into a hashtag, #ChristianTaylor, that was trending nationally on social media. The tennis star Serena Williams captured much of the grief and anger on Twitter, where she wrote, “Are we all sleeping and this is one gigantic bad nightmare? #ChristianTaylor, how many hashtags now?”