https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/17/theater/alice-birch-speaks-softly-and-writes-loud-plays.html
Alice Birch Speaks Softly and Writes Loud Plays - The New York Times
Theater,Birch  Alice (1986- ),Soho Rep,Revolt She Said Revolt Again (Play),Revolt. She Said. Revolt Again. (Play)
April 14, 2016
4177
Arriving at the Metropolitan Museum of Art just as it opened one brisk April morning, the British playwright Alice Birch was on what she called a “morbid little trip” in pursuit of inspiration. Bunking on Wall Street in the run-up to her American debut at Soho Rep with “Revolt. She Said. Revolt Again.,” this 29-year-old had journeyed uptown to do research for a play she’s writing for the Royal Court Theater in London.“I think I want it to be about the police — something to do with violence against women,” she said, slipping into a gallery on the second floor, where a photo exhibition called “Crime Stories” — mug shots, pictures of murder scenes, portraits of miscreants — was on view. “In the U.K., there’s this real Sunday night TV watching: You sit down and watch a crime drama. You watch, usually, half-naked 20-year-old women get murdered. And I love those shows as well; I think they’re really compelling. But I’m fascinated in why we enjoy that.”If that sounds like a polite intellectual interest, that’s not how Ms. Birch’s plays roll. Like “Revolt,” a call for feminist revolution that a critic for The Telegraph likened to “a cluster-bomb of subversion” when the Royal Shakespeare Company produced it in 2014, they have a ferocity that is utterly absent from the playwright’s personal demeanor.So quiet that you have to lean closer to hear her, she comes across as thoughtful, gentle and tenderhearted. In the exhibition, what struck her hardest was the poverty and sadness on display.“My writing has always been much louder than I am,” she said over coffee downstairs, in a cafe looking onto Central Park. “I consider myself incredibly lucky to have that space to be so noisy and to say the things that I feel passionate about. I don’t think I would stand up and say those things necessarily. I don’t think I would have the confidence to.”“Revolt,” which opens Tuesday, April 19, in a production directed by Lileana Blain-Cruz, exhorts women to revolution on multiple fronts, including sex, marriage, work, the female body and, most of all, language: the words the culture uses to frame the way we see women.Yet Ms. Birch’s writing doesn’t have the blasted-earth bleakness of work by Sarah Kane, one of the playwrights she most admires. Humor — playful, wild and jagged — is part of her arsenal.“You will have to pay for those melons,” a supermarket employee says in “Revolt,” addressing a woman who was found semi-naked in an aisle, making a political statement with the produce. “We literally cannot resell those melons.”The play is structured as a series of manifestoes, each section addressing a particular concern — an approach that Ms. Blain-Cruz said is a political statement in itself, a defiance of convention.Ms. Birch credited her inspiration for that form to an unlikely source: the “SCUM Manifesto,” written by Valerie Solanas in 1967, the year before she shot Andy Warhol.“It’s a very difficult read,” said Ms. Birch, who has a 1-year-old son, Arthur, with her partner, Sam Pritchard, a director. “She calls men walking abortions within the first two pages. And she calls for us to get rid of men. Although I disagree with absolutely everything she says, I loved that she was saying something so powerfully.”To the playwright Simon Stephens (“The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time”), a mentor to Ms. Birch, it’s the “bombastic rage” that marks her plays as being from an artist of a different moment than his own.“We were a generation of irony and uncertainty,” said Mr. Stephens, 45. “She’s of a generation that holds no truck with lazy irony. She has conviction behind her ideology in a way that I find really compelling and makes me feel that I’m lazy for nestling into contradiction.”Ms. Birch’s recent work includes “We Want You To Watch,” a collaboration with the feminist duo RashDash calling for an end to pornography, staged at the National Theater; “Little on the Inside,” set in a women’s prison and seen at the Almeida Festival; and, last year in Berlin, with the experimental director Katie Mitchell, “Ophelia’s Room,” which interrogates the gender politics of “Hamlet.”Even at this stage of her career, Ms. Mitchell said, Ms. Birch is an important writer, in the tradition of Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield — “those tough women who can also do exquisite lyricism.”Sarah Benson, the artistic director of Soho Rep, said she felt “immediately unsettled” when she first read “Revolt.” She also had “a sort of visceral reaction” to Ms. Birch’s subject matter. “She’s looking at women within these societal structures and the kind of very explicit, vicious sexism alongside the more insidious stuff that’s very deeply embedded in our culture.”Ms. Birch’s own roots are in the counterculture. She grew up in a commune until she was 5; her mother, a psychotherapist, and her father, a computer programmer, created her surname from its name, Birchwood Hall.By 7, she was already writing, showing up at school with a pantomime of “Sleeping Beauty” for friends to perform. Later, she remembers doing a speechwriting project about the topless models in tabloid newspapers, but she didn’t embrace the term feminist as a teenager. “Because it’s so loaded,” she said. “And I wanted people to like me.”At 18, in the gap year before she started college, she joined the Royal Court’s young writers program. She also spent her savings on a three-month trip to Los Angeles, where she did an unpaid internship for BenderSpink, a film-production company whose major credits at the time included “American Pie.”It was possibly an aesthetic mismatch, but that’s where she learned to read outside her comfort zone in search of project ideas, something she still does.The catalyst for “Revolt,” though, was a commission from the Royal Shakespeare Company that came with the prompt “Well-behaved women seldom make history” — a quotation Ms. Birch found irritating.In response, she did a deep dive into feminist literature, then wrote the play in three days, barely sleeping.“I thought my writing might change once I had a baby,” she said. “But it hasn’t, actually. I’ve just done the all-nighters and fed the baby in between. It’s not a particularly grown-up way of doing the job.“Most things that I write do tend to come out like that,” she added. “Which is why there’s always so much fury. It feels like a need to say these things now.”