https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/09/business/viacom-robert-bakish-flagship-brands.html
Viacom C.E.O. Sets a New Course, Focusing on Flagship Brands - The New York Times
Viacom Inc,Television,Movies,Bakish  Robert M
Feb. 9, 2017
7368
The last year has been rocky for Viacom. There was the caustic fight for control of the company. The ousting of an embattled chief executive. And a push to reunite the company with CBS, then the abandonment of that plan. All the while, the company’s TV and film business struggled mightily.On Thursday, Robert M. Bakish, Viacom’s new chief executive, outlined a path forward for the entertainment conglomerate, as the company released business results that showed a glimmer of hope for a turnaround.Mr. Bakish’s five-point plan for Viacom starts with “putting the full power of Viacom” behind six of the company’s flagship brands: BET, Comedy Central, MTV, Nickelodeon, Nick Jr. and Paramount. He said those brands resonated with target audiences or genres “big enough to matter” and have strong global presences. The brands also have the capacity to produce content across multiple outlets, including TV, digital and theaters.The company also is seeking to recast its approach to content and talent development; strengthen its partnerships with TV distributors and advertisers; invest in short-form video content and live events; and recharge the culture of the company, where morale has been dismal amid the tumult.“We need more focus,” Mr. Bakish said during a conference call. “We have to align the company against areas where we can have the greatest impact.”Mr. Bakish was named chief executive of Viacom in December, after the company reversed course on plans to merge with CBS. A longtime Viacom executive, Mr. Bakish previously led the company’s international division, which had delivered strong results even as the rest of the company faltered. He has spent the last two months establishing a turnaround plan for the company, which he presented to board members this week.As part of the turnaround, Mr. Bakish announced that the company would rebrand its Spike TV network in 2018 as a general entertainment Paramount Network, featuring high-quality programming, movies and documentaries. It is a direction that Spike TV has been moving in over the last couple of years. Long marketed as the first television network for men, it was known for airing programs like mixed martial arts fights and the reality ride-along show “Cops.” But recently, the network has tried to appeal to a broader audience, including women, with a programming mix featuring shows like the hit “Lip Sync Battle.”“Adopting the Paramount name and fortifying its programming is a natural way for Spike to strengthen its position as a major general entertainment network,” Mr. Bakish said. “Internationally, we’ve been very successful in capitalizing on the marquee Paramount brand.”The rebranding of Spike TV comes as Mr. Bakish pushes for more integration between the company’s TV and film group. As part of the plan, he said that each of the flagship brands would contribute one to two films to the slate for the company’s Paramount film studio. At the same time, Paramount will focus on franchise and tentpole projects.Mr. Bakish pointed to Viacom’s children-focused Nickelodeon brand as an example of “what a flagship brand looks like when firing on all cylinders.” In addition to its presence on TV, Nickelodeon feeds a consumer-products business as well as live tours and events.Nickelodeon and Paramount also are working on four films through 2020, Mr. Bakish said. The first is “Amusement Park,” an animated feature with Jennifer Garner and Mila Kunis that will make its theatrical debut in the summer of 2018 and then turn into a TV series the next year.“So the strategy is not just an idea; we are already moving on it,” Mr. Bakish said.As for MTV, Mr. Bakish said that the network’s focus on scripted programming had not worked and that the balance would shift to a mix of reality, music and live-event programming.With a new emphasis on six key brands, Viacom is ratcheting back several others, including CMT, Logo, TV Land and VH1. Mr. Bakish said those networks would not go away but noted they did not have “global or theatrical potential” and would not benefit from increased resources.Analysts said that while the new strategy has potential, it also comes with risks.“We see the new plan as a blueprint for success, but now the company must execute in a highly competitive market for viewing and advertising dollars,” said Benjamin Swinburne, an analyst with Morgan Stanley.Kannan Venkateshwar, an analyst with Barclays, said one challenge Viacom would face is that cable and satellite companies would view the company’s TV networks in two tiers.“In an environment where distributors are likely to continue seeking smaller bundles, this could result in conversations about pruning the number of Viacom channels at a faster pace,” he said.On Thursday, Viacom also released better-than-expected business results that signaled a sense of stability returning to the company. Total revenues increased 5 percent to $3.3 billion in the fiscal quarter ended in December, fueled by increases in theatrical revenues and growth in domestic affiliate revenues, the fees paid by cable and satellite companies. Net earnings attributable to Viacom declined 12 percent to $396 million.“It’s early days in our effort to chart a new course for Viacom,” Mr. Bakish said.