http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/07/business/07phone.html
AT&T; Aims to Become All Things to All Customers - The New York Times
AT&T CORP,BELLSOUTH CORP,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES
March 7, 2006
9819
Is bigger necessarily better when it comes to running a telecommunications company? Apparently AT&T thinks so in announcing plans to buy BellSouth, the primary phone and broadband provider in the Southeast, for $67 billion.Yet AT&T's ambitions on so grand a scale have raised questions about whether its strategy of gobbling up rivals has reached a point of diminishing returns.The company justified the deal yesterday by saying that it expected the merger to save about $2 billion in annual costs by 2009. About 40 percent of the savings are to come from eliminating 10,000 jobs in the next three years. Much of the rest will reflect reduced advertising expenses and the economies of combining the networks of AT&T, BellSouth and the cellphone carrier Cingular Networks.Analysts are skeptical, though, about those projections because AT&T already has its hands full in merging the operations of its leading component, SBC Communications, and the old AT&T, long the namesake long-distance provider, a deal that was sealed last fall. Its wireless subsidiary, Cingular, is still working through a consolidation with AT&T Wireless, which it acquired in 2004.And now, the company's managers and engineers will be asked to add BellSouth's 21 million local lines, 3 million broadband subscribers and lineup of business customers to 50 million existing local phone lines and 7 million broadband customers, most of those until recently customers of SBC."It's a lot for them to swallow in a short period of time," said Christopher C. King, an analyst at Stifel, Nicolaus & Company. "Buying BellSouth does allow them to mask the integration issues they might be having at Cingular and AT&T."A decade ago -- when the regional Bell companies were the nation's main providers of telephone service -- buying a competitor was easier to explain. Adding phone customers meant more revenue, economies of scale on equipment and network investment, and the ability to cut overlapping administrative jobs.But now, size alone does not necessarily allow a Bell company to counteract the many threats to its landline business -- from wireless phones and the Internet service of cable providers and small upstarts.To compete in an Internet economy, AT&T executives say the company has to become a telecommunications supermarket so it can sell more services -- whether phone, broadband or television -- to customers everywhere.AT&T's chairman and chief executive, Edward E. Whitacre Jr., said on a call with analysts yesterday that the merger "will create a strong national and global competitor, better positioned to innovate and deliver new services to both businesses and consumers."The local phone earnings of both BellSouth and its acquirer have been shrinking, and prices for long-distance calls have been falling. With this traditional business suffering, Mr. Whitacre hopes to wring more profit out of the long-distance network and from Cingular, which the two companies own. Having full control of Cingular, which will be rebranded AT&T Wireless, will allow AT&T to sell wireless and landline services nationwide."This deal is all about wireless, market share and brand," said Richard Nespola, the chairman and president of the Management Network Group, a telecommunications consultant. "AT&T recognizes that it needs full control of Cingular to have a seamless brand and a standardized product."To merge its businesses, the company will buy new network technology that integrates wireless and wireline phones so that customers, among other things, will be able to use one handset that runs on a cellular network outdoors and then switch to a wireless Internet connection indoors.These kinds of services are particularly important to big corporate clients that have thousands of corded telephones, mobile phones and Internet lines.Still, industry analysts question whether buying another so-called Baby Bell for $67 billion (and assuming $22.3 billion of debt) is the best way to insulate AT&T from cable providers, smaller companies rushing into the Internet phone market, Wi-Fi companies selling cheap Internet connections and broadcasters offering television programs online.Some investors seemed to have doubts, as well. AT&T's stock slid 97 cents yesterday, or 3.5 percent, to $27.02. While the share prices of acquiring companies typically fall when mergers are announced, at least some of yesterday's decline might indicate concern that AT&T paid too much for BellSouth."The deal does have quite a lot yellow flags planted around it," said Susan Kalla, an analyst at Caris & Company. "The numbers show they paid a hefty premium, and they are not going to be able to recover it over the next two years."Meantime, the shares of BellSouth, typically for a company being acquired, rose briskly yesterday -- up $3.04, or 9.7 percent, to $34.50.Part of the problem, Ms. Kalla said, is that the merger does not generate a lot of new revenue. Since the two companies own Cingular together, BellSouth having 40 percent and AT&T 60 percent, buying BellSouth does not give AT&T new wireless customers. And BellSouth controls just 6 percent of the lucrative corporate telecommunications market, compared with 28 percent for AT&T.But the companies do expect to save money by combining their networks. For example, BellSouth and Cingular will be able to route more long-distance calls on the AT&T national network, and the companies will not have to pay each other fees to terminate calls on their networks.Since BellSouth and AT&T do not sell local phone and Internet lines to residential customers in each other's regions, there is little duplication of services there to eliminate. This means that the bulk of the jobs to be eliminated will be in managerial positions, not workers in the field that maintain the networks.Over all, though, cutting 10,000 jobs in a company with 317,000 workers seems like a modest goal and, analysts say, as with many other planned savings, probably not enough to offset the slower revenue growth from increasing competition."There are some economies of scale that can be eked out primarily in people costs," said Jay Pultz, a telecommunications analyst at the research and consulting firm Gart-ner. "But the real payoff is too far into the future."