http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/13/world/asia/13trace.html
Making Good on North Korea Vow Will Take Detective Work - The New York Times
North Korea,United States Armament and Defense,Atomic Weapons,Defense Department,United States International Relations,Nuclear Tests,Terrorism,International Atomic Energy Agency,Bush  George W
Oct. 13, 2006
6793
WASHINGTON, Oct. 12 — Making good on President Bush’s vow this week to hold North Korea “fully accountable” if it shares nuclear material will pose a major challenge to American intelligence and diplomacy, requiring new equipment and a high level of international cooperation, administration and military officials say.Mr. Bush’s declaration on Monday, in his first public comments after the North announced that it had detonated a nuclear device, underscored the importance of monitoring North Korea’s nuclear program, tracking its exports and investing in technology for “fingerprinting” nuclear materials.Security specialists said Mr. Bush’s warning signaled a significant expansion of longstanding policies of deterrence, extending the threat of reprisals to the transfer of nuclear weapons or materials to another country or to terrorists.That has long been a concern about the North Korean program, but the tools to prevent it are still limited.Robert Joseph, the under secretary of state for arms control and international security, said in an interview on Thursday that “to be credible, declaratory policy must be backed up by effective capabilities.”Mr. Joseph cited three existing programs as models for what was needed: the Proliferation Security Initiative, a loose grouping of dozens of countries that have agreed to intercept illicit arms shipments moving through their waters or airspace; Megaports, an effort to install radiation detectors at major cargo ports around the world; and Second Line of Defense, a program to place radiation detectors at major border crossings around the world.“We are putting in place the ability to detect, disrupt and deter North Korean proliferation activities,” he said. “The announced North Korean nuclear test will provide impetus to further expand these capabilities, particularly in Asia.”The Pentagon, in carrying out one of its most sensitive missions, maintains a team of nuclear experts to analyze the fallout from any nuclear attack by terrorists, not only to identify the attackers but also to figure out where they got their bomb.Separately, the International Atomic Energy Agency, a United Nations unit based in Vienna, compiles identifying markers drawn from the chemistry and physics of processes that produce radioactive material in nuclear programs around the world.Using that kind of data and technology, it might be possible to figure out the likely origin of an intercepted shipment of bomb material — or of the radioactive debris of a weapon that was  used. The atomic energy agency’s inspectors have significant records from their time in North Korea before they were expelled, and they could rule out many other possible sources of radioactive material by calling on records from nations that cooperate with the agency.The real question is how best to head off a nuclear transfer in the first place. Those options include stiff embargos, like those under discussion at the United Nations or even a more muscular international air and maritime inspection operation.And then there is the threat of harsh retaliation.Mr. Bush’s declaration on Monday was no strategic aside, a number of administration and military officials said. Mr. Bush consciously chose language that amounts to a new “declaratory policy” of a line that must not be crossed.“The transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to states or nonstate entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States, and we would hold North Korea fully accountable of the consequences of such action,” Mr. Bush said.When pressed for details on the implications, a range of administration and military officials declined to elaborate, saying that part of the power of deterrence was its very ambiguity. Most would speak about the topic only on condition of anonymity.“These declarations are constructed with some elasticity, specifically to raise questions and doubts in the mind of the object,” one Bush administration official said.Last year the White House ordered a study of whether North Korea might share some  nuclear fuel with Iran, but the report was inconclusive.Some administration officials say they doubt that the North Koreans would take the risk. Others, including Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, argue that the North’s record indicates that it proliferates any weapon in its arsenal. For example, it has long supplied missiles to Iran, and there have been suspicions, but no evidence, of nuclear cooperation between the countries as well.Mr. Bush’s statement was viewed by national security experts as a major shift in deterrence doctrine, one that acknowledges that the mission today is no longer preventing North Korea from building a nuclear weapon, but deterring its use or transfer.“The administration will continue saying that a nuclear weapon in North Korea is unacceptable, but in fact they are beginning to accept it,” said Scott D. Sagan, director of Stanford University’s Center for International Security and Cooperation. “The administration is switching from a nonproliferation policy to a deterrence and defense policy. It is a form of containment rather than a form of nonproliferation.”The considerations during the cold war were far more straightforward: a Soviet missile would leave an obvious return address, allowing the United States to respond with no doubt as to the source of the attack.But getting from the presumption of North Korean proliferation to the evidence is a very difficult task, one that initially is an intelligence, not a military, effort.The difficulties of turning Mr. Bush’s vow into real deterrence were vividly demonstrated in late 2003, the only moment when North Korea was widely suspected of being the source of nuclear material found elsewhere in the world.The discovery was made in Libya, which decided to give up its nuclear weapons program. Along with centrifuges and other equipment purchased from the black market network created by Abdul Qadeer Khan, the Pakistani nuclear engineer, the Libyans turned over a cask of nearly two tons of uranium. It had arrived in Tripoli around 2001 in a semiprocessed form: uranium hexafluoride, the gas that is poured into centrifuges for enrichment into nuclear fuel.Korean markings on the cask suggested that the North was the source. And chemical traces on the outside of the cask proved that the container had been at North Korea’s main nuclear site, Yongbyon.But while the Bush administration at first charged that North Korea had been the source of Libya’s uranium, experts spent months trying to determine whether the contents of the cask had come from there as well or whether it had been filled up elsewhere. The result: plenty of suspicions, but no hard proof.“We took months and months and months and still couldn’t come to a 100 percent conclusion,”  one senior administration official said this year. “That happens. But it doesn’t help you justify a counterstrike against someone.”The president’s new warning grows from his 2002 National Security Strategy and subsequent statements on deterrence and pre-emption. But until now he never specifically said a nation transferring nuclear weapons or components would be held liable and be subject to retaliation, according to administration officials and analysts in the academic community.