http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/21/sports/baseball/21marlins.html
In Lean Times, Miami Helps Pay for New Home for Marlins - The New York Times
Baseball,Stadiums and Arenas,Florida Marlins,Miami (Fla),Gimenez  Carlos A.,Diaz  Manny,Alvarez  Carlos,Loria  Jeffrey
Sept. 20, 2009
7103
MIAMI — The push for a new baseball stadium here began the day the Florida Marlins first took the field in 1993. While city after city worked with major league teams around the country to help build nearly two dozen stadiums, the Marlins were left to play — and endure countless rain delays — in a cavernous football stadium in front of thousands of empty orange seats.Then the recession came along, and the team got what it wanted.Miami and Miami-Dade County have agreed to cover three-quarters of the projected $645 million cost to build the Marlins a home with a retractable roof and four huge parking garages. In return, the city and the county will receive no new revenue from the park, and the team can keep all the money from the 50 luxury suites, concessions and advertising, as well as from naming rights, which alone could generate more than $100 million.Such generous terms were not uncommon during good times, before city and county officials faced yawning budget gaps, potential layoffs and cuts in social services. Yet they forged ahead, anyway, largely dismissing voter opposition and the lessons learned elsewhere that new stadiums sometimes fail to deliver the economic punch promised in forecasts and that the public financing for them can handcuff future generations.The deal was a fresh reminder that even during a recession, sports hold sway over communities regardless of the potential costs.“Outside of Fidel becoming part owner of the team, nothing would have stopped the deal,” said Carlos A. Gimenez, one of the three Miami-Dade County commissioners who voted against the agreement earlier this year. “I’m not anti-baseball, but I’m anti-bad deal. Anyone with any sense can see this is cockeyed.”Backers of the stadium, which is expected to open in 2012, say building it makes sense because it could create more than 2,700 jobs and $300 million in economic output without adding new taxes. Instead, existing hotel bed taxes that are earmarked for tourism-related projects and are often paid by out-of-town visitors are supposed to cover much of the debt for the 37,000-seat stadium and the parking garages. Lawmakers dismiss concerns that the general fund, which pays for public services like the police and schools, will have to be tapped if hotel taxes come up short.“We contemplated a downturn in the economy over the next several years and slow growth after that,” said George Burgess, the manager of Miami-Dade County. “The timing of the payments was to allow for significant time for the tourist economy to rebound.”Tourism, however, is no sure bet. The number of visitors in South Florida dropped after Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and again after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. And in the first seven months this year, hotel tax receipts in metropolitan Miami fell 18.5 percent from the same period in 2008, according to government figures.The economic benefits could also prove illusory, analysts say, because spending at new stadiums often replaces money spent at old ones or comes at the expense of spending at theaters, restaurants and other entertainment sites.Eager to get the project rolling, Miami-Dade issued its bonds over the summer, when the municipal bond market was in flux. The county paid nearly a full percentage point more in interest to issue its bonds than if it had waited a few months. The Marlins agreed to buy the last $7 million of bonds that the county was unable to sell to the market.As the recession has revealed, some conservative forecasts elsewhere proved too optimistic. In 1996, officials in Hamilton County, Ohio, expected their local sales tax revenue to grow 3 percent a year when they agreed to add a half-penny to pay for stadiums for the Cincinnati Reds and the Bengals. Instead, it has since grown 1.6 percent per year on average and fallen nearly 10 percent this year, forcing lawmakers to consider cutting the schools budget.“Cincinnati is a smaller market, but it underscores that all these projects have risks, and Miami has to understand in the depths of this recession it may take longer to recover than people think,” said Mark Rosentraub, the author of “Major League Losers,” which examined stadium deals nationwide. Rosentraub called Miami’s agreement “reckless.”A poll in 2008 commissioned by a prominent critic of the Miami plan showed that a majority of voters opposed a stadium financed by hotel taxes. Some business leaders wanted to use the taxes to improve the city’s convention center, which they said would attract more out-of-town visitors and create long-term jobs. But Miami’s mayor, Manny Diaz, has made the stadium one piece of his campaign to revitalize the city.A deal was signed in early 2008, before the housing bubble burst.  Lawsuits slowed the approval process, and the economy eventually tanked. Yet Diaz and the mayor of Miami-Dade, Carlos Alvarez, both in their last terms in office, refused to turn back.“Even as the numbers got worse, the mayors viewed it as an unacceptable political defeat, so they continued,” said Dario Moreno, the director of the Metropolitan Center, a public-policy research group that was hired to do the poll by Norman Braman, a wealthy auto dealer who unsuccessfully sued to force a referendum on the matter. “It was almost pure stubbornness and ego that made them press ahead even when all the numbers were turning sour.”The mayors declined to be interviewed for this article. But Helena Poleo, a spokeswoman for Diaz, said: “We don’t see it as a political issue; we see it as a community issue. For us, it’s about creating jobs and improving the community and investing in that neighborhood.”Moreno and others do not begrudge the Marlins for seeking the best possible deal, although the team’s owner, Jeffrey Loria, was criticized for dismantling the 2003 World Series championship team.The Marlins play in one of the nation’s largest metropolitan areas but have among the smallest crowds despite two World Series titles in 17 seasons. The team blames the weather, including high humidity and persistent rain, for discouraging fans.David Samson, the Marlins’ president, said his team had the 11th-highest television ratings in baseball. Fans are out there, he said, but they will attend games in earnest only if they are played indoors.“We’ve battled fan anger and apathy,” he said, walking past cranes, earthmovers and 110-foot columns rising out of the soil for the new stadium in Miami’s Little Havana neighborhood. “We said to our fans, if any money could be used for police or teachers, we won’t use it.”Because the stadium is being built on the site of the old Orange Bowl, which lacked a tenant, no new land had to be acquired. The Marlins also agreed to cover cost overruns, to make Miami part of the team name and to give the city and the county a share of any profits if the franchise is sold within 10 years.Construction costs are 10 percent to 20 percent lower than a few years ago, Samson said, and the team has not had to worry about crews leaving the job because of higher bids from competing developers, which happened during the housing bubble. The team received 6,000 job applications since work began in July.“It’s not the best time to open a stadium,” he said. “But it’s a great time to build one.”