https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/nyregion/christie-warns-of-summer-detours-into-hoboken-for-many-nj-transit-riders.html
Christie Warns of Summer Detours Into Hoboken for Many N.J. Transit Riders - The New York Times
Transit Systems,Railroads,Delays (Transportation),Commuting,Amtrak,Pennsylvania Station (Manhattan  NY),New Jersey Transit,Long Island Rail Road Co,Christie  Christopher J
May 23, 2017
8678
Thousands of New Jersey commuters who usually ride trains to and from Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan will have to detour through Hoboken for most of the summer, Gov. Chris Christie announced on Tuesday.The diversions will be necessary to make room for emergency track repairs by Amtrak, the quasi-governmental entity whose operation of Penn Station has drawn the wrath of Mr. Christie and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York. Mr. Christie called Amtrak officials dishonest and incompetent at a news conference in Trenton.“We know we can’t trust Amtrak,” Mr. Christie said, several hours after Amtrak closed an additional track at Penn Station with no warning in a move Mr. Christie described as “a sophomoric episode.” That early-morning track closing caused delays of up to two hours and further damaged the frayed relationship between officials of New Jersey Transit and Amtrak, Mr. Christie said.New Jersey Transit is the second-biggest user of Penn Station, running 63 trains to its overburdened platforms during the morning rush every weekday. The Long Island Rail Road, which also will have to curtail service to Penn Station this summer, carries even more passengers there.Revised summer schedules for the two commuter railroads and Amtrak may not be published until early June. But Mr. Christie provided an early warning about the effect on one of New Jersey Transit’s main lines.He said that all of the trains on the Morris & Essex line — the second busiest line on New Jersey Transit — that usually run directly to Penn Station will be diverted to Hoboken Terminal. All of those passengers would then have to board the PATH train or ferry boats to cross the Hudson River.Mr. Christie said those passengers would pay less than half of what they normally pay for monthly passes during July and August and that they would not be charged additional fares to ride the PATH or ferries. He said that cross-Hudson ferry service would be expanded to meet some of the additional demand.Mr. Christie said schedules for New Jersey Transit’s other lines, including the Northeast Corridor, which serves as the backbone of Amtrak’s intercity service, would not be modified. “For three-quarters of New Jersey Transit customers, travel patterns will not be modified in any way,” he said.But Mr. Christie expressed no faith in Amtrak’s ability to keep any trains running on time. He said that he agreed with Mr. Cuomo that the long-term solution to the frequent disruptions and derailments at Penn Station is to replace Amtrak as the station’s operator, “given Amtrak’s duplicity, their dishonesty and their inability to keep this infrastructure in a state of good repair.”Amtrak has said that it plans to close sections of tracks at Penn Station for repairs from July 7 through 25 and Aug. 4 through 28.