https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/us/trial-of-ex-officers-opens-with-2-views-of-fatal-albuquerque-shooting.html
Trial of Ex-Officers Opens With 2 Views of Fatal Albuquerque Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Mental Health and Disorders,Albuquerque (NM),Boyd  James M (1976-2014),Perez  Dominique W (1981- ),Sandy  Keith P (1975- ),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Homeless Persons
Sept. 19, 2016
4696
ALBUQUERQUE — Lawyers in the trial of two former police officers charged in the fatal 2014 shooting of a homeless man on Monday painted starkly different views of how the encounter unfolded. A special prosecutor said the officers could have backed away from a confrontation. Defense lawyers said the officers were simply doing their jobs.In her opening statement, the prosecutor, Randi McGinn, said the officers “could have stopped at any point and established distance” between themselves and the man, James Boyd, a paranoid schizophrenic who had been illegally camping on a craggy mountainside on this city’s east end in March 2014.But they did not. As Mr. Boyd turned his back on the officers, as if ready to surrender, the officers set off a flash-bang grenade, followed by six shots.Keith Sandy, who has retired since the shooting, and Dominique Perez, who was fired after his indictment, face second-degree murder and manslaughter charges in the shooting of Mr. Boyd.Mr. Perez’s lawyer, Luis Robles, characterized the case as “a clash between the duty of the Albuquerque Police Department to provide safety to our community, and the dangers Mr. Boyd posed to that community.”During the four-hour standoff, Mr. Boyd, who had spent much of his adult life in and out of jail and psychiatric hospitals, repeatedly told the officers that he worked for the Department of Defense and could have them all killed with one phone call.Mr. Sandy and Mr. Perez are the first officers to stand trial for their roles in a fatal shooting in Albuquerque, whose police force has had a rate of shootings higher than the national average for years. The case also spotlights the challenges faced by police officers nationwide in dealing with people with mental illness.Ms. McGinn, a seasoned trial and civil rights lawyer who was named special prosecutor in the case, told jurors that through a series of poor decisions, Mr. Sandy and Mr. Perez created a volatile situation that led to the death of Mr. Boyd. Angry and incoherent through much of the confrontation, Mr. Boyd refused to surrender and drop the knives he held in each hand.“Mr. Boyd, for three hours, said, ‘I’m afraid of you. I think you’re going to murder me,’” Ms. McGinn told the jury. “On this day, he was right.”Mr. Boyd was shot in the arms and back; he died hours later.The lawyers made their opening statements in a courtroom full of friends and relatives of the former officers, along with Mr. Boyd’s brother, Andrew Jones.Mr. Jones winced as defense lawyers played a video clip of the shooting recorded by Mr. Perez’s helmet camera, which, when released in 2014, touched off the largest street protests here in a generation.Mr. Boyd was shot weeks before the Justice Department criticized the Albuquerque police force for excessive use of force and ordered several changes. One change was the disbanding of a special tactical unit known as the Repeat Offender Project, to which Mr. Sandy was assigned.In court on Monday, Ms. McGinn signaled that Mr. Sandy would be portrayed differently from Mr. Perez, a decorated veteran of the Iraq war. It was Mr. Sandy and his team who sent crisis intervention officers who had been negotiating with Mr. Boyd away from the scene, she said, and it was he who told a state trooper before he even saw Mr. Boyd that he planned to shoot him with a stun gun.Ms. McGinn also said that Mr. Sandy did not switch on his body camera during the hourslong encounter.Mr. Sandy shifted in his chair and scribbled notes as Ms. McGinn laid out her case against him. Sam Bregman, Mr. Sandy’s lawyer, said in his opening statement that his client had followed training. Police shootings, he said, are not to be judged in hindsight.The trial is expected to last two weeks. If convicted of second-degree murder, the former officers could serve up to 15 years in prison. They both plan to testify in their own defense.