https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/20/opinion/campaign-stops/is-trump-obsessed-with-putin-and-russia.html
Is Trump Obsessed With Putin and Russia? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Putin  Vladimir V,Russia,Republican Party
July 20, 2016
6353
In an interview on CNN on Tuesday, Senator Marco Rubio wondered why Donald Trump seems so obsessed with Vladimir Putin. It was an excellent question.It’s not hard to guess at least some of what Trump sees in Putin: He’s a strong man (and a strongman) who says whatever he wants, does whatever he wants, and not only does Putin not have to woo the press, he controls it.But Rubio’s right: There are many odd and mysterious points of connection between Trump and Russia.Paul Manafort, Trump’s campaign chairman, has a history of representing heinous dictators, including Viktor Yanukovych of Ukraine, a Kremlin puppet who was deposed by revolution in 2014.Ukrainians think it’s funny. “We joke in Ukraine that it is a bad sign for Trump that he hired Manafort,” Oleg Kravchenko, a Ukrainian political analyst, told PolitiFact in May. “Because his client, Yanukovych, was ousted and fled to Russia, to the city of Rostov. So Trump could also end up in Rostov.”Manafort has ties to Oleg Deripaska, who made a shocking fortune in the aluminum business through his Kremlin connections and, as Michael Isikoff, chief investigative journalist for Yahoo News, reported in April, “for years was barred from entering the United States over allegations of ties to organized crime.”Isikoff wrote that investigators in the Cayman Islands questioned Manafort “in connection with” a $26.2 million investment from Deripaska for a failed telecommunications project in Ukraine. Isikoff said Manafort had “multiple business deals” with “another pro-Putin oligarch, Dmitri Firtash.”Just to make this strange stew more pungent, along comes Michael Flynn, the retired Army general and Trump supporter, who reportedly was vetted by Trump as a potential running mate.In an interview on Yahoo News on Monday, Isikoff asked Flynn why he had attended an anniversary celebration for RT, the Putin propaganda machine, last year, sat next to the Russian autocrat at the celebratory dinner, and delivered a speech.The purpose of the trip, Flynn said, was to try to persuade the Russians to get the Iranians to stop meddling in the Middle East. Isikoff quite reasonably asked whether he had received a fee, and if so, why he accepted the money. “I didn’t take any money from Russia,” Flynn said.Isikoff asked, “Who paid you?” and Flynn testily snapped: “My speaker’s bureau. Ask them.”It would seem absurd at any other convention, but in Cleveland the idea that there is some nefarious undertone to Trump’s obsession with Putin — is the Russian leader flattering Trump to somehow gain control over him? — somehow does not seem entirely crazy.Trump loves conspiracies. He was one of the original “birthers” questioning Obama’s citizenship and religion and he likes to hint darkly that Obama is in league with terrorists. Those are among the things about Trump that terrify ordinary people, but the Cleveland meeting is no place for ordinary people.Trump’s former adviser, Roger Stone, who described his recent book about the Clintons as “a horrifying true story of rape, intimidation, cover-up, drugs, greed and power,” is using the convention to promote himself. So is Alex Jones, who runs the right-wing conspiracy website infowars.com.“The establishment, George Soros and others have done everything they can to try to shut down our free speech,” Jones shouted at a tiny rally on the Cleveland waterfront on Monday, where he seemed free to say whatever he wanted, and Soros was nowhere in sight.Conspiracy theories are contagious, like yawning. One person does it, and then everyone is doing it. James Carville, the Hillary Clinton booster, suggested on Tuesday that someone had actually set up Melania Trump by slipping phrases lifted from a speech by Michelle Obama into her convention address on Monday night.I’m not sure there is more to Trump’s interest in Putin beyond the similarities in their personalities. But I couldn’t help but think of the 1980s, when I covered the Soviet Union, a place where no coincidence was considered benign and all motivations were considered suspect.Evil intent was at the core of Soviet paranoia. As Lenin said in his April 11, 1913, letter to Pravda: “in politics, it is not so important who directly advocates particular views. What is important is who stands to gain from those views.”