https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/04/nyregion/not-sleeping-enough-arianna-huffington-wants-to-help.html
Not Sleeping Enough? Arianna Huffington Wants to Help - The New York Times
Sleep,United States Politics and Government,Computers and the Internet,Huffington Post,Huffington  Arianna,Trump  Donald J,SoHo (Manhattan  NY),Books and Literature,Thrive Global Holdings LLC,The Sleep Revolution: Transforming Your Life  One Night at a Time (Book),Sleep Revolution  The (Book)
Dec. 4, 2016
3721
Arianna Huffington has a lot to say about sleep, but not because she has lost any since Election Day. The fact that Donald J. Trump won the presidential election last month — and as a candidate called her a “dummy” and a “liberal clown” on Twitter — has not kept her up at night, brooding and anxious about government of the big league, by the big league and for the big league. (Or the bigly.)“I’m a big believer in the Serenity Prayer,” she said when asked about losing sleep since Nov. 8. She recited the go-to intercession for the disconsolate: “God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, courage to change the things I can and wisdom to know the difference.”Apparently she did not change enough people’s minds during the campaign, when she said on MSNBC that Hillary Clinton was “the one and only thing standing between the United States and the existential threat of a Donald Trump presidency” and that “you don’t have to like Hillary Clinton to vote for Hillary Clinton.”So now she is trying to change people’s notions of sleep. The sleep she is talking about is aided, she believes, by products that she is selling. Ms. Huffington — a biographer of Maria Callas and Pablo Picasso in the 1980s, a syndicated newspaper columnist in the 1990s, a onetime candidate for governor of California and a founder of The Huffington Post — has reinvented herself again, as a “sleep evangelist” and retailer.This dovetails with her latest book, “The Sleep Revolution: Transforming Your Life, One Night at a Time,” and a company she recently started, Thrive Global. The company’s website has articles about sleep and wellness and a shopping section for sleep- and wellness-related products, like silk sleep masks and Arianna Huffington’s Travel Essentials Kit. For six weeks, through Jan. 15, she is running a Thrive Global pop-up store on Broome Street in SoHo.One morning last week, Ms. Huffington was stretched out in a napping pod by Restworks, a device that looked like a giant football helmet grafted onto a chaise longue. The helmet part can close, creating nap-promoting darkness. But Ms. Huffington was not napping. She was doing what a sleep evangelist does: preaching — specifically, about the benefits of installing a napping pod in an office. “Even if you don’t have room for a nap room, it’s completely private,” she said. “Ten minutes’ rest is all you need.”If the napping pod is a personal recharging station, Ms. Huffington said Thrive Global’s signature product is the $100 Phone Bed charging station — a bed for cellphones. The company’s website calls it “the world’s first family bed for devices.” The idea is to lay phones on a little satin-covered mattress (tablets can be slid into slots in the bed frame). The blanket, made with microfiber and satin, doubles as a screen-cleaning cloth. And just as cellphones demand our attention, they take priority: “First we tuck our phones in,” the website says, “and then ourselves.”Ms. Huffington is serious about sleep, serious about disconnecting in a connected world, but not everything about Thrive Global is serious. There is “Goodnight Smartphone,” a parody of Margaret Wise Brown’s “Goodnight Moon” that she wrote and recorded as an audiobook. Ms. Brown’s famous book has lines like “Goodnight stars, goodnight air, goodnight noises everywhere.” Ms. Huffington’s take: “Goodnight worrying about weight loss. Goodnight demanding boss.” As if that were not enough: “Goodnight test for which I need to cram. Goodnight Instagram.” And, a moment later: “Goodnight phone calls I’ve missed. Goodnight to-do list.”Where customers put their phone-charging beds is up to them, of course, but Ms. Huffington has some advice: somewhere other than the bedroom. “If you wake up in the middle of the night to go to the bathroom, you might be tempted to look at your phone,” she said. “Putting the phone — putting the distraction — away from the bedroom is critical.”She sees that as a good practice not only for adults, but also for teenagers. “We now know about burnout, depression and anxiety” in young people, she said. “They’re fully connected to sleep deprivation. And we see what’s happening in colleges — blackout drinking, suicides. These are all connected to people running on empty.”Ms. Huffington sees implications for the business world as well. She mentioned a new RAND Corporation analysis. It found that insufficient sleep costs the United States economy as much as $411 billion a year, mostly from productivity losses at work — absenteeism, when employees are too tired to show up, and “presenteeism,” when they show up less than bright-eyed and slog through the day.The RAND analysis said such losses were up to $138 billion in Japan and up to $60 billion in Germany. Canada appears to have the most alert work force, or at least the smallest drain on the economy from sleep problems, but the productivity loss is still sizable there: $21.4 billion, with just under 80,000 working days lost because of insufficient sleep, compared with 123 million days in this country.“The speed of life has accelerated,” Ms. Huffington said. “The majority of people are depleted, distracted, unfulfilled.”Then she was off on a whirlwind tour of the store. She introduced Thrive Global’s director of corporate training, who travels a lot. Ms. Huffington mentioned that he had flown in from California and would soon leave for Europe. That led her to some tips about crossing time zones and coping with air travel.“Avoid the foods they feed you on planes,” she said. “Don’t drink — hydrate.”She said she learned the importance of rest and sleep the hard way. In 2007, two years after The Huffington Post started, she collapsed from exhaustion. She said she came to in a pool of blood with a broken cheekbone.“We are all living under delusion — the type-A delusion that we have to burn out in order to succeed,” she said. “The science is in now.”What about people who have felt like wrecks since Election Day?“It’s important to know the fight is done,” she said. “Once the election results are in, the game is different. The more resilient people are, the more they will make the right decisions and fight the right battles rather than fall into despair.” And to be resilient, people need their rest.She was asked if she missed The Huffington Post, which she left in August to focus on Thrive Global. “I’m so engaged in this,” she said. “The only difference I would have made was modest and incremental.”As for Mr. Trump’s Twitter messages about her, she said, “Oh, that was so long ago.”“I practice what I’m preaching here,” she said. “To relive every offensive thing — if you’re still holding on to that, you’re missing the point of life.”