https://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/03/theater/reviews/be-a-good-little-widow-at-ars-nova-review.html
‘Be a Good Little Widow’ at Ars Nova - Review - The New York Times
Theater,Be a Good Little Widow (Play),Brunstetter  Bekah
May 2, 2011
1121
Daniel Zimmerman’s set for “Be a Good Little Widow” is the perfect reflection of the lead character in Bekah Brunstetter’s funny-sad play about loss at Ars Nova.It’s a starter home decorated by a newlywed too green to the grown-up world to be more than superficially acquainted with herself. It’s bright and cheery but unsophisticated. There are too many colors. The throw pillows are trying too hard. The quirky, thrift-store lamp looks incongruous. There’s something disharmonious, even juvenile, about the space. The only thing that really belongs to Melody (Wrenn Schmidt) is the song selection on her iPod.When Melody’s chilly mother-in-law, Hope (Jill Eikenberry), marches in and inspects the Connecticut house with the brisk efficiency of the taste police, we can tell by the angle at which she tilts her immaculately coiffed and highlighted head that the verdict is no endorsement. Without actually saying so, Hope pegs Melody as a girl in a woman’s job.If Melody’s decorator instincts are unformed, so is her marriage to a corporate lawyer, Craig (Chad Hoeppner), who adores his wife but forces her to compete with his BlackBerry for attention. Left home alone during too many business trips, and still struggling to find a focus in her new life, Melody seems more relaxed around Craig’s similarly directionless assistant, Brad (Jonny Orsini).In Stephen Brackett’s crisp production, awkwardness courses through each scene like electricity, whether it’s Melody’s nagging sense of something missing with Craig, her sexual tension with Brad or her eagerness to please Hope, who responds with condescension.When Craig dies, Melody again disappoints Hope. Her messy, uncontrolled reactions fail to adhere to the standards of careful composure learned by the older woman as a member of the Widows League. But despite being polar opposites, Melody and Hope have much to teach each other about grieving.Written when Ms. Brunstetter was a 2009 playwright in residence at Ars Nova, this modest but delicately satisfying serio-comedy keeps threatening to get cute, yet always chooses a more unexpected direction. The play is less about how Melody copes with sudden loss or contemplates her future than about her acquiring an understanding of her marriage and what it might have become. That knowledge provides poignant comfort.Ms. Brunstetter is an emerging playwright working on a commission for Roundabout Underground, part of the Roundabout Theater Company; her play “A Long and Happy Life” will be produced next year by Naked Angels. She writes fresh, unfussy dialogue and characters who earn their laughs and emotional moments by honest means. It’s evident that she feels a generous affection for all four people onstage in “Widow,” including Hope.While the two male cast members are appealing, the play’s engine is the difficult dynamic between the women, played by Ms. Schmidt and Ms. Eikenberry with a lovely balance of cautious distance and tentative communication. The ice between Melody and Hope may never melt to the point where they hug it out, but they form a genuine connection, which seems a promising way for both to move forward.