https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/15/realestate/designing-a-home-with-a-mountain-in-mind.html
Designing a Home With a Mountain in Mind - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Snowmass (Colo)
Nov. 13, 2015
2837
When Diego and Wendy Reyes found a vertiginous lot in Colorado with panoramic views of Snowmass Village and the surrounding mountains and forests, it didn’t take them long to decide what they wanted to do with it: build a vacation home there as breathtaking as the scenery.The site, about two-thirds of an acre, was “an absolute crown jewel,” said Mr. Reyes, 38, a senior vice president of the CIM Group, a real estate investment company. “It’s a little bluff in the middle of the valley that has extremely dramatic sweeping views.”After they took it all in, they realized they needed “to make something that was unconventional and unlike any other space,” he said. And they knew just the architect to call: Jeff Kovel, a principal of Skylab Architecture in Portland, Ore., whom they had met through a cousin. Mr. Kovel, who used to live in Colorado, was passionate about outdoor sports like skiing and mountain biking. He had also designed a number of ambitious homes with exactly the sort of angular shapes and gravity-defying cantilevers they envisioned.The couple, who live in Greenwich, Conn., with their three daughters, Loulie, 9, Mia, 7, and Georgie, 4, already had deep roots in the area. “It’s a really special place for us,” said Ms. Reyes, 38, a founder and the chairwoman of the Greenwich International Film Festival.But the previous home they owned here was a 1970s cabin that was anything but special, Mr. Reyes said: “We were really ready to customize something.”Mr. Kovel didn’t disappoint. After the couple bought the lot for $1.25 million in 2011, he set to work, creating a two-story triangular wedge that jutted out from the hillside — his creative solution to the property’s unusual set of constraints, which included a relatively small buildable area on a steep slope, with a height limit of 28 feet.The shape of the house “is suggestive of the peaks and mountains around it,” Mr. Kovel said, and “is also designed to shed snow downhill.” In short, he explained, it’s a modern ski lodge.To make the building seem even more of its place, he chose materials that he called the “mainstays of the mountain vernacular” — weathered steel, local sandstone and knotty cedar boards — which give it a tough, muscular appearance.That feeling continues inside, where he collaborated with Anna Lambiotte, a Denver interior designer. The reclaimed white oak floors have a rough-sawn finish, Mr. Kovel said, so “if you walk into the house with ski boots, you’re not afraid you’re going to damage it.”Because they plan to have frequent guests, the couple asked him to make the home feel as communal as possible. The result is a split-level arrangement, with the kitchen and dining and living rooms — separate spaces that are open to one another — on the top two levels, where high ceilings and full-height windows take full advantage of the light and views.The five bedrooms are on the two lower levels. To make guests feel like equals, Mr. and Ms. Reyes requested two master suites of the same size and two similarly sized bunk rooms for children, along with an additional guest room.“We didn’t want it to feel like there was one great, big, lavish master area and then a bunch of other underwhelming rooms,” Mr. Reyes said. “We’re not going to be hanging out in the bedrooms, so all of them are compact and utilitarian, which makes them egalitarian.”Their budget for the 4,500-square-foot home was initially $500 a square foot, but after early pricing from contractors came in at nearly double that amount, they negotiated a final cost of about $800 a square foot. Construction started in the summer of 2013 and was nearly finished in time for the family to celebrate the holidays there last December, although workers continued to complete minor details for another six months or so.Now the couple are anxiously eyeing their children’s schedules, looking for every possible opportunity to visit. As Ms. Reyes put it, “We’re going for the absolute maximum holidays school will allow.”