https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/23/theater/the-antipodes-review-annie-baker.html
Review: ‘The Antipodes’ and Ambiguous Brainstorming - The New York Times
Theater,The Antipodes (Play),Baker  Annie,Neugebauer  Lila,Signature Theater Co
April 23, 2017
6756
Just exactly how many kinds of stories are there, anyway? The tallies vary in “The Antipodes,” Annie Baker’s in-all-ways fabulous new play about professional fabulators in pursuit of the ultimate yarn.One character in this endlessly fascinating work, which opened on Sunday in a Signature Theater production, puts the number of variations at 10. Another insists it’s six. And still another has come up with 36 versions, though when he itemizes them, he only reaches 19.Whatever the quantity, it’s hard to imagine a work that touches on as many of those possibilities as “The Antipodes,” or makes as strong a case for the pervasiveness of storytelling in all aspects of our existence. What’s more, unlike her perpetually thwarted characters, who chase their ideas with the exasperation of dogs running after their tails, Ms. Baker delivers a complete and confident narrative.Now “complete” may not be the term you’d apply to a play as steeped in ambiguities as this one. “The Antipodes” portrays a never-ending brainstorming session for unspecified purposes in an unspecified place.Yet as directed with a time-blurring seamlessness by Lila Neugebauer, and acted by a perfectly blended ensemble of nine, “The Antipodes” leaves you glowing with a wondering satisfaction. I mean the happy satiety that comes from being in the hands of a real right-brain/left-brain author who channels her ineffable instincts with a master artisan’s practical skills.Granted, Ms. Baker, who during the past decade has established herself as one of the freshest voices in American theater, has never been everyone’s cup of moonshine. Outraged theatergoers regularly walked out on the Playwrights Horizons production of “The Flick,” her three-hour, four-character portrait of the rudderless employees of a dying movie theater. (Of course, “The Flick” then picked up the 2014 Pulitzer Prize and had a healthy commercial run Off Broadway.)“The Antipodes” is only 115 (intermission-free) minutes long. But while it’s anchored with the character-defining specifics and social detail that naturalistic writers live for, it is also Ms. Baker’s most abstract play. And it has very little plot except that, in another sense, it’s nothing but plot. Or rather plots, of every conceivable stripe, which bubble and spurt from the mouths of everyone onstage.The setting is a conference room, which I would wager is somewhere on the West Coast, though spiritually we may as well be in the far-flung regions of the title. As rendered by the set designer Laura Jellinek, this room is centered on a long oval desk over which hangs a long oval lighting fixture, which is put to subliminally unsettling use. (Tyler Micoleau did the whisper-subtle lighting.)It’s the kind of place you could imagine television writers or Silicon Valley wonder kids gathering for intense group thinks. And as she follows the conversation of those assembled here, Ms. Baker nails the passive-aggressive competitiveness of such gatherings.She also provides evidence of her peerless ear for contemporary language; in this case, it’s the lingo of creative corporate speak, with its calculated humblebrag, masturbational jaw-flapping and implicit sexism. (There’s only one woman among the eight people at the table.)As usual, Ms. Baker is asking us to ponder just how we communicate, or fail to. There’s a hilarious technologically facilitated (and garbled) exchange with an unseen Godlike eminence named Max, voiced by Hugh Dancy.But just what is the objective of all this feverish talk? The team’s leader, Sandy (a perfect Will Patton), a weather-beaten dude swathed in dressed-down black and weary charisma, begins the session with an edict: “No dwarves or elves or trolls.”So maybe it’s a new video game they’re trying to come up with? Or a Netflix series? Or a blockbuster fantasy movie?Don’t bother trying to piece together an answer. Ms. Baker deliberately refrains from providing definitive clues. All we know is that these people are being asked to keep coming up with narratives, the more personal the better, in the hopes that something will jell.The important thing, says Sandy, is that “we don’t feel like we have to self-censor and we can all just sit around telling stories. Because that’s where the good stuff comes from.” So we start off with “how I lost my virginity” anecdotes, and move on to tales of professional mentors and crazy employees and (when Sandy’s out of the room) anxious speculation on how it’s all going.Gradually, an air of surrealism sets in, the distorting hyper-awareness bred of too much talk and too little sleep, and the stories become more fantastical. A tale that might have come from the Brothers Grimm is presented, deadpan, as a true memory of adolescence. By the end, what we’re hearing (and even seeing acted out) are the most primal of creation myths and sacred rituals. These are stories that float into the ether, beyond the think-tanks’ realm of commodification.Time is much discussed in “The Antipodes.” (Is it vertical or horizontal?) And one of the production’s many interwoven marvels is how it distorts our sense of time passing in the conference room.When did those plates of Japanese takeout materialize? How did that scrap of knitting turn into a full sweater without our noticing? Though there are few scene-defining blackouts, we sense that an uninterrupted conversation might be a composite of many days of talk.Besides, pretty much every time Sandy’s gal Friday, Sarah (a priceless Nicole Rodenburg), shows up, she’s wearing a new outfit. (Kaye Voyce did the spot-on costumes.) Sarah helps alert us as to what’s going on outside, as Sandy takes more and more time off and the weather turns apocalyptic.Under the direction of Ms. Neugebauer, who presided over the dazzling ensemble of Sarah DeLappe’s “The Wolves,” the cast members fully and individually embody their characters’ self-conscious selves. I can’t possibly single one out, so let me list those I haven’t already mentioned: Phillip James Brannon, Josh Charles, Josh Hamilton, Danny Mastrogiorgio, Danny McCarthy, Emily Cass McDonnell and Brian Miskell.“The Antipodes” is also deeply funny, but it’s naturally funny, and if it’s a satire, it’s an organic one. This playwright doesn’t need to exaggerate to elicit what’s absurd in the human condition. Ms. Baker hears the roar of eternity in the babble of our existence, and the futile heroism in our unending attempts to tell tales that might make sense of it all.