http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/07/us/how-activist-group-stumbled-on-the-baton-rouge-police-killing.html
How Activist Group Stumbled on the Baton Rouge Police Killing - The New York Times
Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Reed  Arthur (Silky Slim),Baton Rouge (La)
July 6, 2016
3889
The man who says his organization released the cellphone video of the police shooting of Alton B. Sterling in Baton Rouge, La., said on Wednesday that his group had come across the encounter while gathering video for possible use in a documentary about urban violence.Arthur Reed, 43, a onetime gang leader who became an activist against street violence, said members of his group, Stop the Killing, showed up at the Triple S Food Mart after hearing reports about an arrest there on a police scanner.The group started filming immediately upon arriving in the parking lot, Mr. Reed said. “Once he wasn’t getting on the ground for them fast enough, then they tackled him and tased him,” he said, referring to Mr. Sterling and the two officers. “And then it just escalated from there. The video speaks for everything.”Mr. Reed, also known as the rapper Silky Slim, said he decided to release the video after hearing reports in which the police said Mr. Sterling had reached for a gun.“He never reached in the video,” Mr. Reed said, adding that he had seen a gun on the ground only after Mr. Sterling was shot.The cellphone video shows an officer pushing Mr. Sterling onto the hood of the car and then tackling him. He is pinned to the ground by two officers, and one officer appears to hold a gun above Mr. Sterling’s chest. (The linked video is graphic.)At one point, someone on the video can be heard saying: “He’s got a gun! Gun!” and one officer can be seen pulling his weapon. After some shouting, what sounds like gunshots can be heard, and the camera shifts away.Mr. Reed — who declined to say who had been holding the cellphone camera, citing safety concerns — said the wave of public outrage over the manner of Mr. Sterling’s death spoke to the power that ordinary people now have to put a spotlight on police misconduct.“We don’t have to beg the media to come and report on the stories,” he said. “We can put it out on social media now, and the story gets told.”Mr. Reed founded Stop the Killing, a youth mentoring program, in the early 2000s after spending much of his life in and out of prison. The goal was to steer young people away from violence in Baton Rouge, whose murder rate has perennially ranked among the highest of the nation’s large cities.To that end, the group has been producing documentaries as a way to draw attention to the unnecessary toll of street violence. That includes violence against African-Americans at the hands of law enforcement, Mr. Reed said.“We keep those images out there of what we’re doing to ourselves as well as what the police are doing to us,” he said. “We don’t think you can look at one without looking at the other.”