https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/sports/basketball/silver-sees-basis-for-ousting-clippers-owner-donald-sterling.html
Commissioner Sees Basis for Ousting Clippers’ Owner - The New York Times
Basketball,Discrimination,Los Angeles Clippers,National Basketball Assn,Sterling  Donald,Blacks,Silver  Adam (1962- ),Silver  Adam
April 29, 2014
3651
N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver deployed the nuclear option on Tuesday to force the Los Angeles Clippers’ owner, Donald Sterling, out of the league for racist remarks he made in a recorded conversation. Now, will Silver’s actions — banishing Sterling for life from team and league business, and urging the other owners to vote to force him to sell the club — withstand any legal challenges?Silver’s authority seems clear on the banishment of Sterling. The N.B.A. constitution empowers him to suspend and fine owners who make statements “prejudicial or detrimental” to the best interests of the league.Silver said in a news conference Tuesday that Sterling’s comments about African-Americans, which were revealed last week by the celebrity news website TMZ, contradicted the league’s “principles of inclusion and respect that form the foundation of our diverse, multicultural and multiethnic league.” To the sponsors who have been fleeing the Clippers in recent days, Silver said that he hoped his actions would compel them to return.But if Silver’s ability to bar Sterling and fine him $2.5 million is not much in question, he might not find it as simple to successfully terminate Sterling’s ownership of the Clippers’ franchise.“The forced sale is a little bit murkier,” said Gabe Feldman, the director of the sports law program at Tulane University Law School. The league requires a three-quarters vote of owners to get rid of an owner, but “the question will be whether highly offensive comments made in a private call is reason enough,” Feldman added.Indeed, the list of causes in the constitution that would prompt the termination of ownership do not specifically include making racist or incendiary remarks.But Silver — who said he is confident that he has the necessary votes to end Sterling’s ownership, although no timetable for such a vote has been set — is broadly interpreting at least one clause in the constitution, which initiates termination if the owner fails to fulfill his or her obligation in “such a way as to affect the Association or its members adversely.”If at least 23 of the 30 owners vote Sterling out, legal experts said that he could sue the league, arguing that the other owners conspired in violation of antitrust law to harm his business or overstepped their constitutional authority by kicking him out.But any such lawsuit would be a gamble for Sterling. According to the N.B.A. constitution, a decision to terminate the ownership of a team is final and binding and the ousted owner waives any court fight.“When you buy a franchise, you agree to the terms of the league constitution,” said Bradley Shear, a lawyer and professor of sports management at George Washington University. He added, “If you look at the N.B.A. constitution, it leads me to believe that when you start saying the finances of the franchise or league are being impaired, that’s when you have the latitude to require an owner to sell.”“In essence, what N.B.A. owners would be doing is reaching an agreement to boycott and refuse to deal with a particular owner,” said Marc Edelman, an associate professor of law at Baruch College.Sports leagues looking to divest themselves of a misbehaving owner usually suspend them and, in some cases, cajole them to sell.The most famous ownership exile involved George Steinbrenner, the longtime principal owner of the Yankees. In 1990, he made a bizarre choice, agreeing to have baseball’s commissioner, Fay Vincent, bar him for life as an alternative to a two-year suspension. Steinbrenner was being disciplined by Vincent for paying $40,000 to a gambler, Howard Spira, to provide information to discredit Dave Winfield, then a Yankees star.Steinbrenner believed that a suspension would make it more difficult for him to hold onto his role as a vice president of the United States Olympic Committee because he had already been suspended once before by baseball, in 1974, for illegal contributions to Richard M. Nixon’s re-election campaign. Somehow, an agreement to accept a lifetime ban sounded better to him and, he hoped, to the U.S.O.C.In any case, Steinbrenner was not forced to sell the Yankees under the terms of the ban and several years later, Vincent did agree to lift it and allow him to resume an active role with the club.That, however, is not likely to happen in the Sterling case.One issue that was not clarified was who would be in charge of the Clippers for now — an existing team executive or a Sterling family member — and how a sale of the Clippers would be handled. With Sterling barred, the league would appear to want to control the sale process even if the profits will go to Sterling. The question now is whether Sterling will accept his fate and agree to a sale of the Clippers, or fight in court, which would probably diminish the value of the team.Marc Ganis, a sports industry consultant, said that in a protracted legal fight, the league could penalize the Clippers further by taking away draft choices or voiding contracts.“The best-case scenario for Donald Sterling,” Ganis said, “is that he extends the process in court and he wins,” meaning he maintains ownership of the team. “But,” Ganis added, “he will still be banned.”