http://www.nytimes.com/1997/12/08/theater/theater-review-aspiring-achieving-and-struggling-as-her-90-years-go-by.html
THEATER REVIEW; Aspiring, Achieving and Struggling as Her 90 Years Go By - The New York Times
HOWE  TINA,REVIEWS,THEATER,PRIDE'S CROSSING (PLAY)
Dec. 8, 1997
9309
Who needs porpoise oil? In Tina Howe's new play, ''Pride's Crossing,'' this exotic substance is smeared over the skin of a woman to preserve body heat just before she swims the English Channel. But since the woman is played by Cherry Jones, it seems like only a ritual gesture. Ms. Jones, as most Manhattan playgoers know, is a primary source of warmth in the New York theater today. And in Ms. Howe's latest work, the actress is wrapping everyone, onstage and in the audience, in her insulating glow.You don't doubt that Ms. Jones, who has brought invaluable fresh life to revivals of ''The Heiress'' and ''The Night of the Iguana,'' could swim the channel if she chose. Certainly, she navigates a daunting course with astonishing skill and tirelessness in ''Pride's Crossing,'' which opened last night at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center. In it, Ms. Jones portrays Mabel Tidings Bigelow, a Boston blue blood with heroic aspirations, at varied points in her 90 years, from childhood to the brink of death.The transformations are achieved without wigs or makeup, only changes of costume (usually in sight of the audience), carriage and facial expression. Yet it's not a showoff performance, the kind that seems to say, ''See, I can do this and this and this.'' Instead, what Ms. Jones creates is a fluid, finely graded portrait that finds a continuity of self in the different ages of one personality: the child truly coexists in the woman. And though it's a star performance, it is also a remarkably generous one, which always seems to embrace and elevate her fellow actors.And, one might add, Ms. Howe's script, which needs such assistance. Framed by the recollections of the widowed Mabel at 90, ''Pride's Crossing,'' though given a lovely production under Jack O'Brien's direction, can itself seem as garrulous and repetitive as a conversation-starved alumna at a 50-year college reunion. The affection that animates the play is evident (Ms. Howe has said it is a valentine to her aunt); so is the dramatist's ear for the music in everyday conversation. But while ''Pride's Crossing'' is infused with Ms. Howe's lyrical sense of mortality and of the traps of sexual and social identity, this latest work from the author of ''Coastal Disturbances'' can also be like something its no-nonsense heroine might start to read and throw out as romantic hokum.As the story of a woman of achievement who threw away her chance for true love, it brings to mind genteel best sellers with historic sweep by Edna Ferber and, more recently, Barbara Taylor Bradford. (It's the same sensibility that showed up in early talking pictures with stars like Irene Dunne and Barbara Stanwyck looking backward in old-lady makeup.) This, after all, is a play that dares to let an attention-hungry young woman tell her mother, ''It was your gaze I was desperate for,'' and a drunken husband in black tie say to his wife, ''Face it, darling; you're still in love with him.''''Pride's Crossing'' is set in a social landscape that Ms. Howe knows well and has explored before: the waning world of upper-crust Yankee dynasties. Here she has created a vivid, language-driven sketch of the elderly Mabel as a golden anachronism: a woman who can still say ''divine'' without sounding affected and whose imperiousness is leavened by reflexive good manners.Correspondingly, the play is strongest when it stays in the present tense, with the 90-year-old Mabel, whose prized independence has been curbed by a stroke and a shrinking bank balance, living in the chauffeur's cottage of what was once the Tidings family estate. Ms. Howe and Ms. Jones use regional and class cadences to do some terrific things with the character's fierce struggle against the pull of infirmity.There's a priceless scene involving Mabel's dialing a wrong number, and the violence with which she rejects offers of assistance, as she falters forward with her walker frame, is a harrowing reminder of how old age brings out the Lear in everyone. There is also stirring poignancy in Mabel's scenes with her young great-granddaughter (the uncannily accomplished Julia McIlvaine), which, like similiar scenes in Ms. Howe's ''Approaching Zanzibar,'' capture the skittish ballet of wills between extreme age and extreme youth.Even these moments, however, are tinged with a preciousness that does the play no favors. Ms. Howe has said her works tend to alienate men because of her expressly feminine perspective. But the special flavor of her writing has more to do with a kind of whimsy that translates theatrical absurdism into costume-party cuteness.In the first moments of ''Pride's Crossing,'' for example, Mabel's housekeeper (Angie Phillips) scampers onstage in a Paul Revere outfit. (Just so you know, her three-cornered hat will keep reappearing on the heads of different characters.) And the play's climax has everyone dressing up in old-fashioned outfits from Mabel's attic for a croquet match with metaphoric significance. It's not that these elements are thematically inappropriate, but they are, as Mabel's English ancestors might have put it, too twee by half.Forays into the past are triggered by gratingly literal associations. When the aged Mabel complains she's being treated like a child, the play segues right into her childhood. Scenes of Mabel's early, forbiddingly formal family life are used to comment loudly on the claustrophobia of sexual role-playing, underscored by cross-casting among the ensemble.By the way, these actors -- who also include Dylan Baker, David Lansbury, Casey Biggs and Kandis Chappell -- are charmingly dextrous in an assortment of roles. The sets (by Ralph Funicello), costumes (Robert Morgan) and lighting (Kenneth Posner) are all first-rate. And Mr. O'Brien, rebounding from the disaster of last season's ''Little Foxes,'' has provided a seamless staging. In fact, it's hard to imagine a more completely realized production of ''Pride's Crossing.'' That the play's limitations are still glaringly evident shouldn't stop you from seeing it. If Ms. Howe's script can suggest pulp romance tricked out in fey disguises, Ms. Jones is a marvel of unaffected strength and empathy that are as carefully modulated as they are unwavering. Her character may complain of her life that she didn't ''stay the distance.'' It would be impossible to say the same of this actress's performance.PRIDE'S CROSSINGBy Tina Howe; directed by Jack O'Brien; sets by Ralph Funicello; costumes by Robert Morgan; lighting by Kenneth Posner; music and sound by Mark Bennett; projections by Jan Hartley; stage manager, Julie Baldauff. Presented by Lincoln Center Theater, under the dirction of Andre Bishop and Bernard Gersten. At the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.WITH: Cherry Jones (Mabel Tidings Bigelow), Angie Phillips (Vita Bright, Phineas Tidings, Pru O'Neill and Kitty Lowell), Dylan Baker (Chandler Coffin, Mary O'Neill and Dr. Peaboy), David Lansbury (West Bright, Frazier Tidings, David Bloom and Pinky Wheelock), Casey Biggs (Gus Tidings, Anton Gurevitch, Porter Bigelow and Wheels Wheelock), Kandis Chappell (Maud Tidings and Julia Renoir) and Julia McIlvaine (Minty Renoir and Emma Bigelow).