https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/theater/tony-kushner-plans-a-trump-play-and-a-new-west-side-story.html
Tony Kushner Plans a Trump Play, and a New ‘West Side Story’ - The New York Times
Theater,Movies,Kushner  Tony,Trump  Donald J,West Side Story (Movie),United States Politics and Government,Spielberg  Steven
July 19, 2017
140
Tony Kushner — the playwright whose magnum opus, “Angels in America,” painted a kaleidoscopic portrait of the United States’ AIDS crisis while it was still unfolding — is working on a new play about President Trump.In an interview with The Daily Beast, Mr. Kushner, who won a Pulitzer Prize for “Angels,” said that he was planning to write a work set two years before the 2016 election, with Mr. Trump as one of the characters.Still, he said in the interview, it “feels very soon” to grapple with the election, and the play is in its early stages of development.“It certainly feels like folly that I or anyone else has a definitive understanding or comprehensive understanding” of what was going on, Mr. Kushner said. “I have my guesses like everyone else has, but it will take some time and a lot will depend on how it is resolved.”Mr. Trump was close with Roy Cohn, the lawyer who died of complications from AIDS in 1986 and is among the main characters in “Angels in America.” Mr. Kushner portrayed Mr. Cohn, who insisted until his death that he had liver cancer and not AIDS, as closeted and homophobic.Asked whether Mr. Cohn would appear as a ghost in the Trump play, as a spectral Ethel Rosenberg does in “Angels,” Mr. Kushner said: “I think I’ve done all I want to do with him. Maybe not. We’ll see.”Mr. Kushner gave no timeline for the play, and didn’t say whether it would be completed before the end of Mr. Trump’s first term.“I gambled with ‘Angels,’ which is set in the Reagan era but which I felt would be historically significant 30, 40, 50 years later, because something really fundamental had shifted under Reagan,” he said. “The same thing is true with Trump.”Elsewhere in the interview, Mr. Kushner said he was working with Steven Spielberg on a remake of “West Side Story,” the beloved 1961 movie musical directed by Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise.He emphasized that he was working on the screenplay, and that Leonard Bernstein’s score — “the greatest score of a musical ever written,” he said — would remain unchanged. The work would also still be set on the Upper West Side of Manhattan in the 1950s.“I’m interested that we see love at first sight, as opposed to lust,” Mr. Kushner said of his version of the screenplay.He added, “By the time they’re singing ‘Maria’ and ‘Tonight,’ things are at a much deeper plane than just two horny kids.”Mr. Kushner, who could not be reached by phone or email for comment on Wednesday, did not tell The Daily Beast when the film would begin production.