http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/29/upshot/kansas-tax-cut-leaves-brownback-with-less-money.html
Kansas Tax Cut Leaves Brownback With Less Money - The New York Times
Small Business,Income Tax,Kansas,Brownback  Sam,Tax Credits  Deductions and Exemptions
June 27, 2014
8434
Kansas has a problem. In April and May, the state planned to collect $651 million from personal income tax. But instead, it received only $369 million.In 2012, Kansas lawmakers passed a large and rather unusual income tax cut. It was expected to reduce state tax revenue by more than 10 percent, and Gov. Sam Brownback said it would create “tens of thousands of jobs.”In part, the tax cut worked in the typical way, by cutting tax rates and increasing the standard deduction. But Kansas also eliminated tax on various kinds of income, including income described commonly — and sometimes misleadingly — as “small-business income.” Basically, if your income results in the generation of a Form 1099-MISC instead of a W-2, it’s probably not taxable anymore in Kansas.Consider me. I draw a salary from The New York Times; if I lived in Kansas, I’d pay state income tax on it. I also earn income from other news outlets, including MSNBC, where I am not a payroll employee. That makes me a “small-business owner” in the eyes of the government, and if I lived in Kansas, my income from MSNBC would be tax-free.While no state has gone as far as Kansas, four others — Missouri, Ohio, Oregon and South Carolina — have passed laws in the last decade that give some small-business owners lower tax rates than wage earners.By creating this preference for some types of income over others, Kansas has run into at least five problems: It’s sometimes possible to turn taxable salary income into untaxed “business” income.The Times has me on its staff, but it could commission freelance work from me instead. Income from the same work would then become tax-free under the Kansas rules.Jim Dunning Jr., managing partner of Dunning & Associates C.P.A.s in Wichita, says he has seen a few clients change the way their businesses are incorporated to take advantage of the tax law. Many small firms are structured as S-corporations, and federal law requires an S-corporation’s owner-managers to pay themselves at least a “reasonable” salary. But by converting to a limited liability company, or L.L.C., owners can set their salaries to zero and take all of their income from the company as profits, thus avoiding any Kansas tax. A lot of the beneficiaries of the tax break won’t be small businesses.Many are sole proprietors like me, who are fundamentally engaged in labor, not entrepreneurship, and aren’t likely to hire anybody just because they receive a tax break.At the other end of the spectrum, there’s no size limit on “small businesses” as defined by Kansas and the Internal Revenue Service. The Kansas tax break does not extend to C-corporations, the typical corporate form used by large publicly traded companies. But large companies can be structured in forms typically used by small businesses. For example, as of 2005, only 0.2 percent of business partnerships — which Kansas counts as small businesses — had earnings of more than $50 million, but they accounted for 57 percent of all partnership earnings.The investment giant Fidelity Investments converted from a C-corporation to an L.L.C. in 2007, and thus stopped paying corporate-level income tax. Fidelity’s owners pay federal tax on the share of Fidelity’s income attributable to them, but in Kansas the income would not face state income tax at either the corporate or the individual level. It’s not clear that there’s anything special about small businesses for the purpose of job creation. A 2013 study by economists from the Census Bureau and the University of Maryland found that while young firms add jobs more quickly than older ones, the size of a firm does not appear to drive job growth.And indeed, while Governor Brownback wrote last month that the tax cuts were allowing businesses to “hire more people and invest in needed equipment,” job growth in Kansas has been modest since he signed the bill, trailing the national average and the rate in three of its four neighboring states.  Some of the revenue loss doesn’t even benefit taxpayers.Let’s say you own an L.L.C. in Kansas but live in Oklahoma. Mr. Dunning, the accountant in Wichita, described clients in this situation who have oil and gas interests along the state border. The tax change in Kansas relieves those business owners of their obligation to pay income tax to Kansas — but they also lose a credit on their Oklahoma tax returns for taxes paid to Kansas, so they just end up paying more to Oklahoma. This provides no particular incentive to do business in Kansas.Small-business owners who switch from an S-corporation to a limited liability company also face a federal tax hit that partly offsets their Kansas tax savings, again enriching another government at Kansas’ expense, and blunting the tax changes’ benefit to businesses. All of which brings us to the last issue. The state budget is suffering.Of course, lawmakers in Kansas knew when they passed the tax cuts that this would happen; the question is whether they will lose even more revenue than they expected over the long run.The Kansas Legislative Research Department — the state-level equivalent of the Congressional Budget Office — issued a memo this month saying that “it appears that some of the fiscal notes associated with various income tax law changes enacted in 2012 and 2013 were understated.” Translation: It looks as if we gave out a bigger tax cut than we thought.Steve Stotts, the director of taxation at the Kansas Department of Revenue, disagrees. He says the April and May shortfall is driven by a one-time federal tax event unrelated to Kansas state policy that isn’t indicative of future revenue shortfalls.The “fiscal cliff” at the end of 2012 induced people to shift whatever income they could into 2012 to take advantage of low capital-gains tax rates before they went up. That lifted income tax collections, but only for one year (2013, when final payments for tax year 2012 were made). As a result, income tax receipts in 2014 are lower than they were in 2013, and many states underestimated just how much they would drop.But Kansas missed by more than most. According to data collected by the Rockefeller Institute, of 17 states that produce public monthly income tax revenue projections, Kansas’ April error — off by 28 percent — was by far the largest. No other state missed by more than 16 percent, suggesting that a failure to anticipate falling capital gains tax revenue was not the only problem in Kansas.As revenue comes in over the next few months, Kansas will learn just how big of a tax cut it’s given out in the name of small business, and what it will have to do to the rest of the state budget to make the tax cut affordable.