http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/25/books/review/david-ezra-steins-dinosaur-kisses-and-more.html
David Ezra Stein’s ‘Dinosaur Kisses,’ and More - The New York Times
Books and Literature
Aug. 23, 2013
1462
DINOSAUR KISSES Written and illustrated by David Ezra Stein.32 pp. Candlewick Press. $15.99. (Picture book; ages 2 to 5)Stomp! Chomp! Watch out, here comes Dinah, an irrepressible baby dinosaur who starts life doing the kinds of things big, aggressive reptiles do. But a chance sighting of two much smaller, fluffier creatures exchanging a kiss sets Dinah on a new mission. Her attempts to do something that isn’t in her nature make for silly fun that’s likely to set preschoolers chomping and stomping around the room and maybe exchanging a few kisses of their own.CHICK-O-SAURUS REX By Lenore Jennewein.Illustrated by Daniel Jennewein.32 pp. Simon & Schuster. $16.99. (Picture book; ages 4 to 8)Snobbish farmyard bullies won’t let Little Chick play in their treehouse; his family isn’t up to scratch. “If your father isn’t brave and mighty, you’ll never be either.” But Chick digs deeper into his past and unearths some very big — T. rex! — bones. Treehouse acceptance ensured, he shows his own mettle while also remembering the rights of other little creatures. Daniel Jennewein’s bold outlines and expressive animals make this simple story, with its interesting DNA fact, into an entertaining, good-hearted romp.GUS, THE DINOSAUR BUS By Julia Liu.Illustrated by Bei Lynn.32 pp. Houghton Mifflin. $12.99. (Picture book; ages 4 to 8)Getting to school in the morning would be a lot more fun if it meant sliding out your window onto the back of a friendly green dinosaur. Though other picture books have imagined the narrative possibilities of living with oversize animals, Gus, a sweet-faced herbivore who’s happy to help out, is an especially charming addition to the genre. When the Gus bus runs into trouble, kids from school help him find an occupation that’s an even better fit.HOW BIG WERE DINOSAURS? Written and illustrated by Lita Judge.40 pp. Roaring Brook Press. $17.99. (Picture book; ages 6 to 9)Judge knows about dinosaurs; she started going on digs at the age of 15, and published “Born to Be Giants: How Baby Dinosaurs Grew to Rule the World” in 2010. Here she compares dinosaurs with animals (and S.U.V.’s) on earth today. The result is an amusing visual mismatch; a boy clings for dear life to the neck of a galloping Struthiomimus while racehorses struggle to keep up; three cows pause in their grazing to peer worriedly at a Stegosaurus (who weighs as much as they do, combined).DINOSAUROLOGY The Search for a Lost World By Raleigh Rimes.Illustrated. 30 pp. Candlewick Press. $19.99. (Novelty book; ages 8 to 12)The large-format books in the “Ology” series, with their thick, embossed covers and scrapbooklike pages with envelopes of coded messages and tiny artifacts, are just the thing for rainy weekends and late-night flashlight reading. “Dinosaurology,” supposedly the account of a 1907 “expedition into the unknown,” is packed with detailed illustrations, mini-biographies of real and imagined paleontologists and a through-narrative about an island where dinosaurs still roam. Be warned: may cause a severe outbreak of dinophilia among middle-grade readers.