https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/magazine/who-made-that-tabasco-sauce.html
Who Made That Tabasco Sauce? - The New York Times
Inventions and Patents,Sauces,McIlhenny  Edmund (1815-90),Condiments,Peppers,Louisiana
Aug. 29, 2014
6324
In the years before the Civil War, Edmund McIlhenny was a New Orleans banker and bon vivant whose pleasures included boats, horses and spicy food. But after the war, with much of the South in ruins, McIlhenny was unable to find work. After pounding the pavement in New Orleans for months, he retreated to his wife’s family’s sugar plantation on Petite Anse (now called Avery) Island, a 2,200-acre salt dome rising from the marshes of southern Louisiana. There, in the late 1860s, he tended his garden — particularly his bushes of spicy red peppers.Accounts differ as to when exactly McIlhenny acquired the seeds for those Capsicum frutescens peppers. But in the years after the war, he began using them to make pepper sauce, a popular Louisiana condiment. His method was a laborious one that involved crushing the peppers with a potato masher and mixing them with rock salt from the island’s own salt mines, then aging the mash twice, adding vinegar in between. After straining the resulting mixture through a series of sieves, he decanted it into castoff cologne bottles.On Jan. 18, 1868, McIlhenny sent a letter to a family friend in New York. Always a meticulous record keeper, he noted the contents in his correspondence logbook: “Hu. Auchincloss, N.Y., thanking him for a Stanhope lens and a water-drop glass for my microscope. And sending him a bottle of my Tabasco pepper sauce.”Those who received such gifts were so enthusiastic that McIlhenny resolved to bring his Tabasco sauce to market. That year, he planted a bumper crop of peppers. A year later, he sent 658 bottles of his sauce to grocers in New Orleans, where they sold for $1 apiece.Sales increased each year, and by 1872 Tabasco was being distributed throughout the Northeast, each bottle adorned with a warning, “CAUTION: One or two drops are enough for a plate of soup, meat, oysters &c., &c.” But as the condiment’s popularity grew, comic tales of people mistaking Tabasco for ketchup and slathering it over their food began appearing in the pages of The New York Times. “B’jocks, though, I was thunderin’ nigh dead when I fust et that ketchup,” a seafaring New Englander exclaims in one such account, published in 1901. “Dreadful powerful stuff that is to put on victuals.”By then Tabasco had begun to achieve international renown, thanks to the marketing efforts of Edmund’s enterprising sons John and Ned. Edmund McIlhenny had died 10 years before, never suspecting that Tabasco would be his enduring legacy. “He died thinking himself much more successful as an antebellum banker than as a sauce manufacturer,” observes the McIlhenny company historian Shane K. Bernard. “I don’t know that he thought he would be remembered for Tabasco sauce at all — or really for anything.”