https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/dining/western-yunnan-crossing-bridge-noodle-chinese-soup-restaurant-review.html
For This Soup, Some Assembly Is Required (and Provided) - The New York Times
Restaurants,Western Yunnan Crossing Bridge Noodle (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Chinese Food (Cuisine),Sunset Park (Brooklyn  NY)
June 2, 2017
6098
“Once upon a time, there was a scholar who was studying hard for his imperial exams on a small island of Yunnan.” So begins the legend of crossing-the-bridge noodles, as written on the wall at Western Yunnan Crossing Bridge Noodle in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.The scholar’s wife brought him soup every day, but by the time she crossed the bridge it was cold. He grew wan. Then she started spooning chicken fat over the broth to keep the heat in, and carrying the other ingredients separately so they wouldn’t get soggy.For years, one of the only places to find these noodles in New York was Yun Nan Flavour Snack, a takeout shop in Sunset Park that eventually expanded to a larger, sit-down space and changed its name from Snack to Garden. Western Yunnan Crossing Bridge Noodle opened in March just half a mile away, on a block of rowhouses fronted by fire escapes, occasionally interrupted by shops with signs almost entirely in Chinese.Here the soup comes seething in a stone bowl — heart-shaped stickers on the tables warn, “Please beware of burns” — with springy rice noodles on the side and a tray of ingredients around a box of raw beef. The waitresses take charge, first slipping into the soup the beef with its broad stripes of fat, then a raw quail egg like a golden eye.This is followed, swiftly, by a clingy sauce of ground pork and fermented soybeans; small rubbery umbrellas of wood-ear mushrooms and kernels of corn; dense pressed bean curd, invoking havarti cheese, and limp bean-curd skin like shredded bandages; suancai (pickled mustard greens) and garlic chives; panels of canned ham disconcertingly akin to Spam; and a chicken wing steamed over soy-tinged water.Last in are the noodles. Instructions on the wall advise waiting 10 seconds before you eat. (If you do not speak Mandarin or Fuzhou dialect, the waitresses work in silence.)The bowl is wide and deep, and the soup seems to go on forever. (Each is less than $10.) The broths let the flavors of the different add-ins come through, with lovely sunny notes from the bright, sweet corn and, in one precious spoonful, the voluptuous quail egg yolk. In lieu of beef, you may substitute a pork chop, steamed like the chicken wing and arriving slightly damp, or loops of pig intestine, teeth-resistant and netherworldly. But the strips of beef take best to the broth, thin enough to cook quickly without seizing up.Of the five broths on offer, ignore the one infiltrated by kimchi, which has heat but little tang, and another with a tomato base that can’t help but invoke, for a Western diner, an attenuated version of Campbell’s tomato soup. Greatness lies elsewhere, in the so-called Original, which is cloudy with fat, from stock made with a whole chicken, and tastes clean and rich at once. This is even better in a version rouged by chile oil and hiding traces of Sichuan peppercorn, their presence betrayed by a gradual blurring of the lips. Best is one suffused by sour pickled millet pepper, indigenous to Yunnan Province, in southwestern China.There is not much need for side dishes: cucumbers tossed with seemingly more sugar than vinegar; Hmong-style beef, jerkylike in texture, fried with tsaoko (a type of wild black cardamom) and cinnamon and jarringly sweet. Better to focus on the soup and finish the meal with pumpkin cakes, which harbor little hearts of red bean paste.The dining room is half-sunk under the sidewalk, the entrance noted by jagged wooden signs. A portrait of an Akha woman from the hills of Yunnan, her headdress fringed with silver coins, hangs by the door. In a departure from the neighborhood’s typically efficient, underdecorated Chinese restaurants, the inside is papered in black murals with bright drawings — of the pondering scholar and his persevering wife, of stray leaves and spice — and lit by tasseled lanterns. Diners huddle at dark wood tables with chicly skeletal chairs.The owners, Tara Chen and her younger brother, Yong Ting Chen, the chef, are natives not of Yunnan but of Fujian Province, on China’s southeast coast, like many of the neighborhood’s recent immigrants. The restaurant, it turns out, is a franchise of a chain in China. Mr. Chen, the chef, studied hard to learn the recipes.As for the scholar on the island: He regained his strength, fortified by his wife’s soups. And passed the tests.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.