https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/11/fashion/flower-shop-lower-east-side-night-life.html
No Guest List at This Lower East Side Hot Spot - The New York Times
Flower Shop (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Bars and Nightclubs,Lower East Side (Manhattan  NY)
April 11, 2017
4212
For night-life establishments taking a democratic approach, early buzz necessitates a balancing act on the velvet rope. The Flower Shop, a bar-and-grill that opened on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in early March, has no guest list, reservations or sneering doorman. Instead, the rule is simply “one in, one out,” as 20 hopefuls learned on a recent Thursday night as they waited their turn.Inside, it made sense. Early adopters like fashion designers, a Kanye West henchman, pro skaters, a model or three — all the nocturnal critters who sniff out the latest hot spot — were manifold. But their reign is not guaranteed. “No one is more special than anyone else,” said Ronnie Flynn, an owner. “We’ll walk out there when there’s a line, and say: ‘Guys, don’t wait in the cold. We’re not a club.’”The PlaceThe Flower Shop is on Eldridge Street, wedged into a squiggle of bodywork parlors, ramen slurperies and beauty salons that go dark at night. The ground floor is a restaurant and bar with wood-panel walls, camel-hue booths and curios like a parliament of ceramic owls perched overhead. It feels like the house from “Misery,” if the lead character were into beer instead of literature. Downstairs is a rumpus room with kitschy posters for “Crocodile Dundee” and ’NSync, orange carpeting and a sunken fireplace.The CrowdVaries by time and day. Downtown regulars in quilted camo, art kids, Australian entrepreneurs, normies in plaid and Raya subscribers in chokers. One evening, a young woman in a red Vetements hoodie slid by a bearded tech-bro wearing a fleece vest and a backward cap with the logo for a failed stock trading app.The PlaylistNo D.J. Upstairs mixes Australian tunes, classic rock and country; downstairs has a jukebox with selections from Ella Fitzgerald, Motorhead and NOFX.Getting InNo cover, 21 and over. When at capacity, there may be a wait.DrinksReasonable. Bud Light is $5, vodka soda is $9 and house cocktails like the “cold brew martini” are $13. The menu includes cheeseburgers ($16) and 12-ounce rib-eye steaks ($32).