http://www.nytimes.com/1996/10/20/nyregion/police-captain-is-shot-in-the-back-in-a-troubled-precinct-in-the-bronx.html
Police Captain Is Shot in the Back in a Troubled Precinct in the Bronx - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,PLAVNICK  STEVEN,ATTACKS ON POLICE,MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS
Oct. 20, 1996
7157
The executive officer of one of New York City's most violent and troubled precincts was shot in the back early yesterday as he arrived in an unmarked patrol car at his station house in the central Bronx. He survived, and the police mounted an intense search for an assailant they said was probably a sniper.The victim, Capt. Steven Plavnick, 47, was struck in the right back by ricocheting fragments of a bullet -- one of four fired from the street or a roof nearby -- that crashed through the right rear panel of his car at 4:20 A.M. outside the 46th Precinct station at 2120 Ryer Avenue, near East 181st Street, the police said.The captain, a 25-year police veteran who had been driving alone while supervising a midnight patrol shift, was rushed by other officers in a patrol car to the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, where he was listed in serious but stable condition after surgery to remove the fragments.Meanwhile, officers swarmed into the hallways and onto the rooftops of six-story tenements lining both sides of Ryer Avenue, threw up a cordon to seal off the surrounding blocks, and for hours pounded on doors and questioned hundreds of neighborhood residents in their apartments and on the streets. They also searched sewer drains, mailboxes, parked cars and garbage cans for a weapon.But there was no sign of the assailant or the gun used in the attack, and the motive remained a mystery, though investigators and residents focused on two possibilities: retribution by drug dealers against a police crackdown in the area, and revenge for the Oct. 7 acquittal of Officer Francis X. Livoti in the choking death of Anthony Baez, a verdict that has prompted angry protests.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, at a midafternoon news conference at City Hall, praised Captain Plavnick as ''a very fine officer'' and said he was expected to make a full recovery. Asked about a possible connection between the shooting and the Livoti case, the Mayor said, ''There is no direct evidence linking the two things.''He said, however, that there ''have been threats to that precinct'' in relation to the Livoti case and ''in general,'' and he added, ''Whether it is connected or it isn't, everyone should know that the City of New York is doing everything to have that case prosecuted.''He noted that the city had investigated the death of Anthony Baez and given evidence to the District Attorney, and he said the Police Department and the city were cooperating with United States Attorney Mary Jo White to determine whether a civil rights lawsuit should be brought against Officer Livoti. And he noted that police disciplinary action against Officer Livoti was pending.In the absence of a suspect or hard evidence in the Bronx shooting, investigators said it was not possible to say whether Captain Plavnick had been targeted specifically or randomly, or even whether he had been struck accidentally by gunfire that is common in the surrounding Morris Heights, Fordham and Bathgate sections.Captain Plavnick was the second ranking city police officer shot within nine hours. On Friday night, Lieut. Federico Narvaez, investigating a woman's complaint that she was being stalked, was fatally wounded on a Brooklyn street by a 61-year-old career criminal who was chased and killed in a gunfight with the police.In the Bronx shooting, the police said Captain Plavnick -- who joined the force in 1971, became a captain in 1988 and had been executive officer of the 46th Precinct for about a year -- was in uniform and driving a blue unmarked car.After several hours on the streets, he returned to the station house about 4:20 and was hit as he began to exit his vehicle by fragments of a bullet that broke up as it passed first through the rear metal roof-support panel and then through the back of the front seat. Four shots were fired, the police said, but it was unclear where the three other bullets struck.Investigators said they were trying to determine the trajectory of the bullets and to examine recovered fragments for ballistic characteristics, but no conclusions were immediately drawn. While much about the shooting was unknown, officers and neighborhood residents were quick to focus on the possibility of retribution for the Livoti verdict or for the police's heavy narcotics crackdown this year in the 46th Precinct.''It's been pretty tense around here,'' Officer Jose Alequin, 31, said, referring to the two weeks since Officer Livoti was found not guilty by an acting State Supreme Court justice of criminally negligent homicide in the choking death of Mr. Baez, 29, during a confrontation over a football game in December 1994.Officer Alequin's partner, Officer Rose Cruz, 37, said: ''There's been rumors there might be retribution for the Livoti trial, but officers weren't scared. I personally feel that bullet was meant for any cop who was there at that time. They were looking to injure a cop.''Maria Pichardo, 44, who lives at 2175 Ryer Avenue, agreed. ''Yeah,'' she said, ''it probably had something to do with the Livoti case. The judge should have done something to this cop because he killed Anthony Baez. It makes no sense. People are taking justice into their own hands. This is going to keep going. They're not going to be satisfied with Livoti out of jail. This is not just one case. There's too many cases of poor people being hurt by the cops.''The Medical Examiner determined that Mr. Baez's death was caused by compression of his neck and chest, complicated by an asthma condition. The defense focused on asthma as the cause of death. Acting Justice Gerald Sheindlin, in his ruling, offered a scathing assessment of Officer Livoti's conduct and said he had used a chokehold barred by the police. But he concluded that the prosecution had not met the law's narrow criteria for a conviction.Over the past two weeks, there have been angry demonstrations, attended by members of the Latin Kings and Nietas youth gangs and by hundreds of neighborhood residents and friends of Mr. Baez's family, outside the Bronx County Courthouse on the Grand Concourse and outside the 46th Precinct station house.Mr. Baez's parents, Iris and Ramon Baez, have not spoken of any revenge against Officer Livoti, but have said they wanted him out of uniform and punished for his actions in the death of their son. Another Baez son, David, said in a telephone interview yesterday that the family had no control over what other people did. ''All we can do is say that at every protest and rally there has been no rioting,'' he said.Investigators also raised the possibility that the shooting of Captain Plavnick had been the work of drug dealers hurt by the police crackdown on narcotics in the 46th Precinct this year. The shooting of a detective by a sniper in Brooklyn two months ago may have been a retaliatory strike by drug dealers, they said.The drug crackdown, which began last January, has targeted sections of lower Manhattan and north Brooklyn as well as the central Bronx. In August, investigators said that informers told them that drug dealers had met earlier in the month in a park near a Brownsville housing project to plot the shooting of a police officer in retaliation for the north Brooklyn drug crackdown.Forty-eight hours later, Detective David Joseph was shot three times by a sniper while making a call at a public telephone booth in the project. The detective was spared serious injury by his bulletproof vest, but commanders believe the attack was evidence that the crackdown was hurting the dealers.The 46th Precinct, which is bounded by the Cross Bronx Expressway, Fordham Road, Webster Avenue and the Major Deegan Expressway, is one of the most drug-infested and violent areas of the city. The police have recorded well over 90,000 radio calls annually there in recent years. There were 42 homicides there last year, even though murders and other crimes have fallen dramatically in most other areas of the city.