https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/03/nyregion/nypd-body-cameras.html
City Comptroller Blocks Contract to Buy Body Cameras for Police Officers - The New York Times
Cameras,Office of the Comptroller (NYC),Police Department (NYC),Vievu LLC
Feb. 3, 2017
4862
New York City’s comptroller on Friday declined to approve a $6.4 million contract for body-worn cameras for police officers, creating a new obstacle to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s already ambitious plan to outfit every patrol officer with the devices by the end of 2019.The comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, returned the contract to the Police Department with questions that, his office said, had to be answered before he would approve it. The contract would then have to be resubmitted to his office for consideration.“We are seeking additional information on this contract from the N.Y.P.D. and it will not be registered at this time,” said Tyrone Stevens, a spokesman for Mr. Stringer.The decision came three days after Mr. de Blasio, who is facing re-election this year, vowed that every patrol officer in the city would be wearing the cameras within three years.None of the city’s officers currently wear body cameras, despite a 2013 federal court order requiring that the Police Department create a large-scale pilot program using the devices. That program, overseen by a court-appointed monitor, was set to begin this year and stemmed from the court’s decision against the city in a lawsuit over its stop-and-frisk practices.But the planning between the city and a vendor for a pilot program cannot normally begin until a contract is registered. That the body-camera contract would have to be refiled with the comptroller added a delay to a program that had already been redesigned once by the federal monitor and has yet to be rolled out on the streets.Austin Finan, a spokesman for the mayor, said the procurement process had been “rigorous and extensive” and that it was “baffling that anybody would stand in the way of greater transparency and the deployment of these important policing tools.”The Police Department has around 36,000 uniformed members, though not all work in a patrol function. It was not immediately clear how many would wear body cameras under the mayor’s proposal.Mr. de Blasio said on Friday he was confident the Police Department and the city could quickly expand the program from an initial group of 1,000 officers, to roughly 5,000 and then to the whole patrol force.Mr. Finan said that “the comptroller will not slow down our commitment.”Under the City Charter, the comptroller can reject a contract only for specific reasons, such as evidence of possible corruption, a lack of financing to pay for the contract, or an absence of certification from the mayor and Law Department that the contract was legal and proper.Mr. Stevens declined to comment on the specifics of the information sought by Mr. Stringer, who has been weighing a possible challenge to the mayor, in the contract, which was signed by the city with Vievu, a Seattle-based company.