https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/fashion/everyday-people-dance-party-black-diversity.html
A Daytime Dance Party That Celebrates Black Diversity - The New York Times
Parties (Social),Blacks,Fashion and Apparel,Bars and Nightclubs,Everyday People
July 17, 2017
1804
They wore lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender slogans, and cowboy fringe, polo shirts and jackets bedazzled with Swarovski crystals. There were Afros and head wraps, and bodies covered in body paint or nothing at all. They danced to layered, percussive beats, the music vibrant and pulsing.“I’m bubbling inside, but I’m trying to act calm,” said Tolulope Oye, 21, a student at the Fashion Institute of Technology, who wore yellow track pants embroidered with the words “Never Forget Where You Came From.” As a Nigerian immigrant growing up in Columbus, Ohio, she had dreamed of attending this party since she was a teenager. “I’ve been looking for the perfect niche,” she said, “and I think I found it today.”It was the Memorial Day edition of Everyday People, a socially conscious daytime party that celebrates the African diaspora, held at Output, a club in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Started in 2012 as a monthly brunch on the Lower East Side, the parties now draw thousands and are held in other cities, including Birmingham, Ala., and Chicago, as well as in Africa and the Caribbean.The mission is to celebrate the diversity of black culture — African and American, immigrant and first generation — through community, music and food. It is designed to be a safe space, a proud space, a space to be anything you want to be, said Saada Ahmed, 29, the party’s creative director and a model for brands like J. Crew and Nike.“People can put their guard down,” Ms. Ahmed said. “You go to the South and you see L.G.B.T.Q. kids knowing they can be themselves and no one will hurt them. Daytime parties mean Muslim women” — Ms. Ahmed included — “feel more comfortable.”“Celebrating ourselves is definitely a political act,” she added. “It’s important to release all the pain.”It wasn’t so long ago that Ms. Ahmed, who grew up in Atlanta, was new to New York, arriving on a Chinatown bus with no job and few connections. Like many of the young people who now flock to her parties, she was driven to prove herself.Between various sales and production assistant gigs, she started hanging out with East African creative types and eventually met her future partners: Roblé Ali, a chef who later starred in a Bravo reality show, “Chef Roble and Company,” and Mohamed Hamad, an electrical-engineer-turned-D.J.Ms. Ahmed, Mr. Ali and Mr. Hamad wanted to create a social event for their community, so in 2012, they started a brunch party at the Hotel on Rivington, where one of Mr. Hamad’s friends managed the food and beverage.“There were great parties at Bagatelle and Lavo, but they didn’t really appeal to our group of people, our group of friends,” Mr. Ali, 33, said. “A lot of these people are millennials that are striving and may not have hit their financial stride.”Though he and Mr. Hamad were already established in their careers, Ms. Ahmed, who then did online sales for Phillip Lim, was not. “I felt lost,” she said. “I didn’t think I was good at anything.” Working with Mr. Hamad and Mr. Ali gave her confidence.Soon 150 people were coming in for brunch. “And they didn’t want to leave at 5 p.m., so we went until 8,” Mr. Ali said. Eventually, the parties became too big for the hotel, so they were moved a block south to the DL, a three-story event space on nearby Delancey Street.Today, Ms. Ahmed, Mr. Ali and Mr. Hamad collaborate with the Brooklyn Museum and the New York City Parks Department to hold Everyday People events. In recent months, the partners have organized events in Atlanta and Charlotte, N.C. But three New York-based parties form the core of the business: a hip-hop and R&B event at the Watermark Bar on South Street, a Caribbean-influenced party at La Marina in Upper Manhattan, and an African music dance party at Output.The Output party drew about 1,800 guests on Memorial Day and showcased African dance music by Electrafrique, a dance party based in Dakar, Senegal. OkayAfrica, a media platform featuring African music and culture, was a sponsor. “There’s a whole musical wave out of Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa being played in nightclubs all over the world and setting trends,” Mr. Hamad said. “In the past two or three years, I’ve been able to make a living playing the music I love.”The rising popularity of Afrobeats, Mr. Hamad said, is symbolic of the growing popularity of African culture among African-Americans, which is recognized not just by those who attend Everyday People parties, but by brands like Bacardi, Nike and Samsung that are marketing to them.Zandile Blay, 34, a journalist from Jersey City and the editorial director of OkayAfrica, recently spent time in Nigeria. It was the first time, she said, that she saw “en masse so many smart, well-educated, focused, vibrant, happy, stylish youth that looked like me.”The first time she witnessed a similar scene in the United States was at an Everyday People party. “It makes me realize that magic — that black magic — is not only on the continent,” she said. “At this party, you get to see this is real and it’s happening in America.”