https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/briefing/antarctica-donald-trump-jr-senate.html
Antarctica, Donald Trump Jr., Senate: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 12, 2017
3016
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good evening. Here’s the latest.1. Rancor engulfed the White House. But before we get to that, there was a major development in climate news.The map of Antarctica will have to be redrawn now that a chunk of floating ice the size of Delaware has broken off. It’s one of the largest icebergs ever recorded, weighing more than a trillion metric tons.There’s no scientific consensus over whether global warming is to blame, but there is agreement that it may be a preview of what’s to come as Antarctica heats up._____2. President Trump denounced reports about his son’s meeting with a Russian lawyer as part of “the greatest witch hunt in political history.” He fired off posts on Twitter insisting that Donald Trump Jr. was “innocent” and suggested that he may have been “the victim.”We collected the best partisan writing on the whole affair, and our reporter discussed unearthing the emails on our podcast “The Daily.” Above, the media setup outside the White House.Mr. Trump heads to France tonight, where the newly elected president, Emmanuel Macron, invited him to celebrate Bastille Day. “The whiz kid of French politics has a seemingly limitless confidence in his capacity for seduction,” our correspondent writes._____3. In a medical milestone, a gene-altering leukemia therapy got a unanimous vote of confidence from an F.D.A. panel. The treatment alters a patient’s own cells to fight leukemia, transforming them into what scientists call “a living drug.”The F.D.A. is likely to accept the recommendation, which would make the treatment the first gene therapy ever to reach the market. It was developed by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania and licensed to Novartis.Emily Whitehead, 12, above, was the first child ever given the altered cells. She attended the panel meeting with her parents to advocate the approval of the drug. She was treated at age 6 and is now cancer-free._____4. Christopher Wray, the president’s nominee for F.B.I. director, appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee for his confirmation hearing.He is a former federal prosecutor under President George W. Bush and a criminal defense lawyer. He faced questions about whether he will maintain the bureau’s independence and resist pressure from the White House.He vowed to “never allow the F.B.I.’s work to be driven by anything other than the facts, the law and the impartial pursuit of justice. Period.”_____5. In the Senate, Democrats are going to try to block the Republican health care bill by exploiting procedural rules.Mitch McConnell has set the health bill for debate and a vote next week. And he has promised a new version of the bill on Thursday.He has also delayed the Senate’s August recess. Our columnist says that Republicans can’t afford to face their constituents without another push to pass the contentious legislation._____6. In recent years, on campus after campus, higher education has been roiled by high-profile cases of sexual assault accusations. Now Betsy DeVos is stepping into that maelstrom.She plans to review Obama-era policies on campus sexual assault after complaints from the accused that their rights are being ignored. She’s scheduled to meet with women who say they were assaulted, accused students and their families on Thursday._____7. The Marine Corps transport plane that crashed in Mississippi, killing 16 service members, experienced an emergency at high altitude.That’s the latest on the crash from the Marines, and bolsters witness accounts that the plane exploded or broke apart in the air. Debris from the crash was found in two places a mile apart. The names of the dead still have not been released.The plane, a KC-130T built in 1993, is a mainstay of the U.S. military. Experts said that with proper maintenance, its age should not have been a safety issue._____8. Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president of Brazil known as “Lula,” was convicted of corruption and money laundering and sentenced to nearly 10 years in prison.The case stemmed from charges that a construction company gave him over $1 million worth of work on his beachfront apartment in return for contracts from the state-controlled oil company.He has called the allegations “a farce” and said he’ll run in next year’s presidential election._____9. Our tech writer says there’s a lesson in this week’s news: Step away from the inbox.He argues the dust-up over Donald Trump Jr.’s emails may serve as the final nail in the coffin as office workers move to messaging services that allow for auto-deletion and encryption.Email is an older, less secure system that, because of its ubiquity, “provides an almost uncomfortably intimate view into the historical record.”_____10. Finally, the late-night hosts went to town with — you guessed it — some news about email.“Donald Jr. hired a lawyer yesterday,” Jimmy Kimmel quipped. “This lawyer in the past represented members of the Mafia, which actually makes sense. Because the Trumps are like the Corleone family — if all of them were Fredo.”And our TV critic has some soothing words for all you anxious binge-watchers out there: It’s O.K. to skip episodes. “There’s a kind of Protestant-work-ethic guilt attached to skipping,” he notes. “But do what you gotta do.”Have a great night._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.Want to look back? Here’s last night’s briefing.What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.