http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/13/world/americas/eduardo-cunha-brazil-impeachment-dilma-rousseff.html
Brazil’s Congress Expels Lawmaker Who Led Ouster of President - The New York Times
Cunha  Eduardo Consentino da (1958- ),Rousseff  Dilma,Brazil,Corruption (Institutional),Cruz  Claudia (1967- )
Sept. 13, 2016
6936
RIO DE JANEIRO — Brazil’s lower house of Congress voted overwhelmingly late Monday night to expel the conservative lawmaker who led the charge to oust Dilma Rousseff, Brazil’s former president, reflecting how on edge the country’s political class remains over colossal corruption scandals.The chamber voted 450 to 10 to strip the lawmaker, Eduardo Cunha, of his seat as he faces a trial on graft charges. As a result, Mr. Cunha, 57, an evangelical Christian radio commentator who was the speaker of the lower house, loses the broad legal privileges that normally protect federal legislators from imprisonment.The expulsion of Mr. Cunha from the chamber he once deftly commanded, ranking him among Brazil’s most powerful politicians just a few months ago, shows that the country’s political turmoil is far from settled. The new administration of President Michel Temer, the former vice president who broke with Ms. Rousseff, is grappling with low approval ratings, street protests and claims that it is trying to stifle corruption inquiries.Mr. Cunha faces an array of corruption charges, making him a symbol of the widespread graft and impunity in Brazil’s political system. Federal investigators say he took as much as $40 million in bribes, laundering the money through an evangelical megachurch while squirreling away millions in Swiss bank accounts.“It’s not me who says that Cunha is a criminal,” said Jean Wyllys, a socially liberal lawmaker who is among Mr. Cunha’s most prominent opponents. “It’s the prosecutor general of the republic in his indictment. And I agree with it.”After losing the vote, Mr. Cunha is expected to be made ineligible to run for office for eight years.Even as he battled bribery charges, Mr. Cunha was arguably the top ally of Mr. Temer in seeking to impeach Ms. Rousseff on charges of manipulating the federal budget to conceal economic problems. Unlike Mr. Cunha and dozens of others in Congress who maneuvered to drive her from office, Ms. Rousseff remains rare among senior political figures in that she has not been accused of illegally enriching herself.Mr. Cunha, who frequently quotes from the Bible on social media, has repeatedly insisted that he is innocent. But as a prominent member of Mr. Temer’s centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, which is plagued by various other graft scandals, Mr. Cunha steadily found himself shunned by his fellow lawmakers in the capital, Brasília.Various legislators in the lower house vented their ire against Mr. Cunha on Monday night. Clarissa Garotinho, a lawmaker from Rio de Janeiro, called him a “psychopath to the point of believing his own lies.”Investigators raised pressure on Mr. Cunha by charging his wife, Cláudia Cruz, a former journalist, in the corruption case after evidence showed that a secret Swiss bank account linked to Mr. Cunha was in her name. Prosecutors found that the couple had used their holdings for tennis lessons in Florida, jaunts to luxury hotels in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, and in Paris, and shopping sprees at Giorgio Armani and Ermenegildo Zegna boutiques.Ms. Cruz, 49, said over the weekend that she was not afraid of going to prison if she is convicted of corruption charges. “I didn’t do anything for which I should be jailed,” she told the SBT television network, contending that investigators had invaded her privacy. “This is what women of my financial standing do,” she said in reference to her extravagant shopping habits.Brazil’s Supreme Court dealt a blow to Mr. Cunha in May when it removed him from his daily duties as speaker of the lower house. Still, he continued to influence the workings of the chamber behind the scenes, defiantly remaining in a palatial residence paid for by taxpayers.After he resigned as speaker in July, Mr. Cunha vowed to keep fighting to clear his name and remain in the political arena. “Politics is the only activity where you can die and be resuscitated numerous times,” he told reporters in recent days. “I’ve lived through many things, seen a lot of things. This is like a seesaw. It doesn’t worry me.”