http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/02/world/lionel-poilane-parisian-baker-missing-in-helicopter-crash.html
Lionel Poilâne, Parisian Baker, Missing in Helicopter Crash - The New York Times
FRANCE,POILANE  IRENA,POILANE  LIONEL,ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,HELICOPTERS
Nov. 2, 2002
7072
Lionel Poilâne, who baked and sold the most famous bread in Paris, was missing and presumed dead today after a helicopter he was piloting crashed off the Breton coast Thursday evening.Mr. Poilâne was traveling with his wife, Irena, aboard their Augusta 109 to the Île des Rimains, where the couple owned a second home. Shortly after the first landing attempt, which was blurred by thick fog, the helicopter crashed into the sea, according to Cmdr. Jérôme Erulin, a spokesman for the French sea rescue service.The rescue service sent a search team to look for Mr. Poilâne, who is also the president of the Organization of French Helicopter Pilots. This morning divers recovered parts of the helicopter, one body and a dog, said Commander Erulin. He could not confirm the deaths of Mr. or Mrs. Poilâne.The Poilâne family, which includes two daughters, Apollonia and Athenia, had not released a statement by tonight, but Mr. Poilâne's assistant, Sandrine Pouvreau, said, ''Mr. and Mrs. Poilâne had a helicopter accident and the bodies have not yet been recovered, and today this is all we can say.''Mr. Poilâne, who was 57, began his baking career at 14 as an apprentice to his father, Pierre Poilâne, when there was just one Poilâne bakery in Paris.After inheriting the business from his father in 1970, Mr. Poilâne turned it into a multibillion dollar empire. Today, Poilâne sells its thick, chewy, round loaves made of stone-milled wheat flour over the Internet and sends them overnight via air courier to customers around the world.In a country that reveres both food and history, Mr. Poilâne blended tradition and technology. His family's bread recipe uses the basic ingredients of flour, water and sea salt from Brittany.In the early 1980's, Mr. Poilâne decided to tap into the memories of the oldest bakers in the country for advice on how to reproduce the older, less refined bread of ordinary people. For two years, with the help of two students, he contacted more than 10,000 bakers.''Using old ways is a glorious way to make new things,'' he once told an interviewer. ''The man with the best future is the one with the longest memory.''He called his style retro-innovation, explaining that it ''takes the best of the old and the best of the new.''A Poilâne-owned factory with 40 bakers and 16th-century wood-fired clay-and-brick ovens on the outskirts of Paris produces about 15,000 loaves each day -- about 2.5 percent of all the bread served in Paris. Company-owned trucks deliver the bread to more than 2,500 shops and restaurants throughout Paris. As his business grew, Mr. Poilâne gave in to popular tastes and added croissants, tarts, brioches and other popular breads to his menu.''He was very respected in our club,'' said Jean Colanéri, secretary general of the Club des Croqueurs du Chocolat, a social club in Paris, of which Mr. Poilâne was a member. ''We loved him because he had an original spirit.''