http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/08/us/politics/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-emails.html
Newly Released Hillary Clinton Emails Offer Glimpse at Husband’s Advice - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016
Oct. 7, 2016
8609
WASHINGTON — The State Department on Friday began releasing thousands of emails the F.B.I. collected as part of its investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of state, but many were duplicates or near duplicates of messages already made public.The emails released on Friday suggested that materials from the investigation might not add significant new information to an issue that has dogged Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign for a year and a half. They nonetheless revealed still more details about her tenure as secretary and the advice she received from those closest to her, including her husband, former President Bill Clinton.One email offered a rare glimpse into the strategizing between the two Clintons on matters of foreign policy. In a message dictated to an aide, Mr. Clinton offers his recommendations for negotiating with China, India and other poor countries in the days leading to the Copenhagen conference on climate change in December 2009.“I recommend that you begin by saying that this challenge is an opportunity if we approach it the right and way,” the note read, including an unnecessary word, “and provide the right financing options so that the old energy economy no longer has an advantage over new ways of providing and consuming energy.”The State Department released only 75 new emails on Friday, including some that were merely brief replies to emails that had been previously turned over by Mrs. Clinton’s lawyers and made public under the Freedom of Information Act.Under a new court order, the department is scheduled to continue releasing batches of emails before the election on Nov. 8. That has raised hopes among Mrs. Clinton’s critics that new disclosures could still damage her prospects. At a minimum, the staggered releases will keep a focus on her use of the server, which she has repeatedly acknowledged was a mistake.The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey Jr., announced in July that he found insufficient evidence to recommend criminal charges against Mrs. Clinton, though he sharply criticized her and her aides for carelessly handling classified information that ended up in 110 emails that passed through the server.Mr. Comey has since faced intense criticism from Republicans over his handling of the investigation, including decisions to give immunity to some of Mrs. Clinton’s aides in exchange for testimony.“Folks, this is a very sad time, I’m telling you, for justice in this country,” the Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said at a recent rally, where he ridiculed the investigation.In reaction to the criticism, the F.B.I. took the unusual step of turning over to the State Department and Congress reams of materials related to its investigation, including 14,900 emails. More than 9,000 of those were deemed personal, however, and will not be made public. That leaves roughly 5,600 more, many of which will not become public until well after Election Day.It appeared that many of the emails the F.B.I. uncovered came from other accounts at the State Department or from fragments of the computer servers and phones Mrs. Clinton used.Five of the emails released on Friday included replies or forwards to emails that contained information later upgraded to classified. One included a note from Mrs. Clinton to her aide Huma Abedin in response to a long discussion on Honduras in 2009. “All of this did not print last night,” she wrote. The original message, from Jake Sullivan, a senior policy adviser both then and now, was previously released by the State Department with sections blocked on the grounds they were classified confidential.Mrs. Clinton was usually the recipient of the emails, not the sender. But in one email she expressed to a confidante what she said was her deep personal pain over the death and destruction caused by a 2010 earthquake in Haiti.“We have much to do, my friend, and I’m sending strength and blessings to you and the Haitian people,” she wrote to Dr. Paul Farmer, co-founder of a group called Partners in Health, as he was preparing to go to Haiti to help with the relief effort, in which the Clinton Foundation played an important role.“If we’re falling short in our efforts, pls yell. Love, Hillary,” she wrote.In a separate email released last year by the State Department, Chelsea Clinton warned her parents that the relief efforts were indeed falling short.The message with advice from Mr. Clinton, who has said he rarely used email, was sent through intermediaries. “I’ve had a busy day and too little time to study all the articles enough to give much good advice,” stated his note, dictated to an aide, Jason Cooper. “Call me anytime to talk,” he said, and forwarded two articles he wrote on climate change. It was signed simply “Bill.”Another email came from Mark J. Penn, Mrs. Clinton’s former pollster, analyzing President Obama’s State of the Union address in 2010 (“pretty good speech — but he seemed angry”) while praising one of hers by contrast.He offered a predication that proved false: “Only way for him to win second term is to ask you to be VP,” Mr. Penn wrote.