http://www.nytimes.com/1999/05/05/us/woman-testifies-president-made-very-forceful-sexual-advance.html
Woman Testifies President Made 'Very Forceful' Sexual Advance - The New York Times
NEWSWEEK,EISEN  RUTHIE,CLINTON  BILL,WILLEY  KATHLEEN E,STARR  KENNETH W,ISIKOFF  MICHAEL,STEELE  JULIE HIATT,SEXUAL HARASSMENT,PERJURY
May 5, 1999
6889
A former White House volunteer, Kathleen E. Willey, testified today that she had confided to her friend Julie Hiatt Steele in November 1993 that President Clinton had made a ''very forceful'' sexual advance in the White House.But Ms. Willey said she was so upset on that day, Nov. 29, 1993, that Ms. Steele had to later remind her of their conversation.It is a crucial point in the trial of Ms. Steele, who is charged with lying to investigators for the independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr when she denied that Ms. Willey had told her about the incident hours after leaving the White House.Ms. Steele says Mr. Willey first told her about the experience with Mr. Clinton in 1997, asking her to lie about it to a Newsweek reporter.Mr. Clinton has denied under oath making any advance on Ms. Willey.Earlier today, a friend and colleague in the White House social office testified that Ms. Willey had spoken of a sexual advance by Mr. Clinton on the day in question.In a barely audible voice, the friend, Ruthie Eisen, said Ms. Willey had told her the President ''kissed her and hugged her'' and ''touched her chest.'' Ms. Eisen testified that Ms. Willey had told her the President said, ''He had wanted to do that for a long time or wanted to do that since he saw her.''Ms. Eisen said Ms. Willey had told her she was caught off guard by the advance. Ms. Eisen said that she assumed their discussion was in confidence and that she did not tell anyone about it until being questioned by Mr. Starr's investigators.Asked whether Ms. Willey ever asked her to lie or fabricate anything, Ms. Eisen replied, ''Absolutely not.''Ms. Willey, a former White House volunteer, said she had met with Mr. Clinton to ask for a paying job to help her family's financial problems.She said Mr. Clinton ''hugged me and told me he was very sorry,'' then began to kiss her.''His hands were all over me,'' Ms. Willey testified. ''I told him I needed to get out of there.''A prosecutor asked if she had tried to resist. ''Yes,'' she said.