https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/03/arts/television/jimmy-kimmel-health-care-son.html
Jimmy Kimmel Gets to the Heart of the Matter - The New York Times
Television,Kimmel  Jimmy,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Jimmy Kimmel Live (TV Program),Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
May 3, 2017
8388
Be honest: You did not have Jimmy Kimmel in your “Most Socially Resonant Late-Night Monologue of 2017” betting pool.Clearly he didn’t either. “I’m sorry,” he began his monologue Monday night. “I try not to get emotional.” But he was — his voice immediately caught in his throat — as for 13 minutes he laid out the story of how his newborn son, Billy, was born with heart defects and nearly died.Mr. Kimmel was not the first late-night wiseacre to give a speech about a heart and find his own. In 2000, David Letterman returned to the air after bypass surgery and paid a humane, spellbinding tribute to the professionals who saved him. In retrospect, it was the beginning of Mr. Letterman’s late-career phase, when he moved from prankster to raconteur.I can’t tell you if this is the start of something different for Mr. Kimmel. But it was something different to watch. First because Mr. Kimmel’s story was so raw, grateful and — but for the occasional wisecrack — sincere. Then because he turned from his own story to the current debate over who gets access to this kind of miraculous care, and how.Mr. Kimmel doesn’t try to get emotional. He also, generally, doesn’t try to get political. He unloaded on Donald J. Trump at the Oscars, but night by night he hasn’t bird-dogged politics like Stephen Colbert, or played catch-up on it like Jimmy Fallon.Mr. Kimmel has been late night’s stick-to-sports guy — or rather, he’s stuck to Matt Damon feuds and viral prank videos. Elsewhere — on Comedy Central, TBS, HBO — more and more TV comics have been feeding off the energy of political fights.But Mr. Kimmel’s monologue showed there’s still a power in hearing this kind of message from the sort of guy it’s not supposed to come from.Politics, for a lot of people, is something that recedes behind everyday life. You have your job, your kids, your health. Politics can be distant, theoretical noise, until it springs out at you — maybe through your job, your kids or your health.The story Mr. Kimmel told was about encountering a political issue the way nonpolitical people do — unexpectedly, through a situation no one would ever seek out.One danger of a speech like Mr. Kimmel’s is the limousine-liberal trap: Here’s this rich celebrity lecturing us. And inevitably some people will take it that way.But Mr. Kimmel’s speech made a point of just that difference. Yes, he is a rich celebrity. His family will go to fine hospitals, have access to attentive nurses and outstanding surgeons, get flowers from Mr. Damon.On the other hand, he made achingly plain, there are some things you can’t buy your way out of: the frailty of life, the randomness of nature, the strangling terror of a parent with a deathly ill baby.So his story said, I am different from you, and I am the same as you — and because of the ways that we are the same, there are some ways in which we should not conscionably let each other be different. “If your baby is going to die and it doesn’t have to, it shouldn’t matter how much money you make,” he said. “I think that’s something that whether you’re a Republican or a Democrat, or something else, we all agree on that, right? I mean, we do.”Well, sort of. It didn’t stop the former Republican representative (and syndicated radio host) Joe Walsh from tweeting back:As I’m sure Mr. Kimmel knows, just beyond the things “we all agree on” are the things we all don’t — means, policy, priorities — which is where politics begin.The breathless declarations that Mr. Kimmel had killed the Republican health care plan might be premature. As of this writing, it looked as if it might yet pass the House, with at least cosmetic nods toward people with pre-existing conditions, but not the guarantees that Mr. Kimmel argued for.But Mr. Kimmel’s voice rang louder in the hubbub over health care than any politician’s or comedian’s, precisely because he’s not that guy who obsesses about politics. Many of us, after all, aren’t that guy, either — until life happens to us, and we are.