https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/world/europe/uk-dup-deal-conservatives.html
Theresa May Reaches Deal for Backing of Northern Ireland Party - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Legislatures and Parliaments,Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Foster  Arlene (1970- ),May  Theresa M,Great Britain,Conservative Party (Great Britain),Democratic Unionist Party (Northern Ireland)
June 26, 2017
9782
LONDON — Britain’s Conservatives signed a deal on Monday with Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party that will allow Prime Minister Theresa May to govern after losing her majority in a general election this month.The deal, reported to provide Northern Ireland with additional funding of about $2 billion over five years, will enable Mrs. May to win a clear majority vote in Parliament on Wednesday on the legislative program her government set out last week. Without the support of the D.U.P., Mrs. May risked losing that vote of confidence, which would have opened the way for the opposition Labour Party to try to form a minority government of its own.The Northern Irish party, socially conservative and largely Protestant, has 10 members of Parliament. After nearly two weeks of negotiation, mostly about money for the province, its leader, Arlene Foster, agreed to what is known as a “confidence and supply” agreement with Mrs. May. The documents were signed in Downing Street by lesser figures.Mrs. May was quoted by the Press Association as saying that the pact was a “very, very good one” and that the two parties “share many values,” including “the desire to ensure a strong government, able to put through its program and provide for issues like the Brexit negotiations.” Ms. Foster said she was “delighted that we have reached this agreement, which I think works, obviously, for national stability.”The smaller party will support the Conservatives in crucial votes that could bring down the government and on “legislation relating to Brexit and national security,” Mrs. May said. Its support is not guaranteed on other legislation. But the two parties agree on most things, including Britain’s exit from the European Union, and the Democratic Unionists are particularly eager to keep Jeremy Corbyn of the Labour Party from being prime minister, given his past sympathies for the Irish Catholic Sinn Fein party and the Irish Republican Army.Mrs. May called a snap election for June 8 to bolster her authority in Parliament in preparation for Britain’s exit, but her campaign faltered and she lost her absolute majority. With the support of the D.U.P., she will now have an effective working majority in the 650-seat House of Commons of 13 — given that Sinn Fein does not take up the seven seats it won and the speaker of the House and his two deputies do not vote.The terms of the agreement are still vague beyond the extra funding for the province over the five-year term of the Parliament, if it lasts that long.Such deals with smaller parties, which are short of a formal coalition, have proved fragile in the past. And Mrs. May’s own position is extremely weak, both in her party, which was shocked by her failure, and in the country.There is continuing speculation that the Conservatives may choose to replace her as prime minister as early as October; no senior Conservative has publicly suggested that the party wants to fight another election with her as leader.Some Conservatives, like John Major, the former prime minister, had urged Mrs. May to manage a minority government without the D.U.P. Their fear was that a formal deal would violate the British government’s vow of neutrality in Northern Ireland, where the D.U.P. and Sinn Fein are at odds over continuing a power-sharing agreement.Opposition parties said the pact was “shoddy” (the Liberal Democrats) and “grubby” (both Labour and the Scottish National Party) and called for its details to be publicized. Labour’s deputy leader, John McDonnell, said: “Let’s call this grubby deal what it is: This is a straightforward political bribe to desperately prop up Theresa May in office.”Mrs. May also gave more details on Monday of Britain’s offer to secure the rights of more than three million citizens of other European Union countries after Britain’s withdrawal, as she seeks to gain reciprocal rights for some one million British citizens living in the bloc.“We want you to stay,” she said in Parliament. “I want to completely reassure people” that “no E.U. citizen currently in the U.K. lawfully will be asked to leave.”But she did not specify a cutoff date, saying it should be part of the negotiations with Brussels, which wants the cutoff to be when Britain formally leaves, March 29, 2019, and not before.The two sides also disagree on what body should adjudicate disputes over citizen rights. Britain argues that after it leaves the bloc, British courts should rule for those living in Britain; the European Union wants the European Court of Justice to decide. A compromise may be found in a special tribunal.There are also many complicated issues, like the rights of spouses of European Union citizens living in Britain who arrive after the cutoff date, and who will be eligible for health care coverage after Britain’s withdrawal is formalized.And these are only some of the easier issues involved in Britain and Europe unwinding a legal relationship of more than 40 years.