http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/07/fashion/talking-to-honey-dijon-a-fashion-forward-dj.html
Talking to Honey Dijon, a Fashion-Forward D.J. - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Honey Dijon,Bars and Nightclubs,Parties (Social),Disc Jockeys,Transgender and Transsexual,Music
Feb. 6, 2013
7714
“There are so many of these girls in fashion nowadays who call themselves a D.J.,” said the house-music D.J. Honey Dijon with a sigh. She was at S’Nice, a vegetarian cafe in the West Village, dressed casually in a sleeveless black Alexander Wang shirt and a slouchy beanie from Supreme.And yet surely she is in part responsible. Over the last five years, nearly every reveler visiting the nexus of art, fashion and night life has boogied down to the sounds of Miss Honey, as she is sometimes known (her legal name is Honey Redmond), whether it be in a basement with smoke machines or at a formal party for the Council of Fashion Designers of America.She has shared top billing on party invitations issued by V magazine, Narciso Rodriguez, Hermès, Balenciaga and Givenchy. She has had mobbed residencies at after-dark fly traps like Hiro Ballroom; the Cielo nightclub in the meatpacking district; and Clubber Down Disco, a former nightclub in the Chelsea Hotel that was selected by the owners of the store Opening Ceremony as one of their favorite parties of the last decade. She currently has a monthly gig, “Muzik Box,” at Le Bain at the Standard hotel.“The fashion world has a handful of ‘it girl’ D.J.’s, but there are very few that other serious D.J.’s respect,” said Ladyfag, a night-life habitué who was the host of the Clubber Down Disco party. “Honey is one of those rare birds that traverses both worlds.”This was said without double entendre: The fact that Honey Dijon is transgender has caused barely a shrug in the widening circles that have embraced her. Edina Monsoon, the cult lead character from the popular BBC show “Absolutely Fabulous,” quipped that Ms. Redmond was “killing it” in a special episode during the London Olympics. Style.com routinely features her as a talking head alongside industry power players in its video reviews of ready-to-wear collections. In August, she spun at the Ushuaia Beach Club in Ibiza, Spain, a night life arena typically reserved for stadium-friendly acts such as Swedish House Mafia. And in January, Vogue Italia chose a snapshot of Ms. Redmond wearing thick blue-frame glasses and a floral print blouse by Givenchy as its “Look of the Day,” praising her personal style as a “mix of femininity, androgyny and irony, which is always cool.” The top was a gift from her friend Riccardo Tisci, the label’s designer.In an e-mail, Mr. Tisci wrote: “I’ve known Honey for a long time. I love her style and I like her playing with her masculine and feminine sides.”Kim Jones, the men’s style director at Louis Vuitton, invited Ms. Redmond to collaborate with the legendary disco producer Giorgio Moroder for his fall men’s runway presentation.“Honey knows my musical taste well,” Mr. Jones said. “I totally trust her, and she always gets it right.”Ms. Redmond said that wearing runway looks help her stand out (being 5-foot-10 does not hurt, either).“The D.J. world is still a boy’s club in a lot of ways,” she said. “You figure most D.J.’s show up in jeans and a T-shirt or whatever, but then I show up in a Givenchy Rottweiler shirt and it’s like, ‘Oh, my God.’ You’re seen in a different light.”But she stressed that there’s more to her persona than labels. “For me, house music has never just been about D.J.ing and fashion has never been about clothing,” she said. “It’s always been about the possibility of a more beautiful life.”Ms. Redmond, who declined to give her birth name, grew up in the 1970s on the South Side of Chicago in a “very middle-class, loving African-American family,” she said. Her young parents often gave parties in their basement on Friday nights and invite their son, who identified as female from an early age, to lift the needle on the record player between songs from artists like the Isley Brothers and Minnie Riperton. “That’s where I got my first education in music,” she said.By the age of 12, she said, she would sneak into clubs, with the permission of her parents as long she kept up with her schoolwork. (“I made sure to be in the top 10 percent of my class,” she said.) At storied clubs like C.O.D.’s, she heard the house-music pioneer Frankie Knuckles for the first time. From that moment on, her fondest childhood memories happened with the music on full blast — usually with her headphones on.“I would lock myself in my room and listen to house music and read fashion magazines, many of which I used to steal because I couldn’t afford them, and go on a trip in my head,” she said.Her family relocated to the suburbs of Philadelphia when she was 15. Honey’s D.I.Y. clubland look — bootleg Azzedine Alaïa stitched together by local tailors, an oversize sweater with leggings and a Grace Jones flat top — was not received well by her classmates, she said.“I felt like an alien descending onto Earth for the first time,” Ms. Redmond said. “People would never attack me, but they would verbally say things to me. I was very alone.”Like most high school students, she felt pressure to conform.“People always ask me, ‘Growing up, did you know you were a trans person?’ None of these terms were around,” she said. She found solace in genre-bending musicians such as Culture Club and Annie Lennox. “I didn’t know what I was, except through music and fashion.”Ms. Redmond, who said she is in her mid-30s, thought that going public about her transition, which took place after moving to New York (where “there was more of a community”) might help broaden notions about feminine ideals of beauty in the fashion and D.J. worlds.“I’ve always wanted my talent to speak for itself,” she said. “I didn’t want ‘black’ or ‘trans’ or any of it to speak for me. Now I am beginning to realize the importance of it because there is really hardly any visibility for black trans women, especially in fashion. Hell, there are hardly any black women in fashion. Period.”But despite her success, Ms. Redmond said she still can feel like an outsider.“The only other trans woman I relate to is Leah T,” she said, referring to the transgender model and muse to Mr. Tisci. “Most trans women are only interested in extreme femininity,” she said, referring to voluptuous physiques. “That was never my story. I was always into Ann Demeulemeester and Martin Margiela.”Antony Hegarty, who fronts the music act Antony and the Johnsons, chose Ms. Redmond to be a part of his film “Turning,” a documentary about his band that he made with the artist Charles Atlas. The film, which came out in November, features interviews with 13 women and their stories of self-discovery.Ms. Redmond has been “a bridge and a role model for the youngest generations,” Mr. Hegarty said. “She doesn’t hold back, she gives it everything, she’s not afraid to take the risk to live openheartedly.”For now, Ms. Redmond has a different set of stereotypes she would like to brush aside. At an event at Art Basel in Miami Beach, where another D.J. was playing ’80s hits, she had an epiphany.“You have the top tastemakers in the world coming together under one roof, and at almost every party they’re listening to wedding music,” she said. “You guys are supposed to be cutting edge, but you’re listening to Madonna’s ‘Vogue’? Just like they want to expose the world to new ideas in design, fashion and art, why don’t they want to expose new ideas in music?”She paused. “That’s where I come in, I guess.”