https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/20/us/politics/ivanka-trump-charity-women-who-work.html
Ivanka Trump Says She Will Donate Book Proceeds to Charity - The New York Times
Trump  Ivanka,Books and Literature,Philanthropy,Boys & Girls Clubs of America,National Urban League
April 20, 2017
2224
Ivanka Trump said on Thursday that she would donate the unpaid portion of her advance for writing a book called “Women Who Work” to charitable groups that help children in urban areas. She also will forgo a book publicity tour to avoid using her government perch to promote her private product.In announcing her plans to donate $100,000 each to the National Urban League and the Boys & Girls Clubs of America, Ms. Trump, the president’s daughter and adviser, released a statement calling the book part of a continuing effort to empower women that “has been central to my mission throughout my career.”Ms. Trump said her book aims to supply advice and tips on leadership, entrepreneurship, juggling work and family “and building cultures where multidimensional women can thrive — now and in the future.”“Like many other professional women, I have juggled the demands that come with growing my family and building my businesses, and I realize that I am more fortunate than most,” Ms. Trump said in the statement.She said she has created the Ivanka M. Trump Charitable Fund for the unpaid portion of her advance and any future royalties to facilitate grants to charitable groups that “support the economic empowerment for women and girls.”She said she chose to donate to the Urban League and the Boys & Girls Clubs because both have “made it a priority to promote entrepreneurship and educational opportunities for women and girls in underserved communities.”The Urban League will launch a new women’s initiative with the money, while the Boys & Girls Club money will go to the group’s science, technology, engineering and math program.Ms. Trump also took care, given government ethics rules, to note that the book is a personal project. “I wrote it at a different time in my life, from the perspective of an executive and an entrepreneur, and the manuscript was completed before the election last November,” she said.Ms. Trump has come under intense scrutiny over potential overlap between the policies she has said she plans to promote in office and any potential benefit to her businesses. She recently became an official government employee, which requires her to adhere to strict ethics rules.