https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/magazine/the-rise-of-jeremy-corbyn-and-the-death-throes-of-neoliberalism.html
The Rise of Jeremy Corbyn and the Death Throes of Neoliberalism - The New York Times
Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Conservative Party (Great Britain),Thatcher  Margaret H,Labour Party (Great Britain),Socialism (Theory and Philosophy),Taxation,Blair  Tony,Reagan  Ronald Wilson
June 20, 2017
8950
“We do not believe in untrammeled free markets. We reject the cult of selfish individualism. We abhor social division, injustice, unfairness and inequality.”This sounds like the manifesto of a hard-left political party, sternly aiming to cleanse society not only of a failed ideology (untrammeled free markets) but also of its cultural tenor (selfish individualism). Such critiques are now commonplace among insurgent left-wing movements in the United States and Europe, like the one that anointed Jeremy Corbyn leader of the British Labor Party and then increased the party’s share of the popular vote. The above-quoted rejection of free-market capitalism, however, appeared last month in the manifesto of Britain’s Conservative Party as it called an election designed to expand its parliamentary majority. It is the clearest evidence in plain prose, after the shocks of Brexit and Donald Trump’s victory, of a world in interregnum: Mass disaffection has ended an era and inaugurated a turbulent new phase.In this new reality, the rhetoric of the conservative right echoes that of the socialistic left as it tries to acknowledge the politically explosive problem of inequality. The leaders of Britain and the United States, two countries that practically invented global capitalism, flirt with rejecting the free-trade zones (the European Union, Nafta) they helped build. One sign of the general confusion is the desperate improvisation by politicians on the right as they try to respond to angry voters — often at the risk of failure, as Theresa May’s election campaign proved this month. May opposed Brexit before the referendum last year and then became its hard-line advocate within the Conservative Party. She began to echo Trump’s denunciation of cosmopolitan elites, announcing that “if you believe you’re a citizen of the world, you’re a citizen of nowhere.”But in their appeals to the working classes, Trump and May also sound a lot like Bernie Sanders and Corbyn. Britain’s Conservative Party mimicked its Labor rival by arguing for more transparency on executive pay and a higher minimum wage. The Tories, traditionally representatives of big business and the landed aristocracy, weirdly resembled the fiery trade unionists of the past in their demand that workers be represented on corporate boards.In trying to build an “economy that works for everyone” — a phrase that May lifted from Corbyn — politicians of all stripes seem to be hurriedly abandoning the experiment in neoliberal economics that, beginning in the 1980s, disempowered government, enriched a minority and made many more feel left behind. You need recall only a few resonant declarations from the 1980s to appreciate the extraordinary counterrevolution underway in Anglo-America. “Society? There is no such thing,” the Conservative prime minister Margaret Thatcher proclaimed. “There are individual men and women, and there are families.” Thatcher wanted to “roll back the frontiers of the state.” From across the Atlantic, her ideological kin Ronald Reagan shared the sentiment: “Government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.”In Britain, Conservatives today claim that “government can and should be a force for good” and refuse to rule out tax increases for high earners. But back in the 1980s, they promoted a vision in which a community of self-interested individuals was a force for good. Government’s role in economic planning, social welfare and wealth redistribution was stigmatized as a foe of individual initiative and self-regulating markets. “The market is a more powerful and more reliable liberating force than government can ever be,” Thatcher asserted. Reagan promised: “You know, there really is something magic about the marketplace when it’s free to operate. As the song says, ‘This could be the start of something big.’ ”And so it was: a social and intellectual as well as an economic and political revolution that transformed Britain and the United States. Thatcherism, which emerged as a series of improvised responses to Britain’s economic crisis in the 1970s, mutated into a revolutionary ideology — one that gave as much priority to “market forces” as Marxism once gave to class struggle.Thatcher did not simply insist that markets were more effective economically than centralized planning. In her view, society itself could be reorganized around the laws of the market, with myriad self-interested individuals voluntarily competing with one another and producing optimal outcomes for all. Not since the heyday of social Darwinism in the 19th century, as the intellectual historian Daniel T. Rodgers wrote in “Age of Fracture,” had “the idea of the beneficent results of competition cut so broad a swath through public and academic discourses or been called upon to do and explain so much.”It is also true that a range of cultural figures, from Harold Pinter to Angela Carter, denounced Thatcherism as wicked. But the harsh, moralizing critiques missed the true scale of Thatcher’s reconstruction of social as well as economic realms. With her promise of prosperity, she managed to convince a significant part of the British population that with cheap credit and privatized public services, they would become stakeholders in the system. These invitations to private pleasures were adorned with invocations of British identity. Under Thatcher, there was a nationalistic surge of feeling “great again.” In 1982, her determination to take back the Falkland Islands from their Argentine usurpers baffled Reagan. But the exploits of the Royal Navy perfectly consummated a British fantasy, nurtured today among Brexiteers, of regained imperial vigor.Thatcherism was further entrenched by Tony Blair’s “New” Labor Party (1997-2007) and David Cameron’s Conservative “modernizers” (2010-16). Blair sought, with some help from Bill Clinton’s triangulations, to put a human face on selfish individualism. Government, he suggested, was not the problem — or not entirely. Its main task was to help individuals help themselves in the universal competition opened up by globalized markets. Individual wealth creation remained the goal: As Peter Mandelson, a theoretician of New Labor, put it, “We are intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich.” During the long reign of New Labor, inequality grew in Britain, and Thatcher-style deregulation and privatization proceeded, often by stealth through public-private partnerships. David Cameron, who proudly claimed to be Blair’s “true heir,” mounted a radical assault on the welfare state that revealed how deeply Thatcherism shaped a whole generation of British politicians (and journalists).An influential part of the British media — from the respectable Economist to the jingoistic Daily Mail — presumed, along with the bipartisan Thatcherites, that “there is no alternative” to market forces. May, however, confirmed that not only is there an alternative (an interventionist state) but also that the right is eager — in Britain as much as in the United States — to appropriate this increasingly popular remedy of the left. Her party’s manifesto was almost communistic in its assertion that the government’s “power should be put squarely at the service of this country’s working people.” May even co-opted the Labor Party’s old promise, originally denounced as “Marxist” by the Conservative Party, to cap energy prices.Such ideological cross-pollination angered and baffled those still faithful to the memory of Reagan and Thatcher. The Economist denounced May’s leftish program as “perverse” and “risky.” George Osborne, a former chancellor of the Exchequer in Cameron’s government, accused May of following Jeremy Corbyn in a terrible “retreat” from globalization.May broke many ideological taboos in her eagerness to turn angry disaffection with Thatcher’s long revolution into electoral gains. She still failed to persuade a clear majority of the British electorate of her credentials as a savior of the working people. The Conservative Party’s savage cuts to spending on public services belied her redistributionist rhetoric — which seemed more authentic when it came from Corbyn, who has promised to renationalize the railways and abolish tuition fees. For many British people, especially the young, the unabashedly socialist Corbyn seems more committed to reimposing the tax and regulatory regimes that force the rich to rediscover their social obligations.Confronted with the nearly impossible tasks of Brexit and a struggling economy, May and her successors are doomed to failure with their impersonation of the left, let alone their rightist fantasy of restored greatness. As economic growth slows and inflation rises on the heels of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union, the “hard” Brexit that May advocated looks even more like an imperial fantasy of self-sufficiency. It is most likely to be abandoned. In any case, the interventionist British state that could presumably heal the open wounds of inequality no longer exists. It has been hollowed out by decades of outsourcing and marketization. The Conservatives may cling to power by forming an alliance with an ultraright Northern Irish party. But increasingly forced to own their economic failures, they will struggle to rebrand themselves as partisans of an economy that “works for everyone.”A new economic consensus is quickly replacing the neoliberal one to which Blair and Clinton, as well as Thatcher and Reagan, subscribed; politicians are scrambling to articulate it, often blatantly breaking with their own history. Certainly, May’s frantic left-wing posturing against inequality and social division confirmed that the Anglo-American revolution of the 1980s — built around a strong prejudice against government and for free markets — is over. At least in Britain. May, the conservative daughter of a country vicar, will probably be best remembered for advancing, inadvertently, a counterrevolution of the left.