http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/udall-loses-senate-seat-to-gardner-a-republican.html
Mark Udall of Colorado Loses Senate Seat to Cory Gardner, a Republican - The New York Times
Midterm Elections (2014),Udall  Mark,Gardner  Cory S,Colorado,Elections  Senate
Nov. 5, 2014
7767
DENVER — Colorado voters elected Representative Cory Gardner, the Republican challenger, as their new senator on Tuesday, rejecting the incumbent Mark Udall as a Democrat too closely tied to President Obama and as a candidate who ran a one-note campaign focused on the politics of abortion.Mr. Gardner and Mr. Udall each tried to persuade voters that he truly represented Colorado, while framing the other as one who embodied Washington politics and extreme views.Mr. Udall’s campaign echoed what Republicans called a “war on women” strategy, casting Mr. Gardner as a rigid opponent of abortion who supported legal rights for embryos and whose positions could outlaw some forms of birth control.Mr. Gardner’s camp did everything possible to weld Mr. Udall and Mr. Obama together in voters’ minds, focusing in particular on Mr. Udall’s support for a health care overhaul. Ad after ad by Republicans and outside conservative groups declared that Mr. Udall voted with the president 99 percent of the time.“This guy just follows in lock step with the president,” said Dustin Zvonek, of the Colorado chapter of Americans for Prosperity, a group funded by the conservative Koch brothers. “Coloradans, it doesn’t matter if you’re a Republican or a Democrat. They want someone who’s independent, who’s there for them. It’s really a Western thing.”Few Republicans doubted Mr. Gardner’s conservative credentials, which allowed him to quickly pivot to the center to court the unaffiliated voters who make up a third of Colorado’s electorate. He announced his support for providing birth control pills without a prescription and promised that he would stand up to fellow Republicans when he disagreed with them.Democrats scoffed at the claims as hollow, election-year feints toward bipartisanship. But in the end, it was the Republican from the eastern farming town of Yuma, not the fence-post-slender Democrat who climbs mountains, that Colorado believed would provide a new, more independent voice.Early Wednesday morning, Gov. John W. Hickenlooper edged slightly ahead of his Republican challenger, Bob Beauprez, as the last several thousand votes from Democratic-friendly bastions like Denver and Boulder were counted. But the two men remained separated by less than a percentage point, and it was uncertain whether any winner could be declared or whether the race would head toward an automatic recount.The governor’s race has focused more on the state’s economy. A drilling boom, construction downtown and new waves of mountain-loving migrants have helped lower unemployment in Colorado to 4.7 percent.The race also hinged on whether Democratic-supported laws expanding background checks for firearms, limiting the size of ammunition magazines and expanding renewable-energy standards were turning away from Colorado’s older values, or simply extending them into a new era.At times, both parties treated the election as a battle for the soul of a Western bellwether.Urban growth and the rapidly swelling number of Hispanic residents have helped hand control of the governor’s mansion and state legislature to Democrats in recent years, and many liberals had hoped that victories this year could help give Colorado new stature as a reliably Democratic foothold in the Mountain West. After years of defeats in statewide races and self-inflicted wounds, Republicans here were desperate for a win demonstrating that — despite the state’s embrace of legal marijuana, civil unions for same-sex couples and new gun restrictions — Colorado was still a moderate place that would punish politicians who lurched too far leftward.Conservatives, in particular, cast the races for senator and governor as battles between the rural values of ranchers and farmers and the urban leanings of a growing number of constituents living in the suburbs. At a campaign stop earlier this summer, Mr. Beauprez told a group of civic officials from the northeastern corner of the state, “Rural Colorado, I think, probably determines the outcome of this election.”