https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/us/california-today-undocumented-immigrants-lawyers.html
California Today: They’re Lawyers, and at Risk of Deportation - The New York Times
California Today
July 18, 2017
53
Good morning.(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Today’s introduction is from Jennifer Medina, a national correspondent based in Los Angeles. The lawyer advertising his services on a Spanish radio station claimed he could fix even the most complicated immigration problems. So Luis Angel Reyes Savalza’s parents called him, their frustration evident in their voices as they asked him: Why can’t you do that?“Nothing is that simple with immigration,” he told them. Mr. Reyes Savalza became an immigration lawyer in San Francisco largely because of his own family’s entanglement with the system: As a child, he crossed the Mexican border illegally with his parents.Today, he represents clients who are at risk of deportation.One of them, Lizbeth Mateo, just became a lawyer herself. Ms. Mateo and Mr. Reyes Savalza are the beneficiaries of a California law that allows undocumented immigrants to be admitted to the state bar.Although they are officers of the court, they continue to face their own obstacles with immigration law.I spent several weeks with both lawyers, talking with them about their role in the Trump era and their entry into the legal world. While they’ve been widely supported in California — one of the highest ranking Democrats in the state presided over Ms. Mateo’s swearing-in ceremony — critics say they should not be practicing law at all and should be deported themselves.Mr. Reyes Savalza’s parents have begun to build a house in Mexico, just in case they are sent back. Along with his brothers, he is helping his parents cobble together thousands of dollars to pay for a home that they hope to never live in.Ms. Mateo’s own status is even more precarious: The government has rejected her application for an Obama-era program that allows young people to legally stay and work in the country. Even as Mr. Reyes Savalza continues to work on her case, Ms. Mateo, who is based in Pasadena, is now focusing on opening a private practice to help other immigrants like her.At a backyard party to celebrate her admission to the bar, there was no sign of anger or danger. Ms. Mateo’s friends and family laughed over plates of tortas, her parents smiled as they danced in the driveway. But their futures here are still at risk.Read our article and tell us what you think here: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Does this kind of defiant activism help immigrants or is it going too far? Should Ms. Mateo offer legal advice, even while she risks deportation?(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)• California lawmakers, including eight Republicans, voted to extend the state’s pioneering cap-and-trade program. [The New York Times]• The median cost of a home in California is now a staggering $500,000, twice the national cost. [The New York Times]• Several coastal communities sued a group of oil and coal companies, saying they should pay for damages wrought by climate change. [San Diego Union-Tribune]• Many cities are shunning marijuana. Not Santa Rosa, which is positioning itself as a destination for quality pot. [San Francisco Chronicle]• A wildfire in Mariposa County exploded to more than 11,000 acres, forcing hundreds of people to flee. [ABC30]• “Thought I’d take an ecstasy before the ball.” The secret, drug-fueled life of a former U.S.C. medical school dean. [Los Angeles Times]• A bike-sharing program was blocked by a neighborhood group in part of San Francisco. The reason? Gentrification fears. [S.F. Examiner]• “A.I. is a fundamental existential risk for human civilization,” Elon Musk told a gathering. [KQED]• Self-driving vehicles are moving from experiment to reality, and the Bay Area is driving the change. [San Francisco Chronicle]• Alphabet’s life sciences unit is releasing 20 million sterile mosquitoes in Fresno. The idea is to fight diseases like Zika and dengue. [Bloomberg]• Athletes who run a 135-mile ultramarathon in Death Valley are crazy, right? That, or they’re onto something. [Los Angeles Times]• They’ve won 29 of their past 33 games. Is this the new norm for the Dodgers? [The Associated Press]• San Diego knows beer — a guide to 10 top-notch breweries. [Los Angeles Times]A New York Times article on California’s housing crisis prompted some personal, and at times passionate, comments from readers.A selection:“My wife and I live in a very desirable little ‘island’ of homes within the city of San Francisco, where a house a couple of blocks away just sold for $400,000 OVER the asking price. Some of our neighbors are busy trying to block the proposed development of a multi-unit senior center at the edge of our neighborhood. So, yes, high time for a proposal like Scott Wiener’s, to stop the self-centered NIMBY neighborhoods — like ours — from blocking development for everybody else.”— R-Star, San Francisco“I find the current home pricing situation in Los Angeles vulgar and immoral. My wife and I are both professionals (teacher and nurse), and if we were in the market to buy a home, the starting price would be $1 million. The message those prices send is very clear. We want you to teach our children, and to take care of our loved ones. But when your shift ends, please return to YOUR side of town.”— Tony, Los Angeles“I wonder where we are supposed to get the water for all these people who want to live in the area. I, for one, am tired of not flushing my toilet and taking two minute showers all so some developers can build more hotels for visitors. They certainly don’t care that we live an area that persistently has water problems. I’m tired of the short sighted view of the politicians in our state. We don’t have the water to support more people.”— Steve Clemens, Santa BarbaraCalifornia Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.