https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/30/nyregion/sandy-of-all-things-has-helped-open-access-to-jersey-shore.html
Sandy, of All Things, Has Helped Open Access to Jersey Shore - The New York Times
Surfing,Coastal Areas,Hurricane Sandy (2012),Beaches,Parking,Land Use Policies,Army Corps of Engineers,Mantoloking (NJ),New Jersey
May 30, 2017
8681
MANTOLOKING, N.J. — Alex Staal never saw this town at its worst, submerged and ravaged by Hurricane Sandy, 90 percent of its homes damaged by the storm. He started visiting only two years ago, and what he knows is a vast sandy expanse for relaxing and refreshing dips in the Atlantic Ocean.And the need to move his car every two hours.“It gets so annoying,” Mr. Staal, 44, of Philadelphia, said, referring to the town’s two-hour parking limit. He recalled scampering across the scalding-hot midsummer sand to move his car and momentary mental lapses that have earned him more than a half dozen tickets.But as the federal Army Corps of Engineers replenishes this town’s beach and builds new dunes, one of the obligations of benefiting from taxpayer-funded beach reconstruction is ensuring that the beaches can be used by, well, taxpayers. So the town is proposing doubling the parking limit to four hours and expanding the number of parking spots.“The state is basically being very adamant that anybody can access the beach,” said Lance White, the town council president in Mantoloking.A battle over beach access has raged for generations along the Jersey Shore as wealthy enclaves have fought to keep their beaches uncrowded and free of day trippers. Restrictive tactics include imposing parking permits, adding parking meters, creating private beach clubs, limiting facilities for bathers and raising fees for badges that allow access to the beach.But the destruction that Hurricane Sandy caused nearly five years ago has produced a bit of a silver lining. The sand and construction provided by the Corps of Engineers comes with a catch: They will be made available only to public beaches, and parking and pathways to the beach must be accessible.So up and down the 127-mile coastline, in areas hit the hardest by the storm, beach access for the first time in years is slowly becoming easier.“As part of the Corps’s project and all the easements, all the new beach that’s being built as part of those easements, a requirement was it had to be open to the public,” said Ray Cantor, the chief adviser for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, which works with the Corps of Engineers. “There’s a lot more beach and a lot more area that’s resulting in public access.”Mr. Cantor cited Loveladies on Long Beach Island as a community that was known for putting up obstacles to the beach but has added parking and better access, though organizations like the Surfrider Foundation argued the plans weren’t sufficient. Many condominium complexes across the state that once claimed beachfront property as private have had to make it public after replenishment projects.Yet the shift has been uneven. Restoration work sometimes requires the closing of beaches, funneling people to nearby beaches and creating more crowding and access issues.“That’s why I think there’s been a surge in towns trying to control parking recently,” said Andrew Chambarry, a co-chairman of the Surfrider Foundation’s Jersey Shore Chapter.Indeed, not every town is welcoming an influx of “shoobies” or “bennies” — pejorative terms for day trippers — to their glistening shores.In the tony enclave of Deal, where the beach bungalows of Asbury Park give way to mansions seemingly plucked from the Hamptons, residents have been battling to keep beaches to themselves, despite work by the Corps of Engineers.It began in 2015, when residents promoted an ordinance requiring parking permits that could be obtained only by residents, basically barring outsiders from the beach. That prompted an outcry, and the idea was shelved. This year, the town has proposed a $100 parking permit, available to anyone and mandatory for parking near the main access point to the beach.Those plans have been strenuously opposed by Mr. Chambarry, who grew up spear fishing off the shore in Deal and is also a lawyer.He filed petitions against the ordinance and spoke out at town meetings, presenting studies that poked holes in the town’s arguments. He argued that claims that residents needed permit street parking were bogus and that homes near the beach had spaces for an average of 10 cars.The potential to choke off parking by charging such a high price with no guaranteed parking spots for out-of-towners infuriated surfers, swimmers and fishermen alike.“It’s just another way for the locals to privatize the coastline,” said Michael Connor, 26, who lives in Rumson and has been surfing since he was 6. He noted that Deal was one of the few surfing breaks in New Jersey that worked well in the summer and said installing any parking permit process would force surfers to ever shrinking spots.“We have a friend that lets us park in northern Sea Bright,” Mr. Connor said. “If we weren’t friends with her, there’s only maybe 10 to 15 parking spots in that town. It’s getting more and more difficult each year to just get to the beach.”Surfers and fishermen can claim at least a temporary victory in Deal, as the town reportedly dropped its plan for parking permits.There are other tactics that frustrate many beachgoers. Countless towns rely on metered parking. In Mantoloking, while the parking changes are welcome, rules prohibiting food on the beach remain. And nearly every beach requires a paid badge of some sort.But parking remains the biggest issue. Glenn Rossi, the owner and operator of Used to Be’s, one of the few bars in the Mantoloking area, looks at a full parking lot outside his bar on the weekend and cringes, he said.“A lot of people try to park here and just go to the beach, without coming inside,” he said. He does not have the time, nor the desire, to police his own lot of about 40 spaces. But if his patrons can’t find a spot, they’re out of luck; there’s nowhere else to park nearby.The new parking spots would be a welcome salve, though. With so many people flocking to the Jersey Shore every weekend, overcrowding and precious parking are just a fact of life.“There’s no real way to stop it,” Mr. Rossi said. “This is, after all, ‘public access.’”