https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/arts/television/jimmy-fallon-trump-health-care-fail.html
‘Let Obamacare Fail’? Fallon Says Democrats Are Trying That With Trump - The New York Times
Fallon  Jimmy,The Tonight Show (TV Program),Trump  Donald J,Colbert  Stephen,Meyers  Seth,Pence  Mike,Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (TV Program)
July 19, 2017
104
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.After the Republicans’ effort to replace the Affordable Care Act fell through in the Senate on Tuesday, President Trump said he’d now like to simply “let Obamacare fail.” On “The Tonight Show,” Jimmy Fallon suggested that Mr. Trump knew a thing or two about failure himself.This week is the end of the first six months of the Trump presidency. Mr. Fallon took the opportunity to rattle off some pros and cons.Stephen Colbert seemed a bit surprised to discover that Steve Whitmire, who has voiced Kermit the Frog since 1990, was fired by Disney over what the company called his hostile workplace behavior. But relatives of Jim Henson, the founder of the Muppets and the original voice of Kermit, said they agreed with executives.Using a puppet, “The Late Show” imagined how contract negotiations might go with a cantankerous Kermit. The best line from the bit:Wherein we discover that the vocalist Rita Ora doesn’t exactly know how a trombone is played — but things work out fine anyway.Keegan-Michael Key got back in character as Luther, the anger translator for President Barack Obama, to give us a glimpse at what has really been going through Mr. Obama’s mind in recent months.One of the country’s most prominent Democratic governors, Terry McAuliffe of Virginia, is a leading figure in the resistance to President Trump’s policy goals. On Wednesday, he’ll speak to Trevor Noah on “The Daily Show.”Our culture reporter’s new favorite fictional character is “basically a feminist Dilbert,” with an “anticapitalist sheen.” Believe it or not, that character was created by the same Japanese company that gave us Hello Kitty. Meet Aggretsuko.