https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/us/iran-brothers-travel-ban-ali-vayeghan.html
He Was Sent Back to Iran. Now, a Court Says the U.S. Must Readmit Him. - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Los Angeles International Airport,Iran,Vayghan  Hossein
Jan. 30, 2017
4115
LOS ANGELES — Soon after Hossein Vayghan arrived at Los Angeles International Airport, he bought a bouquet of roses to hand to his brother, Ali Vayeghan, who was scheduled to arrive from Tehran just after 7 p.m. on Friday, with his green card in hand.But Mr. Vayeghan, 52, never made it through security. Instead, he was put on a plane to Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, and then sent back to Iran. Now, thanks to a court order, he is the only foreigner who was refused entry after President Trump issued a travel ban and has since been given permission to return to the United States.Mr. Vayeghan is one of hundreds of people who whose lives were upended by the executive order this weekend. The ordeal has left him and his family, which includes several American citizens, shaken and deeply worried about what comes next.The brothers (who spell their names differently) had planned to spend Saturday catching up over leisurely meals. Mr. Vayeghan would have gone on to reunite with his wife, who arrived in the United States a few months ago to visit their son, a United States citizen working as a nurse in Fort Wayne, Ind., whom they had not seen in more than a decade.Instead, they spent the weekend frantically relaying messages to his lawyers.So far, no other judge has ruled that the government should bring back someone who was denied entry to the United States under the Trump administration’s executive order banning entry from several Muslim-majority countries. And it remains unclear when Mr. Vayeghan will come back to the United States. Still, the ruling, by a United States District Court judge, Dolly M. Gee, is one of the most aggressive actions a federal judge has taken against the executive order. Judge Gee held that barring Mr. Vayeghan’s entry likely violated immigration law and the Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection.At the same time that White House officials walked back a provision that included green-card holders in the ban, the brothers were feeling the sting of its impact.As Mr. Vayghan, 61, watched the hours tick by on Friday evening, he became increasingly agitated. An airport greeter tried to reassure him around 9 p.m., saying it could sometimes take more than two hours for a passenger to pass through customs. Two hours later, with no sign of his younger brother, Mr. Vayghan was distraught.Mr. Vayghan, his wife and his daughter had not heard any news about the executive order — they thought that perhaps Mr. Vayeghan was being targeted for a crime he did not commit.Mr. Vayghan asked a man he saw helping passengers with their wheelchairs for help: Could he look for Mr. Vayeghan? He offered a brief description of his brother — “skinny, not too tall and not very dark or very white, like me” — and handed him his business card. A minute later, the man returned, saying the only people he had seen were returning from Latin America. Then Mr. Vayghan’s phone rang, with a federal agent on the other end.“Sorry, sir, I have bad news,” Mr. Vayghan recalled the agent saying. “In my culture, we only say bad news when it means somebody is dead.”The agent told him he could not talk to his brother but said he would call again on Saturday morning. Still confused and scared, Mr. Vayghan returned to his home in west Los Angeles.By the time he came back to the airport on Saturday, protesters were beginning to gather, and lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union and other organizations had set up shop in the international terminal. After hearing about Mr. Vayeghan, the lawyers quickly filed a case arguing that the order violated due process and the First Amendment because it was hostile to Muslims.The brothers communicated occasionally by phone and text, and Mr. Vayeghan said he had not been given any food to eat or a place to sleep. Federal officers were pressuring him to a sign a document withdrawing his green card, he said, telling him he could be permanently banned from the United States if he did not. After hours of refusal, Mr. Vayeghan gave in, unsure of what exactly he was signing. Soon after, the authorities tried to get him to board a plane to Dubai, but Mr. Vayeghan hesitated. The agents soon picked him up to force him onto the plane, he later told his family.Officials from Customs and Border Protection, which carried out the order at airports across the country, did not return calls for comment.When Mr. Vayeghan arrived in Dubai, the officers who escorted him off the plane took his passport and pushed him several times, he told his brother.“I don’t understand. If somebody is criminal, they don’t treat them this way,” Mr. Vayghan said. “All of us, we have a good name. We have done nothing wrong in our whole life. In generations, we have had no problems.”After the court ruled in Mr. Vayeghan’s favor on Sunday, the lawyers rushed to alert the authorities in Dubai, but it was too late.If he had been on a later flight or if the order had come more quickly, Mr. Vayeghan might have been back in Los Angeles by now.“What he went through is not this country,” said his niece Marjan Vayghan, who came to California with her parents when she was 6. “That is like a madness. That is not the right L.A. that I know at all.”Peter Bibring, a lawyer for the A.C.L.U. of Southern California who is representing Mr. Vayeghan, said the ruling showed that scores of removals this weekend were unfair and illegal.“This was a case for one person, but people across the country suffered similar treatment,” he said. “It demonstrates that the valid visa holders who were removed this weekend should be returned.”Ms. Vayghan and her father are urging Mr. Vayeghan to come back and stay in the United States, living here with his status as a legal permanent resident. Now in Tehran, he is reluctant to board another plane. He worries what will happen if he returns, Ms. Vayghan said. If this could happen, he told her, what else might be possible?