https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/sports/basketball/new-york-knicks-draft-frank-ntilikina.html
Knicks Draft Frank Ntilikina of France, Avoiding a Dramatic Twist - The New York Times
Draft and Recruitment (Sports),Basketball,National Basketball Assn,New York Knicks,France,Ntilikina  Frank (1998- ),Jackson  Phil (1945- )
June 22, 2017
3571
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Frank Ntilikina was determined to get to New York for the N.B.A. draft. Even though Strasbourg, the team he plays for in the French Pro-A League, was in the midst of the championship round of the playoffs, he calculated that he could catch a train to Paris and a flight to New York, make a quick appearance at the draft and then hustle back in time to join Strasbourg for the decisive game of the finals.Ntilikina’s next stay in New York will last a lot longer. The Knicks, in desperate need of backcourt help for a glaringly imperfect squad, selected Ntilikina, a 6-foot-5-inch 18-year-old, with the No. 8 pick in the draft Thursday night, setting the stage for another European import to impress at Madison Square Garden.Ntilikina, who was born to Rwandan parents and lived in Belgium as a child before moving to France, is an intriguing pick because of his biography as well as his talent.But in many ways, his selection was almost an anticlimactic moment after days of increasing speculation that the Knicks might trade Kristaps Porzingis, their budding 7-foot-3 star who has become estranged from the team’s president, Phil Jackson.In the end, a deal for Porzingis did not materialize. For now, Porzingis remains at the core of the team, along with another young 7-footer from Europe, Willy Hernangomez, who not long ago was playing with Porzingis in Spain.Ntilikina, Porzingis and Hernangomez could give the Knicks a European identity, an interesting plot twist for a franchise that was struggling before Jackson took over three years ago and has continued to do so.Jackson declined to talk about Porzingis on Thursday night, which meant he did not have to answer questions about how close he came to dealing him. Instead he focused on Ntilikina, who impressed the Knicks’ front office with his size and his defensive prowess.Ntilikina can play point guard and shooting guard, two positions the team needs help with, although his immediate contributions might be limited. While he did not work out for the Knicks because of his team’s playoff run in France, he interviewed with Jackson and Knicks Coach Jeff Hornacek on Wednesday.Jackson called him a “project-type” player, which is an understandable assessment. Ntilikina was the second-youngest player in the draft, and Jackson said there was considerable debate among Knicks executives before a consensus was reached to gamble on him.“We like his aptitude for the game, the athleticism, and actually the ability to incorporate himself into a winning-type situation,” Jackson said.Ntilikina will step into a Knicks team still rife with issues. There is the ongoing tension with Porzingis, who blew off his end-of-season interview with Jackson over apparent frustration with the team’s problems, as well as the stalemate between Jackson and Carmelo Anthony, whom Jackson would like to trade.But that is not something for Ntilikina to concern himself with, at least not yet.“I think it’s really exciting to have challenges right at the beginning of your career, like it’s really exciting,” he said after the Knicks picked him. “I mean, I’m ready for whatever will happen.”It is not that surprising the Knicks once again turned to Europe to make a first-round pick. Jackson has shown a preference for the style of play employed and the players who develop in that system.“Our college game becomes more a style of what you can do offensively, just giving a lot of room to players just to play whatever, one-on-one or whatever ability they have,’’ Jackson told reporters Thursday night. “Whereas the European players are schooled into a system and how to fit into it.”If that sounds like Jackson was looking for a player willing to play in his beloved triangle offense, he has apparently found that person in Ntilikina, who has spoken positively about the triangle, even though it has been criticized as being increasingly irrelevant in the fast-paced N.B.A.In drafting Ntilikina, Jackson also said he thought back to his time playing for the Knicks when the franchise won its only two championships — in 1970 and 1973. Many of those Knicks players, he said, were within a few years of experience of one another.He said he hopes that the younger Knicks now on the team can grow together as well. Porzingis is only 21 after two seasons in the N.B.A. Hernangomez is 23. Ntilikina is the youngest of them all.Ntilikina’s emergence does not necessarily mean the team will not re-sign point guard Derrick Rose, who is mending from April knee surgery. And as for repairing his relationship with Porzingis, Jackson said any comments on that issue would have to wait for another day.“This isn’t the time to talk about that,” he said. “This is the time to talk about Frank.”ReboundsWith their two second-round picks, the Knicks took a college senior and another European player. They selected Damyean Dotson, a 6-foot-6 guard from the University of Houston, with the 44th overall pick. Dotson began his college career at Oregon, but he and two teammates were dismissed from the university after they were accused of sexual assault. They were never charged with a crime, and Dotson ended up at Houston in 2015. With the 58th pick, the Knicks took Ognjen Jaramaz, 21, of Serbia. Jaramaz, who plays for Mega Bemax in Belgrade, is a 6-foot-4 point guard.