https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/arts/television/american-gods-tv-review.html
Review: ‘American Gods’ Works in Mysterious Ways - The New York Times
Television,American Gods (TV Program),Starz,Fuller  Bryan,Green  Michael J (1973- ),McShane  Ian,Gaiman  Neil
April 28, 2017
1120
At one of the many tense moments in “American Gods,” a character named Shadow Moon pleads with his employer, Mr. Wednesday, saying, more or less: “I don’t give a fig if they don’t have a figging clue. I want one. Give me a figging clue.” This happens early in Episode 2, by which time viewers might want one, too.Like the much-loved Neil Gaiman novel from 2001 on which it’s based, “American Gods,” which starts Sunday on Starz, is a melting pot of themes, styles and influences. There’s an American-roots thing going on, with characters road-tripping across the heartland and Bob Dylan, the Band and Creedence Clearwater Revival on the soundtrack — like a much more serious “Supernatural,” annotated by Greil Marcus.There’s a fortuitously timely displacement theme, in which the presence in America of some of the gods of the title — human avatars of deities from Norse, African, Slavic, Indian and other traditions — appears to be tied to the experiences of immigrants, explorers or slaves from those regions.But primarily, “American Gods” fits into the television category of speculative fiction of the hard-edge, violent variety. The occasional billows and streams of blood are reminiscent of “Game of Thrones” and “True Blood,” though the show doesn’t share the linear storytelling style of those HBO fantasies.It belongs instead with shows that favor fractured, withholding narratives, arresting visuals (whether they serve the story or not) and an overall sense of dread. Recent comparisons, none perfect, include “Outcast” on Cinemax, “Emerald City” on NBC and “Preacher” on AMC. Also NBC’s canceled “Hannibal,” which makes sense — its creator, Bryan Fuller, developed “American Gods” along with Michael Green.And in terms of style, Mr. Fuller has outdone himself on “Gods.” It’s consistently eye-catching, sometimes in burnished, picturesque ways and sometimes disorienting, grotesque ways. (Severed limbs are a recurring motif.) But he and Mr. Green have also pushed the envelope in terms of cryptic and leisurely storytelling. Through the four episodes (of eight) available for review, viewers who haven’t read Mr. Gaiman’s book will have only the faintest idea of where the plot is headed.They’ll know that Shadow (Ricky Whittle), just released from prison, hits the road with Mr. Wednesday (a droll Ian McShane) on a mission of unspecified aim but great importance that takes the two toward Chicago. They won’t know how this connects with other sequences involving a neon-suited fancy man on a slave ship, a flame-eyed gay genie in modern-day New York or a woman who picks up men for a uniquely predatory form of sex.Those who have read the novel, or read about the novel, can assume (spoiler alert) that a battle looms that will pit Shadow, Mr. Wednesday and the other old-school gods against a crew of new gods representing the worst aspects of modern American culture. Knowing this might be crucial for making it through the starts and stops and sideways jumps of the early episodes.If you’re willing to wait for the story to take shape, there are compensations. The action hums along, even if you can’t tell where it’s going, and there’s a welcome edge of humor (not abundant in this genre), especially in the performances of Mr. McShane and Pablo Schreiber as a tall Irishman who calls himself a leprechaun. Gillian Anderson shows up, delightfully, as one of the new gods, who takes the form of Lucy Ricardo in “I Love Lucy” and speaks to Shadow from a display of flat-screen TVs.The elusive narrative threads of “American Gods” make a kind of structural sense: Shadow, plunged without warning into the gods’ realm, is bewildered by everything he sees, and we’re experiencing his bewilderment. Whether you take to the show will depend on whether you’re as patient as Shadow when it comes to getting a clue.