http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/30/arts/video-games/lara-croft-shows-a-vulnerable-side-in-new-tomb-raider.html
In New Tomb Raider, Lara Croft Shows a Vulnerable Side - The New York Times
Computer and Video Games,Tomb Raider (Video Game),Crystal Dynamics Inc,Square Enix
March 29, 2013
3188
Lara Croft, perhaps the most famous heroine in video games, started out as a man, according to reports about her creation some 17 years ago. She was too much of an Indiana Jones clone, the men making the original Tomb Raider thought, so they turned her into a woman.She was certainly no damsel in distress. Introduced as a busty explorer in a tight top and short shorts, she was a controllable daredevil armed with two pistols. Her creators gave her the ability to climb ancient tombs, a feat of interactive gymnastics that defied a physique honed more for a pinup than for a pull-up. She was as physically improbable a virtual being as Super Mario, Nintendo’s fat plumber who bounded with a grasshopper’s leap.Nine console games of uneven quality and a couple of Angelina Jolie blockbuster movies later, Lara Croft has been rethought and reprogrammed for a new game. This version, developed by Crystal Dynamics, has been flattered by its publisher, Square Enix, with the simple title Tomb Raider. It’s a reboot. And the creators have tried to turn Lara into something new yet again: a realistic, relatable person.In Tomb Raider’s first couple of hours, they impressively succeed as few games, in this series or otherwise, have before. This adventure introduces a younger, less accomplished Lara Croft.She’s barely past her teenage years and not at all a confident, sexy treasure hunter. She’s a smart explorer trying to track a legendary Japanese queen. Less overtly made to be ogled, the new Lara is still blessed — well, programmed, of course — with a model’s looks, but also with the practical sense to wear at least pants, if not to put on a jacket.At the start she’s on a ship somewhere in the Pacific. Soon, while listening to music in her cabin, she’s tossed about in a shipwreck. Those who aren’t treasure hunters playing the game might grasp for something they can relate to. In the Lara Croft who washes up on shore, they may discover an avatar who could be one of them. This is Lara’s new, extraordinary leap.Real life doesn’t work like video games. If we were shipwrecked on an island, we might not immediately be kidnapped, tied up and suspended from the ceiling of a creepy cave. But quickly enough we, like Lara Croft, probably would be trembling and nervous about what comes next. This is a twist. Video game action heroes seldom tremble.Dispute, if you must, how quickly you’d start a fire or learn to stab a deer with an arrow to begin to skin it for a meal. Those are the things players make Lara do next. But if the island’s bad people were to show up, and if they were to bind our hands, threaten our lives and react to a knee in the groin with a tackle, then we too might struggle for control of a handgun. We too might pull the trigger and kill our assailant in self-defense. We too might do that thing that the heroes of action games are rarely programmed to do: collapse from the inner pain of taking a life.We would run. In the game, we make her run. We find a campsite to direct her to. She sits down, exhausted physically, mentally and emotionally. She seems overwhelmed.These are the events of the game’s opening, a stirring sequence that smoothly winds back and forth from noninteractive cinematic scene to controllable action. For an experienced gamer it is full of refreshing turns.The heroes of action games aren’t prone to remorse or regret, certainly not for the violence they commit. This may be partly because they’re typically portrayed as expressing a calculating confidence. It’s also because the fundamental steps of an action video game — the simulated violence of shooting, punching or stomping — are repeated so often, are so central to making it feel interactive, that there is no emotional room for regret and no functional and fun way to express it.No major action video game has put a male lead through the wringer of pain, doubt and subjugation that Tomb Raider’s heroine goes through in this adventure. The vulnerability is welcome, though it raises questions about whether such a depiction would be grafted onto a male hero. The new Lara Croft’s trembles and stumbles may be attributed to attitudes about gender, to the belief that a woman’s passage to greatness is fraught with suffering. But it’s just as likely that these vulnerabilities have been avoided in other games because they might not make for an enjoyable experience.Even by the end of this game, those vulnerabilities are disappointingly gone. They flow against the currents of empowerment for which video games, including this one, are well suited. Games are exceptional at teaching players a set of interactive skills and then challenging them to improve. Games rarely let us feel weak; they’re designed to make us enjoy the fantasy of becoming stronger.The weak, fleeing Lara Croft we controlled early in Tomb Raider eventually becomes the Lara Croft armed with shotgun, pistol, climbing rope and grenade launcher. The Lara Croft who cowers from enemies begins to shout back at them and taunt them. The tombs she raids earn her points to make her a better, more lethal shot.By the end Lara Croft is again not one of us.She’s an action hero. She’s a video game star. She’s a killer without pause. In isolation, her journey is stunning to look at and satisfying to play. But on another level it is disappointing to feel as if we were someone new and knowable, only to wind up role-playing a hero who exhibits the familiar ruthlessness of her medium.Tomb Raider is available for personal computers, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. It is rated M (Mature, for players 17 and older) for intense violence and strong language.