http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/19/arts/television/review-kevin-can-wait.html
Review: In ‘Kevin Can Wait,’ a Certain Domestic Déja Vu - The New York Times
Television,CBS Corporation,Kevin Can Wait (TV Program),James  Kevin
Sept. 18, 2016
3883
Either Kevin waited too long, or he didn’t wait long enough.For more than 200 episodes Kevin James did his schlubby thing in the CBS series “The King of Queens,” which ended its nine-season run in 2007. Now he’s working a similar schtick in “Kevin Can Wait,” an anemic sitcom that has its premiere Monday on CBS.No, it’s not exactly the same show that he did before, but it’s exactly the same show that you’ve seen before. If, that is, you’re old enough to have grown up during the bland period when a domestic sitcom consisted of a husband and wife whose attraction to each other was never convincing and who conversed in setup/punch line repartee of the most predictable sort. Oh, and there were forgettable children lurking about.Working that formula here, Mr. James plays Kevin, who as the series opens is retiring from his job as a police officer after 20 years. This means he’ll be spending a lot more time with his wife, Donna (Errin Hayes), who tolerates his overeating and apparently does most of the work of raising their three children, the two youngest of whom are still at home.It’s the older child, Kendra (Taylor Spreitler), who seems from the premiere episode as if she’s going to be the important one. She’s away at school, but a not-very-surprising change in her personal life apparently is the source of the show’s title. A garage apartment Kevin and Donna had hoped to rent to provide a bit of retirement income has to be offered to her instead, and thus Kevin has to look for work and may not be able to pursue all the childish pastimes he and his retired buddies had been contemplating.That’s all we know about “Kevin Can Wait” from the first episode, and maybe the show has more on its mind, but the writing and acting in the premiere are so unexceptional that there’s not much incentive to find out. At a time when the best television comedies are taking on race, politics, disability and more, this one hopes that there’s still an appetite for Mr. James’s macaroni and cheese.It might have worked right after “The King of Queens” went off the air and his bereft fans were channel surfing. Or, 10 years hence, it might have pushed some nostalgia buttons, but it’s too soon for that in 2016. As Kevin the cop might have said while working some accident scene, “Move along, folks; there’s nothing to see here.”