http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/11/realestate/commercial/11sqft.html
Larry A. Silverstein - The New York Times
Silverstein  Larry A
Oct. 9, 2009
9015
Mr. Silverstein, 78, is the president and chief executive of Silverstein Properties, which acquired the World Trade Center just weeks before the Sept. 11 attacks.He is now involved in rebuilding ground zero. He opened 7 World Trade Center three years ago and has plans for three more towers.Q. What is the occupancy at 7 World Trade Center now?A. Eighty-five percent. The largest tenant is Moody’s; they have about 700,000 square feet.Q. Are you close to leasing the remaining portion?A. It should not be too long.The German bank WestLB signed a lease for the top three floors several months ago.Q. WestLB will have spectacular panoramic views. What rent will it pay per square foot?A. We don’t talk about rents, but the highest rent is $80.Q. What are some of the building’s green features? A. Well, there are several. Believe it or not, we collect rainwater on the roof and that has multiple functions in the building. It also makes for energy efficiency. The glass is without any film on it. When you look out the windows, you see exactly what’s out there, and the way we handle the federal energy requirements is by ceramic frits in the glass.Q. And security measures? A. This is probably the safest building ever built in America.We learned so much from what transpired on 9/11, particularly how not to build a high-rise office building.  For example, on 9/11 we learned that the wallboard that surrounded the core walls — what contains your elevator system, stairways, communications system, sprinkling system and pipes for fighting fires — served no function at all. What we resolved to do here was to construct the core walls of two-foot-thick concrete, one of the densest forms of concrete you could pour. We then proceeded to impregnate every floor of the core with 70 tons of steel reinforcing bars.Q. Did all this add a lot to construction costs? A. What we did was abandon cost issues, the thought being you can’t measure life with costs. I knew we were going to occupy this building upon completion. I also have my children working with me and 150 people working for me and with me. So you want everybody to feel comfortable.Q.  Will this be repeated in your other ground-zero buildings? A. It’s being repeated in all the buildings. Totally beyond code. But the nice thing — the happy thing in all this — is that the code has now begun to catch up. The city has now begun to change and enhance the building code to require some of the advances that we built in this building.Q. Knowing what you know now, is there part of you that regrets becoming involved in the World Trade Center? A. It’s been the focus of my business life since ’01, and that hasn’t changed. What I can tell you from a very personal standpoint and as a New Yorker: I’m glad that I acquired the Center when I did because I’m not sure that anyone would have had the guts and determination to stay with this thing and let it become a part of their lives as I have.Q. You’ve locked horns with the Port Authority over scheduling in rebuilding ground zero. Are you close to resolving matters? A. We’re now in the process of arbitration. It’s just a question of time until the arbitrators sift through all the information and come to a conclusion: either we’re nuts or they’re nuts!Q. What’s the problem? A. You have a bureaucracy at the Port, and their mind-set is different from private enterprise. Anytime there’s a delay, they just change the schedule; anytime there’s an increase in costs, they increase the budget. As a private entrepreneur, I can’t function that way. We should have been much farther along.Tower 4 is already at street level. Unfortunately, at the present pace of construction our building will be finished two years before the infrastructure is in place, the infrastructure that the Port’s obligated to do. So by virtue of that,  we’re going to have to stop.Q. What do you hope happens? A. We prefer a partnership arrangement. If we do it our way, we could get this thing done by 2016. If you’re going the Port’s way, I think the time frame they set for completion is sometime around 2037. Now I look at this and I say to myself, I won’t be around in 2037 — hopefully, I’ll be around in 2016.Q. Do you still play the piano? A. Not as much as I like to. My father was a fine classical pianist; he’d put me to bed every night to Chopin, Beethoven.At N.Y.U., I was in the band. I played the drums. It was cool and it was a lot of fun.