http://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/02/theater/theater-review-pint-size-fighter-hangs-tough-in-world-of-glass.html
THEATER REVIEW; Pint-Size Fighter Hangs Tough In World of Glass - The New York Times
KENNEDY  JOHN F  CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS,WILLIAMS  TENNESSEE,MOSHER  GREGORY,FIELD  SALLY,REVIEWS,THEATER,GLASS MENAGERIE  THE (PLAY)
Aug. 2, 2004
6764
A group of accomplished exorcists have been let loose on one of the most haunted plays in American theater. And against the odds, this courageous team -- led by the director Gregory Mosher and the actress Sally Field -- has succeeded in its mission. It has stripped Tennessee Williams's ''Glass Menagerie'' of six decades' accumlation of ghostly legends and overheated analysis, of canonized performances past and deconstructions by psychobabbling biographers.The resulting production, the last in the Williams festival at the Kennedy Center here, is a gentle, modest-looking affair. And therein lies its beauty. This ''Glass Menagerie,'' which runs through Aug. 8, affords the privilege of seeing a myth-inflated drama restored to human scale. Virtues long hidden by overconceptualized stagings and flamboyant acting emerge as clear and glistening as the translucent animals of the play's title.At the center of this transformation is Ms. Field's portrait of Amanda Wingfield, although it should be said right away that she does not dominate what is very much an ensemble production. Amanda is, along with Eugene O'Neill's Mary Tyrone, the ultimate child-mangling mother of American drama and a part coveted by every actress past her Juliet days.But whoever takes on Amanda must reckon with the phantom presence of Laurette Taylor, who created the role in 1945 in a performance recalled as -- oh, you name it -- transcendent, definitive, unmatchable. The implication has always been that any subsequent Amanda is never going to be more than second best. Which hasn't stopped Maureen Stapleton, Jessica Tandy, Joanne Woodward and Julie Harris (with Jessica Lange in the wings for a new Broadway production) from trying.Ms. Field would not automatically seem to belong in such company. Though a two-time Oscar winner, she made her Broadway debut only recently, creditably replacing Mercedes Ruehl in Edward Albee's ''Goat.'' And Amanda has traditionally had an element of the grotesque that would seem to be outside the range of the sunny Ms. Field.Yet it turns out that Ms. Field has spent much of her career preparing for Amanda. In the films that won her Oscars (''Norma Rae'' and ''Places in the Heart''), she played pint-size Southern women of outsize will and tenacity. Williams describes Amanda in the stage directions for ''Menagerie'' as ''a little woman'' of ''endurance and a kind of heroism.''The signal difference, of course, is that the little women of Ms. Field's films realize their dreams. Amanda -- a former beaux-collecting belle who was abandoned by her handsome husband and now lives in a cramped, rundown apartment with her two, disappointing grown children -- has been poisoned by failure. She clings to the all-American watchwords of self-improvement from her youth, and she still has a fighter's metabolism. But her refusal to admit defeat has started to look less like valor than delusion.Still petite, pretty and perky, Ms. Field transforms the traits that made her a screen sweetheart into the armory of outmoded weapons that Amanda deploys in her war against her children's lassitude and the poverty of Depression-era St. Louis. Ms. Field's Amanda may dwell lovingly on memories of a grander past, in a high tremolo that summons the genteel old ladies I grew up among in North Carolina.But there is also a pragmatist beneath the fluttery artificial postures, a woman harshly aware of the possibility of destitution. Small wonder she relentlessly nags her dreamy son, Tom (Jason Butler Harner), and her wounded bird of a daughter, Laura (Jennifer Dundas). On the rare occasions Amanda stops moving or talking, you see either fathomless fear and fatigue or even more unsettlingly, when she tilts her chin upward and closes her eyes, the complacent beauty of the girl she was.Designed with threadbare period exactness by John Lee Beatty (set) and Jane Greenwood (costumes), this ''Menagerie'' has an acute feeling for the hardship of its era. And while Aaron Copp's prismatic lighting does full justice to the lyrical aspects of a memory play, Mr. Mosher's production is steeped in a fine-grained psychological realism.As Tom, the play's regretful narrator, the superb Mr. Harner speaks with a sly, audience-courting facetiousness that is also informed by an air of perpetual apology. Guilt saturates his every word and gesture. The equally good Ms. Dundas doesn't make the usual mistake of overly poeticizing her character. This Laura is a genuinely damaged creature, slow-witted, slow-moving and pathologically afraid of the world. She keeps backing herself into corners, as if willing herself to disappear into the faded wallpaper.As for the fabled Gentleman Caller, on whom the Wingfields pin their hopes as a prospective suitor for Laura, Corey Brill shrewdly plays him as a younger, masculine variation on Amanda. Like the relentlessly plucky Mrs. Wingfield, he is filled with optimistic aphorisms for every occasion. But his glory days, as a prince of popularity in high school, are already behind him. When he says he is disappointed but not discouraged by life, you know it's only a matter of time before discouragement, too, overtakes him.That's the glory of this production, that it allows you to feel pity for everyone in it and to realize that Williams created not one but four meticulously drawn portraits, each infused with compassion for people who can keep going only by deceiving themselves. You are always aware of the truly good intentions of characters doomed to hurt one another. And the scene between Laura and her Gentleman Caller is all the more poignant for the genuineness of the romantic hopes it raises.The generosity of Mr. Mosher's letting the characters exist so naturally, free of confining stereotypes and imposed conceits, is such that his use of a technological gimmick, involving a moving photographic portrait of Amanda's husband, feels intrusive. Tom may deplore the existence of an eye-searing world ''lit by lightning.'' But Mr. Mosher, Ms. Field and company find a bright, crystalline core of truth in the play's flickering candlelight of memory.THE GLASS MENAGERIEBy Tennessee Williams; directed by Gregory Mosher; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by Jane Greenwood; lighting by Aaron Copp; original music and sound by John Gromada; hair and wig design by Tom Watson; dialect consultant, Lynn Watson; produced by Max Woodward; general manager, Michelle Kozlak; technical director/production manager, Neil Fleitell; ''Tennessee Williams Explored'' production stage manager, Elaine M. Randolph; stage manager, Jeanette Buck; assistant stage manager, Shari Silberglitt. Part of ''Tennessee Williams Explored'' series. Presented by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. At the Eisenhower Theater, Washington.WITH: Sally Field (Amanda Wingfield), Jason Butler Harner (Tom Wingfield), Jennifer Dundas (Laura Wingfield) and Corey Brill (Gentleman Caller).