https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/nyregion/de-blasio-makes-sudden-trip-to-trump-protests-at-g-20-summit.html
De Blasio Makes Sudden Trip to Trump Protests at G-20 Summit - The New York Times
New York City,de Blasio  Bill,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Group of Twenty,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,United States International Relations
July 6, 2017
7152
With only the barest of notice or declared interest, Mayor Bill de Blasio suddenly jetted off to Germany on Thursday to join protest events around the Group of 20 meeting in Hamburg, where President Trump is meeting with President Vladimir V, Putin of Russia and other world leaders.The trip seemed to be an international extension of Mr. de Blasio’s election-year effort to portray himself as a foil to Mr. Trump, and to project his image as a progressive leader.Mr. de Blasio kept his travel plans secret until shortly before his departure, but a spokesman, Eric F. Phillips, said that he would attend a demonstration on Saturday called Hamburg Shows Attitude. Mr. Phillips said that the mayor would return to New York on Sunday.Organizers later announced on Twitter that Mr. de Blasio would be the event’s keynote speaker. The event had previously listed as the featured speaker Gesine Schwan, a German politician who has run for president as the Social Democratic Party candidate.There are numerous protests planned around the summit, including a series of anticapitalist events, beginning Thursday, called “Welcome to Hell.” The Hamburg police said some protesters attacked officers on Thursday with bottles, poles and iron bars.The Hamburg Shows Attitude event, sponsored by mainstream groups, appeared to be among the less confrontational events planned.An organizer of the event, Marcel Schweitzer, said it was meant to “stand up for democracy and human rights.”“We aren’t against G-20,” Mr. Schweitzer said in an email, adding that the event would point out that “every member of the G-20 — including the U.S. (and especially President Donald Trump) — has to respect the human rights charter of the United Nations.”Mr. Phillips, the mayor’s spokesman, said that Mr. de Blasio decided to take part on Thursday afternoon. His plans were in flux after the murder of a police officer, Miosotis Familia, in the Bronx on Wednesday. Mr. Phillips said that Mr. de Blasio decided to make the trip when it became clear that Officer Familia’s funeral would not take place this weekend.Mr. Phillips and two other City Hall staff members were traveling with the mayor, and several members of his police security detail. He said that the travel costs for the mayor and staff members were being paid by the organizers of the Saturday event, but that they were not paying the costs for Mr. de Blasio’s police detail.Mr. Phillips said that Mr. de Blasio’s son, Dante, was spending the summer in Germany and that the mayor would visit his son during the trip.Mr. de Blasio has frequently faced criticism for his pursuits beyond New York, with detractors saying that he appeared unenthused by the daily work of running city government.More recently Mr. de Blasio has stayed closer to home, while seeking to cast New York as a leader in efforts to push back against the policies of Mr. Trump.He has vowed that the city will resist efforts to deport more immigrants, and he has said the city will push ahead with a commitment to meet or exceed the goals of the Paris climate accord, which Mr. Trump plans to set aside.But Mr. de Blasio appears to again be feeling the need to travel.Recently he met with the mayor of Seattle, and in June he flew to Miami where he spoke about health care and climate change at a meeting of the United States Conference of Mayors.Mr. de Blasio’s father, Warren Wilhelm, was of German descent, and his parents named the future mayor Warren Wilhelm Jr. But Mr. de Blasio had a difficult relationship with his father, and he later changed his name, taking his mother’s maiden name as his legal surname and a childhood nickname, Bill, as his first name.Mr. de Blasio often plays up his Italian heritage and has made high-profile trips to his mother’s ancestral homeland. A few months after becoming mayor, in 2014, he was received as a hero in the Italian town where his grandfather was born.Mr. Phillips said that Mr. de Blasio had no plans to visit any locations associated with his father’s family.