http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/04/nyregion/new-york-city-police-speeding-up-effort-to-give-officers-body-cameras.html
Police Body Cameras Could Come to New York Soon - The New York Times
Police Department (NYC),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,de Blasio  Bill,Garner  Eric,New York City
Dec. 3, 2014
1408
Mayor Bill de Blasio announced on Wednesday that the New York Police Department was accelerating its efforts to outfit nearly every patrol officer on the force with body cameras.With communities across the nation wrestling with questions about police conduct and struggling to bolster public trust in law enforcement after the unrest in Ferguson, Mo., Mr. de Blasio said the cameras would provide a sense of accountability and transparency.Officers in several precincts could be wearing the cameras as soon as Friday.Mr. de Blasio, speaking at a news conference at the Police Academy in Queens, said the cameras would “fundamentally change” the way the police and community interact.“When something happens, to have a video record of it, from the police officers’ perspective, is going to help in many, many ways,” he said. “And God forbid, when something goes wrong, we are going to have a clearer sense of what happened.”He unveiled the cameras, which he said were light, easy to use and would “in no way impede” the work of the police.The mayor’s announcement comes at a time of rising tension in New York City and some minority communities following the death of Eric Garner, who died in July after being placed in a chokehold by a police officer during an arrest on Staten Island.Mr. Garner was suspected of illegally selling individual cigarettes when he was confronted by the police and wrestled to the ground – an altercation that was captured on video by a bystander. A Staten Island grand jury decided not to indict the officer who placed Mr. Garner in a chokehold.Mr. Garner’s death in July was followed three weeks later by the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, in Ferguson, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson.A grand jury declined to press charges against Mr. Wilson, a decision that prompted protests and riots.After the unrest, President Obama met with local leaders and law enforcement officials at the White House to discuss how to restore trust of the police in minority communities.Mr. de Blasio, who attended the meeting, said earlier this week that one subject Mr. Obama focused on was the efficacy of body cameras.“Body cameras are one of the ways to create a real sense of transparency and accountability,” Mr. de Blasio said.On Wednesday, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said that the use of body cameras was something he has been interested in since his time leading the Los Angeles Police Department.In recent years, the technology has continued to improve, and Mr. Bratton said the city would learn from the experience of other departments, including that of London, where some 20,000 officers are being outfitted with cameras.The New York program will last several months and will be rolled out as part of a broader effort to increase the technical capabilities of the department. In addition to the cameras, 35,000 police officers will be issued specially programmed smartphones. Additionally, about 6,000 tablet computers will be distributed to help officers obtain real-time information while in the field.Officials also said they hoped the cameras would provide evidence that would help them limit the amount of money the city pays in claims against the department.New York City paid $212 million last year on claims against the police and nearly $1 billion over the last five years.Even before the recent unrest, New York was poised to begin a pilot program to test the use of cameras, as part of an order issued last year by a federal judge.The judicial mandate was intended to curb what the court found to be unconstitutional stop-and-frisk interactions by the officers.In his campaign for mayor, Mr. de Blasio had railed against the stop-and-frisk tactics and embraced the judge’s ruling.But he said he felt the need to move quickly to get the camera program underway given the national focus on the question of police conduct.Earlier this year, the police said the pilot program would hew closely to the judge’s order in some respects, but not in others. The participating precincts, selected in “direct response” to the order, include ones in Harlem; the South Bronx; East New York, Brooklyn; Jamaica, Queens; and northeastern Staten Island, where Mr. Garner died.Thousands of small- and medium-size police departments have been using the cameras for the past few years, and many big city police forces, including Los Angeles and Washington, have begun tests or have plans to do so.Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, had resisted the push for cameras, calling them a “nightmare.”“We can’t have your cameraman follow you around and film things without people questioning whether they deliberately chose an angle, whether they got the whole picture in,” Mr. Bloomberg said when the court first ordered the use of cameras.But even when the police do not wear cameras, there is the increasing likelihood that their interactions will be recorded by someone equipped with nothing more than a cellphone.After Mr. Garner’s death, a video emerged that showed the altercation in graphic detail, and the episode became a national story.In the video, recorded by a bystander, other officers can be seen restraining Mr. Garner on the ground. He can be heard repeatedly telling officers: “I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe.”A short while later, he lay motionless on the pavement.