http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/28/politics/politicsspecial1/bushs-court-choice-ends-bid-conservatives-attacked-miers.html
Miers Withdraws Nomination for Supreme Court - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Oct. 28, 2005
5152
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27 - Harriet E. Miers abruptly withdrew her nomination for the Supreme Court on Thursday after withering attacks from conservatives and weeks of doubt from both political parties about her qualifications for the job.Her decision forces President Bush to scramble for a new nominee at a time of growing disarray at the White House.Ms. Miers, the reticent White House counsel who faced three weeks and three days of a conservative rebellion against the president, walked into the Oval Office shortly after 8:30 a.m. and handed Mr. Bush, her longtime friend and patron, a letter of withdrawal. "I am concerned that the confirmation process presents a burden for the White House and our staff that is not in the best interests of the country," she  wrote.Mr. Bush, in a written statement made public shortly before 9 a.m., said that he had "reluctantly accepted" Ms. Miers's decision and praised her as "a pioneer in the American legal profession." Ms. Miers is expected to remain in her job as White House counsel.Concern about Ms. Miers's candidacy had intensified on Capitol Hill and at the White House this week. It was unclear how White House officials, in consultation with her, decided to pull the nomination.Both Mr. Bush and Ms. Miers cited the principle of separation of powers as the reason for the withdrawal and said that releasing documents requested by the Senate about Ms. Miers's work in the White House would weaken the independence of the executive branch and a president's freedom to confer in private with advisers.But members of both parties said that the separation of powers argument was not the central reason for the withdrawal. The most powerful factor, they said, was the strong  opposition from conservatives who questioned Ms. Miers's ideology on abortion and other social issues and saw her as an impediment to their decades-long goal of control of the court."The issue of whether the documents were the make-or-break issue is really a red herring," said Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. "The extreme right wing of the Republican Party have effectively undermined this nomination. They have a litmus test, and Harriet Miers didn't pass that test."Ms. Miers had also been unable to gain strong support among Senate Republicans in recent days, and some said her confirmation was in jeopardy.In addition, members of both parties said, Mr. Bush appeared eager to change the subject and calm conservatives only 24 hours before a special counsel might announce indictments in a leak inquiry that has involved top White House officials and severely shaken the West Wing.White House officials said Mr. Bush would act within days to name a new nominee, possibly as early as this weekend. Officials said they could move quickly because they had a pool of possibilities from the recent vetting processes of Supreme Court nominees that led first to Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and then Ms. Miers."We're not starting from scratch here," a White House official said.Republicans close to the White House said Mr. Bush could turn to a man, like J. Michael Luttig, Samuel A. Alito Jr. or J. Harvie Wilkinson III, all federal appellate judges. Women mentioned as candidates include Priscilla R. Owen and Diana Sykes, also federal appellate judges, and Maureen Mahoney, a Washington lawyer who frequently argues cases before the Supreme Court.Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, said that Ms. Miers called Mr. Bush in the White House residence on Wednesday at 8:30 p.m. to tell him of her decision to withdraw. It was unclear if she  had had conversations with other White House officials before the  call, or whether Mr. Bush or a member of his staff had encouraged her withdrawal.Congressional officials said that Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the majority leader, raised the question of the nomination with Mr. Bush in a meeting at the White House on Wednesday morning. A Republican close to the White House said Mr. Frist told Mr. Bush that Ms. Miers's courtesy calls on senators were worsening her chances and that she might not even have the votes to be approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee, let alone the full Senate.Congressional officials said there was a series of discussions throughout the day between the Senate leadership and White House, culminating in a 9:30 p.m. phone conversation between Mr. Frist and Andrew H. Card Jr., the president's chief of staff, although the White House said that by then Ms. Miers had already told Mr. Bush she wanted to withdraw."I gave an accurate reflection of where the Senate was," Mr. Frist said.Despite what the White House said about Ms. Miers's decision to withdraw, her answers to a Senate questionnaire for her confirmation hearings were sent up Wednesday night to Capitol Hill, where they were received shortly after 11:30 p.m. A White House official said that Ms. Miers had completed the questionnaire about 5 p.m., and that the decision was made to send it up so as not to tip off White House or Congressional staff members that something was out of order.Ms. Miers was the 10th Supreme Court candidate in American history to founder without a confirmation hearing and the first since Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg, who in 1987 asked President Ronald Reagan to withdraw his name after admitting that he had smoked marijuana while teaching at Harvard Law School.Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee and who has expressed his own reservations about Ms. Miers's qualifications, said he regretted that she had dropped out before formal confirmation hearings could occur."Instead of a hearing before the Judiciary Committee and a debate on the Senate floor, Ms. Miers's qualifications were subjected to a one-sided debate in news releases, press conferences, radio and TV talk shows and the editorial pages," Mr. Specter said.He later added: "Whether she would have been confirmed remains an open question. But at least she would have had the major voice in determining her own fate."Democrats, who had remained largely silent as the conservative opposition to Ms. Miers grew, braced for the prospect of a highly conservative replacement choice as the administration seeks a candidate who can better unify Republicans. They said the failure of the nomination illustrated how captive Mr. Bush was to the right wing of his party."The only voices heard in this process were the far right," said Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, who had initially suggested Ms. Miers to Mr. Bush as a potential justice.Mr. Reid said  he hoped that Mr. Bush, in picking another nominee, "won't reward the bad behavior of this right-wing base."Several senators said they believed that Ms. Miers could have  been confirmed, though it would have been a grueling fight."I think it is a shame she did not get her day in court, so to speak," said Senator Mike DeWine, Republican of Ohio and a Judiciary Committee member who said he believed the withdrawal request was driven by her decision to avoid a battle over documents related to her White House work.But Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas and a prominent critic of the nomination, defended the campaign against Ms. Miers and said it represented the maturing of the Republican Party."This is not a one-person party," said Mr. Brownback, an ardent opponent of abortion rights who urged the president to pick a new choice with well-defined conservative credentials. "This position is extremely important. This was a nominee who people were unclear on, and they wanted a clear nominee and they were very free to voice that."Administration allies dismissed the implication that Ms. Miers and the president were caving in to conservative critics."I really think this is a personal choice on her part," said Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas and a strong Miers supporter. "I wouldn't want to give any pundit or any group credit, because they actually might think that people are listening and that they have some power to influence this process, and I wouldn't want to give them that misimpression."Ms. Miers had stumbled in her meetings with several senators. One dust-up with Mr. Specter resulted in his publicly declaring that he had misunderstood her position on a landmark privacy case, a dispute that was read as a misstep by Ms. Miers and her advisers. Others who met with her also did not find her impressive as she appeared to have difficulty articulating her legal views in the tense atmosphere where nearly every word was closely parsed."I think what is most significant is that members did not come out of their personal meetings with her feeling more strongly about her than when she went in," said Senator John E. Sununu, Republican of New Hampshire.Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, expressed a similar view. "I don't know of a single senator, Democrat or Republican, who walked away from that meeting saying she belongs on the Supreme Court," Mr. Schumer said.The schedule for a new confirmation remained unclear, though most on Capitol Hill said they had a hard time seeing how a new justice could be on the court by year's end."The next one is going to come, I think, fairly quickly, but I don't know exactly when," Mr. Frist said, adding that timing "really depends on who it is."At the White House, colleagues said that Ms. Miers had not only shown up for work but also seemed chipper after her ordeal, and that she felt good about her decision. Later, Ms. Miers's deputies and other staff members in the White House counsel's office went out to lunch, and were described by a friend as "exhausted but relieved."