https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/style/for-locally-owned-stores-head-to-nolita.html
For Locally Owned Stores, Head to NoLIta - The New York Times
NoLIta (Manhattan  NY),Shopping and Retail,Fashion and Apparel,Restaurants,Travel and Vacations,New York City
Nov. 10, 2016
4151
Start exploring NoLIta with a little fuel from Café Integral at 149 Elizabeth Street. Nicaraguan coffee is roasted in New York, and nut milks like almond, cashew and coconut are made in-house. The Almond Milk Latte ($6) has been life changing, tasting not like store-bought almond milk, but like warm, creamy almonds. You’ll also rarely find a line here, which makes starting your day that much better.Around the corner from Café Integral is Warm (181 Mott Street), with a friendly staff and a thoughtfully decorated space. There’s an unusual selection of accessories and home goods like miniature sheepskin rugs, handmade wall hangings and oversize bean bags. The range of books includes vintage surf volumes and the monolithic Gisele Bündchen photo book. Warm also has its own women’s clothing line. Should you need sage to smudge your home, you can find that here as well. Come here if your travel destinations of choice are Costa Rica, Nicaragua or Colombia, and if your idea of shopping heaven is buying from the local craft makers you would find there.I found my favorite-ever piece of clothing at Ritual Vintage (377 Broome Street) in the summer of 2014: high-waisted, ’80s purple silk Issey Miyake pants (they never fail to get compliments). The racks are filled to capacity, but it’s worth digging through every single one. You’ll find pieces from high-end designers like Dior, Dolce & Gabbana and Ann Demeulemeester, mixed in with more budget-friendly offerings from Levi’s, as well as countless no-name labels. The stock changes often; prices range from $15 for small jewelry and sunglasses to around $450 for more unusual pieces.With outposts in East Hampton, St. Barth’s and at 255 Centre Street, Clic describes itself as a general store, bookstore and gallery. Among the range of prints, books, home goods and apparel, some of the stock verges on the odd and quirky. Things I probably don’t need and definitely can’t fit into my apartment, but want nonetheless, include a Life Size Sheep Stool ($1,500); the Miffy lamp ($200 to $270), which resembles a bunny, made by Dutch artist Dick Bruna, and a Fiona Walker Unicorn Bust ($160). Items I also don’t need, but usually leave the store with, include books by the photographers Mario Testino, Peter Lindbergh and Dan Martensen, as well as a humourous birthday card or two (always good to keep on hand).While you’re here, skip over the border to Totokaelo (54 Crosby Street) in SoHo. It’s a serene shopping experience, with a selection of some of today’s most finely made clothes. If I had to shop at just one store for the rest of my life, Totokaelo would be it. Allow plenty of time to peruse the five floors full of fashion industry favorites like Vetements, Rick Owens, Dries Van Noten and Junya Watanabe. You’ll find men’s wear in the basement, and women’s wear spread out on the other four levels.For a lunch stop, walk back to Fiat Cafe (203 Mott Street). While most restaurants in NoLIta are the epitome of cozy, none are as cozy as Fiat. Favorites here include the simple penne with sauce ($9), burrata ($9) and the arugula tuna salad ($8). For dessert, you can’t beat tiramisù ($5.50). Breakfast is served until 4 p.m on weekdays.Part bookstore and part cafe, McNally Jackson (52 Prince Street) is the place to spend hours immersed in books of every variety. Should you ever look lost, the staff are right there to offer recommendations based on the last book you read. The magazine selection is solid as well, with volumes of Vogue and Elle from around the world, and indie titles such as ID and Love. Take a book and magazine (or two) off the shelves, and sit in the cafe where you can read undisturbed for hours, with a small purchase like a pot of tea ($4.50) or Bruno’s Rosewater ($3).A savvy New York shopper should never have to pay full price, and at Otte (281 Mott Street), you never will. There are branches in TriBeCa, the West Village and the Upper East Side, but here, you will find items from designers like Alexander Wang, MM6, Robert Clergerie and Frame Denim at 50 percent off, all year.Stocked with an eclectic mix of fine, modern and vintage jewelry along with lifestyle goods and items for your home, Love Adorned (269 Elizabeth Street) is the offspring of a tattoo shop, Adorned (47 Second Avenue). My personal mantra is that if no one else buys you jewelry, then just buy it for yourself, which is why you’ll find me here on a regular basis. Should you happen to be buying for a significant other, Love Adorned also carries Alternative Bridal jewelry. While here, be sure to also pick up something from the aromatics they carry, with candles by Lola James Harper ($45) and Mad et Len ($100) some of the best around. Items might be on the pricier side of the spectrum, but you’re buying one-of-a-kind pieces.Wrap up the day with one last drink and snack at the Randolph at Broome (349 Broome Street). A consistently great, seasonally changing cocktail list along with some of the best bar food — like the waffle fries ($8) and evil sprouts ($10) — has made the Randolph a NoLIta mainstay since 2007. Be sure to snag the couches by the windows.