https://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/09/nyregion/09steam.html
$24 Million to Be Paid by Con Ed in Pipe Blast - The New York Times
Consolidated Edison Inc,Explosions,Accidents and Safety,Manhattan (NYC)
Aug. 8, 2008
7687
Con Edison has agreed to pay more than $24 million to make up for damage caused by the explosion of one of its steam pipes in Midtown Manhattan last summer, which injured dozens of people and displaced thousands more.The utility promised not to pass those costs on to its customers, and to credit customers who paid their energy bills but did not receive service while they were shut out of their buildings after the blast. It will also pay more than $2 million in additional liability insurance premiums during the next four years without passing those costs on to customers, either.The explosion occurred last July 18 at Lexington Avenue and 41st Street. One person died of a heart attack in the blast.The agreement between the utility and the state’s Department of Public Service and Consumer Protection Board, was signed on Wednesday and reported by The Daily News on Friday. The Public Service Commission, which must vote to approve the settlement, is scheduled to hold public hearings about it on Aug. 21 in New York City.Approval by the commission would end a yearlong fight over whether Con Edison operated its steam network properly. But the commission is still looking at whether Con Edison violated any rules, which could result in up to $5 million in penalties.Con Edison is involved in dozens of private lawsuits over the explosion. In May, it sued one of its contractors, Team Industrial Services, as well as the city itself, contending that they contributed to the debacle. Con Edison alleged that a sealant used by the contractor clogged steam traps designed to remove condensation from steam pipes.The utility wants to recoup $45 million it has already spent on repairs, legal costs and compensation for people whose clothing, cars and other property were damaged in the explosion.But in the deal with the Consumer Protection Board and the Department of Public Service, Con Edison agreed to return to customers anything beyond $24 million that it wins in any legal settlements.“There’s a provision that eliminates the possibility that Con Ed would be enriched as a result of this tragedy,” said Mindy A. Bockstein, the executive director of the Consumer Protection Board. “Ratepayers will not have to pay the cost of cleaning up or replacing the steam network. There is a slight possibility that without this settlement, ratepayers could have had to shoulder some of the costs.”Bob McGee, a spokesman for Con Edison, said the utility is “committed to learning from this experience in order to strengthen the safety and reliability of the steam system and has already implemented measures to enhance its system.”A spokeswoman for the Public Service Commission declined to discuss the agreement.City Councilman Eric N. Gioia, a Queens Democrat who has been a consistent critic of the utility,  said that agreeing to cover the cost of the damages makes sense.“Paying for the damages they caused is the least Con Ed can do,” Mr. Gioia said.The utility’s “mistakes and bad management don’t just cost New Yorkers money, they also cost lives,” he added.