https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/us/politics/readers-react-to-trumps-disclosure-of-classified-intelligence.html
‘Seriously? This is Not News’: Readers React to Trump’s Disclosure of Classified Intelligence - The New York Times
Classified Information and State Secrets,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Russia,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
May 16, 2017
4518
President Trump disclosed highly classified intelligence to Russian officials in a meeting last week, a government official said on Monday. The disclosure was not illegal, since presidents have the power to declassify nearly anything, but the sharing of sensitive intelligence provided by Israel, one of the United States’ most important allies in the Middle East, was disclosed without their permission.Mr. Trump defended his disclosure on Twitter, saying it was his “absolute right” to do so.Our readers shared thousands of comments on Facebook, Twitter and the website of The New York Times. Some called him a danger to the United States, while others praised his actions, saying it would aid efforts to defeat ISIS.Here are excerpts from the comments, some of which have been edited for length and clarity.Some readers called on Republicans to scrutinize Mr. Trump’s dealings with the Russian government.“For all the damage this ‘President’ is doing to the national interest, one positive aspect is that the Republicans’ utter hypocrisy is being laid bare. There is absolutely no question that they would have been calling for Clinton’s head if she had done anything remotely like this, or for that matter, any of dozens of outrages Trump has committed since taking office after losing the popular vote.Mr. ‘President’, it’s you who are ‘Not fit!’, and the same is true of any elected official who defends you at this point. Just plain disgusting.”— David in Portland, Ore.“Numerous times in my professional life, I’ve been drug-tested, I’ve gone through background checks and security clearances. I’ve signed legally enforcible non-disclosure agreements. I’ve had to disclose that I have been involved in lawsuits or have felonies and I don’t have any financial liens against me.Apparently, I have been more thoroughly vetted in my professional work by my employers ... than Trump. And the Republicans expect all of us who must meet a high worth ethic to put up with this?”— Ann in California“All any Republican politician has to do to secure their legacy as a hero is to repeat after me: ‘The President is unfit for office and should resign.’”— Constantine Bristow, on The Times’s Facebook pageSome commenters did not believe that revealing classified information to the Russians was detrimental to national security, and could even help the United States defeat ISIS.“Seriously? This is not news. If it’s so sensitive why make this a story? If no specific details of sources were shared and only the nature of the plot, how is that excessive disclosure?Wouldn’t rapprochement among the two largest nuclear powers be a good thing? The partisanship is obscuring everything Trump says and does to the extent that people always want to see it in the negative. There isn’t a story here, at least not yet.”— Objective Foreigner in Zambia“Not news anymore, unfortunately. Tell us when you have audio of Trump promising allegiance to Russia. Anything else is starting to become a lot of white noise. Where is the illegal act? Where did he cross the line?”— NYLA Kid in Los Angeles“The way I look at it, if this information helps fight ISIS or prevent loss of innocent life, what’s wrong with sharing it? I think this is getting blown out of proportion.”— Andrei in CanadaPotential repercussions of Mr. Trump’s disclosure for the intelligence community were chief among the concerns of some commenters.“Which ally is now going to feel comfortable sharing intelligence with the U.S.? and even the security agencies within the U.S. may have doubts about what can be shared. Nixon pointed out that whatever the president chose to do is legal.By extension the worst excesses of despots will also be legal but could not be considered moral, sensible or in the best interests of the nation. ‘Checks and balances’ just don’t address this lack of fitness to govern adequately.”— John Smith in Kingston upon Thames“It seems to me that the larger story here is that the intelligence community has so little faith in Trump that it is putting stories like this out in the press. Whoever gave this story to the press may also be trying to protect other sources by letting them know what’s at risk.That this story found its way into the headlines suggests that the intelligence community increasingly sees Trump as a threat to their mission, not to mention the principles that they risk their lives for.”— ACA in Providence, R.I.“The White House says that sources/methods were not disclosed. Perhaps they were made discoverable by the revelation. But, we will never know if ISIS would have been aware of the intelligence but for the news clamor. And that clamor is what will likely put any source, which may or may not be human, in jeopardy. If the source is human, let’s not pretend that the media cares a whit if someone is killed if they can lay it at Trump’s door or even if they can use the disclosure to harm him in some way.I’m not a supporter of Trump and have always thought he was completely unqualified. But, I have very decent friends who are supporters and they feel we are approaching sedition.”— David H. Eisenberg in Smithtown, N.Y.Some readers were skeptical about the use of anonymous sources while others blamed the media for further bolstering Mr. Trump’s sharing of information with Russia. “Unless these news agencies stop using anonymous sources, there is no way a rational person can believe them. If the sources identified themselves, they could then be questioned/cross-examined!If they continue to hide, they could say or simply make up almost anything! How do we know where the truth ends and their speculation begins? How can the truth be found? Even the reporter is shielded from scrutiny. This looks like a coup attempt by Trump’s enemies.”— Steve in FloridaIt’s quite strange that the media is giving such prominence to and broadcasting so much detail about supposedly highly secret information and its source in order to show how irresponsible President Trump is.By contrast, all President Trump did was warn two highest-level Russian diplomats in private about an ISIS threat to global airline traffic—presumably because no one wants Russian airliners blown up any more than they want American ones blown up (although one wonders about some people on that account).It seem that of the two, the media and the President, the media is by far the most at fault for leaking state secrets. Strange indeed: it seems the goal of bringing down Trump overrides all other considerations.”— Nick Wright in Halifax, Nova Scotia