http://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/23/nyregion/trump-draws-criticism-for-ad-he-ran-after-jogger-attack.html
Trump Draws Criticism for Ad He Ran After Jogger Attack - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,CENTRAL PARK (NYC),RICHARDSON  KEVIN,MCCRAY  ANTRON,SALAAM  YUSEF,WISE  KHAREY,TRUMP  DONALD,SANTANA  RAYMOND,SEX CRIMES
Oct. 23, 2002
8408
On May 1, 1989, Donald J. Trump took out full-page advertisements in four New York newspapers calling for the return of the death penalty. Mr. Trump said he wanted the ''criminals of every age'' who were accused of beating and raping a jogger in Central Park 12 days earlier ''to be afraid.''Thirteen years later, as new evidence raises the possibility that the five teenagers convicted in the attack had nothing to do with it, their supporters are focusing some of their fiercest anger at Mr. Trump.''Trump is a chump!'' protesters shouted during a recent demonstration, accusing Mr. Trump of, at least, further inflaming passions and perhaps tainting the defendants' future jurors. Some called him a racist. Supporters of the Central Park defendants have demanded an apology.One does not appear to be forthcoming.''No,'' Mr. Trump said yesterday. ''They confessed. Now they say they didn't do it. Who am I supposed to believe?''The lingering anger over the ad underscores the powerful emotions unleashed by the case 13 years ago, and by its sudden re-emergence at the forefront of public debate. Just as the case came to symbolize the feeling of vulnerability among New Yorkers, especially white New Yorkers, the ad seems to represent, for its detractors, the perceived rush to judgment against five black youths. The text of the ad is misremembered at times, with protesters quoting words like ''animals'' and ''wilding'' that did not actually appear in it.In 1989, Mr. Trump paused in building his real estate empire to run the 600-word ad in The New York Times, The Daily News, The New York Post and New York Newsday, at a total cost of $85,000, under the boldfaced heading, ''Bring Back the Death Penalty. Bring Back Our Police!''In the ad, Mr. Trump said Mayor Edward I. Koch had stated ''that hate and rancor should be removed from our hearts,'' to which Mr. Trump replied: ''I do not think so. I want to hate these muggers and murderers. They should be forced to suffer and, when they kill, they should be executed for their crimes.'' At the time, the attack victim was still in a coma.The ad does not name any defendant, instead referring collectively to ''roving bands of wild criminals.''The five young men confessed, four of them on videotape, and served prison sentences. But last January, a convicted murderer, Matias Reyes, announced that he alone had raped the jogger and that the teens who had confessed had not been present. DNA tests linked Mr. Reyes to semen on the jogger's sock. Lawyers for the original defendants have called for their exoneration, and a report from the Manhattan district attorney's office on the new evidence is due in court on Dec. 5.''At the time there seemed to be very little question, but all of a sudden this seems to come up,'' Mr. Trump said. ''I do have tremendous respect for the district attorney, and I'm sure the right answer will come out.''The confessions mystify him, he said. ''Why did they confess to the crime?''Michael W. Warren, a lawyer for the men, said there was a growing resentment for Mr. Trump's advertisement.''It was outrageous,'' Mr. Warren said, ''the manner that Mr. Trump used to engage in his own personal form of rhetoric. A lot of people felt it colored the eyes of prospective jurors who ultimately sat on the case. Now it's even more appalling, with new evidence that points exclusively to another person. I think Donald Trump at the very least owes a real apology to this community and to the young men and their families.''Carol Taylor, a writer and demonstrator at the recent rallies, was not surprised at Mr. Trump's recent comments. ''Of course he won't apologize, because he's a rich white colorist male who is wallowing in the unearned privilege of his white skin color,'' she said. On Monday, she held a sign that said: ''Donald Trump, don't be a chump. For dissing black boys so bad, where's your full-page apology ad?''A protest is planned near the Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue in Midtown on Sunday. ''I'll be there. I think I'll make my sign bigger,'' Ms. Taylor said.Mr. Trump shrugged off the planned protest. ''I don't mind if they picket. I like pickets.''