http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/nyregion/report-retraces-six-minutes-of-horror-and-every-step-a-gunman-took.html
Report Retraces Six Minutes of Horror, and Every Step a Gunman Took - The New York Times
Newtown  Conn  Shooting (2012),Lanza  Adam,Sandy Hook Elementary School (Newtown  Conn),Newtown (Conn)
Nov. 25, 2013
7895
At 9:30 a.m. on Dec. 14, in Room 9 of Sandy Hook Elementary School, the principal, psychologist, and other staff members had gathered for a meeting about student placement.Sixteen first graders were assembled in Classroom 8, overseen by a substitute teacher.Sixteen more were next door, in Classroom 10, where their instructor had been known to spend evenings designing poster boards for the children.Eighty-two staff members had reported to work; nine were absent. Student attendance had not yet been recorded.Outside, a Honda Civic had pulled up beside a “No Parking” zone.Around 9:34, a cascade of shattering glass could be heard near the front lobby doors. A man in a hat and sunglasses, holding what appeared to be a rifle, walked in.He said nothing.“Stay put!” shouted the principal, Dawn Hochsprung, emerging from Room 9 with the school psychologist, Mary Sherlach.Moments later, a staff member followed, heard gunshots and saw the two women fall.With the release of a report on the mass school shooting in Newtown, Conn., the state’s attorney for Danbury on Monday provided a meticulous account of that morning, sketching the parallel chaos of school personnel trying desperately to protect students and the authorities scrambling to assess an unthinkable emergency. The report did not name the children who died, and it did not include graphic descriptions of the crime scene, but the sequence of events was recreated in minute detail.Another shot struck the staff member, who sprawled across the hallway, crawled back into Room 9 and held the door shut.A call was placed to 911, and, perhaps accidentally, the dialing activated the schoolwide intercom system.“This appears to have been done inadvertently,” the report said, “but provided notice to other portions of the building.”After killing Ms. Hochsprung, 47, and Ms. Sherlach, 56, and wounding two others in the hallway, the gunman, 20-year-old Adam Lanza, entered the main office, where some staff members had taken shelter.They heard the office door opening. There were sounds of footsteps, moving closer, then receding.By 9:36, according to a timeline of 911 calls and radio transmissions, the Newtown police had been notified of a shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary. Six seconds after 9:36, a dispatcher delivered the message to officers: “Sandy Hook School caller is indicating she thinks there is someone shooting in the building.”Forty-two seconds later, the dispatcher, Bob Nute, reported that the school’s front glass had been broken.Thirty-nine seconds after that, Mr. Nute delivered a disquieting update. “All units,” he said, “the individual that I have on the phone is continuing to hear what he believes to be gunfire.”After leaving the main office, it is unclear whether Mr. Lanza entered Classroom 8 or 10 first. The police would later find 15 children in Classroom 8, 14 who were dead and one who would be pronounced dead after being taken to Danbury Hospital. One child survived, exiting after the officers arrived. Two other adults — the substitute teacher, Lauren Rousseau, 30, and a behavioral therapist, Rachel D’Avino, 29 — were also killed.In Classroom 10, five children were found, with a behavioral therapist, Anne Marie Murphy, 52, partially covering one of them. Four of the children were dead and the fifth was pronounced dead after being taken to the hospital. Ms. Murphy and the teacher, Victoria Soto, 27, were killed. Ms. Soto was found near the room’s north wall, near a set of keys. Nine children had run from the room and survived; two were found uninjured.At 9:40 a.m., the police said, Mr. Lanza shot himself in Classroom 10.In the minutes that followed, officers feared that another gunman may have been at large.Some people were “treated initially as suspects and handled accordingly, including being handcuffed,” the report said. These included a parent holding a cellphone and two reporters in the woods outside the school, who were held at gunpoint by officers until their identities could be verified.Investigators determined that Mr. Lanza had acted alone. They are still unsure why.“There is no clear indication why Sandy Hook Elementary School was selected,” Stephen J. Sedensky III, the state’s attorney in Danbury, wrote in the report’s conclusion, “other than perhaps its close proximity to the shooter’s home.”