http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/23/arts/23aqua.html
A Hundred Thousand Fish, Behind a Pane 2 Feet Thick - The New York Times
ATLANTA (GA),ZOOS,AQUARIUMS,FISH AND OTHER MARINE LIFE
March 23, 2006
3069
ATLANTA, March 19 - When you enter a zoo, you usually know pretty much where you stand: there are trees or rocks, sunlight or windows, bars or glass or fences. Zoos have traditionally been extensions of public parks, offering exotic marvels safely contained on home turf. Even fish can sometimes be found in such terrain, swimming about as they did in the well-stocked ponds of ancient rulers.Aquariums, though, which developed in the mid-19th century along with public zoos, are a different story. But it might be difficult to see precisely why when visiting so new and grand an enterprise as the Georgia Aquarium, which opened here to great acclaim last November.One of its sensations, in fact, is simply its ambition -- look what we have gathered and constructed! The Georgia Aquarium is billed as the world's largest, and one can't escape statistics of size and number: over 100,000 fish are displayed in five galleries and 60 habitats in the more than 500,000 square foot building; there is a 6.2 million gallon pool in which 1.8 million pounds of salt and minerals have been dissolved since last October and in which two whale sharks -- the world's largest fish -- swim, displaying themselves to visitors through acrylic walls that are two feet thick. A stainless steel "commissary" behind the scenes holds 20,000 pounds of frozen food at minus 20 degrees Fahrenheit.This aquarium is also somewhat unusual in its origins: it is not created by a municipality, or a society of subscribers like those that founded the earliest public zoos. It is almost completely the creation of a single man, Bernard Marcus, co-founder of the Home Depot, as a "gift" to the people of the city in which his company began. He and his wife, Billi, donated $250 million of the $290 million cost. The land itself was donated by the Coca-Cola Company, which is building another attraction next door.In fact, every gallery (and a 3-D theater) bears the label of a corporate sponsor: AirTran, BellSouth, Georgia-Pacific, Home Depot, the Southern Company, SunTrust Bank. If old-fashioned princely patronage was meant to reflect glory on royal powers, a similar goal is apparent here.But the aquarium does not woo or court its visitors. It means to overwhelm them the moment they pass through a narrow entrance walled by swimming fish and enter the cavernous central space, where public dining areas are surrounded by entrances to thematic galleries -- "Ocean Voyager," "River Scout," "Cold Water Quest" "Tropical Diver" and "Georgia Explorer" -- that almost seem like entrances to amusement park rides.The aquarium has been an overwhelming popular success. Even with admission prices of $22.75 for adults ($17 for children), demand has been so great that the building is often sold out. Tickets come with timed entrances, and 290,000 annual passes, costing almost $60 for adults, were purchased before their sale was stopped in January. A million visitors have come since the opening.The expense of the institution also puts it squarely in the center of aquarial tradition. Aquariums have historically been extraordinarily costly enterprises and have had to supplement their incomes. The original Berlin Aquarium, for example, which was built in 1867 and lured 100,000 visitors in its first three months, had to import a gorilla, sell salt water and rent out tank space for the local restaurants' lobsters and trout. Technology was not quite ready to maintain its 50 tanks enclosed in stone-lined grottos; glass panels burst, rats set up shop and salt water corroded pipes and pumps.No such risk here. Besides ticket sales, income is flowing from a subdividable 16,400-square-foot ballroom, which is fully booked for parties and events. And so intriguing is the infrastructure required to sustain a living coral reef or a pool for the beluga whales that behind-the-scenes tours are offered for $50 -- and are, in many ways, more compelling than what is more theatrically offered on the tanks' other sides.For here is one of the problems. Aquariums have often aimed at being other-worldly and strange. Their lighting is muted, atmospheric -- out of need, but also out of desire. The worlds on display are so alien and so far beyond ordinary experience that one visitor to a pioneering European aquarium in 1860 demanded, "What in heaven's name am I actually supposed to see in there?"Here, in fact, the marvels are immediate and apparent. A wall in a darkened gallery reveals a Pacific coral reef curving overhead, the water's surface bubbling with waves from invisible machinery; the effect must be comparable to that in 1866 Paris, where a new aquarium's dim halls were lighted with projected sea images, creating an almost oceanic atmosphere. Here, too, there is a 100-foot-long tunnel through the 33-foot-deep ocean tank that captures the almost mystical sensations of submersion that those Parisians may also have sensed when transparent tanks were mounted over their heads.In Atlanta, too, river fish are glimpsed in an atmospheric, jungle-like path with rippling light and water -- a latter-day variation on aquariums' once-standard grottos. And perhaps most dramatically, there is the sight of a small school of golden trevallies, swimming in perfect formation, inches from the grim mouth of a 17-foot whale shark.Yet to discover that those fish are trevallies, I had to search. Labels are either nonexistent or uninformative. One is often meant to browse through touch screens of images that offer minimal enlightenment for maximal effort. The galleries are organized around habitats, but they provide no information about what effects these habitats have on marine life or how animals function within it. Without enough context, it is astonishing how often these carefully planned routes devolve into miscellany.And though much was apparently spent on atmospherics in the river display, sea lions and South African penguins must make do with mock habitats so unimpressive that one almost wishes to set the animals free.The lack of information and the inconsistency of imagination are strange, given the ambitions and accomplishments of this institution -- including an educational program that draws schoolchildren with an apparently detailed curriculum. It is as if once the big effects were created, the creators relaxed into routine. Why though, is there a reluctance -- here as in so many other museums -- to provide real information for those who want it? Or to design exhibits that don't just create atmosphere but spur understanding? The now requisite messages about conservation are pumped into a 3-D cartoon, but even they have no real import.All this actually undercuts what the aquarium does right. Technology is now so familiar and sensation so insistently demanded that it is easy to forget how little is required to inspire the sense of sacral awe traditionally cultivated by aquariums. Nineteenth-century displays now look almost mundane, amounting to mere arrays of tanks on tables. But as Bernd Brunner shows in an elegant recent book, "The Ocean at Home: An Illustrated History of the Aquarium" (Princeton Architectural Press, 2005), the sense of visiting another realm was still palpable. In 1872, an aquarium in Brighton, England, was even built to look like a church with vaulted ceilings, the tanks mounted like altars in adjoining chapels.That spirit is missing here. And this aquarium's risks are not of tanks fracturing or sea water growing stale, but of isolated spectacles and too little information. Perhaps all this will moderate over time, as it becomes more clear that the more we understand, the more mysterious things become; the more things are brought into the light, the more the shadows haunt. Here are habitats in which nothing human can live but about which all humans fantasize."The dream is the aquarium of the night," Victor Hugo wrote -- which just shows how much aquariums had begun to haunt the imagination in the 1860's. Are our own dreams so jaded that aquariums must start to seem like zoos and water parks?