https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/18/world/americas/venezuela-sanctions-supreme-court-president-nicolas-maduro.html
U.S. Blacklists Maduro Loyalists on Venezuela Supreme Court - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Courts and the Judiciary,Embargoes and Sanctions,Maduro  Nicolas,Politics and Government,Venezuela,Office of Foreign Assets Control (United States Treasury),Assets  Frozen
May 18, 2017
280
The Trump administration announced sanctions against eight members of Venezuela’s Supreme Court, singling out judges loyal to President Nicolás Maduro who tried to dissolve the country’s legislature this year.The announcement, published Thursday by the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control, froze any assets in the United States belonging to seven judges of the court’s Constitutional Chamber as well as the court’s chief magistrate, Maikel Moreno, and barred Americans from doing business with them.American government officials, in a call with reporters on Thursday, said the measures were intended to pressure the court to stop its efforts to obstruct the National Assembly, the legislature controlled by Mr. Maduro’s opposition. The court has nullified almost every major measure passed by lawmakers since the president’s rivals took control of the body last year, including efforts to free political prisoners.“The Venezuelan people are suffering from a collapsing economy brought about by their government’s mismanagement and corruption,” the Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, said in a statement. “Members of the country’s Supreme Court of Justice have exacerbated the situation by consistently interfering with the legislative branch’s authority.”There was no immediate response from Venezuelan officials.For six weeks, the country has experienced turmoil on the streets, after a decision by the court to essentially disband the National Assembly and take powers for itself. While Mr. Maduro later ordered the court to reverse much of its ruling, his opponents have called hundreds of thousands of protesters into the streets to demand new elections. At least 43 people have died in clashes, according to the authorities.It was the second round of sanctions this year by the United States against top Venezuelans.In February, the Treasury Department said it would freeze the assets of Tareck El Aissami, the country’s vice president, along with those of a business associate. The United States called Mr. El Aissami a drug kingpin and said he had worked with Mexican and Colombian drug runners to move narcotics out of the country.The sanctions announced Thursday did not accuse officials of drug activity, but rather were intended to increase political pressure on Mr. Maduro.But David Smilde, an analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America, a human rights group, warned that the United States’ ability to alter Venezuela’s behavior with sanctions was limited. If anything, Mr. Smilde said, the measures might have the opposite affect — discouraging neighboring countries from taking action for fear of appearing to be submissive to American interests.Mr. Maduro has ordered scores of civilians to military courts, charging them with rebellion for protesting, human rights officials say. On Thursday, officials revoked the passport of Henrique Capriles, a top politician, refusing to allow him to leave the country, according to a spokesman. Similar measures were taken Wednesday against César Miguel Rondón, perhaps the country’s best-known radio journalist.The government’s response to the unrest has isolated Venezuela.On Thursday, the departing president of Ecuador, Rafael Correa, a longtime ally of Venezuela, called for new elections in the country to end the violence, a major demand of the protesters. Late last month, the Organization of American States, a pro-democracy group, moved forward on an investigation of human rights violations in Venezuela, prompting Mr. Maduro to announce that the country was leaving the group.