https://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/01/nyregion/01steam.html
Survivor of Steam Blast, in Pain, Relives Escape - The New York Times
Explosions,Grand Central Terminal (NYC),McCullough  Gregory
Nov. 1, 2007
7688
By the time he woke up, the summer had passed. Days and weeks he couldn’t remember had been crossed off the calendar hanging on the wall of his hospital room.The last thing that Gregory McCullough did remember was a doctor hovering over his badly burned body. On that terrible day in July, the ground beneath his  red tow truck, passing through Midtown Manhattan, had exploded.After that, everything went blank.When he finally awoke in mid-September, after weeks in a coma, Mr. McCullough found that he was in a hospital, with third-degree burns over most of his body. It hurt to move, to stretch and to breathe. Day in and day out he fought hard to keep believing what the voice in his head was telling him: You’re going to make it. You’re going to survive. Your faith is strong.“I woke up and I started to cry,” Mr. McCullough said yesterday from his room at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell hospital, a day before he was scheduled to be released. “I didn’t understand. Why me? I did everything I was supposed to do. I was making a living and going to school. I didn’t deserve this. I didn’t deserve all of this pain. I didn’t deserve any of this.”On July 18, Mr. McCullough, 21, a student and tow truck driver from Canarsie, Brooklyn, was driving with a customer through traffic during the evening rush when a steam pipe exploded beneath the intersection of 41st Street and Lexington Avenue, near Grand Central Terminal.Windows in buildings along 41st Street shattered as chunks of the street were ripped from the ground and tossed into the sky. Mud and debris rained down on fleeing drivers and passers-by. One, Lois Ellen Baumerich, 51, died of a heart attack while fleeing.The blast sent Mr. McCullough’s truck soaring several feet into the air before it came crashing down in a crater left by the explosion. Mr. McCullough said he and his passenger, Judith Bailey, 30, huddled closely as hot smoke and steam began pouring into the truck from the vents and floorboard.“We just looked at each other,” Mr. McCullough said, pausing as he recalled the moment. “And I said to her: ‘We’ve got to get out of here. We have to get out or we’re going to die.’ ”He grabbed her hand, and they counted to three. Then they jumped from the truck and into the street, which by then had become a frenzied scene of panicked drivers and pedestrians.As he ran from the truck, he fell to the ground, he said, his skin burning even though there were no flames.“I was just rolling around trying to make it stop,” he said. Then he hopped up and ran into a nearby building. He said he pleaded for help, but people shuddered and recoiled at the sight of his badly melted skin.“I was screaming, ‘Help me! Help me!’” he said. “I ran up to one woman and I was basically begging for my life.”He ran back into the street. Several people splashed cups of water in his face, washing  his eyes enough to see what was going on.Then, he said, he remembers a doctor hovering over him, asking questions about allergies and emergency contacts.Ms. Bailey, who was also badly burned, was released after three weeks in the hospital.Mr. McCullough spent several weeks after the explosion in a coma that had been medically induced to help him weather the pain.Yesterday, as the sun retreated and shards of orange-yellow light spilled into his hospital room, his parents, Tanya McCullough-Stewart and Frank Stewart, listened intently as he described what had frustrated, angered and inspired him through his ordeal.He has shed some weight since he entered the hospital. There is some scarring on his face and neck, but it is nothing compared with the twisted skin on the rest of his body. His arms were wrapped in pressure sleeves yesterday to control blood flow to the limbs. But every time he lifted them, enough for his elbows and triceps to peek out from his shirt sleeves, one could see where the scalding steam had bit through his skin, to the flesh.Each day in the hospital meant a painful regimen of invasive medical procedures and cleansings. And for a while, doctors feared that they would have to amputate an arm and a leg. But he made steady progress.Mr. McCullough put on a brave face yesterday, smiling easily and cracking jokes. But that seemed only to mask, for moments at a time, the physical and emotional pain he continues to bear. He cringed when he stood up and when he struggled to show how hard it was to touch his pinky finger with his thumb. And he lowered his head and paused frequently, struggling with hard memories.He is certainly not out of the woods, doctors told his parents, and he has years and years of healing and rehabilitation before he is anywhere near his “normal self,” he said.The pain is constant. And he fears that he will never be whole again, that he will never be the fit martial arts enthusiast that he once was, that he will never make it into the Marines, or the State Police, as he has always dreamed of.Still, he has faith. If anything, he said, the accident has strengthened his faith and his resolve to get better.“It’s frustrating to know that none of this was my fault,” he said, clutching the cane he uses to walk, though painfully. “I’m thankful that I’m alive. But to see the pain my family has gone through, to see my dad cry, that hurts the most.”Mr. McCullough’s family has filed a lawsuit against Consolidated Edison, which owns the city’s almost century-old steam pipe system.Yesterday, as he prepared to go back to the home he left the morning of the blast, Mr. McCullough said he would just sit back and appreciate life.“I could’ve been dead,” he said. “But I guess God has other plans for me. I don’t know what they are. But one day, he’s going to reveal them to me.”