https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/14/upshot/explaining-the-health-payments-that-trump-is-threatening-to-end.html
Explaining the Health Payments That Trump Has Called ‘Ransom Money’ - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),Trump  Donald J,Obama  Barack
April 14, 2017
8333
The subsidies at the heart of an Obamacare dispute are back in court today. In April, we described the stakes for the case, and the preferences of the players. Now that the case has reached a possible turning point, we’ve updated our analysis.Cost-sharing reductions seem like an arcane aspect of the Affordable Care Act, but they could now make or break the Obamacare insurance marketplaces. Even President Trump has been talking about them, as a possible bargaining chip to help pass the Republican health bill in Congress.Insurance companies rely on these payments when selling Obamacare policies, which is why President Trump has said that withdrawing them would destabilize markets. (“Obamacare is dead next month if it doesn’t get that money,” he told The Wall Street Journal in April.) On Monday, lawyers from both sides of a case about the payments have asked to delay making a decision about them. That means there will be no immediate change in policy, but it leaves open the possibility that the Trump administration will still halt the payments.The Affordable Care Act helps make health insurance affordable for low-income people in two ways. The government provides a subsidy to help buy a policy, but about seven million people also get help with their out-of-pocket costs when they go to the doctor or fill a prescription. The government pays the insurance companies extra — $7 billion last year — to offer plans with discounts on the usual deductibles and co-payments that might make medical care unaffordable for relatively poor consumers.There is no language in the bill explicitly linking the subsidies to a permanent funding source, but the Obama administration argued that Congress intended for the money to be paid alongside other subsidies, and the subsidies have been paid over the last three years.House Republicans said what the Obama administration was doing was unconstitutional, and they brought a lawsuit to stop the payments. The House won, but the decision has not taken effect while the case is being appealed. The Trump administration is in the awkward position of deciding whether to keep fighting the Obama administration’s fight. A group of states has also asked the court to let them join the case as intervenors.Killing the cost-sharing subsidies would be a huge and immediate hit to insurance companies offering Obamacare plans. The companies are still required by law to offer their customers discounts, but they could lose the money to help fund them. Without the government payment, they would need to find another way to make up the difference.Insurers could raise the price of insurance for everyone, a change that would affect even people who don’t get the subsidies. The Kaiser Family Foundation has estimated premiums for a plan would go up by an average of 19 percent without the funding. (This paradoxically could end up costing the government a lot of money, since it is still required by law to help many customers pay their premiums.)A decision to do away with the subsidies would also send a key signal to the insurance companies that the Trump administration and Congress have decided not to stabilize the market, which has been particularly shaky in some areas. Without the subsidies, insurance could get very expensive in some places in the country. In other areas, no insurance options might be available. Several insurance companies have said that they would exit markets or sharply raise premiums if the money disappears.It’s complicated.The easiest way would be to encourage Republicans in Congress to pass an appropriations bill that explicitly funds the subsidies. But Congress did not include the money in its most recent appropriations bill.The Trump administration could also keep fighting the House lawsuit in court. Many legal experts think that the administration has a good chance of winning if the case continues, since courts rarely recognize the right of Congress to sue the White House. It’s not clear if the parties could settle the case in a way that preserves the subsidies, even if they wanted to.A broad coalition of insurance companies, hospitals, doctors and patient groups want the subsidies to be paid. Democrats in Congress are also strong supporters of the cost-sharing reductions. A letter to the White House urging a resolution of the issue was signed by insurers, hospitals, doctors and even the solidly Republican Chamber of Commerce. Many of those groups have also been writing to Congress asking for help.The House leadership that brought the suit argued that the payments were worrisome because they represented illegal spending. But that does not mean that all Republicans in Congress want to see Obamacare markets in their home state fail. In fact, several key Republicans in Congress, including Greg Walden of Oregon, the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, have said that they would prefer Congress to pass legislation explicitly funding the subsidies.But some people in the Trump White House believe that preserving the risk of market failures could create political pressure for a deal on a larger Obamacare replacement bill. In a Rose Garden ceremony after House passage of the American Health Care Act, Mr. Trump described the payments as ransom money. That means that the parties’ recent decision to postpone the court case may not erase uncertainty about the future of the payments. An unresolved appeal still leaves room for the Trump administration to change course and halt the payments at any time.