https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/books/review-eve-babitz-eves-hollywood.html
Eve Babitz, a Glamour Girl Who Refused to Be Dull - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Writing and Writers,Eve's Hollywood (Book),Babitz  Eve (1943- )
May 4, 2017
9428
EVE’S HOLLYWOODBy Eve Babitz296 pages. New York Review Books. $17.95.I have a well-read friend, a former used-book dealer in New Orleans, who is of the opinion that the person with the best literary taste in America is Edwin Frank, the editor of New York Review Books Classics. I’m in no position to argue.Since 1999, Frank’s imprint has reissued hundreds of out-of-print books, many of them foreign-language volumes in their first American translations. There’s been nary a misfire in the bunch. Several of these handpicked books, including John Williams’s novel “Stoner,” originally published in 1965, have become not just critical but commercial successes.The books are beautifully designed, as distinctive in their way as are Penguin Classics. Merely holding one to your forehead raises your I.Q. by a standard deviation.I have Frank to thank for introducing me, through his series, to a writer who’s given a steep amount of pleasure over the past year. That writer is the Los Angeles-born glamour girl, bohemian, artist, muse, sensualist, wit and pioneering foodie Eve Babitz, whose prose reads like Nora Ephron’s by way of Joan Didion, albeit with more lust and drugs and tequila.Over the past two years, New York Review Books Classics has reissued two of Babitz’s nonfiction books — “Eve’s Hollywood,” a memoir of sorts that was first published in 1974, and the essay collection “Slow Days, Fast Company: The World, the Flesh, and L.A.,” which originally appeared in 1977.These books are companion pieces, and they deserve to be read in tandem. But I’m here to talk about “Eve’s Hollywood,” and thus to right a historical wrong: This potent cocktail of a book was never reviewed for this publication.Babitz was born in 1943. Her father was a gifted studio musician for 20th Century Fox; her mother was an artist; her godfather was Igor Stravinsky. The family’s house was a literary and artistic salon. In 1963, Babitz was photographed nude while playing chess with Marcel Duchamp.In her intelligent new introduction to “Eve’s Hollywood,” Holly Brubach puts Babitz’s work in context and reminds us that she designed album covers for Buffalo Springfield and Linda Ronstadt, and that her lovers included Jim Morrison, Ed Ruscha, Steve Martin and Harrison Ford. She led a big life.Babitz could have simply name-dropped her way through this book, but she’s not that lazy — she’s too busy being interested in everything.I knew I was going to like “Eve’s Hollywood” the moment I scanned its dedication, which Babitz places up front. She thanks not only friends ranging from Orson Welles to Annie Leibovitz but also her gynecologist, deviled marrow bones, “Desbutol, Ritilin, Obertol and any other speed,” and “the way the whipped cream comes in a silver gravy dish in the Polo Lounge when you order Irish coffee.”Babitz is aware, throughout “Eve’s Hollywood,” of the effect she has on people, especially men. “I looked like Brigitte Bardot and I was Stravinsky’s goddaughter,” she writes. Actors spun their cars around to follow her.She decides the thing to do with her life is not to be dull. “Mother,” she says one evening, when she’s a teenager. “Yes, darling,” her mother replies. Babitz says, “I think I’m going to be an adventuress. Is that all right?”She does become an adventuress; she pursues ravishment. There’s a good deal of sex in “Eve’s Hollywood.” There are scenes of running into the ocean with vodka martinis in hand.Babitz is a keen appraiser of beauty, and not just her own. “In the Depression,” she writes, “people with brains went to New York and people with faces came West.”About a certain kind of California teenager, she says: “When they reach the age of 15 and their beauty arrives, it’s very exciting — like coming into an inheritance and, as with inheritances, it’s fun to be around when they first come into the money and watch how they spend it and on what.”Despite the comment about New York’s brains and the West’s faces, Babitz is an ardent defender of Los Angeles. She delivers a takedown of the sort of person who thinks that Nathanael West is the great Hollywood writer because all he sees is a “shallow, corrupt and ugly” place.She reads M.F.K. Fisher, whom she describes as “just like Proust only better because she at least gave the recipes.” She recommends reading Colette for the life-lessons: “you open up anywhere and brush up on what to do.”Babitz flips on the radio and is entranced by what she hears. “If you live in L.A., to reckon time is a trick since there are no winters,” she observes. “There are just earthquakes, parties and certain people. And songs.”She describes the Mamas and the Papas and the Byrds as sounding “as though they came out of a Frostie Freeze machine pipe organ.” Throughout this book, sentences fall like planks of sunlight.Babitz has yet to find her due as an important, early American food writer. There is a chapter on taquitos here that deserves to be widely anthologized. Babitz likens these crispy little things to smack.She watches the man at the counter prepare them, and, she writes, “Watching turns what has been only a stir in your frontal cortex into complete physical wanton craving. Like listening in whorehouses is supposed to do.”She loses her virginity while drinking Rainier Ale. Soon she “began to wonder what else there was out there that was like Rainier Ale.”She’s just as good on dowdier meals. “Jewish food was something you only get to know when, after hating it your entire childhood and thinking everything from the horseradish on the gefilte fish to the no desserts were without sympathy to the human condition, you find yourself alone and cold in a strange place and suddenly discover that you have to have kasha or you’ll shrivel up and die.”Babitz is 73. She stopped writing after suffering severe burns in a freak accident in 1997. The good news is that more reissues of her work are planned, including the republication this summer of her 1979 novel “Sex and Rage.”Reading Eve Babitz is like being out on the warm open road at sundown, with what she called, in another book, “4/60 air conditioning” — that is, going 60 miles per hour with all four windows down. You can feel the wind in your hair.