https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/07/us/politics/before-main-republican-debate-bottom-7-contenders-put-on-brave-faces.html
Before Main Republican Debate, Bottom 7 Contenders Put On Brave Faces - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Republican Party,Fox News Channel,Perry  Rick,Jindal  Bobby,Fiorina  Carleton S,Santorum  Rick,Pataki  George E,Gilmore  James S,Graham  Lindsey
Aug. 6, 2015
7384
CLEVELAND —  They called it the undercard. The kiddie table. The happy hour debate.The wry and self-deprecating nicknames coined by the seven presidential candidates bumped from the main Republican debate on Thursday were meant to put a brave face on a situation that none liked: They were relegated to a forum several hours earlier on the same stage, with far fewer people watching.The moderators repeatedly asked questions that reminded the candidates of their status. They told Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana that he polled behind Hillary Rodham Clinton in his own state. Rick Santorum, the former Pennsylvania senator, was asked if his time had passed. Carly Fiorina, the former Hewlett-Packard chief executive, was reminded of her poor polling.The absence of the top 10 candidates, chosen based on national polls, sapped much of the potential energy from the debate, which took place in a nearly-empty sports arena. None of the participants criticized their peers. The pacing of the questions and dutiful answers felt more like a spelling bee than a vigorous exchange of ideas.At the outset, one of the two Fox News moderators, Bill Hemmer, brought up “the elephant that is not in the room tonight, Donald Trump,” and the outspoken billionaire’s shadow was felt throughout the debate.Former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, whose sharp critique of Mr. Trump last month as a “cancer on conservatism” may have cost him a place in the main debate, repeated that Mr. Trump, the real estate mogul and former reality television star, was running on his celebrity, not policies.“How can you run for the Republican nomination and be for single-payer health care?” Mr. Perry asked, referring to a position Mr. Trump once took.Even when not asked about Mr. Trump, candidates alluded to him. Mr. Santorum, speaking of illegal immigration, said that “some of the other candidates have strong positions” on the topic, but that his was different. Perhaps in an effort to top Mr. Trump, Mr. Santorum called for restricting legal immigration by 25 percent.Ms. Fiorina criticized Mr. Trump for shifting from liberal policies he had favored while flirting with earlier presidential runs.“Since he has changed his mind on amnesty, on health care and on abortion, I think, what are the principles on which he would govern?” she said.Few of the candidates attacked Hillary Rodham Clinton unprovoked. (When asked by moderators, however, they enthusiastically obliged.) One who did, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, accused Mrs. Clinton of doublespeak in her defense of her use of a private email server as secretary of state. Mr. Graham later took aim directly at the Obama administration’s nuclear deal with Iran, saying, “This deal is giving him a pathway to a bomb, a missile to deliver it and money to pay for it all.”Nearly all of the participants promised to reject the deal with Iran on their first day in office.Jim Gilmore, the former governor of Virginia, who struggled to get his share of the attention during the debate, proposed that “there be a Middle East NATO so that we can combine our allies there.”Abortion was also a focus of the 80-minute debate. Mr. Jindal said that on Day 1 in the Oval Office, he would order investigations by the Justice Department and other agencies into Planned Parenthood, whose handling of fetal tissue has been the subject of secretly recorded videos that Mr. Jindal said “show hideous disrespect for life.”George E. Pataki, the former New York governor, was asked how, as a Republican favoring abortion rights, he could hope to win support when no candidate with his views had won a Republican presidential primary anywhere in 35 years. Mr. Pataki said that he was “personally appalled” by abortion, but that it was fruitless to continue trying to overrule the Supreme Court’s decision to allow it under certain circumstances.Each candidate could cite long résumés, from stints as governors to senators to chief executives. And many pointed to their experience to suggest that they could bolster job growth and the economy.It was unclear whether any of the candidates delivered a forceful enough performance to move themselves into the “adult table” in future debates. One of the contenders previously least known nationally, Ms. Fiorina, did come across as poised and tough.Mr. Perry, the No. 11 candidate in national polls, according to Fox News, may have suffered most under the formula used to winnow the field. Four years ago, he stood at center stage in a Republican presidential debate, reflecting his position as the leader in polls. His fall from favor with primary voters had much to do with his moderate positions on illegal immigration as governor.But on Thursday, he insisted there could be no national conversation on granting any kind of legal status to the millions of immigrants in the United States illegally before securing the border with Mexico. He said “strategic fencing” and patrolling the border with “aviation assets” were necessary to secure it.“At that particular point in time,” Mr. Perry said, “then Americans will believe that Washington is up to a conversation to deal with the millions of people that are here illegally, but not until.”