https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/nyregion/mta-reconsidering-an-age-old-tradition-eating-on-the-subway.html
M.T.A. Reconsidering an Age-Old Tradition: Eating on the Subway - The New York Times
Subways,Transit Systems,Metropolitan Transportation Authority,Lhota  Joseph J,Russianoff  Gene,New York City
July 18, 2017
2375
It is a time-honored tradition for many New Yorkers: eating on the subway.Riders regularly carry slices of pizza onto trains and munch on bagels while bolder passengers openly dine on heaps of pasta or Chinese takeout. Anything goes, even if fellow passengers are annoyed by the smells. Other transit systems, like Washington’s subway, ban eating on trains.But after a track fire in New York this week, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority is considering whether to establish new guidelines for eating on the subway. On Tuesday, the authority’s new chairman, Joseph J. Lhota, said that he wanted to eliminate fires caused by trash on the tracks and that some types of eating were not appropriate on the subway.Mr. Lhota recalled that he was recently riding a No. 2 train when a passenger stepped on board carrying a Styrofoam container of Chinese food with rice.“Inevitably, the rice fell,” he said. “It was all over the place. I want to avoid things like that.”The current subway rules allow riders to eat on trains, though they do prohibit carrying liquids in an open container — a rule that does not appear to be stringently enforced. But the rules on Washington’s Metro system are clear: No eating, drinking or smoking because of “the labor and cost associated with maintaining the cleanliness of the transportation system as well as for safety reasons.”On Monday, a track fire near the 145th Street station in Manhattan sent nine people to the hospital and wreaked havoc on the morning commute across the city. Mr. Lhota said the authority was working to reduce subway track fires and had brought the number of fires down by about 90 percent since 1981, when there were 5,800.Now subway officials were debating whether to recommend that riders avoid eating messy foods, Mr. Lhota said. Packaged goods were less disruptive, he said, pointing to a student who might eat a protein bar on the way to class.“It may be an education program about what types of foods really shouldn’t be brought on,” Mr. Lhota said, though he did not rule out the idea of a ban, suggesting only that he would provide more details in the coming weeks.It was not the first time Mr. Lhota, who recently returned to lead the authority after an earlier stint as chairman, had weighed in on a food ban. In 2012, he said that he had watched too many children eating breakfast on the subway and that banning eating would hurt minority communities.Gene Russianoff, the longtime leader of the Straphangers Campaign, a rider advocacy group, said he did not think a ban would be enforceable. He pointed to a 2015 viral video, known as Pizza Rat, showing a rodent carrying a large slice on the subway as an example of the trash on the system.“It’s not like I would hand out individual slices to Pizza Rat on the subway,” he said. “But there are people who have no choice — they’re going from work to school.”