http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/17/world/europe/europe-refugees-migrants-rules.html
Explaining the Rules for Migrants: Borders and Asylum - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,European Union,Europe,Refugees and Displaced Persons,schengen,Dublin Regulation
Sept. 16, 2015
6027
The migrant crisis in Europe has been greatly complicated by the Continent’s incomplete integration, as national interests and political attitudes toward the newcomers have clashed with Europewide policies and initiatives that have been among the Continent’s most significant political achievements.Two policies that loom large in the crisis are often obscured by the opaque bureaucratic shorthand that European leaders use to refer to them: “Schengen” and the “Dublin Regulation.” Here they are in a nutshell.— PATRICK J. LYONSIt is an agreement to abolish border controls among the European nations that have joined. For the most part, people in any Schengen country can travel freely to any other without stopping to show a passport or visa, just as travelers can between American states or Canadian provinces. Only when entering from outside the Schengen area are a traveler’s credentials regularly checked.Where did the name come from?It is named for the town in Luxembourg where the original agreement was signed in 1985. The Schengen area began with just five countries and was set up separately from the European Union, but it was incorporated into the union’s 1997 Amsterdam Treaty with provisions for some nations to “opt out.”Where does it apply?Most European Union nations — 22 out of 28 — are part of the Schengen area. So are four that are not part of the union — Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. For practical purposes, the microstates San Marino, Monaco and Vatican City are part of the Schengen area (but Andorra is not).Where does it not apply?In Britain and Ireland, which have opted out; in Cyprus; and in most of the Balkan nations between Greece and Hungary. Three Balkan countries — Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania — are expected to join the Schengen area eventually but have not done so yet.How is it threatened now?The agreement depends on each member nation trusting the others to control who enters the Schengen area from outside, but the recent flood of refugees and migrants has overwhelmed those controls in some countries, like Greece. Several member nations have responded by temporarily reimposing internal border controls. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany has warned that Schengen could fall apart if Europe cannot agree on how to manage the migrant crisis.It is a European Union law that determines which member nation is responsible for processing the requests of asylum seekers from outside the union. In general, the country where an asylum seeker first enters the union is responsible for registering the asylum application and taking fingerprints. But there are exceptions, including some meant to unite or reunite families. Asylum seekers who move on to other countries after being registered can be sent back to the responsible nation to be processed, in what are called Dublin transfers. Many migrants try to skirt the system by refusing to be fingerprinted or otherwise avoiding registration in the first country they reach, usually Italy or Greece.Where did the name come from?Member nations signed the Dublin Convention, the first version of the law, in the Irish capital in 1990. It has been amended several times since then to address various problems, and it now has the legal status of a regulation; the current version is called Dublin III.Where does it apply?Throughout the European Union, although slightly differently in Denmark for technical reasons. Four countries outside the union have also agreed to apply the regulation in their territory: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland.Where does it not apply?Anywhere else outside the union. Most notably, that includes two Balkan countries — Macedonia and Serbia — that have been the next stops for thousands of migrants who pass through Greece hoping to reach Western Europe. Four other Balkan nations — Albania, Bosnia, Kosovo and Montenegro — are also outside the system, as are European microstates like Monaco.How is it threatened now?Greece and Hungary, where many migrants from the Middle East first reach the union’s territory, have been swamped with new arrivals, and the system has started to break down. The European Union has had a moratorium on Dublin transfers back to Greece since 2011, and Hungary unilaterally stopped accepting them in June. Germany decided in August to suspend the Dublin rules for Syrians who manage to reach its soil, and to process them itself. European leaders have been arguing over how to modify the regulation and distribute the migration burden more evenly across Europe, but several countries, especially in Eastern Europe, have resisted proposals for mandatory quotas.