http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/18/nyregion/silver-made-misleading-comments-about-how-he-disclosed-his-income-us-says.html
Silver Made Misleading Comments About How He Disclosed His Income, U.S. Says - The New York Times
Bribery and Kickbacks,Silver  Sheldon,New York State,Income,Democratic Party,Glenwood Management
Nov. 17, 2015
6843
Sheldon Silver’s voice was finally heard in a federal courtroom on Tuesday, but not because he took the witness stand.For the first time in Mr. Silver’s corruption trial in Manhattan, prosecutors played recordings of the assemblyman giving what the government says were misleading statements to reporters about how thoroughly he disclosed outside income he received from his legal practice.“We have to make disclosure the key,” Mr. Silver said in one 2009 interview. He added that he described his clients “very specifically” in his ethics disclosure form, and did not “represent people who have business before the Legislature.”“I disclose in the way that everybody else discloses,” he said in another interview, in 2008.The recordings are part of the government’s case that Mr. Silver, a 71-year-old Democrat from the Lower East Side, sought to conceal illicit payments through false or misleading public statements or by making misrepresentations on legislative disclosure forms.Prosecutors have told the judge, Valerie E. Caproni of Federal District Court, that they could rest their case as early as Wednesday. After the jury had been sent home for the day on Tuesday, the judge asked Steven F. Molo, one of Mr. Silver’s lawyers, whether the defense would present a case.“Hopefully not,” he said. That statement suggested that Mr. Silver would not testify on his own behalf.A prosecutor, Carrie H. Cohen, then asked who the witnesses would be if there were a defense case. Mr. Molo said he would try to tell the government later in the evening.Finally, Judge Caproni said: “If you don’t want to say it and you don’t want the press to hear it, tell me that. Come to sidebar.”At the sidebar, a transcript shows, another defense lawyer, Joel Cohen, told the judge that if there were a defense case, the witnesses would include Judy Rapfogel, Mr. Silver’s chief of staff, and James A. Yates, Mr. Silver’s counsel when he was speaker.The government has alleged that Mr. Silver received about $700,000 in payments through a law firm, Goldberg & Iryami, in return for referring to it certain real estate tax business from two developers, Glenwood Management and the Witkoff Group. The government has also said that Mr. Silver took official actions as speaker to benefit the developers, including signing off on critical real estate legislation that was supported by Glenwood.Mr. Silver, who was forced to step down as the speaker after his arrest in January, has pleaded not guilty to charges of fraud, extortion and money laundering.Earlier on Tuesday, the government presented testimony from Steven C. Witkoff, owner of the Witkoff Group, one of the real estate firms that became enmeshed in Mr. Silver’s scheme.Mr. Witkoff testified that around 2004, he was having lunch with Mr. Silver when the speaker asked whether he would consider using a friend of his, the lawyer Jay Arthur Goldberg, for certain real estate tax work.“It was an easy favor to do,” Mr. Witkoff recalled of his decision to retain Mr. Goldberg’s firm, which became Goldberg & Iryami. Mr. Witkoff said he did not want to alienate Mr. Silver.“He was one of the most powerful politicians in state politics,” Mr. Witkoff testified.“In the event that I wanted to discuss things with him, or have access to him about things that might be relevant to my business, I wanted to be able to have that,” he added, “to be able to approach him as needed.”It was not until June 2014, Mr. Witkoff said, that he got a call from Mr. Goldberg, who said Mr. Silver was receiving a share of the fees that Mr. Witkoff’s firm was paying Mr. Goldberg’s firm. Mr. Witkoff said he became incensed during the call when Mr. Goldberg suggested that Mr. Witkoff had known about the fee-splitting arrangement.“I said to him that I wasn’t aware of this,” Mr. Witkoff testified. “In fact, if there was fee-splitting, he had an obligation to tell us.”“I was very, very concerned that what I thought had been a favor for someone’s friend was now going to turn into being a misperception that we had done something wrong,” he added.