https://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/09/dining/09noteside.html
Chef Sean Brock’s  Restaurant Farming - The New York Times
Local Food,Cooking and Cookbooks,Brock  Sean,Chefs,Farmers,Restaurants
Feb. 8, 2011
6122
Charleston, S.C.SEAN BROCK’S obsession with the South’s culinary heritage grew out of frustration. When he took over McCrady’s in 2006, he was unable to get the variety and quality of local food he wanted, so he decided to see what he could do himself.After pitching in on local farms for two years and learning about farming, he leased a plot where he and McCrady’s staff grew produce for the restaurant and themselves. Later, the farm’s owner, Shawn Thackeray, offered Mr. Brock the land for 14 heritage pigs to forage. Two years ago, Mr. Brock moved to a larger plot at Thornhill Farms, in the tiny town of McClellanville, S.C.The farming led to culinary experiments like a gazpacho of unripened green strawberries and a garnish of radish flowers on seafood.He also experimented in the field, raising a forgotten type of rice he found growing by the road. But his drive to find the tastes of the Southern past really took root on a trip to the Blackberry Farms  in the Smoky Mountains of Tennessee with Glenn Roberts of Anson Mills, who had helped resurrect Carolina Gold rice, once a Charleston staple. The master gardener John Coykendall described how they grew Webb Watson corn, a variety  thought to have become extinct. The idea of  serving food thought to have gone the way of the Confederacy delighted Mr. Brock. “I was blown away,” he said. “That night I was sitting with Glenn and I said, ‘I’ve got this land, plenty of room.’ ”Mr. Brock began visiting farmers, historians and biologists about crops that had once been at the heart of Southern cooking but had disappeared or been replaced by higher-yielding crops. His kitchens and pantries became filled with jars of seeds from plants rarely seen in the last century.He began raising some, like a smooth old South Carolina okra once called choppee, which Mr. Brock found in Tennessee, and legumes like wild goose beans, discovered by his grandmother in the gizzard of a goose at the dinner table. Sea Island red peas were introduced to Mr. Brock by a local farmer. Brought here by African slaves, the peas are thought to be what was first used for the Charleston rice dish known as Hoppin’ John.With seeds from Mr. Roberts, Mr. Brock and the farmer Maria Baldwin have grown benne, a nutty, low-oil, high-protein African sesame seed whose flour and oil was once a vital part of the Charleston diet.Mr. Brock’s favorite discovery came after Mr. Roberts noticed eight-foot-tall stalks at a nearby farm. They held a blood-red aromatic corn known as Jimmy Red that was used for grits and corn bread all across the Carolina Lowcountry.After a long discussion, the farmer gave Mr. Brock a handful of kernels. “When something’s that rare, you don’t just give it to a complete stranger,” Mr. Brock said, taking a deep whiff of a bag of Jimmy Red grits. “You smell this, and you think about the past, how many people have enjoyed that same smell from this same strain of corn, how many people were able to survive because of it. I mean, that’s the real deal.”