http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/world/asia/chinese-governor-signals-crackdown-on-separatists.html
Chinese Governor Signals Crackdown on Separatists - The New York Times
Terrorism,Civilian Casualties,Communist Party of China,Kunming (China),Xinjiang (China),Uighurs (Chinese Ethnic Group),Han Chinese (Ethnic Group),China,Murders and Attempted Murders
March 6, 2014
8153
BEIJING —  A government leader in the western region of Xinjiang said Thursday that officials would “rigidly crack down” on separatist groups in the area and that “foreign forces” were behind the separatist activities.The remarks by Nur Bekri, governor of Xinjiang, signaled that the Communist Party would tighten security measures throughout the region in reaction to a knife attack that killed 29 people last weekend in a train station in the southwestern city of Kunming. The attack was carried out by a group of eight who also wounded more than 140 people, according to state news media reports. Xinhua, the state news agency, said evidence pointed to “terrorists from Xinjiang.”Mr. Bekri made his remarks during a question-and-answer session with reporters after a public meeting of Xinjiang delegates on the second day of the National People’s Congress, the annual meeting of a rubber-stamp legislature. Each province-level administrative area has a public session during the congress, and Xinjiang held its meeting on Thursday afternoon.Mr. Bekri is a Uighur, an ethnic minority in Xinjiang whose members, primarily Turkic-speaking Muslims, are enmeshed in a growing number of clashes with China’s ethnic Han majority. Uighurs often complain of discrimination by Han, and some Uighurs say they want an independent state called East Turkestan to be established in the region of Xinjiang. The top official in Xinjiang, Zhang Chunxian, party chief of the region, is an ethnic Han and was also present at the National People’s Congress this week. Mr. Zhang told reporters on Thursday that people carrying out attacks had been influenced by content on the Internet that is usually blocked by China but able to be accessed using software.Chinese officials have not disclosed the ethnicities of the attackers in Kunming, but they have said that the leader of the eight-person group was a man called Abdurehim Kurban, a name that has led many Chinese to assume that Uighurs are responsible. Four members of the group were shot dead during the attack last Saturday night, while one, an injured woman, was detained. Later, the remaining three members were detained, according to state news media reports.“I especially want to stress that terrorists don’t represent any ethnic group; they don’t represent any religion; their act of violence is simply antihuman and antisociety,” Mr. Bekri said. “That is to say, Xinjiang people strongly condemn any form of revenge and terrorism.”There have been different accounts of the motivations of the attackers and explanations of why they were in Kunming in Yunnan Province. Radio Free Asia, which is financed by the United States government, reported Wednesday that the group was made up of Uighurs fleeing a crackdown near the southern town of Khotan in Xinjiang who had tried to cross the border into Laos from Yunnan. The party chief of Yunnan, Qin Guangrong, told China National Radio that members of the group had been trying to leave China at a border in the southwest to train to become jihadists.In his remarks, Mr. Bekri did not provide evidence of foreigners being the masterminds behind separatist activities, but brought up the idea several times. “There are certainly some foreign forces and people who don’t want to see a united, strong China led by socialism and led by the party,” he said. These people were “instigating and manipulating things from behind,” he said.Chinese officials generally will not admit to the existence of significant ethnic tensions in the country, despite intense cycles of violence in Xinjiang and in Tibetan regions. The officials often blame outsiders for igniting the violence. They have said recently, for example, that Tibetans who set fire to themselves to protest Chinese rule are being manipulated by foreign forces or are mentally unstable.