https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/theater/review-othello-david-oyelowo-daniel-craig.html
Review: Jealousy and Lies in a No-Exit Theater of War in ‘Othello’ - The New York Times
Theater,Othello (Play),Craig  Daniel,Oyelowo  David,New York Theater Workshop,Wittrock  Finn,Gold  Sam (1978- ),Shakespeare  William
Dec. 12, 2016
2017
“I am your own forever.” When these words are uttered in the electrifying new production of “Othello,” which opened on Monday night at the New York Theater Workshop, you feel you’ve heard the most frightening vow ever spoken. It is delivered at the end of the first half of a performance that is drawn in lightning.The speaker is a soldier, Iago by name, played by Daniel Craig; the object of his ardent declaration is his general, Othello, portrayed by David Oyelowo. Their faces are as close as clasped hands, foreheads pressed hard together as if in some ungodly mind meld.By that moment, you have come to know these men intimately. You understand exactly how they’ve arrived at such a moment of communion and exactly where they’re headed. As presented by two actors at the top of their game, in a marriage made in both heaven and hell, the story of Othello and Iago could not possibly end otherwise than it does.And, O the pity of it!Character truly is fate in this breathless interpretation of Shakespeare’s taut portrait of lives razed by jealousy, in which Mr. Oyelowo and Mr. Craig, best known as movie stars, enter the ranks of first-rate classical stage actors. I’ve never seen an “Othello” as convincingly inexorable as this one.Often when you watch a Shakespeare tragedy, you think hopefully of how things might end differently. If only Friar Laurence’s letter could get through to Romeo, or if Julius Caesar would listen to his wife and stay home on that day in mid-March.But what’s so thrilling — and so terrifying — about this “Othello,” directed by Sam Gold, is that everything that occurs is so irrevocably inevitable. And not because of capricious gods, or cruel coincidences. No, the cause — to use a word Othello memorably repeats — lies in the precisely defined personalities of everyone who inhabits the play’s closed universe.Mr. Gold’s production puts us smack in the claustrophobic center of that universe. The theater has been reconfigured (by the designer Andrew Lieberman) as a raw wooden barracks, with bleachers-style seating on three sides of the playing area. There are mattresses on the floor, and laptops, radios, barbells and cellphones. When the soldiers party, they sing Drake’s “Hotline Bling.”The 21st century has become the default era for “Othello” since the American invasion of Iraq — sometimes brilliantly (Nicholas Hytner’s 2013 London version), sometimes misguidedly (Peter Sellars’s 2009 New York production). But this “Othello” isn’t striving for contemporary relevance or high-concept surprise.The colorblind casting of other roles (Iago’s wife, Emilia, is played by a fine Marsha Stephanie Blake, an African-American actress) makes Othello’s blackness less of a cultural issue than it often is. What interests Mr. Gold is the intimate spectacle of two disastrously different, equally great minds in collision.The sealed military environment brings us into touching distance with people who can never escape one another’s company. (Jane Cox’s lighting, which often plunges us into pitch darkness, emphasizes smothering insularity.) Though the script’s location moves from Venice to Cyprus, the set remains the same. It’s a no-exit theater of war, invisibly stage-managed by a military underling with an instinct for human frailties.That’s Iago, whose resentment of Othello, the Moorish commander who passed him over for promotion, sets the play on its destructive course. As incarnated in recent decades by the likes of Simon Russell Beale and Liev Schreiber, this vicious manipulator has stolen the show, leaving us with the impression that it’s Iago’s world — Othello and everybody else just live (and die) in it.But in Mr. Gold’s production, the charismatic weight is more evenly balanced. Yes, Iago — embodied with gritty brilliance by Mr. Craig — is still the smartest guy in the room. But Mr. Oyelowo’s Othello has a daunting authority. And passion, and a paradoxically worldly innocence, and an enviable ability to love (his bride, Desdemona, played with piquant freshness by Rachel Brosnahan) that Iago will never know or entirely understand.That doesn’t mean he doesn’t know how to turn Othello’s forceful feelings inside out. Throughout the production, you watch Mr. Craig’s Iago sizing up the psychology of everyone around him and then acting on the assessment.Though he retains a hearty bluffness, he is also unusually chameleonic, subtly altering his speech and affect to be what other people expect him (and think they need him) to be. Mr. Craig, whom international moviegoers know as the infinitely suave James Bond, lends Iago a disarming, virile charm, through which only we can glimpse the contempt and the calculation.That seductiveness is exerted on characters as diverse as his earthy wife; his Desdemona-besotted stooge, the wealthy Venetian, Roderigo (a perfectly fatuous Matthew Maher); and the young soldier Cassio (a radiantly open-faced Finn Wittrock), the central pawn in Iago’s scheme to convince Othello of his wife’s infidelity.That these characters don’t catch on to Iago’s duplicity isn’t because they’re stupid. (Well, except Roderigo.) Ms. Brosnahan’s Desdemona comes across as a cleareyed, sharp-witted woman who, until the play’s end, can stand up for herself.But like everyone else, she can’t conceive even the possibility of the self-sustaining malice that fuels Iago. (Isn’t that what’s scariest about psychopaths, that we can’t fit them into our frame of reference?) Nor can she believe that Othello would doubt her; she is confident in his affection.As she should be. Mr. Oyelowo, who was a magnetic Martin Luther King Jr, in the movie “Selma,” gives Othello’s love for Desdemona a solar heat. Speaking with an African accent that underscores his mythic presence as a war hero, Othello exudes the titanic certainty of someone who thinks in absolutes.That means he knows no middle ground of feeling. As he says, “To be once in doubt is to be once resolved.” And when suspicion becomes resolution here, Mr. Oyelowo is Olympian in his anguish. His Othello is the real thing — a bona fide tragic hero, whose capacity for emotion is way beyond our everyday depths.The play’s stark final scene finds our leading men stripped to their essences. “When you these unlucky deeds relate, speak of me as I am,” says Mr. Oyelowo, looking directly into the audience with scorched eyes. This incandescent production makes it possible for us to speak with rare understanding of this Othello — and this Iago — as they are.