https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/podcasts/what-are-the-limits-of-gay-pride.html
What Are the Limits of Gay Pride? - The New York Times
Podcasts
June 22, 2017
4190
June is Gay Pride month: four weekends of parades, pageantry, and partying all over the country, meant to celebrate the destigmatization of gay, trans, queer and nonbinary people and their open acceptance into American life. The parades are fun. They’re moving. But now, a year after the Pulse nightclub shooting, people are asking whether they’re sufficiently black, political and confrontational. Since gay marriage, a kind of complacency has set in. Or has it?This week we’re talking about how we can simultaneously feel pride in Pride and recognize the limits and blind spots of the parade and the gay rights movement in general. Are they as inconclusive as they think they are? And what’s the smartest, most effective way of asking who Gay Pride is for? We also talk about how those blind spots reflect little-acknowledged racism in gay life, and where that leaves the two of us.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.