https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/world/asia/thailand-lese-majeste.html
Thai Police Investigate U.S. Ambassador on Suspicion of Insulting King - The New York Times
Thailand,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Defense and Military Forces,Davies  Glyn T,Bhumibol Adulyadej,Royal Families,United States International Relations,Libel and Slander
Dec. 9, 2015
9160
YANGON, Myanmar —  Thailand’s aggressive campaign to protect its ailing king from criticism escalated into a diplomatic feud on Wednesday when the Thai police said they were investigating the United States ambassador to the country in connection with a royal insult.The police said that the ambassador, Glyn T. Davies, had diplomatic immunity and could not be charged for such a crime. But the authorities are obliged by law to investigate a complaint lodged last week, said the deputy spokesman of the national police, Maj. Gen. Songpon Wattanachai.“We have to accept the complaint and proceed with it,” he said.General Songpon said that if comments by the ambassador were judged to be insulting to the monarchy, the government might proceed with some kind of reprimand, although he was unsure of the form it might take. “We may have to issue a warning to him,” the general said.In a speech last month, Mr. Davies criticized the long prison sentences handed to some of those found guilty of criticizing King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The police have requested a copy of the speech and will have it translated by a “reliable institution,” General Songpon said.The investigation highlights how much relations between Thailand and the United States have deteriorated recently.The king, who turned 88 on Saturday, was born in the United States and played a major role in a decades-long close alliance, especially during the Vietnam War.Now the king is ill. He has not been seen in public since September, and he did not make an appearance for his birthday, as has been tradition.As his health has worsened, the monarchy has become highly politicized.Critics accuse the country’s military rulers, who demand absolute loyalty to the monarchy, of harnessing the deep reverence that Thais have for the king to buttress their own power.When the military government seized power in May 2014, it banned all political protests. Yet on at least two occasions, the junta allowed groups of protesters carrying portraits of the king to convene in front of the United States Embassy, including during a gathering last month of about 200 people led by an ultranationalist Buddhist monk.Relations with the United States cooled markedly after the American government denounced the military takeover last year. The United States has avoided any visits to the country by high-level officials. American officials have also repeatedly said that jailing people for perceived slights against the monarchy violates free speech.Winyat Chatmontree, a lawyer who has represented many people accused of the crime, known as lèse-majesté, said that from a strictly legal standpoint, the accusation against the ambassador was weak. Mr. Davies criticized the lèse-majesté law, which includes punishment of up to 15 years in prison for violators.“He didn’t target the monarchy,” Mr. Winyat said. “His actions do not fall under the scope of the offense.”Mr. Davies, who was sworn in as ambassador in September, told an audience at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Thailand last month that the American government was concerned by “lengthy and unprecedented prison sentences” handed down by Thai military courts to civilians for violating the lèse-majesté law.“We believe no one should be jailed for peacefully expressing their views,” he told the audience.The comments prompted the protest in front of the United States Embassy last month. Then, last week, a Thai man, Sonthiya Sawasdee, filed a complaint with the police against Mr. Davies.“I am a Thai person who reveres our king above everything,” read the complaint, a copy of which was posted on Mr. Sonthiya’s Facebook page. “Any action of a person who incites disobedience towards the monarchy is unacceptable by the Thais.”The junta has had opportunities to smooth over the current dispute but has chosen to issue warnings to Mr. Davies instead. Referring to the ambassador’s remarks last week, a spokesman for the junta, Sansern Kaewkamnerd, said comments that were “not neutral” or showed “personal bias” could damage “the longstanding relationship” between Thailand and the United States.A spokeswoman for the American Embassy said staff members would seek guidance from Washington before responding.