http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/28/sports/football/super-bowl-betting-odds-panthers-broncos.html
Super Bowl Challenges Wisdom of Crowds and Oddsmakers - The New York Times
Football,Gambling,Super Bowl,Carolina Panthers,Denver Broncos
Jan. 27, 2016
9532
When the betting line was first announced for this year’s Super Bowl, the Carolina Panthers were favored by 3½ points in many places. Quickly that line moved to 4 and then to 4½, and it is even listed at 5 or 5½ in some places.It is not uncommon for the odds to change for any game in any sport — even a game as analyzed as the Super Bowl. Essentially, bettors liked the Panthers in the game, found the 3½-point spread to be appealing and bet heavily on it. In response, bookmakers have continued to increase the spread.You might think that the collective wisdom of gamblers would prove correct a great deal of the time. But at least at recent Super Bowls, it has not been.A look at the last 10 Super Bowls that had line movement, using opening and closing lines provided by Bookmaker.eu, shows that the teams that bettors supported went 5-5.Although the sample size is small, credit should be given to Giants bettors. In both of the team’s recent Super Bowl appearances, the Giants opened as the underdog, and bettors felt the line was too big. Both times they were right; the Giants not only covered the spread but won.Generally, lines move by only a point or 2, partly because the opening numbers are fairly accurate but also because bookmakers are afraid to be caught in what bettors call a middle.Super Bowl XIII in 1979 is not fondly remembered by linesmakers. The Pittsburgh Steelers opened as a 4½-point favorite, and money came in heavily on the underdog Dallas Cowboys. The line moved to 3½, which brought in money on the favored Steelers. That meant that many Cowboys bettors were getting 4½ points while Steelers bettors were largely giving only 3½. When the game finished as a 4-point win for the Steelers, almost everybody won — except the bookies, who were caught in the middle and found themselves paying off both sides.A more modern way to adjust the odds without the danger of a middle is adjusting the extra money, or vigorish, that bettors must pay. Pinnacle, for example, was offering a 4½-point spread on Wednesday, but money was still coming in on the Panthers with that line. So Pinnacle required Panthers bettors to put out a little more money — $109 to win $100 — while encouraging Broncos bettors by asking for only $101 to win the same $100.Super Bowls generally feature two elite teams, so the spread is usually a touchdown or less. That was not always the case. During a period of N.F.C. dominance in the 1990s, there were five straight Super Bowls in which the A.F.C. team was an underdog by 10 points or more, including a record 18½-point spread for the San Francisco 49ers over the San Diego Chargers in 1995. (The 49ers won by 23 and covered.)For this year’s Super Bowl, the over-under — a bet in which gamblers select whether the game’s point total will be over or under a predetermined figure — is 45 and appears likely to wind up the lowest since 2004. Both defenses in this year’s game were in the top six in points allowed. On the other hand, with an explosive offense, the Panthers averaged a league-leading 31 points a game in the regular season and have averaged 40 in the playoffs.For an ordinary N.F.L. game, the point spread and the over-under are, for the most part, the only games in town. But for the Super Bowl, casinos and gambling websites pile on the extra bets, including who will win the game’s Most Valuable Player Award (Cam Newton is the favorite, followed by Peyton Manning) and how the opening coin toss will land (not surprisingly, heads and tails are co-favorites). Weirder bets should be posted in the coming week as bookmakers look for action and publicity.More than $100 million is bet legally at Nevada sports books on the game each year; add in Internet betting companies and old-fashioned illegal bookies, and the figure is vastly higher. Plenty of people in Denver and North Carolina will have a passionate rooting interest. But plenty more will be hoping to be counting their winnings at the final whistle.