https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/08/opinion/sunday/aurora-movie-theater-shooting-colorado.html
The Wounded Fight On to Survive in Aurora - The New York Times
Aurora  Colo  Shooting (2012),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides
July 8, 2017
2473
“I don’t know who I am any more,” Ashley Moser said, trying to account for the manifest harm done to her by a gunman who sprayed a movie theater audience with bullets five years ago in Aurora, Colo.As the audience screamed and ducked for cover, Ms. Moser had turned to shield her 6-year-old daughter, Veronica. But the girl was fatally wounded in the thunderous volley. Ms. Moser, 25, was shot in the spine, and collapsed. Soon after, the fetus she carried was lost in the hospital struggle to keep the mother alive. Ms. Moser survived, paralyzed from the waist down.“I was a mom when I was 18, and that’s all I knew how to be,” Ms. Moser testified two years ago, bewildered and weeping, at the trial of James Holmes, who killed 12 and wounded and injured 70 in his shooting spree with a military style rifle equipped with a 100-round ammunition drum. “And now I’m not a mom,” Ms. Moser said with desperate finality from her wheelchair.As the fifth anniversary of the Aurora carnage approaches, Ms. Moser and her family fight daily for survival, like so many in the sizable but little noticed cohort of those wounded in the nation’s gun assaults. For them, closure — the cliché of so many gun death stories — is not easily attainable.Across town from Ms. Moser, 23-year-old Stefan Moton survives his gunshot wounds as a quadriplegic in a wheelchair. He needs help to eat but finds Ashley Moser an inspiration. “I see her at the rehab gym,” he says. “She’s like me — works to be positive.”There also is 28-year-old Caleb Medley, who had worked local clubs as an aspiring stand-up comic. Now he struggles at life after being shot in the right eye, paralyzed on his left side with bullet fragments still in his brain. “For sure, he still has his sense of humor,” says his wife, Katie, who translates his slurred speech. “We’re not going to let this situation take everything away from us,” she vows.By one accounting, an average of 315 people are shot every day in this country. While 93 of them die in murders, assaults, suicide attempts and gun accidents, there are 222 who were shot and survive with various degrees of trauma, much of it lifelong, according to a five-year survey of federal data by the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence.“A mass tragedy of astounding proportions every day — concentric circles outward to family and community,” says Dan Gross, president of the Brady Campaign, whose brother struggles and suffers every day from the effects of being shot in the head during a shooting spree at the Empire State Building in February 1997. “Twenty years later, his hard work at therapy is heartbreaking still, and inspiring still.”The emotional trauma is no easier for physically unscathed family members who lost loved ones to the Aurora shooter. Lately, Theresa Hoover, whose son A. J. Boik was killed, works on planning an Aurora memorial garden (7-20memorial.org) with Jansen Young, who lost her boyfriend, Jonathan Blunk. Ms. Hoover, who saw hundreds of residents mourn her 18-year-old son at his funeral, at first talked to gun safety groups about his talent and promise. But she soon found people “numb” to the reminders of mass shootings. “Unless it happens to you, you can’t understand my pain,” she realized. “It’s just another story.””Everyone has their own story, their own grief,” says Heather Dearman, Ashley Moser’s cousin, who became active in the memorial after the family’s initial reaction of grief and firm public silence. “There was the whole element about it being a mass trauma and: Don’t say anything!”But that is changing with time, Ms. Dearman says. Ashley needs morning nursing help, but she shares an apartment now with her brother and can drive a specially equipped car. “She wants everyone to treat her the same way as they did before the shooting.”As they struggle, barely noticed years after the Aurora headlines, the wounded survivors of the movie house massacre are like countless others across the land where gunmen have struck; there is no definitive accounting of their numbers, their wounds or the suffering families. Like shipwrecked searchers, connections are made among victims of the separate, continuing tragedies. They realize that after each gun outrage gets its burst of attention, nothing substantially changes, and the need for definitive action is ignored.The dedication of Aurora’s assorted casualties to labor beyond ineffable tragedy is heartening. But they admit there are limits.“This happens, and we live with it,” notes Katie Medley, “while for everyone else the world keeps on spinning.”