https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/10/fashion/new-york-fashion-week-thakoon-creatures-of-the-wind.html
At New York Fashion Week, Just Swipe Left - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Creatures of the Wind (Fashion Label),Thakoon LLC,New York Fashion Week
Sept. 9, 2016
4136
It was noon Thursday, and on the second floor of the Masonic Hall in Chelsea, Julee Cruise, the blonde chanteuse with the shag cut who was the voice behind the “Twin Peaks” theme song, was sporting a silver dress and crooning into a microphone. Models wearing scarf-neck blouses and denim dusters drooped by, and in the audience, a woman in a Mongolian-lamb chubby — 80-degree weather be damned — and holding a Chihuahua on her lap looked rapt.That was the Creatures of the Wind show on Day 1 of New York Fashion Week. It sounds weirder than it was. There were some curious juxtapositions, to be sure, like dual-layer skirts with a hip-slung wrap atop a speckled pencil cut; sleeveless Juliet-seamed coatdresses with utilitarian zippers up the front; and black-tie skirt-suits in blue-and-white gingham (if Ms. Cruise were to sing a fashion week theme song, it might well be called “We’re not in Kansas anymore”), but nothing was really too jarring. You kind of longed for David Lynch to get his hand in.Paradoxically, the advent of the digital age, with its sense of boundless possibility, seems to have encouraged a number of designers to think small. It’s as if, since they know they can reach a great deal more people than there are chairs at a show, and since everyone can see all the detailing up close via device, they’ve stopped challenging themselves to make a statement that will carry to the rafters. Instead, they are content with little moments. The result might be pretty, but it is also pretty deflating.That is the case with Creatures of the Wind, where the designers Shane Gabier and Christopher Peters, despite being long considered “promising” — for which, read “nominated for a lot of fashion awards” — are still struggling to define their specific point of view. “Quirky” is about as close as it gets, and that’s fairly vague. The same goes for the Brock Collection, the three-year-old line from the husband-and-wife team of Kristopher Brock and Laura Vassar that is also in the promising category: as a CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund finalist this year.They make perfectly accomplished, understated clothes — this season, in faded floral taffetas, jewel-tone jacquards and creamy linens that looked like nothing so much as romantic workingwoman wear or like Edwardian lingerie for the office. Off-the-shoulder ruffled tops, the edges just vaguely frayed, came atop skinny trousers, and skirts with a ruffle climbing up the side were paired with shirts in mattress ticking stripes; there were also airy seaside-striped shirtdresses and apron slips. Each piece was absolutely fine. But fine should not be enough.Yet there it was again, at Thakoon, where the designer Thakoon Panichgul was making a return to the catwalk after a season off to reconsider (and reconfigure) his business, transforming it via a new owner, Bright Fame Fashion, into a direct-to-consumer, see-now/shop-now endeavor. So on every seat at the show was a lookbook with each exit of the show already photographed and scannable.And they were? A collegiate array of tartan and bias knits, print blouses and cashmere coats, lingerie tops and buffalo plaid — plus some grungy, and unnecessary, ribbed long-john leggings (in another weird paradox, although seeing fall clothes in September ought to make them feel more relevant, the recent sweltering temperatures make the heavier fabrics look oddly out of place). There was also a notable lace-camisole-topped cropped-trouser black jumpsuit and a marigold tea dress.Ruffles ran diagonally up skirts, knits were wrapped at the neck, layers were omnipresent, and it was all — well, exactly as it was in the pictures. A catalog, as opposed to a concept. Fit best, perhaps, for a small, portable screen.Sure, there’s a commercial imperative here. But the end result makes it awfully easy to just swipe left.