https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/09/arts/design/suffering-for-art-in-greece-and-matching-the-national-mood.html
Suffering for Art in Greece and Matching the National Mood - The New York Times
Art,Athens (Greece),Abramovic  Marina  Institute,Performance Art,Benaki Museum,As One (Exhibit),NEON Foundation
April 8, 2016
3443
ATHENS — One artist counts out loud in Greek for eight hours a day, transforming herself into a human metronome. Another subjects himself to intense low-frequency sounds and documents the effects on his mind and body. A third takes an ax to chip away at a large boulder, then flings plaster on top to build it up again in a loop of destruction and creation.They are among six Greek artists who are toiling away in long-duration performances — eight hours a day for seven weeks, through April 24 — at the Benaki Contemporary Museum here. The show, called “As One,” has become a hit in a city not known for performance art, drawing more than 22,000 visitors in the first three weeks.The intensity of the performances and their explorations of time, fear, entrapment, discomfort and control have tapped into the emotions of a country grappling with economic hardship and waves of migrants arriving via neighboring Turkey, factors that have caused a feeling of existential crisis.“They’re kind of mirroring Greek society through the work,” said Iliana Fokianaki, an art critic and gallerist in Athens. “The fact that we’re the scapegoat of Europe, and we are the pariah — these are all emotions most Greeks have,” she added. “This frustration is manifested through the work.”The show is a collaboration between the Marina Abramovic Institute, run by the performance artist, and NEON, a three-year-old Athens-based nonprofit arts organization underwriting the effort. They are also offering exercises in the Marina Abramovic Method intended to improve focus and enrich human interaction — such as counting grains of rice and walking in slow motion. The exercises have become a kind of group therapy for anxious Athenians.In his work “The Micropolitics of Noise,” Lambros Pigounis, 39, a sound artist and composer, drew on military research into the use of sound as a nonlethal weapon to destabilize populations in conflict situations. He spends eight hours a day on a sloped platform under which speakers rumble. “My body goes through three different stages: fight, flight, freeze,” he said. “Conflict, escape, immobilization.”He said some visitors who join him on the platform show fear. “They feel the sound and can’t determine the cause,” Mr. Pigounis said. Others overcome the fear. On the room’s walls, Mr. Pigounis writes the effects on his body each day. They include nausea, chest constriction, loss of mental capacity. The work has changed him. “It’s like a shamanic journey,” he said.In “White Cave,” the artist and dancer Nancy Stamatopoulou, 41, spends much of the day in a tiny white box. Monitors show recordings of the previous week’s performance. Inspired by Plato’s Cave, she wanted visitors to examine the ways they are trapped in their own lives. For “Corner Time,” Despina Zacharopoulou, 33, binds and unbinds herself with rope and carries out a series of actions and rituals.Visitors are entranced. Mike Chatzopoulos, 24, a semiprofessional basketball player recovering from a knee injury, said he had rarely been to a museum but came often to watch Virginia Mastrogiannaki, the human metronome, as she counted out loud, a performance called “Jargon.” “She has so much dignity,” Mr. Chatzopoulos said. “It’s like a movie. You see something different every time.”The artists were chosen from an open call that drew 320 people. From these, NEON, Ms. Abramovic and her institute chose 24 artists from a range of disciplines — the six who do long-duration works and others who perform for shorter periods. The show is a homecoming for many Greek artists who left to pursue careers abroad. (Ms. Abramovic remains present as teacher and amanuensis, not performer.)For the performances, the artists do not take breaks for the entire eight-hour stretch, not even to use the bathroom. To prepare themselves mentally, the six long-duration artists and two others attended a five-day retreat that called for them not to speak or eat. (They were supposed to have only tea with honey.)NEON, which means “new” in Greek, was founded in 2013 by Dimitris Daskalopoulos, a businessman and art collector who supports it with his own money. Rather than constructing a building, he said, he wanted to invest in arts programming that would energize existing spaces in Athens — like archaeological sites — to draw new audiences and generate conversation.“You have the ability to look at the situation in the country and look at the people, look at the city and where it’s moving and just go there,” Mr. Daskalopoulos said of NEON’s approach. “Exposing people to new ideas, the challenges and difficulties of contemporary art,” he said, can ferment the “cultural change that we need to go through so that our children don’t see such a crisis again.”“As One” is NEONS’s biggest undertaking to date, employing 121 people. The Method has also been a big draw. Visitors put on noise-canceling headphones to do a series of exercises — walking in slow motion, separating rice from lentils, sitting and staring at another person in the face.Some have found resonances between the art and the refugee crisis. The Kathimerini daily published a cartoon depicting Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras as “Alexis Abramovic,” sitting in a chair and facing a family of refugees, a reference to Ms. Abramovic’s 2010 work at the Museum of Modern Art, “The Artist is Present,” in which she sat, facing one visitor at a time, for 700 hours.At the end of a long day, Ms. Abramovic gave the Greek performance artists her comments. She told Ms. Stamatopoulou, who spends much of the day curled up inside her wooden box, that she was getting too thin. “You need some chicken soup,” she said. She told Thodoris Trampas, who spends the day casting, smashing and recasting plaster for his work “Pangaia,” that maybe he could find a way to incorporate rest into his performance.The actress Yota Argyropoulou, who passes the hours in a room behind a glass wall separating it from an identical room in which visitors interact with her through the glass, said that an angry woman had recently entered, shredded a pillow, then refused to leave. “After that, the energy was very strange, very violent,” Ms. Argyropoulou said. “I started throwing things at her.”Ms. Abramovic advised that the best approach was to ignore such people, adding that it was too bad the pillow was synthetic. “If it had been feathers,” she said, “you could have counted them.”