https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/25/world/americas/venezuela-nicolas-maduro-pope-francis.html
Vatican to Act as Mediator Between Venezuela’s Dueling Sides - The New York Times
Referendums,Venezuela,Francis,Maduro  Nicolas,Roman Catholic Church,Torrealba  Jesus
Oct. 24, 2016
1176
CARACAS, Venezuela — As President Nicolás Maduro flew to Rome for a hastily arranged meeting with Pope Francis, representatives of Venezuela’s government and a leader of the opposition agreed on Monday to allow the Vatican to mediate a dialogue intended to solve the country’s political crisis.The accord appeared to mark a pause in Venezuela’s escalating tension, which intensified last week when the country’s electoral council suspended the opposition’s drive for a referendum to recall Mr. Maduro.This is the first time that the Vatican has succeeded in bringing representatives of the two sides together since it began attempts to intercede in May.The first formal meeting between the two sides is scheduled for Sunday on Margarita Island. The pope’s envoy, Archbishop Emil Paul Tscherrig, will preside over the gathering.Jesús Torrealba, the secretary general of the coalition of opposition parties, met with government representatives on Monday and agreed to the Vatican’s mediation. But other opposition leaders did not attend the meeting, and it was unclear how united the opposition would be behind the dialogue.Leopoldo López, a jailed opposition leader, wrote in a series of Twitter messages that a dialogue was “not possible” after the recall referendum was suspended and “the people’s right to express themselves was robbed.”Mr. Lopez repeated his call for a large protest on Wednesday.Gov. Henrique Capriles, who ran against Mr. Maduro in the 2013 presidential election, said he was not aware of the coming meeting in Margarita Island. “In Venezuela, we haven’t started any dialogue,” said Mr. Capriles, who is governor of the state of Miranda. He echoed Mr. Lopez’s call for a Wednesday protest, which he said could reach the presidential palace in Caracas.At the Vatican, Mr. Maduro spoke privately with Pope Francis for 30 minutes on Monday in a meeting that a Vatican spokeswoman said had been arranged just “hours in advance.” The Vatican said the pope “desired to continue to offer his contribution” to “build trust between the various parties.”Experts said the pope, who is from Argentina, was eager to help defuse the crisis in Venezuela.“I think the Vatican’s diplomacy has always wanted to create bridges,” said Paolo Rodari, the Vatican correspondent for the daily La Repubblica. “In particular, given how grave the situation in Venezuela has become, the pope must have decided to try to mediate and help like he did with Cuba.”