https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/13/nyregion/mayors-take-on-policing-lacks-nuance.html
Mayor’s Take on Policing Lacks Nuance - The New York Times
Police Department (NYC),Bloomberg  Michael R,Kelly  Raymond W,Racial Profiling,Search and Seizure,Scheindlin  Shira A
Aug. 12, 2013
4898
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and his police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, were in fine fettle on Monday, which is not to be confused with doing themselves any favors.Can you, a reporter asked at a news conference, persuade an appeals court to block a federal judge from imposing a legal monitor on your police force? The mayor offered a Dirty Harry squint.“Boy, I hope so,” he said, “because I wouldn’t want to be responsible for a lot of people dying.”Mr. Kelly took on the judge’s charge that the department was racially profiling young men: “That simply is recklessly untrue,” he said.They are the aging Dead End twins, the billionaire mayor with his Hamptons-by-way-of-Bermuda tan and the square-jawed, crew-cut commissioner. Again and again, they displayed a fossil-like rigidity, refusing to concede even a jot of a point to the federal judge who imposed a monitor on the Police Department, or to the many critics who warned so often that a once-reasonable stop-and-frisk program had metastasized.Judge Shira A. Scheindlin’s ruling that the city’s stop-and-frisk program violates the constitutional rights of tens of thousands of black and Latino men came dipped in a bathtub of inevitability. She had signaled in every way possible during the trial that city officials held a losing legal hand.The mayor has a self-made man’s disdain for introspection and a wealthy man’s disdain for the word “no.” So on Monday, he preferred to grump about an unfair judge. “Throughout the case,” he complained, “we didn’t believe we were getting a fair trial.”Judge Scheindlin never talked, he complained, about how safe the city is. In fact, she made reference to this in the first line of her decision: “New Yorkers are rightly proud of their city and seek to make it as safe as the largest city in America can be.” But, she added, “New Yorkers also treasure their liberty.”Some in the mayor’s administration had argued that this case was a loser and that the administration should settle. The mayor waved them off, and in the end his theatrics could not disguise the bottom line: Once again, a judge had made chowder of a cherished policy.“He’s got a record-low murder and crime rate, and his Police Department has just had a federal monitor imposed on it,” said Christopher Dunn, associate legal director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. “How did he manage to pull that off?”The ruling did not turn on its head every police success. Legal stop-and-frisk tactics remain important, and officers are not, as some suggest, so many George Zimmermans. Nor is there a non-nauseating analogy to be drawn, as Anthony D. Weiner, the Howard Beale of mayoral candidates, tried, between Nazi Germany and officers on the beat.Rather, the city’s stop-and-frisk numbers might be seen as a visit from the ghosts of our long-ago dirty war. The late 1980s and early 1990s offered grim passage, with toddlers hit by stray bullets and mothers and even an elementary school principal slaughtered in the cross-fire of gangbangers.The response was not pretty. Police officers stopped young black and Latino men by the tens of thousands, and detectives and prosecutors too often treated legal standards of evidence and interrogation as optional.Michael Baum, a lawyer, defended David Ranta, who was convicted — unjustly — of killing a Brooklyn rabbi in the 1980s. After the verdict, Mr. Baum sat in a bar, disconsolate. A detective who had helped convict his client slid onto a stool next to him. “Don’t sweat this conviction,” he advised. “That skell of yours was guilty of something.”So the unjust was rationalized in service of safe streets.It is as if all of us — citizens, police officers, prosecutors, even judges — closed our eyes. What sets the use of mass stop-and-frisk tactics apart is that it continued into a new and safer era.Perhaps there’s a subtle conversation to be had about this. Just not on Monday at City Hall.The mayor chose to end the news conference by conjuring up an officer who comes upon a criminal with a drawn gun. The officer wants to pull his service revolver and defend himself. But he thinks: What about the federal monitor? What about the City Council-imposed inspector general?“By that time, he’s dead,” the mayor said, swelling with anger at his imaginary tale. “I’d like to see you go to the funeral and explain to the wife.”We had now floated a long way from the shores of stop-and-frisk tactics, into a mayoral reality all his own.