https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/nyregion/new-york-today-nyc-triathlon-family.html
New York Today: Taking on the Triathlon, as a Family - The New York Times
New York City
July 14, 2017
7700
Updated, 11:14 a.m.Good morning on this wet Friday.In the wee hours of Sunday morning, before many of us are awake, 4,000 athletes will leap into the Hudson River for the New York City Triathlon.Several of them will be Sigelbaums.Jeffrey Sigelbaum, 57, and his sons Calvin, 27, Malcolm, 25, Doug, 24, and Greg, 22, are all competing.When we joined the Sigelbaum squad this week for a run on the West Side Highway, the consensus was that Jeffrey, the father whose tenure as a swimmer dates back to his days as a lifeguard in college, would beat his sons in the mile-long swim down the Hudson River. Malcolm is expected to outpace the rest in the 25-mile bike ride on the Henry Hudson Parkway. Doug, who has completed four marathons, should prevail in the roughly six-mile run through Central Park. Calvin, now in his fourth triathlon, said he was aiming for second place in each leg, and Greg — the only Sigelbaum doing the competition for the first time — is the wild card.“This is going to be our first group race where all five of us are doing it together,” said Calvin, who was the first Sigelbaum to compete in the triathlon, in 2014.“We’re all going to have a lot of fun, but at the same time I can’t let Malcolm beat me. I can’t let my dad beat me. I can’t let my youngest brother beat me, especially, and I just want to keep up with this guy,” he added lightheartedly, pointing to Doug, who he said can outrun the rest of the family “by a long shot.”Growing up, the four brothers would often compete two-on-two in games like basketball and table tennis. They plan to do the same at the triathlon, adding up the times of the oldest and youngest brothers, and comparing that result with the combined times of the middle two brothers, to determine the family champions.It makes sense that the Sigelbaums are competing as a pack. With the exception of Doug, who flew in from San Francisco, they all live within a mile of one another in the city. They often go to Knicks games, run the reservoir in Central Park and eat Sunday night dinners as a unit.The triathlon will include professionals, paratriathletes and others from 45 states and 40 countries as far away as Australia and Japan. We asked the Sigelbaums to share race-day advice for first-timers taking on the challenge this weekend.“Stay hydrated, drink little gels and keep your nutrition going during the race,” Doug said. “Always drink water when offered.”“Pace yourself; don’t let the adrenaline get to you in the beginning,” Calvin said. “Work on your transition times because you can either help or hurt yourself there,” he said, referring to the minutes spent at the changing station, moving from water to bike, and then from bike to run.And in the Hudson, “don’t put your feet on the ground,” he added. “It’s pretty gross down there, so if you’re getting tired, just float.”Their father chimed in: “Getting out of the swim, do not let your feet drop as you’re coming to the ramp; it’s just this disgusting, slimy silt at the bottom there. Swim until your chest hits the ramp, and then they’ll just yank you out.”What’s the next Sigelbaum family race, after they cross the finish line Sunday morning?Over to Second Avenue, they said, to fill up on thin-crust pizza at Posto, or sandwiches at the Second Avenue Deli.Here’s what else is happening:Bring that poncho or umbrella with you.We’re expecting showers and thunderstorms throughout the day. It’ll be cooler than yesterday — with the high expected to near 75.But ease up — the skies may dry up this weekend.It should be partly sunny on Saturday with temperatures in the mid-80s. Sunday should also be warm and sunny.• A federal appeals court overturned the 2015 corruption conviction of Sheldon Silver, once the powerful speaker of the New York State Assembly. [New York Times]• … Mr. Silver’s conviction was among the first federal verdicts to be reversed as a result of the Supreme Court’s decision on the corruption case of former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia. [New York Times]• … And in “About New York,” the columnist Jim Dwyer tells us how Mr. Sheldon leveraged obscurity in a criminal case on bribery and money laundering. [New York Times]• Residents in Rockaway wonder whether prevention measures taken thus far are enough to protect the Queens neighborhood against another storm like Hurricane Sandy. [New York Times]• A Brooklyn man was charged with murder in a shooting during a T.I. concert at Irving Plaza in Manhattan last year. [New York Times]• A Bronx man who plowed his car through Times Square in May has been indicted on charges that include two counts of murder and 18 counts of attempted murder. [New York Times]• A study suggests that bike lanes helped push the sale price of homes higher in parts of Bushwick. [DNAinfo]• Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey vetoed a bill that would have blocked enforcement of President Trump’s travel ban at Newark Liberty International Airport. [CBS New York]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “Love Rides the A Train”• Scoreboard: New York Red Bulls top New England Revolution, 1-0.• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Friday Briefing.• “Jazz & Chihuly: Celebrating 100 Years of Jazz,” an evening of music and art, at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. 6 p.m. [$45]• Tap Ellington, a show celebrating Duke Ellington’s legacy in music and tap dancing, at Jazz at Lincoln Center on the Upper West Side. 7 p.m. [Prices vary, tickets here]• Take the family to an outdoor screening of “Moana” at Beach 59th Street on the boardwalk in Rockaway Beach, Queens. 8 p.m. [Free]• Emo Night Brooklyn, a concert featuring hits from the 2000s, at Brooklyn Bowl on Wythe Avenue. Midnight. [$10, tickets here]• Yankees at Red Sox, 7:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Rockies, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Liberty host Sky, 7:30 p.m.• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Aug. 15.• Weekend travel hassles: Check subway disruptions and a list of street closings.Saturday• Join New York Road Runners for guided runs through the Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn and Manhattan. 9 a.m. [Free]• Allergic to Salad hosts a farm-to-table cooking class, for parents and children, at the Queens Botanical Garden. Noon. [Prices vary, tickets here]• A five-kilometer, or roughly three-mile, canoe challenge on the Bronx River — with music, dance performances and more entertainment — at Starlight Park in the Bronx. 2 to 8 p.m. [Free]• Watch “Beauty and the Beast” under the stars at Westerleigh Park on Staten Island or Grover Cleveland Park in Queens. 8:30 p.m. [Free]• Yankees at Red Sox, 4:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Rockies, 7:10 p.m. (WPIX).Sunday• Take in “Magic at Coney” at the Coney Island Museum in Brooklyn. Noon. [$5 for children, $10 for adults]• Round out the weekend with Laughter in the Park, an outdoor comedy series at the Granite Prospect in Brooklyn Bridge Park. 4:30 p.m. [Free]• … Or with Aasif Mandvi, the comedian and former “Daily Show” correspondent, at the Peoples Improv Theater in Flatiron. 8 p.m. [$10]• Summergarden presents a jazz concert, with the Marquis Hill Project, in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art in Midtown. 8 p.m. [Free]• Yankees at Red Sox, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Rockies, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). Liberty host Mystics, 3 p.m. Yankees at Red Sox, 8:08 p.m. (ESPN).• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.On July 16, 1790, President George Washington signed into law the Residence Act that would make what we now know as Washington, D.C., our country’s permanent capital.But before the capital was ever in Washington, it was in New York for five years.New York City was the country’s capital from the winter of 1785 to the autumn of 1788, when the Continental Congress, operating under the Articles of Confederation, met at City Hall on Wall Street. During this time, some government departments, including the War Department and the Treasury, operated out of the landmark saloon Fraunces Tavern.After the Constitution was ratified, the First United States Congress met in the city, in the spring of 1789, and quickly inaugurated Washington as the nation’s first president. The ceremony was held at Federal Hall — the new name for City Hall, which had been renovated to better suit our country’s new government.But it didn’t last long: A year later the capital relocated to Philadelphia, before moving, forevermore, to Washington on Dec. 1, 1800.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.