https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/us/politics/comey-testimony-loretta-lynch.html
Comey Raises Concerns About Loretta Lynch’s Independence - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Attorneys General,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Lynch  Loretta E,Comey  James B,Senate Committee on Intelligence
June 8, 2017
4500
WASHINGTON — James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, said on Thursday that President Barack Obama’s attorney general sought in 2015 to play down the significance of an investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server.In his wide-ranging testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee, Mr. Comey said the request by that attorney general, Loretta E. Lynch, led him to question her independence.Last summer, Mr. Comey said the F.B.I. was completing its investigation into Mrs. Clinton, and he took it upon himself to announce that “no reasonable prosecutor” would bring charges against her, after concluding that Ms. Lynch might be perceived as politically compromised. One of the incidents he cited was a request by Ms. Lynch to use a blander term to publicly describe the investigation in the midst of a presidential election.“The attorney general had directed me not to call it an investigation, but instead to call it a matter, which confused me and concerned me,” Mr. Comey said in response to questions during testimony, which focused mainly on President Trump’s decision to fire him last month. “That was one of the bricks in the load that led me to conclude, ‘I have to step away from the department if we’re to close this case credibly.’”The attorney general’s request, reported in The New York Times in April, came just before a congressional hearing in September 2015 where Mr. Comey was sure to be asked about the investigation.“The Clinton campaign, at the time, was using all kind of euphemisms — security review, matters, things like that, for what was going on,” Mr. Comey said on Thursday. “We were getting to a place where the attorney general and I were both going to have to testify and talk publicly about. And I wanted to know, was she going to authorize us to confirm we had an investigation?“And she said, ‘Yes, but don’t call it that, call it a matter,’” Mr. Comey continued. “And I said, ‘Why would I do that?’ And she said, ‘Just call it a matter.’”Mr. Comey said the “conclusive” episode that persuaded him to make his own announcement in the Clinton investigation rather than leave it to Ms. Lynch came last June, when former President Bill Clinton spontaneously boarded her plane on a tarmac and sat down to talk with her.“That was the thing that capped it for me, that I had to do something separately to protect the credibility of the investigation, which meant both the F.B.I. and the Justice Department,” Mr. Comey said.Republicans on Thursday pointed to Mr. Comey’s testimony to question Ms. Lynch’s independence during her tenure as attorney general. The Republican National Committee called her actions “interference” in the Clinton investigation and added in a statement, “Attorney General Lynch has a lot of explaining to do.”Ms. Lynch made no public comment on Thursday, but a person close to her who requested anonymity said Mr. Comey requested the September 2015 meeting to ask for guidance on his coming congressional testimony. Ms. Lynch said he should follow normal department policy of not discussing open investigations.Ms. Lynch, the person said, told Mr. Comey that she had used the term matter in response to inquiries by the news media. But the person said use of the bland term was intended to neither confirm nor deny that the investigation existed — as was standard Justice Department and F.B.I. practice.At the time, the person close to Ms. Lynch said, Mr. Comey did not contest the attorney general’s request, which was described as an attempt to be consistent in discussing the issue publicly.