https://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/28/theater/28jackie.html
Jackie Hoffman - Jackie With a Z - The J.A.P. Show - Theater - The New York Times
Theater,Hoffman  Jackie,Jews,Joe's Pub
March 28, 2007
8805
Jackie Hoffman just wants to be Jackie Hoffman.But with a movie option. Or a television series. Or at least an HBO special, for crying out loud.“I want to go in the direction I’m going, but maybe ratchet the name up bigger,” she said, wearing jeans and a cardigan, sitting in her “masking tape”-colored living room. The idea, she said, is to have some Hollywood power broker bark into the phone one day: “See if we can get Jackie Hoffman.”For now, though, New York is keeping Ms. Hoffman  busy. Her one-woman show, “Jackie With a Z,” opened in February at Joe’s Pub and has been extended  most recently for two additional nights, April 8 and 15. She is joining three other female comics in “The J.A.P. Show, Jewish American Princesses of Comedy,” which opens April 18 at the Actors’ Temple. And she will play Calliope, muse of epic poetry, in the musical “Xanadu,” opening on Broadway this summer.At its most chaotic, this convergence means “The J.A.P Show” at nights at the synagogue-cum-theater, on top of six-day-a-week “Xanadu” rehearsals, all on top of those extra Joe’s Pub shows.“Nutzoid,” she said.And Ms. Hoffman knows from nutzoid. As she sings in “Jackie With a Z,” tightly sheathed in a black-sequined bodice-turned-skirt, “I almost had cancer.”She didn’t. She did, however, have a benign tumor, and in December — right in the middle of another show, “Regrets Only, ” at the Manhattan Theater Club — she went in for a hysterectomy at age 46.“I said to the doctor: ‘But I’m in a play! I’m in a play!’ ” Ms. Hoffman said, slumping backward and imitating her doctor’s shocked response. “He stared at me like I was nuts.”She was back in three weeks, with a cot backstage for whenever she wasn’t singing or talking.“That hospital experience was an absolute blessing,” Ms. Hoffman said. “And everybody said the same thing: ‘You’re going to get material out of this, you’re going to get at least a half-hour.’ That’s what I told myself. It was like, ‘If I don’t get a show out of this ... .’ ”“Jackie With a Z” soon followed, and “the big C,” as Ms. Hoffman calls cancer, factors heavily into her routine of singing, joking, moaning, groaning, stomping and clomping.She explained this from the couch in her Eighth Avenue apartment in Chelsea, and as her voice quieted and squawked  for emphasis, she resembled a more distilled version of her cabaret self.“A more theatrical Jackie concentrate” is how she described her stage persona.Her face suggests a ball of bread dough that can be pulled, pushed, poked and prodded into an endless array of expressions and impressions.“For expressions, I’d say varied and limitless,” Ms. Hoffman mused. “I’m not thrilled with my face. I wish I were prettier. My nose is too big, my cheeks hang, the eyes are pretty nice, and I like the full lip.”But Ms. Hoffman is weary of all the reviews that invariably mention the “rubber” quality of her face, or describe her as some cross between Bette Midler and whatever actress-of-the-moment comes to mind. Because Jackie Hoffman is Jackie Hoffman, O.K.? She’s Jackie who hates children; Jackie who can dispatch a lone, drunk heckler with a quick one-liner; Jackie with a Z.In her current show Ms. Hoffman unleashes her cheerful rancor on the Joe’s Pub crowd, imitating everyone from a toddler to a self-satisfied Upper West Sider. The performance ends  with Ms. Hoffman and her uterus singing a duet.“Now watch,” she tells the audience. “Someone from HBO will be here, and my uterus will get a series.”Not that Ms. Hoffman hasn’t had some commercial successes. She has played the misdirected mother, bullying gym teacher and sadistic  prison guard in “Hairspray” on Broadway; appeared in the film “Kissing Jessica Stein”; and even had a cameo on the television show “Curb Your Enthusiasm.”But she said her true passion was for the shows she had written for Joe’s Pub.“I’d rather do that than anything because it really gives me a chance to just vent and be completely offensive and say things I wouldn’t be allowed to say,” she explained. “I certainly wouldn’t be allowed to say them in ‘J.A.P.’ in a synagogue, and I wouldn’t be allowed to say them on Broadway, that’s for sure.”Should that power broker ever call, Ms. Hoffman said she was hoping for “a series that’s not a reality series, but that would really be me.”Larry David, a co-creator of “Seinfeld” and star of “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” hasn’t cornered the market on dissatisfied Jews who are funny, she said.“When I was lying in the hospital, I said to my boyfriend, ‘I can’t wait to be in a sparkly dress at Joe’s Pub, talking about this,’ ” Ms. Hoffman recalled, with her show wrapping up and two more on the horizon. “That’s what I want.”