https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/us/chris-mintz-who-tried-to-block-oregon-gunman-has-history-of-service.html
Former Soldier Who Tried to Block Gunman Has a History of Service - The New York Times
School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Mintz  Chris L (1985- ),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Colleges and Universities,Roseburg (Ore),Umpqua Community College
Oct. 2, 2015
652
ROSEBURG, Ore. —  Chris Mintz has served in the Army, practiced mixed martial arts fighting and dedicated himself to raising an autistic child.Chances are all those experiences played a role in preparing him for the ordeal he faced on Thursday when he was shot numerous times while trying to save others during the murderous rampage at Umpqua Community College. His legs were broken as well, but he is expected to live, according to family members and friends.Friends and family said his bravery was reflected in the way he took care of them. Blake Meacham, 20, a first-year student at the college, said, “It didn’t surprise me to hear he would do anything. He’s the kind of guy who wouldn’t necessarily think about it and would just do what he had to do to buy time.”Mr. Mintz, 30, a stocky former soldier, told relatives and friends that he was shot several times through the classroom door as he tried to hold it shut. After the gunman broke through, Mr. Mintz told him that it was the sixth birthday of his son, Tyrik, but he was shot again.“He was trying to hold the door and block the gunman,” Derek Bourgeois, a relative and high school classmate of Mr. Mintz’s, said in a telephone interview. Mr. Bourgeois said he spoke briefly with Mr. Mintz on Thursday night after calling his hospital room.Mr. Mintz attended Randleman High School in North Carolina, where he was a lineman on the football team and graduated in 2003. He served in the Army from 2004 to 2007, according to his service record, and trained at Fort Benning, Ga. He was stationed in Fort Lewis, Wash., and decided to stay on the West Coast after leaving the military.Jamie Skinner met him about a decade ago when Mr. Mintz was in the Army. After he left, she said, he moved to Roseburg, where they lived together. The two had a son, Tyrik, in 2009, and a year later, in October 2010, she said their child received a diagnosis of autism. Tyrik still wears diapers and is unable to speak.She said Mr. Mintz had a series of jobs, including working at Walmart, and also was a stay-at-home father while she worked as a security guard.“He’s been a big factor in my being able to bring up the child,” she said. “It’s how we are able to balance a one-income household.”Mr. Mintz was active in mixed martial arts and was studying physical fitness. He wants to be a personal trainer, Ms. Skinner said.Ms. Skinner said that she and Mr. Mintz split up a year ago, but that he is still close to her family. He lives with Ms. Skinner’s sister and her husband while he attends school.Mr. Mintz has posted several pictures on his Instagram account with his son: snuggling in bed, their heads together, driving in his car, picking pumpkins in a patch. He has 16,300 followers. Almost a year ago he posted a photograph of the two at the community college, writing, “Tyrik and I on campus, love these moments.”Shellie Dodd, a friend who lives down the street from the home Mr. Mintz shared with Ms. Skinner, said, “In the few years I’ve known him, his mental outlook is so positive. Tyrik can be so intimidating to other people. He squeals. But he too can show when he’s happy.”Ms. Skinner said that Mr. Mintz was recently approached by a company seeking a sponsorship, having seen him on Instagram.She said she spoke to him Thursday night. He was worried about paying his medical bills, but was glad to be alive. She said she, too, was approached about having him appear on television programs, including “Good Morning America” and “Ellen.” He was not interested until she suggested that he speak about what it was like to be the parent of an autistic child.“You have a forum here,” Ms. Skinner said she told him. “Use it.”