https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/12/world/middleeast/iraq.html
Iraqis Nominate Maliki Successor, Causing Standoff - The New York Times
Iraq,Maliki  Nuri Kamal al-,Abadi  Haider al-,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Kurds,United States International Relations,Massoum  Fouad,Kerry  John
Aug. 11, 2014
7856
BAGHDAD —  Under heavy pressure from the United States, Iraqi lawmakers took a significant step on Monday by choosing a replacement for Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, widely blamed for their country’s polarized politics. But Mr. Maliki angrily rejected the move, vowing to fight in the courts and perhaps by use of force, throwing the country into new uncertainty even as it fights an onslaught by Sunni militants.The change in leadership could help soothe Iraq’s sectarian fractures and unite the country under Mr. Maliki’s nominated successor, a member of his own Shiite party. But Mr. Maliki’s insistence that he is the rightful leader could just as easily tear Iraq further apart.Complicating the picture more was the United States, which helped orchestrate Mr. Maliki’s rise to power eight years ago but now holds him responsible for alienating the country’s Sunni minority and helping fuel the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, the Sunni extremist group. Territorial gains by ISIS in the north prompted a new military intervention by the United States — and gave Washington fresh leverage to demand political changes in Baghdad.President Obama welcomed the nomination of a new prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, interrupting his vacation on Martha’s Vineyard to announce in a televised statement that both he and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. had congratulated Mr. Abadi on the phone, calling his nomination “an important step towards forming a new government that can unite Iraq’s different communities.”But Mr. Obama also reminded the Iraqis that America’s renewed military assistance — punctuated by the airstrikes that began pounding ISIS positions last week — was no solution to what he called the larger crisis in Iraq. “The only lasting solution is for Iraqis to come together and form an inclusive government,” he said.Although Mr. Maliki is widely reviled in Iraq, he remains a formidable force, with relatives who command special security forces, courts that are heavily shaped by his influence and a history of exacting revenge on his domestic opponents. Mr. Maliki’s stubbornness presents multiple challenges to the United States, which wants to preserve Iraq’s cohesion while helping to stop ISIS’ avowed goal of creating a monolithic Islamic caliphate that ignores national boundaries.Mr. Obama spoke after a day of high political drama in Baghdad, where Mr. Maliki appeared on state television and blamed the United States for “standing beside those who violated the Iraqi Constitution.” The stage was set for more drama in the coming days, as the new nominee works to form a government, and Mr. Maliki pursues his bid to remain in power through a legal challenge or, as some worry, the use of the military to guarantee his survival.“We will fix the mistake,” he said, without being specific.The nomination of Mr. Abadi came hours after a television appearance on Sunday, just before midnight, by a defiant Mr. Maliki, who had already deployed extra security forces around the capital. In that speech he challenged the Iraqi president, Fuad Masum, and threatened legal action against Mr. Masum — and implied that the army was ready to step in and defend the Constitution — for not choosing him.In Washington, the Sunday routines of officials who work on Iraq policy were suddenly interrupted. American officials, worried that a coup might be underway, scrambled to ensure that Mr. Maliki’s rivals would decide on an alternative candidate by Monday. They sent a pointed message to Mr. Maliki not to target political rivals for arrest, as he has done many times in the past, according to a senior Shiite lawmaker involved in the negotiations to form a government.A senior State Department official said that Mr. Maliki appeared to be mounting a “last, desperate effort to try to force some kind of a deal.” The official added, “He ain’t going to be prime minister.”Other senior Obama administration officials said American representatives in Iraq had been increasingly and deeply involved in Baghdad discussions during the last 10 days to settle on an alternative to Mr. Maliki.The officials said they were in constant contact with the new Iraqi president over the past several weeks as Mr. Masum sought to narrow the possible candidates from five to one. On Sunday, as the deadline approached, American officials were in conversations throughout the day, urging the various factions to coalesce around a nominee, officials said.The message, according to one senior administration official: Your country is in desperate straits, and you need to get together and make some political decisions.On television Monday afternoon, as Baghdad wondered whether a coup was imminent, competing visions played out: one of the country uniting, the other of it spiraling further apart. In midafternoon, in a show of national unity, the new president, a Kurd, and the new speaker, a Sunni, stood with several Shiite lawmakers to formally nominate Mr. Abadi.“The country is in your hands,” Mr. Masum said to Mr. Abadi.With a smile, another Shiite lawmaker then shook Mr. Abadi’s hand and said, “May God help you.”Hours later, Mr. Maliki appeared on television next to an ever-shrinking circle of Shiite allies from his party. He did not speak then — although he would later in the appearance in which he castigated the United States — but a surrogate, Khalaf Abdul Samad, did.“Abadi does not represent the Dawa Party; he represents himself only,” Mr. Samad said. “We are sticking with Maliki as our only candidate for prime minister.”Mr. Samad said that Mr. Maliki would pursue a legal challenge against Mr. Masum’s choice of Mr. Abadi, arguing that it was Mr. Maliki’s bloc, State of Law, that has the constitutional right to have the first opportunity to form a new government.The question is whether Mr. Abadi, who like many of Iraq’s Shiite leaders led a life of exile until the American invasion in 2003 ousted Saddam Hussein, can forge a grand political bargain with meaningful roles for the two significant minority factions, Sunni Arabs and Kurds. Under the Constitution, he has a 30-day window to conclude the sort of back-room deals — promises of positions and ministries, which sustain Iraq’s system of patronage — that would be the backbone of a new government.Most Iraqi leaders, by now so exasperated by Mr. Maliki’s leadership and his insistence on clinging to power, have said any other Shiite lawmaker will do. “Really, at this point, I think it’s anybody but Maliki,” said a Kurdish politician who asked not to be identified because of the sensitivity of the situation.For weeks, under pressure from both the Americans and Iraq’s Shiite religious leaders, lawmakers met to negotiate over the prime minister position. Several names were discussed, including Ahmed Chalabi, the former exile who fed intelligence, now debunked, about Mr. Hussein’s weapons programs to American intelligence agencies that was used to justify the American invasion.It was only during the past week that Mr. Abadi became a candidate. He is a onetime ally of Mr. Maliki’s, and because Mr. Abadi is from the same party his candidacy became attractive, as it recognized the legitimacy of the election victory for Mr. Maliki’s bloc in April’s national elections.This is what “encouraged them to make a coup against Maliki,” said one of the Shiite negotiators, who asked to remain anonymous to discuss internal deliberations.Another deciding factor, lawmakers said, was the clear stance of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the country’s most influential Shiite cleric, who had pushed for political change.Still, many lawmakers who abandoned Mr. Maliki are fearful of possible retaliation. In the past, when he has wanted to eliminate Sunni rivals, Mr. Maliki accused them of terrorism. Shiite rivals would be accused of corruption.“The problem is he still has great power,” said a senior Shiite leader. “He controls the police and the army, plus the Special Forces. Our biggest fear is that Maliki could arrest everyone who participates in this, but we have seen that the Americans have warned Maliki this morning not to target the political elites who are seen as Maliki’s opponents.”Mr. Abadi’s biography is typical of many Iraqi Shiite leaders. He was born in 1952, grew up in Baghdad, and joined the Dawa Party as a teenager, entering the clandestine opposition to Mr. Hussein’s dictatorship. Two of his brothers were said to have been killed by Mr. Hussein’s government. Mr. Abadi left Iraq in 1977 and moved to London, where he earned a doctorate in electrical engineering from Manchester University.Politics in Iraq often carries undertones of violence, as seen in the past few days: A prime minister fighting to retain power dispatched loyal security units, some directly overseen by his son, and tanks occupied the center of power, the Green Zone. Political rivals sat at home, wondering if they would be arrested.Heightening the tension were fears that if Mr. Maliki were to call on the Iraqi Army to back his effort, he could face resistance from militia groups aligned with other political parties.“I wish he would cool it down,” said Mohammed Bahr al-Uloum, a lawmaker with the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, a Shiite party that opposes Mr. Maliki. Political violence in Baghdad, he said, is the last thing Iraq needs.“I don’t want to see more blood in the streets,” Mr. Uloum said. “We have enough with ISIS.”