https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/08/opinion/08iht-edrosner08.html
Who Killed the Israeli Left? - The New York Times
Israel,Jews and Judaism,Gaza Strip,Politics and Government,Palestinians,Defense and Military Forces,International Relations
Sept. 7, 2014
8643
Tel Aviv — When my father was born in Palestine, before the State of Israel was established, less than half a million Jews lived in this territory. In 1949 — a year after Israel was born — the one million threshold was crossed, and was celebrated with a poem by a leading literary figure of the day. “It is good to be a million,” Natan Alterman wrote. Two decades later, when I was growing up, the magic number was “three million.” In 2014, the count was more than six million Jews. Ten times the number of Jews on Israel’s inauguration.It’s therefore amusing to follow the latest raging Israeli debate prompted by some Israelis’ threats to jump ship and leave the country. The number of Israeli Jews has grown but Israelis have still not outgrown their sense of demographic apprehension.For educated, liberal Israelis it’s easy to air one’s frustration with the country and grab a headline by declaring their intention to leave. Last year, the public was chattering about young Israelis who were moving to Berlin, of all places, because of high rents in Tel Aviv. Now, Israel is threatened to be abandoned because it “is a dangerous place, which takes much more than it gives, for reasons that I do not accept”, as columnist Rogel Alpher wrote in Haaretz last week.This threat is a dog that never bites. Certain Israeli leftists feel sidelined and powerless and therefore they threaten to leave, which makes the rest of Israelis even less attentive to their views. (Why would we listen to those who don’t even want to live here?) This, in turn, makes the leftists feel even more isolated.The Israeli left is in trouble, as most leftists would admit — and the Gaza war that ended two weeks ago put it under even more pressure.During the war, Israelis’ sense of unity and purpose became pronounced, leaving the war’s few domestic opponents feeling marginalized.After the war, things got worse for the left; voters now seem even more stubborn in their support of rightwing prescriptions of policies. According to recent polls, rightwing parties are getting stronger, and the number of Knesset seats projected for the current right-of-center coalition have skyrocketed.No less significant, some left-wing acquaintances of mine admit in private that they were shaken by the war, and had to reconsider some long-held positions. Their dislike of right-wing policies remains, but their belief in remedies proposed by the left has eroded.This is first and foremost a byproduct of the region we live in. Israelis look at the neighborhood and instinctively cling to their guns. But there is also a second, often neglected, reason for the Israeli left’s demise.For many years, the “international community” was Israel’s left most significant ally. When Israelis were losing faith in the so-called peace process, a shrinking left found consolation in the continued support of liberal Europeans and Americans (Jewish Americans included). And the less the left was able to convince fellow Israelis to adhere to its remedies, to free Palestinian prisoners or freeze settlements, the more it tended to find consolation in international support and to invite international intervention and pressure on Israel’s government.And the more the left invited foreign pressure on Israel, the less legitimate its actions became in the eyes of non-leftist Israelis.Meanwhile, the international community was also misreading the situation. Foreign leaders and shapers of opinion didn’t realize that by supporting a marginalized left they were actually making the left even less influential.They didn’t see that relying on a dwindling political camp would only reduce their ability to impact Israel’s policies. International players, notably President Barack Obama, put pressure on Israel, in part because of the encouragement of the Israeli left. The result was disastrous for the White House: Israel lost faith in Mr. Obama (and most other international players) and hence became less inclined to heed his advice or take a chance with his proposed policies.Disappointment was the logical next step.A month ago, former diplomat Alon Liel wrote that “while me and my friends, the shattered remnants of the Israeli peace camp, put our trust in President Obama, it now turns out that he’s banking on us for a solution.”Mr. Liel and his friends made the mistake of thinking that outside forces would force Israel to act as they wished – instead of realizing that in a democracy like Israel the primary mission of any political camp is to rally fellow citizens to its cause.Mr. Obama and like-minded world leaders made the mistake of thinking that the best way to sway Israelis was to pressure their government – instead of realizing that Israelis respond better to policy proposals of outside leaders if they have a measure of trust in those leaders (Israel’s close and respectful relations with former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush are the best proof that Israelis only listen to you if they trust you).International encouragement of Israel’s left was instrumental in killing it. The outside world promoted the unpopular views of an Israeli political minority, giving the left an inflated sense of its own importance domestically. This illusion led to despair, and then to alienation from mainstream Israeli society – all resulting in a further reduction of the left’s political allure.Israelis can listen to the views of dissenters. They are used to it. But they also want to trust that their dissenters are still a part of the family.