http://www.nytimes.com/2000/07/18/nyregion/state-commission-investigates-trump-effort-to-stop-casino.html
State Commission Investigates Trump Effort To Stop Casino - The New York Times
CATSKILLS (NYS AREA),NEW YORK INSTITUTE FOR LAW AND SOCIETY,TRUMP  DONALD J,INDIANS  AMERICAN,GAMBLING,CASINOS
July 18, 2000
8407
The state lobbying commission is looking into Donald J. Trump's ties to a group that used television, radio and newspaper ads to try to block an Indian casino in the Catskills, a project that Mr. Trump also tried to stop, according to people close to Mr. Trump.The Temporary State Commission on Lobbying is investigating the anti-casino group, called the New York Institute for Law and Society, a fact confirmed by correspondence from the group's lawyers to the commission, and obtained from the commission under the state's Freedom of Information Law.The Institute, based in Rome, N.Y., bought the ads in March, at a time when the State Legislature was considering various bills -- all of which failed -- dealing with whether and how the state might approve a casino in Monticello proposed by the Mohawk tribe. The lobbying commission is looking into whether those ads should have been considered a lobbying expense, intended to influence legislation. If so, the institute would have been required by law to register with the commission as a lobbyist and a lobbying client and report its expenses, which it did not.Trump associates say the lobbying commission is also asking whether Mr. Trump paid for those ads, using the institute as a front group without reporting that spending to the commission, which could be a serious violation of the lobbying law. Mr. Trump opposes development of a Catskills casino, which could draw business away from his Atlantic City casinos.David M. Grandeau, executive director of the lobbying commission, refused to say whether the commission was investigating a Trump link to the anti-casino ads.Violations of the state's lobbying law can bring fines up to $25,000 per incident. The commission can also refer cases to prosecutors for criminal action, but it has done so just once in its 22-year history, and no charges were filed in that case.People close to Mr. Trump have said that he put up much of the money used for the ads. Calls today seeking comment from the Trump organization and the Institute for Law and Society were not returned.The lobbying commission is investigating Mr. Trump and a rival Atlantic City gambling magnate, Arthur Goldberg, president of Park Place Entertainment, to determine whether they should have registered as lobbyists because of the time they spent trying to influence the Legislature's handling of the casino bills. That investigation was first reported Monday by The New York Post and confirmed today by associates of Mr. Goldberg and Mr. Trump.While Mr. Trump sought to prevent construction of a casino in the Catskills, Mr. Goldberg wants to build one in a deal with the Mohawks.Under the lobbying law, anyone whose work and expenses in trying to influence legislation exceed $2,000 in a year must register with the commission as a lobbyist. Mr. Trump and Mr. Goldberg both contend that they did so little lobbying that they did not cross that threshold. In a 1997 opinion sought by Mr. Trump, the commission ruled that the $2,000 rule applies not only to professional lobbyists, but also to business owners and corporate executives who buttonhole lawmakers on issue of interest to them.A lawyer for Mr. Trump, Edward C. Wallace of Greenberg, Traurig, noted that Mr. Trump, following the commission's advice, registered as a lobbyist in 1997 and again in 1998, and that his company, Trump Hotels and Casino Resorts Inc., had reported its rather lavish spending on several of the state's high-priced professional lobbyists. ''Obviously, this is not a guy who's averse to disclosure,'' Mr. Wallace said.To determine whether Mr. Goldberg and Mr. Trump spent more than $2,000 worth of their time lobbying, the commission would have to determine not only how much time was involved, but how much the two men earn, information they may be reluctant to reveal.Legislators, lobbyists and lobbying commission officials all agree that there are many corporate chiefs who make calls to legislators but do not register as lobbyists.Some Trump associates said that the commission may be looking to make an example of Mr. Trump, hoping that because he is so well known, an action against him would be widely publicized and would spur other business leaders into filing as lobbyists.