http://www.nytimes.com/1996/03/04/opinion/court-control-of-the-city-jails.html
Court Control of the City Jails - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,GIULIANI  RUDOLPH W,PRISONS AND PRISONERS,VIOLENCE,EDITORIALS
March 4, 1996
4897
For nearly two decades, New York City has run its jails under a detailed Federal court consent decree, which sets standards on everything from guard staffing to the condiments available in the prison dining room. Now, the Giuliani administration has asked the court to loosen or lift some of the provisions.Granting the request would help the Correction Department operate more efficiently and save the city an estimated $3.5 million a year. More important,  it would give the judiciary added credibility, demonstrating that court intervention in the city's affairs need not last forever.When the Federal court first intervened in the city's Correction Department  operations, inmates awaiting trial often spent 16 hours a day double-bunked in an eight-foot cell, with little or no access to reading material, telephones or  visitors. Legal Aid lawyers filed a suit on behalf of the prisoners. The city was so clearly in the wrong that its lawyers agreed on a cumbersome collection of rules, goals and procedures aimed at fixing the problems. Now prisoners awaiting trial live in single-person cells or dormitories, and are locked in only at night. They have open access to law libraries, telephones, televisions and radios. Over the last two years, overcrowding and violence have dropped dramatically.As a reward, the city wants the court to drop a few of the most impractical court requirements, like the one that says windows must be washed at least four  times a year. It wants to modify others that have become outdated. Giving prisoners free phone calls, for instance, made sense when prisoners needed coins for a pay phone, but it is not necessary when computers can deduct the cost of a call from each inmate's commissary account. The handful of totally indigent prisoners would still get free calls under the proposed system.Other requests are reasonable proposals to improve jail operations. For instance, the Correction Department wants to deliver legal books to prisoners confined in a segregated unit for violent inmates, rather than letting them use  the law library. Officials believe this will cut down on the problem of assaults in the library itself.The administration clearly sees its motion as the first step in getting out from under the consent decree in general. The barriers to achieving total compliance in tough economic times seem almost insuperable. The Giuliani administration, for instance, is spending $200 million rebuilding prison kitchens at a time when city schools are crumbling.For all its efforts, the city has yet to meet a court requirement that visitors do not have to wait more than an hour to see the inmates. Half a million people a year come to Rikers Island to visit friends and relatives. All  of them must be processed, bused to one of 10 jails, searched and connected with an inmate who may not have been in his or her cell when they arrived. To New York citizens who have to wait for everything from welfare checks to driver's licenses, solving the problem might not be a top priority. But the court recognizes that people awaiting trial have a right to visits from their loved ones and that long waits become a barrier. The city must address the main complaint, even if its solution does not necessarily hit the literal target of the court's goals. But once that happens, the court should lift its mandate.The city argues that operating under court decrees is inefficient and expensive. A while ago prisoners began wearing jewelry with gang colors, an invitation for fights. When the Correction Department wanted to ban the jewelry, it had to produce 1,500 pages of documentation.The court's obligation to make state and local governments live up to their legal responsibilities is too basic to need defending. But the public has a right to question whether the court, once involved, will ever go away. The city's motion on its jail operations is an excellent opportunity for Judge Harold Baer Jr. to demonstrate that the courts can oversee improvements and then retire from the field.