https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/08/fashion/mens-style/william-wegman-chelsea-studio.html
A Tour of William Wegman’s Studio in Chelsea - The New York Times
Art,Interior Design and Furnishings,Wegman  William (1943- ),Chelsea (Manhattan  NY)
April 6, 2016
9645
Name William WegmanAge 72Occupation Artist and author, most recently of “William Wegman Paintings”Location ManhattanFavorite Room Mr. Wegman lives in a fortresslike building in Chelsea that was formerly a day school, a space he shares with his wife, Christine Burgin, and two Weimaraners, Flo and Topper.What was your greatest artistic breakthrough in this room? I think dealing with postcards. I attach them to the canvas. I go off from the edges and try to make them get lost in the surface.Are these paintings works in progress? All these things are here because I’m still working on them. Paintings get built slowly. They’re easy to start, impossible to finish.This white chair held together with duct tape must have a story. This chair in particular was in a piece called “Throwing Down Chairs,” so it got kind of smashed. John Baldessari, who took over the studio space I had in Los Angeles when I left for New York, mailed it back to me. It was really cool that he would do that.You moved to the city in 1973. What were your first studios like? My first space was $200 a month for 2,500 square feet. Briefly, I had 7,000 square feet for $350 a month, down below the Trade Center. I don’t know if I could really manage it now. I didn’t love New York when I came here. I really thought I’d be going back to L.A., where I lived a block from the beach with my dog, and I was really happy. I was never really happy in New York.Are you still unhappy in New York? Moving here changed that. The other key thing is I started playing ice hockey, and I’m a couple of blocks from the Chelsea Piers. I also have a hockey net up on the roof here where I shoot pucks.You’re known for using your dogs in your work. How are Flo and Topper as models? Flo gives you a lot of psychology. When she’s up there, she’s thinking. When he’s up on something, he’s just there. Like a mountain goat.