http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/08/us/politics/candidates-continue-to-plead-their-cases-after-first-republican-debate.html
Candidates Continue to Plead Their Cases After First Republican Debate - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),United States Politics and Government,News and News Media,Social Media,Fox News Channel,Republican Party
Aug. 7, 2015
2248
The stage lights have dimmed, the spin room has been shuttered, but for Republican presidential candidates, the debate goes on.As the horde of White House hopefuls departed from Cleveland on Friday morning, they continued to plead their cases on the airwaves and on social media. There were commotions to play down and flip-flops to explain away.Central to all this, as he was on the debate stage on Thursday night, was Donald J. Trump.After a flurry of late-night tweets in which he continued to deride Megyn Kelly, the Fox News anchor who questioned his party loyalty and his history of sexist remarks, Mr. Trump said that he had no idea what she was talking about when she said that he had called women slobs, dogs and pigs.“You know, the question on the women, I didn’t say many of those things,” Mr. Trump told MSNBC. “Not that I’m an angel, by the way, but I don’t recognize those words.”Carly Fiorina, the former Hewlett-Packard chief executive, who was excluded from the prime-time debate featuring the top-polling candidates, may have had the best evening thanks to a standout performance in the forum held hours earlier. She said on Friday morning that she was expecting an increase in donations and that she was pleased to have surprised so many people.“I think what happened last night was a lot of people said, ‘Oh my gosh, there’s another woman in the race,’” Ms. Fiorina told Fox News. “Of course it makes me feel good.”Most of the candidates left Friday for Atlanta for the annual Red State gathering, hosted by Erick Erickson, a conservative commentator. With one debate complete, the rhythm of cattle calls and red-meat speeches to the Republican base continues.“In two weeks, this debate will be forgotten, new events will change the polling,” Mr. Erickson said.Mr. Trump was not the only candidate who had to answer for things he said in the heat of the debate. Senator Marco Rubio seemed to shift his position on abortion when he said he never advocated it for any exceptions, despite co-sponsoring a bill that made allowances in cases of rape, incest and when the life of a mother was at risk.In a circuitous explanation, Mr. Rubio said that he was adamantly anti-abortion in all cases and that he supported that legislation because it would have helped to reduce the occurrence of abortion. The Republican from Florida was steadfast, saying he could not in good conscience accept the killing of an unborn child.“I never said that I will only support a bill that has an exception in it,” Mr. Rubio told CNN, referring to rape and incest. “But I will support bills that have exceptions in it because they prevent abortions.”Mr. Rubio’s stance confounded some who thought he had more moderate views on abortion, and Democrats said it could damage his standing among voters who view rape and incest as legitimate reasons for a woman to terminate a pregnancy.“The candidate who loves to brand himself as the future of the country made it crystal clear he doesn’t care how far women have come or where we are going,” said Christina Freundlich, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee. “Rubio remains so stuck in the past when it comes to women’s health — or really, anything.”Other candidates tried to look forward and bask in their victories, however fleeting they might prove to be.Former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas tantalized the audience in Cleveland by setting up a skewering of Mr. Trump.“It seems like this election has been a whole lot about a person who’s very high in the polls, that doesn’t have a clue about how to govern,” he said. “A person who has been filled with scandals, and who could not lead.”The punch line, of course, was Hillary Rodham Clinton.Mr. Huckabee said he was trying to come up with something funny to stand out in a crowded field that has become increasingly noisy thanks to Mr. Trump. While he has made hard-line rhetoric about the military and social issues a hallmark of his campaign this election cycle, Mr. Huckabee said that a lighter touch might now be in order.“Those of us who run, we need not take ourselves so seriously,” he said.