https://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/16/world/asia/16taiwan.html
Taiwan and China Restore Air Links - The New York Times
Taiwan,China,Airlines and Airplanes
Dec. 15, 2008
967
HONG KONG — Shortly after dawn on Monday, a passenger plane took off from Shenzhen, China, bound for Taiwan. The 80-minute flight across the Taiwan Strait was the first direct, daily cross-strait traffic since the end of the civil war in 1949 and another step in the improvement of relations between the sides.The Shenzhen Airlines flight from China — along with a later TransAsia Airways flight to Shanghai from the Taiwanese capital, Taipei — inaugurated regular direct flights between Taiwan and mainland China. Direct ship traffic and mail service also began Monday, state media reported.Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, reported that the flight from Shenzhen took off at 7:20 a.m. The TransAsia flight from Taipei left 46 minutes later. A total of 16 direct passenger flights were scheduled Monday.When Ma Ying-jeou, the president of Taiwan, took office in May, he pledged to improve relations with the mainland, especially in trade. Beijing has largely welcomed the changes, although China still claims sovereignty over Taiwan.The sides signed agreements on Nov. 4 to open the direct links that began Monday, and the improved connections were expected to benefit both economies through increased tourism and faster delivery of mail, parcels and remittances. China is Taiwan’s largest trading partner.As many as 108 direct passenger charters are scheduled to operate each week across the strait, state media reported Monday, as well as 60 direct cargo flights a month. The flights will come and go from 21 cities on the mainland and 8 cities in Taiwan.Twenty cargo ships from both sides were scheduled to set out across the strait on Monday. Sea voyages are now expected to take four days, according to the state-run newspaper China Daily, about half the time of previous indirect routes.Passenger flights have been flying between China and Taiwan since July, but not daily and not regularly — only tourist-group charters on weekends and holidays. Previously, nonstop flights have had to take roundabout routes through Hong Kong’s airspace. The direct flights cut flying time in half.In July, Chinese citizens were finally allowed to visit Taiwan as tourists. Before then, only Chinese citizens who were permanent residents of a foreign country or those with special permission for business or cultural exchanges could visit the island.The president of China Airlines, Taiwan’s largest carrier, was quoted by Bloomberg News last month as saying that the number of mainland travelers flying to the island could reach one million by 2010, up from about 300,000 last year.