https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/23/us/as-dallas-sniper-prowled-quick-decisions-and-life-altering-consequences.html
As Dallas Sniper Prowled, Quick Decisions and Life-Altering Consequences - The New York Times
Dallas  Tex  Shooting of Police Officers (2016),Attacks on Police,Police Department (Dallas  Tex),Brown  David O,Johnson  Micah X,Dallas (Tex),Taylor  Shetamia
July 22, 2016
636
DALLAS — Officer Patrick Zamarripa was down.A peaceful march here had turned grisly, and a gunman’s rampage wrapped darkening downtown streets in panic, noise and the stench of gun smoke. Officer Jorge Barrientos rushed to his friend’s side and tried to seal a sucking chest wound with the only cover he could find: the plastic wrapping off a pack of cigarettes.In a summer marked by chaos and disorder, that moment was a reminder how much very different mass shootings have in common — confusion akin to the fog of war, improvisation under fire, and the way that chance decisions can put officers and civilians in harm’s way.After the gunfire began in Dallas on July 7, officers loaded a wounded mother of four into a shot-up cruiser with flattened tires and sped to a hospital. Protesters reunited lost children with their parents. Frightened, and even bloodied, officers returned fire, and an El Centro College lawman worked with bullet fragments lodged in his stomach. And in one controversial decision, the Dallas police ended a standoff with the gunman by turning a robot into a mobile bomb-delivery vehicle.The improvisation was born of confusion. For demonstrators, for officers on the ground and for Dallas leaders, the bursts of gunfire and the hours that followed were a blur of threats, misinformation and false leads, including that multiple gunmen were triangulating on officers from elevated positions.“We’ve got a guy with a long rifle,” an officer said during a radio transmission recorded by the website Broadcastify. “We don’t know where the hell he’s at.”Other mass shootings have been far deadlier than the one here that killed five officers. But few lasted longer. The gunman — Micah Johnson, 25 — lay siege for up to six hours, from the time gunshots were first reported at 8:58 p.m. until early Friday, when the authorities detonated a pound of C-4, killing him.But not even that lethal explosion seemed to stop him, according to a member of law enforcement at the scene.As his body lay amid the rubble, Mr. Johnson’s finger remained on the trigger of his AK-74 rifle. The weapon fired additional bullets.The temperature was typical for a Texas evening in July: 91 degrees.Outside Bank of America Plaza, this city’s tallest skyscraper, the protest against fatal police shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota was winding down. Demonstrators had gathered at a park called Belo Garden and then marched through downtown, past Dealey Plaza, where a sniper killed President John F. Kennedy in 1963. Hundreds of the marchers were headed back to Belo Garden.Officers were on the scene but had relatively few concerns. Dallas had gained a reputation as an orderly, process-oriented city, a smooth-running place whose mayor was the once the chief executive of Pizza Hut.C. D. Kirven, an activist, quickly said goodbye to another demonstrator, hoping to beat the traffic. To the north, Mayor Mike Rawlings had returned from his mother-in-law’s funeral, made a tuna sandwich and settled in to watch the Texas Rangers baseball game on television. Clay Jenkins, Dallas County’s chief executive, was also at home, watching the Disney Channel with his 10-year-old daughter.Just before 9 p.m., gunshots shattered the calm. So soon after Independence Day, Ms. Kirven thought they were firecrackers.“It was like, ‘pow, pow, pow, pow,’” Ms. Kirven, 39, said. “Once I heard it again, and it was closer to me, I hit the ground.”The gunfire’s roar echoed along the street. Then more shots — at a different pitch, she said, which seemed to signal that someone was fighting back. “There was just so much chaos,” she said. “Nobody could really tell where the gunfire was coming from.”At his home, Mr. Rawlings, 61, learned of the shooting when his assistant called, and he headed to the emergency operations center in City Hall’s basement. The police chief, David O. Brown, went there, too, as did Mr. Jenkins and F.B.I. officials.The drama was unfolding in real-time on social media and on television, heightening the tension and confusion. In the minutes after the shooting, one of the first calls Mr. Jenkins received was from a White House official, asking what he knew about what was happening.The mayor, meanwhile, feared a widespread gunfight on the streets of the nation’s ninth-largest city.Mr. Rawlings remembered thinking, “This is a disaster.”Shetamia Taylor, 38, had driven in from a suburb in her minivan, bringing her four sons to a protest that she emphasized to them was about police violence, not the police themselves.Hours later, she heard the first shot. Then another. And then an officer yelled: “He’s got a gun! Run!”The boys bolted. The pops came faster, and Ms. Taylor felt the force of a hot needle in her right calf. A bullet. She lunged toward her 15-year-old son, Andrew, and thrust her body over him, the two of them huddling between a car and the curb.Andrew noticed his mother’s blood. “Get my mom,” he yelled. “Get my mom out of here. Oh my God, Mom. I love you.”Ms. Taylor prayed aloud, and four officers surrounded them, she said, shielding them from the violence. One officer rubbed her back amid the chaos. “We’re going to get you out of here, Mom,” Ms. Taylor recalled him saying. “It was like whatever was going to happen to me was going to happen to him first.”The officers hoisted her into the back seat of a squad car, where an officer and her son cradled her as they drove to the hospital for surgery.She learned later that the squad car that was her ambulance came on its rims, its tires shot out by bullets, and that her other boys had sought refuge where they could: behind a pillar, at a hotel, in a stranger’s apartment.The killer prowled the sidewalks in body armor and tan pants. He moved stealthily, using the wide columns of El Centro College as cover. The police initially said he shot at officers from inside a parking garage. But investigators, Mr. Rawlings said, now believe Mr. Johnson opened fire only at street-level and from a second-floor window of El Centro.In a video of the bedlam, Mr. Johnson and an officer exchange gunfire at close range, not far from where Mr. Johnson had parked a black Chevrolet Tahoe, its hazard lights flashing.The officer fires from around the corner of a column. Mr. Johnson quickly steps toward the column but comes up on the other side to find the officer with his back turned. A puff of smoke blows as Mr. Johnson fires, and the officer falls to the ground.Other officers fired on Mr. Johnson, but he stayed on the move. Darting amid the pillars and shadows, he kept officers guessing about who was firing and from where.“Those officers by squad car 2091,” an officer said on the radio. “You’re facing the wrong direction. You need to get behind some cover.”At 10:27 p.m., less than 90 minutes after the shooting started, Chief Brown issued a terse statement. It appeared that two snipers had opened fire on officers, the chief said. Three officers had been killed. The chief released another statement minutes later, describing a person of interest. The statement urged people not to approach him because he was armed and dangerous. That man, whose picture the authorities posted on social media, turned out to be a legally armed protester who had nothing to do with the attack.The chief had more grim news by midnight: The death toll had increased to four officers. But he said that the person of interest had surrendered, and that other people were being questioned in connection with the attack, including a man carrying a camouflage bag who had quickly left the area in a black Mercedes.In a span of hours, Matt Walling, a deputy police chief for the Dallas Area Rapid Transit system, raced from a command post to a hospital to the operations center. One of his officers, Brent Thompson, had been killed, and three others were injured.At City Hall, the talk of logistics paused for a quiet interruption. Someone from the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department passed out mourning badges: black plastic bars to clip onto their badges.“We’ve all woken up from bad dreams, and they seem so real at the time,” Chief Walling said. “It set in that it was real. And that we had officers that had been killed, and we had officers that had been seriously hurt. And I knew at that point that it was going to be a long road.”Senior Cpl. Jaime Castro, 42, a police union representative, hurried to a hospital. A fellow union member had called him and told him an officer was down. His police radio crackled while he drove. Officer down. Officer down. Officer down. He assumed it was repeated accounts of one officer who had been shot.At the hospital, he walked around a corner and saw a friend.“He had that look on his face,” Corporal Castro said. “I knew it was going to be bad. I walk up to him and I said, ‘Who is it?’ He put his hand on my shoulder. And he said, ‘It’s Ahrens.’”Senior Cpl. Lorne Ahrens, known to his buddies simply as “Meat,” was a hulking officer recognized for his work on a drug squad. Corporal Castro, who had been part of the unit, recalled one summer night when the two officers crawled into some bushes before a raid. Corporal Castro whispered to his friend not to leave his side. Corporal Ahrens grabbed him by the shoulder.“I got your back,” he remembered Corporal Ahrens telling him. “I’ll take a bullet for you.”Now, at the hospital, Corporal Ahrens was alive but struggling. From a hospital room window, Corporal Castro watched and waited.“I wanted to grab the surgeon and say, ‘Get back in there,’” Corporal Castro said. “You want to get in there and say: ‘Does he need an organ? Does he need one of my organs? I’m here, get it.’”Staring through the glass, Corporal Castro read the doctor’s lips. His friend was dead.In the operations center, officials like the city manager, A. C. Gonzalez, were overseeing an acute crisis and contemplating how to manage the reality that, in a matter of hours, more than 100,000 workers were due in downtown Dallas.“There were certainly tears in people’s eye as they were working, but they were all focused on making things happen as efficiently as we could,” said Mr. Gonzalez, whose team ultimately asked residents to treat Friday like a snow day.Around 12:30 a.m., Mr. Rawlings and Chief Brown addressed reporters. The narrative had changed. The gunman was holed up at El Centro, and the police had been negotiating with him for about 45 minutes. The man and the officers continued to trade gunfire, and he had told the police “that the end is coming, and he’s going to hurt and kill more of us, meaning law enforcement, and that there are bombs all over the place,” the chief said.The police still believed Mr. Johnson had accomplices. People who had been detained, the chief said, were not cooperating. He talked of “waiting for the suspects to break.”The echoes of gunshots on the downtown streets, the presence of armed protesters and the gunman’s use of a combat tactic known as “shoot and move” all fueled the theory there was more than one sniper.“There’s always going to be a lack of clarity early on in an emergency response,” said Mr. Jenkins, the Dallas County official. “But tornadoes are not evil. They’re not trying to confuse you. A tornado whips through and it’s gone in minutes, and this guy is still shooting and telling us information that turns out not to be true.”Around the time of the news conference, the chief briefed officials about his plan to end the standoff. The authorities had developed an idea to attach C-4 to the remote-controlled robot and detonate it.“He wasn’t asking for our opinion necessarily,” Mr. Jenkins said, recounting when the chief told him and the mayor of the plan. “Both of us had words of affirmation that we supported that.”Mr. Jenkins spoke with a police officer outside the main room at the operations center. He asked for some information about the officers who had died — Officer Zamarripa, Corporal Ahrens, Officer Thompson, Officer Michael Krol and Sgt. Michael J. Smith. “He said, ‘I don’t know some, but one trained with me. He’s got two daughters — his voice cracked when he said it — ‘and he’s a good man.’ We looked at each other, and he went away.”Mr. Jenkins stood in the hallway, leaning against a table. His eyes were closed. He was praying.President Obama called from Europe and spoke with Mr. Rawlings.The mayor said of the conversation, “It was just two sad men.”