https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/06/sports/tennis/elena-vesnina-gets-a-surprise-wimbledons-semifinals.html
Elena Vesnina Gets a Surprise: Wimbledon’s Semifinals - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Vesnina  Elena,Cibulkova  Dominika,Williams  Serena
July 5, 2016
6503
WIMBLEDON, England — Elena Vesnina ran away in a 6-2, 6-2 romp over 19th-seeded Dominika Cibulkova on Tuesday at Wimbledon to reach her first Grand Slam semifinal, then confirmed that she was just as stunned as anyone else to see herself in the final four.“I am very surprised,” Vesnina said, beaming. “It was like a dream came true. I’m always thinking I can do well in the Grand Slams. I had some good wins. I was close to be in the quarterfinal couple times, but it was not good enough. I was just waiting and waiting for this happen. But, of course, semifinal is a big surprise for me.”Vesnina, who turns 30 next month, grew up in Sochi, Russia, playing alongside Maria Sharapova, who won the title here at age 17. Vesnina was a highly regarded young prospect — Justine Henin once declared that she would be a top-five player after playing her at the 2007 French Open — but her singles career fell short of expectations. After reaching a career-best ranking of 21 in 2013, she plummeted last year and fell out of the top 120 this year after losing in Australian Open qualifying.“Yeah, of course, everybody had this kind of time when you’re down and you’re thinking that it’s over,” Vesnina said. “You’re never going to be there, and you’re watching tennis on the TV, how everybody’s winning and playing semifinals, finals of the Grand Slams.”She added: “But I’m a very positive person. I’m never getting down too much on myself. I know that there is a life besides tennis. So I’m really trying to be fast to forgive all the losses, just to forget it, just move forward.”To move forward, Vesnina had to enter qualifying draws, which became a positive. They gave her match practice, which paid off once she made it back to the biggest stages.“It was not easy,” she said. “I’m really happy that it didn’t break me up. I think the difficult times, every single player has to go through it because it makes you better. It makes you stronger.”Vesnina, who has notched five top-20 wins this year and reached the final in Charleston, S.C., pointed to two Wimbledon semifinalists in their mid-30s as proof that time was on her side.“I know that now I’m close to 30; most of you are thinking that it’s end of the career,” she said. “But look at Venus. Look at Serena. It just depends on how you feel and how you want to keep going.”Vesnina, who announces each shot with a shout of “ai-ya!” that sounds more suited to a dojo than a tennis court, maintained her purpose and urgency throughout the match. She and Cibulkova had played what Vesnina called “marathon matches” the day before, each winning by 9-7 in the third set. Vesnina, who had to go back on court later Monday for doubles, said her sense of opportunity trumped fatigue.“I was not thinking about being tired,” she said. “I was just thinking that this is my chance, and I had to use it. I’m really impressed the way I played today. I was playing from the first ball till the last ball, like, really confident, aggressive. I was not giving her a lot of time. I was using the pace really good. My serve was working and helping me a lot in the key moments.”Serena Williams, Vesnina’s opponent in Thursday’s semifinals, also mentioned Vesnina’s serve as a strength.“She has a really good grass-court game, I think,” Williams said. “She has a really good serve. I notice that she always works on things and she always improves her game.”Williams, who did not face a single break point on her serve in her quarterfinal win Tuesday over Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, has had mixed results against Vesnina: She won all four previous singles meetings between the two, but has lost three of their four meetings in doubles.“I know her game really, really well,” Williams said. “It’s good to play someone’s game that you know.”In turn, Vesnina offered her own praise.“Serena, I’m admiring her,” she said. “I’m always watching. She’s No. 1 in the world. She’s best player in the world. I respect both Serena and Venus. What they bring to the sport is just incredible.”Vesnina, with excitement, called the match a “big challenge.”“That’s a dream semifinal,” she said. “I think nothing can be better than playing against Serena in a semifinal on Centre Court at Wimbledon. It’s special. Of course, I need to try to win this match.”