https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/business/justice-department-weighs-in-against-wells-fargo-in-a-whistle-blower-suit.html
Justice Department Weighs In Against Wells Fargo in a Whistle-Blower Suit - The New York Times
Wells Fargo & Company,Justice Department,Whistle-Blowers,Frauds and Swindling
June 6, 2017
6374
Fresh woes for Wells Fargo and a victory for two of its whistle-blowers occurred late Tuesday when the Justice Department filed a friend-of-the-court brief in a lawsuit brought against the bank by two former employees, who were fired after they tried to report misdeeds they had observed to their supervisors.The government’s filing adds heft to a long-running case that involves behavior that predates the 2008 financial crisis and the sham-accounts scandal that came to light at Wells Fargo last year.Although the Justice Department’s filing does not opine on the whistle-blowers’ claims, it argues that an appellate court should revise the analysis it made when it dismissed the case last year. Tuesday’s filing follows a Supreme Court ruling in February that also asked the appellate court to review the matter.The whistle-blowers who filed the case worked at Wachovia and World Savings, banks that were folded into Wells Fargo. In their complaint, filed in 2011, they contend that their employers engaged in mortgage improprieties and deceived federal regulators by hiding billions of dollars in losses from them. They filed the suit under the False Claims Act, which encourages individuals to come forward with evidence of fraud against the government. Plaintiffs who succeed in these cases receive part of the damages that are recovered.One of the plaintiffs is Paul Bishop, a former mortgage sales representative at World Savings; the other is Robert Kraus, an executive in commercial real estate at Wachovia. The men say they were fired after they alerted superiors to what they considered misdeeds at their institutions. Wells Fargo absorbed World Savings and Wachovia into its operations in 2008, and it has been vigorously defending the case.Mr. Bishop and Mr. Kraus argued that the hidden problems at Wachovia, which bought World Savings in 2006, made the bank appear financially stronger than it actually was. They contend that this represented a fraud on the government because the bank borrowed regularly from the Federal Reserve and received financial assistance during the crisis.Had regulators known the bank’s true financial position, it would have had to pay more for the federal aid it received, the complaint says. As a result, taxpayers should receive damages representing the difference between what the bank should have paid for assistance and what it actually paid.In a statement, Mary Eshet, a Wells Fargo spokeswoman, said: “We continue to believe these claims are without merit, as the previous court decisions have confirmed. We look forward to the opportunity to again present legal arguments to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.”The whistle-blower case has had its ups and downs. In 2014, the Justice Department declined to intervene. The Federal District Court that heard the case dismissed it in 2015, and the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed that decision in 2016.But last February, the Supreme Court ruled that some courts had been applying too narrow a legal standard when hearing lawsuits filed under the False Claims Act. The Supreme Court remanded the Wells Fargo case to the Second Circuit for reconsideration.Tejinder Singh, a partner at Goldstein & Russell who represents Mr. Bishop and Mr. Kraus, said the government’s filing in the case will benefit future whistle-blowers.“Because the government is the intended and principal beneficiary of cases brought under the False Claims Act, its position matters a great deal when it comes to the enforcement and interpretation of the statute,” Mr. Singh said in an interview.Mr. Bishop said he was thrilled the case had finally attracted the Justice Department.“As Martin Luther King said, the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice,” Mr. Bishop said, referring to Dr. King’s paraphrase of the 19th-century abolitionist and Unitarian minister Theodore Parker. “We’ve been at this a long time, and a lot of people, for whatever reason, haven’t shown up. Now the government has, and I’m happy.”