https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/nyregion/new-york-today-1977-blackout-nyc.html
New York Today: The Beauty in a Blackout - The New York Times
New York City,Power Failures and Blackouts
July 13, 2017
7701
Updated, 8:14 a.m.Good morning on this searing Thursday.What happens when the lights go out in a city that never sleeps?Forty years ago, on July 13, 1977, a blackout engulfed New York City for more than 24 hours after lightning struck a Con Ed power station. Businesses were looted, riots erupted in the streets and thousands were arrested.But when we asked readers to share their most vivid memory from that night, many wrote in about the silver linings of the disaster — glimmers of light that emerged from the darkness.Here are a few of our favorite responses, showing the city’s optimism and camaraderie amid chaos. (We’ve noted the neighborhoods where the respondents said they were located at the time.)“Bigelows Drugs (still in the same spot) had their gas lamps on, so it was the only place lit up. They were giving away ice cream before it all melted. All the food shops were giving away their food before it spoiled. There was an excitement of sharing another New York happening.”— Minna Scharff, 69, West Village“The scene in the piano bar was wonderful. All of the piano players who played there on varying days came by, and the place was in full song, defying the dark and the heat.”— Carl Ian Schwartz, 66, Washington Square West“Outside, you could look up and see the stars.”— Jane DeFilippis, 68, Greenwich Village“The city was alive with hundreds of people in the streets, many dancing and just having fun. Latin music was blaring out of battery-operated boomboxes, and the entire walk was musical. I admit I found myself dancing and taking a longer route home just to enjoy the festivities.”— Harry Wagowski, 68, Upper West Side“When the power didn’t return, I went outside and played Frisbee with my father (it glowed in the dark).”— Nancy Nicolelis Litsas, 58, Astoria, Queens“We attended a performance of a revival of ‘The King and I’ with Yul Brynner. The blackout interrupted the performance. The cast (including Brynner) came out in rehearsal clothes and sat on the edge of the stage. Several cast members had transistor radios which they held up for the audience to hear as borough after borough shut down. The orchestra continued to play songs like ‘Dancing in the Dark’ and ‘Glow Little Glowworm.’ ”— Lucille Shanahan, 70, Broadway“Upper West Side was among the first of neighborhoods to have our electricity restored late the following morning. Friends from the East Side came to our home that day to take baths.”— Jane Strompf, 79, Upper West Side“The next morning, the skies were clearer than I’d ever seen them in N.Y.C.”— Elaine Steelman, 58, Morningside HeightsHere’s what else is happening:Sorry to break it to you, but prepare to sweat.The high is expected to climb to 92 today, and a heat advisory remains in effect until 6 p.m.It’ll be partly sunny and there’s a chance of showers after 4 p.m.• Four young Latino men were killed in Long Island by the brutal MS-13 gang in April — mysterious slayings that remain unsolved. [New York Times]• The retirement of the principal at Fieldston Lower, an elite elementary school in the Bronx, has led to accusations and rancor. [New York Times]• Mayor Bill de Blasio announced a $32 million plan to address rat infestations in certain parts of the city. [New York Times]• Mom-and-pop dollar stores fight to survive as retail chains begin to take over neighborhoods that smaller businesses have traditionally dominated. [New York Times]• David Wildstein, an ally of Gov. Chris Christie and the professed planner in the Bridgegate scandal, was spared prison. [New York Times]• A Girl Scouts troop established at a homeless shelter in Queens will expand to 14 additional shelters in the city. [New York Times]• A high-speed race featuring electric cars is headed to Brooklyn this weekend. [CBS New York]• Prescriptions for opioids have fallen 12 percent since the establishment in 2013 of a database to track them. [DNAinfo]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “Murky Puddle and a Muddled Mind”• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Thursday Briefing.• The National Jazz Museum in Harlem presents the Jazzmeia Horn Quintet, at the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum on the Upper East Side. 6 p.m. [$15]•  … And the Rebirth Brass Band performs bayou beats as part of the River & Blues Festival at Wagner Park on Battery Place. 7 p.m. [Free]• The final Manhattanhenge of this summer. The best places for watching are on 14th, 23rd, 34th, 42nd and 57th Streets in Manhattan, shortly before 8:21 p.m.• The Comedy Blender, a monthly variety show of stand-up and sketch comedy, begins at Triad Theater on the Upper West Side. 9:30 p.m. [$10, tickets here]• New York Red Bulls at New England Revolution, 7:30 p.m.• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until August 15.• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.This week has been nothing short of sticky and sweaty, and today will be the worst of it, with a high of 92.The good news: You can cool off at a festival in New York Harbor this weekend.City of Water Day, now in its 10th year, celebrates all things aquatic around the city, inviting New Yorkers to kayak, paddleboard, row and explore other adventures across the boroughs on Saturday — for free.Highlights include a waterfront activity fair on Governors Island, a kayak race with two dozen teams, and tours of vessels like tugboats and yachts. You can learn more about those events here, or search for goings-on in your borough at the bottom of this page.And if you’re looking to beat the heat beyond Saturday’s affairs, here are a few suggestions for surfing and fishing that are just a hop, skip and a jump away.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.