http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/21/books/andrew-m-cuomo-tells-his-story-in-all-things-possible.html
Andrew M. Cuomo Tells His Story in ‘All Things Possible’ - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Cuomo  Andrew M,Elections  Governors,All Things Possible: Setbacks and Success in Politics and Life (Book),All Things Possible (Book)
Oct. 20, 2014
7759
Strip away the fulsome platitudes and self-congratulation that punctuate Andrew M. Cuomo’s 500-page memoir, and what’s left is an insightful coming-of-age political autobiography of a guy whom you might trust as a babysitter and, warts and all, vote for again as governor of New York.Maybe you wouldn’t want to work for him, but you’ll be surprised that — in spite of everything you’ve heard — you’d probably like to join him for a drink.Judiciously purging the gimcracks would have made “All Things Possible: Setbacks and Success in Politics and Life” even more statesmanlike. And more introspection — combined with less braggadocio and caustic score-settling with the media — would have qualified this book as a shrewd political primer rather than left it vulnerable to being dismissed as a predictable campaign manifesto.Every civics class should revisit Mr. Cuomo’s Machiavellian game plan to outwit Democratic Party regulars at a state convention during the first campaign of his father, Mario M. Cuomo, for governor in 1982 (and Mario’s early instinct for defusing community conflicts). Equally instructive are Andrew’s muscular, Lyndon Johnson-like lobbying for same-sex marriage and the profiles in courage of four principled Republicans who joined him.Even cynics disillusioned with government might be reinvigorated by Mr. Cuomo’s lofty cri de coeur for ideologues to concede that some promised solutions were oversold, to compromise for common goals and to deliver services by melding compassion, competence and dexterity. Before Mr. Cuomo became governor, he beat the odds to build transitional housing for the homeless: He did it, he writes, “by not knowing what I couldn’t do.”And you can even find some sound personal advice in “All Things Possible”: on balancing child rearing and public duty, and on rebounding from a humiliating political defeat in 2002 and a messy divorce the next year. (It was so messy that Mr. Cuomo first learned about it from a reporter.) After all, he notes, there is “no college course called ‘Losing 101.’ ”This book gives us sanitized glimpses of Cuomo the human being: a glimmer of his grandparents’ background; his home borough’s dominion (“born with a plastic fork in my mouth,” he says, adding, “I knew where I was when I was in Queens”); his mother’s profound influence (without elaboration); his being fired for refusing to wear a paper hat — “a girl repellent” — while serving fluffernut at Baskin-Robbins; the palpable absence of, and early lack of praise from, his preoccupied father (although Mario chose him, at 24, over 60 contenders to run his first campaign for governor).We also learn that, despite the advantages of name recognition, being a politician’s child can be a detriment. And talk about inner circles: In the acknowledgments, Mr. Cuomo puts the word “friends” in quotation marks, cautions that they “should be measured in quality and not quantity” and in three pages identifies only two by name.It turns out that not all  things are possible: for example, reconciling Mr. Cuomo’s rhetoric from one page to the next and also with his real life.His divorce from Kerry Kennedy was agonizing for him and his three young daughters, but he barely assesses the causes or how his wider circle of “friends” made matters worse by spreading gossip that his wife was philandering. He says he did not run for governor just to avenge his father’s defeat for a fourth term (“If you had run the campaign, I would have won,” he quotes Mario as saying), but acknowledges that “taking the oath of office with my father looking on in 2010 helped assuage much of the pain we both felt after his 1994 loss.”Notwithstanding feeling like “the Beatles and Elvis wrapped into one” after signing the Marriage Equality Act, his truly touching account of that legislative victory would have been even more poignant had he mentioned the homophobic campaign some of Mario Cuomo’s supporters waged against Edward I. Koch in the 1977 mayoral race.Written with Linda Kulman (who helped Hillary Rodham Clinton anthologize children’s letters to the family’s cat and dog in “Dear Socks, Dear Buddy” and who collaborated with Amanda Knox, the American woman accused of murder in Italy, on her memoir), this book, not to mention Mr. Cuomo’s record as governor, includes other contradictions. He champions conciliation (“If you compromise, you win”) and the “overlooked majority” versus extremes on both left and right, but applauds “the necessity of being both relentless and unyielding in pursuing our dreams.”“Politics is not the only way I define myself,” he insists in this book. But asked what he learned from his humbling exit from the governor’s race in 2002 (in the face of inevitable defeat), he mused this month in The New York Times Magazine: “When you lie in bed and you think of the worst thing that could happen to you, short of death or serious health issues, for me that was the nightmare: public humiliation, public embarrassment, political loss.” Huh?More puzzling than whether the divorce and the defeat delivered personal redemption — “What I thought was my undoing saved me” — is the extent to which Mr. Cuomo really believes, as friends said his father did after his 1977 loss to Mr. Koch, that losing expunged his hubris.The same man who writes that he became more willing to expend political capital hasn’t done so with gusto when it comes to public campaign financing or clinching control of the State Senate for fellow Democrats. This exponent of collegiality writes that “government today is a combat sport” in which he and his fellow gladiators in the Executive Chamber are gallantly waging a lonely fight, their only allies “their teammates and the truth.”Mr. Cuomo may have lost some of his youthful arrogance, but he delineates his second-term agenda only vaguely, and in all of four pages. Just last spring, he abruptly halted his own inquest into Albany corruption. And he has not agreed to a single one-on-one televised debate with his Republican rival in the Nov. 4 election.Andrew’s Uncle Frank once said of his brother, Mario Cuomo: “He’s right much more than he’s wrong. But, then again, I’ve never heard him admit it when he was wrong.”Still, Andrew Cuomo’s flirtation with humility and humanization following a stable partnership with his companion, Sandra Lee, suggests that more may be possible, in this snarky era, than cynics are willing to admit. Maybe the public really wants results and, as we used to say in Brooklyn, could care less about the words or warts that mesmerize the media.During the time when the defeat and the divorce were still front-page news, Mr. Cuomo recalls, he remembers hailing a cab.“When we reached the destination, I said to the cabdriver, ‘How much?’“He said, ‘It’s on me.’“I was startled. ‘Why?’ I asked.“He said, ‘I know who you are, I know what you are going through, and you need it more than me.’ ”