https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/us/politics/republican-congress-baseball-shooting.html
What We Know and Don’t Know About the Shooting of the G.O.P. Men’s Baseball Team - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,House of Representatives,MedStar Washington Hospital Center,Republican Party,United States Capitol Police,Scalise  Steve,Alexandria (Va)
June 14, 2017
8562
Right Now: Five people have been wounded by a single gunman, who died after he was shot and taken into custody.• Five people, including Representative Steve Scalise, Republican of Louisiana and a member of the House leadership, were shot Wednesday morning in an attack at a baseball field in Alexandria, Va.• Police said the gunman was shot and wounded and taken into custody. President Trump said the assailant, identified by authorities as James T. Hodgkinson of Belleville, Ill., died from the wounds.• Mr. Scalise was in critical condition and was undergoing surgery. His office said that he was “in good spirits” before going into surgery at MedStar Washington Hospital Center and that he spoke to his wife by phone. “He is grateful for the brave actions of the U.S. Capitol Police, first responders and colleagues,” his office said.• He was at a baseball practice with other lawmakers and staff members preparing for a charity game when the attack occurred.• Representative Mo Brooks, Republican of Alabama, said two law enforcement officers and a congressional aide were among the injured.• Mr. Brooks told CNN that players took cover wherever they could on the field and that members of a security team exchanged fire with the gunman, who had a rifle.• Police said a call came in at 7:09 a.m., and officers responded in three minutes. Two officers engaged the attacker and returned fire, the authorities said.• The office of Representative Roger Williams, Republican of Texas, said that a member of his staff had been shot and was receiving medical attention. (His office said the congressman had not been shot, as some have reported.)• Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, said quick action by Capitol Police saved lives. “The field was basically a killing field,” he said.• The motive of the gunman was still under investigation.• Police have not said whether the gunman knew any of the victims.• The conditions of the other wounded were not immediately available.• Police have not disclosed how the gunman knew of the lawmakers’ practice schedule.