http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/28/us/department-of-justice-reaches-agreement-with-ferguson.html
Department of Justice Reaches Agreement With Ferguson - The New York Times
Ferguson (Mo),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Justice Department,Civil Rights and Liberties,Brown  Michael (1996-2014),Wilson  Darren (1986- )
Jan. 27, 2016
4640
WASHINGTON —  An agreement between federal officials and leaders in Ferguson, Mo., released Wednesday seeks to overhaul the city’s beleaguered justice system. It calls for ending unlawful arrests, ensuring that the courts are independent of prosecutors and preserving people’s right to film police officers.The pact between the Department of Justice and the city still requires public scrutiny and approval from the City Council. But it came after months of negotiations stemming from the Justice Department’s scathing critique of the city’s police and courts in the aftermath of the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, by a white police officer in 2014.The agreement, known as a consent decree, would spare Ferguson a long and expensive court fight. It could also help change the image of the city, which came to symbolize controversial policing. For the Justice Department, where civil rights and policing have become dominant policy issues, the broad settlement offers a road map that it can show cities around the country, a sort of benchmark against which other police departments can measure themselves.The consent decree demonstrates the city’s “commitment to refocusing police and municipal court practices on public safety, rather than revenue generation,” Vanita Gupta, the department’s top civil rights prosecutor, said in a letter to Ferguson.In its report last year, the department described Ferguson as a city where the Police Department and court operated not as independent bodies but as a single moneymaking venture. Investigators found that officers stopped and arrested people without cause and used excessive force almost exclusively against African-Americans.It was a sweeping report and the settlement, too, is unusual in its breadth. It demands changes not only to how and when police officers use force, but to the city’s entire criminal justice system.The city agreed to change some laws, including repealing a jaywalking ordinance. Blacks accounted for 95 percent of all arrests made using that law, according to the Department of Justice. In the rare cases in which whites were charged with such minor crimes, they were 68 percent more likely to have their cases dismissed.After the unrest following Mr. Brown’s death, the city announced plans to create a civilian board to review complaints against the police. The settlement with the Department of Justice makes that plan explicit.In one unusual provision, the city agreed to videotape every time a police officer asks someone for consent to conduct a search. Before conducting a search, the agreement says officers must inform people of their constitutional right not to be searched without a warrant. That provision reflects concerns among civil libertarians and lawyers that people too often unwittingly give officers permission to search their cars or homes.The agreement also calls for officers to stop making unwarranted arrests and declares that police officers and the courts should not be used to resolve routine school disciplinary issues. Police officers would no longer be able to shoot at moving cars or use stun guns as punishment.Ferguson says in the agreement that it wants to “become an exemplar of modern community-oriented policing” for cities its size. City and federal officials will jointly select a team to monitor the city’s justice regimen to ensure that it is complying with the agreement, and that its legal system meets constitutional muster and is increasing trust with the community.The city has scheduled three public hearings on the consent decree before the council is scheduled to vote on it Feb. 9.“I just want to listen to the citizens before I say I fully back this agreement,” said Mark Byrne, a Ferguson councilman. “It’s going to be the citizens of this city that are not just going to have to bear the costs, but are going to have to get behind it. You can’t have community policing without the community.”The city started carrying out some of the measures called for in the agreement long before leaders came to the table with Department of Justice officials, Mr. Byrne said. What worries him most about the agreement, he said, was the cost, which could be as high as $800,000. Ferguson has been running an operating deficit of about $2.5 million since the unrest of a year and a half ago, he said.Representative William Lacy Clay, a Democrat whose district includes Ferguson, praised the agreement as “a victory.” But some residents did not seem convinced.Phil Gassoway, who lives in Ferguson and has been active in the protest movement, said he wanted to see a wholesale change in the city’s leadership and amnesty for anyone charged with a violation under the city’s questionable legal practices.“It don’t satisfy me,” he said. “Until they do something to actually impact the people they already hurt and took advantage of, that’s when I’ll be satisfied.”