https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/18/theater/review-in-the-christians-a-schism-over-fire-and-brimstone.html
Review: In ‘The Christians,’ a Schism Over Fire and Brimstone   - The New York Times
Theater,Hnath  Lucas,Waters  Les,Garman  Andrew,Powell  Larry,Playwrights Horizons,The Christians (Play),Christians  The (Play)
Sept. 17, 2015
6758
Religious beliefs evolve, just as people do, in ways good and bad. But they rarely change quite as suddenly as in “The Christians,” Lucas Hnath’s softly mesmerizing drama about a schism that arises in an evangelical megachurch. In this terrific play about the mystery of faith, and how religion can tear people apart just as it can bring them together, a revelation experienced by the pastor causes a potentially disastrous rupture in the congregation.“The Christians,” which opened on Thursday at Playwrights Horizons, is the first important new play of the young fall season. It has been ingeniously staged by the director, Les Waters, as a stylized Sunday service. We are in a plush church somewhere in America. A giant white cross, elegantly backlit, shines from the rear wall. Beams of gleaming wood surround the glass pulpit, and digital video screens depict celestial-looking visions of clouds bathed in golden light. A full choir is also present, rising to sing at regular intervals. Arrayed before them in stately chairs are the church principals: the founding pastor, Paul (Andrew Garman); his demure wife, Elizabeth (Linda Powell); the associate pastor, Joshua (Larry Powell); and an elder, Jay (Philip Kerr).Pastor Paul begins his sermon with what sounds like soothing boilerplate: “Dear Lord, bring us together today, bring us together in our hearts and souls and minds.” But he soon reveals that his call for solidarity comes from a place of greater urgency. In a voice hushed with earnestness (honorable earnestness, not let’s-make-fun-of-smarmy-pastor earnestness), Paul explains that he has had a conversion.While attending a conference, he heard a missionary speak about a teenage boy in a violence-riven country who ran into a burning grocery store to save his sister and subsequently died of his wounds. The idea that because the boy was not saved in the Christian sense, he would be damned to eternal hell, roiled unpleasantly in the pastor’s consciousness. That night he had a conversation (while on the toilet!) with God, who revealed that man’s traditional conception of hell, with fires and pitchforks, and Satan presiding with horns, is misguided. Hell is what man makes of the earth; therefore, Paul announces gravely, it will no longer be church policy to believe in hell.It only takes a look at the befuddled faces before us to realize that Pastor Paul’s revelation may not sit easily with some of his flock. Soon Joshua, played with a powerful sense of confused grievance by Mr. Powell, takes the pulpit to question Paul. Quoting Scripture, he pushes back against this startling assertion, which contradicts what these good Christians, under Paul’s ministry, have long been taught.But Joshua finds Pastor Paul can match him line for line. Paul points out that the word “hell,” as rendered in the Bible, was in the original language the name of a garbage dump, and that when references are made to sinners going to hell, the meaning may have been more prosaic: After death, they were thrown on a trash heap. Although his respect and affection for Paul are clear from his measured tone, Joshua sees the story of the boy who died as “a message that our work is not done, and that we need to not be complacent in these dark end days.”Later, the church elder Jay, in what is ostensibly a private conversation (all the speakers use microphones, though some exchanges are not public), questions whether Paul would have been so quick to suggest a radical departure from orthodox belief if the church had not recently paid off its debt and become solvent. Even Elizabeth, portrayed with a touching sense of sorrowful dignity by Ms. Powell, finds herself conflicted as her husband’s pronouncement reverberates through the congregation.Mr. Hnath, author of the plays “Isaac’s Eye” and “A Public Reading of an Unproduced Screenplay About the Death of Walt Disney,” is one of the freshest playwriting voices to emerge in the past five years or so. He’s also an adventurous thinker in terms of style and content — not always the case even with gifted writers. (Some of the narration is spoken in the play, which works well but is becoming something of a young playwright’s go-to gimmick.) “The Christians” is Mr. Hnath’s most penetrating work, but what you take away is the play’s ruminative gravity, and how each character is given an authentic voice and a complexity of feeling.“The Christians” has grown more relevant since I saw it in 2014 at the Humana Festival, where it had its premiere. Since then we have seen acceptance of gay marriage — once a line in the sand for much of mainstream America — gaining significant ground, even among some Christians. Mr. Hnath’s depiction of a conservative congregation wrestling with radical new ideas mirrors what’s happening now in churches across the country.The conflict is explored with a refreshing lack of condescension. It would be safe to assume that Mr. Hnath’s sympathies ultimately lie with Pastor Paul, whose embracing vision of God’s justice would be more likely to strike a chord with a young playwright living in New York. (One wonders if the pastor’s name is a sly reference to the biblical Paul.) But the sympathy he extends to the other characters, like a young woman from the chorus who haltingly tells of her disappointment (the wonderfully natural Emily Donahoe), reverberates with a strange sweetness throughout the play, much like the traditional hymns that are sung with rousing heart by the choir. Mr. Hnath sees the drama at hand from all sides with virtually equal clarity and compassion. (Perhaps not incidentally he was once a member of an evangelical church, and his mother became a minister.)Like the embattled Dr. Stockmann of Ibsen’s “An Enemy of the People” (Mr. Hnath uses a few lines as an epigraph in the script), Pastor Paul gradually finds himself with few allies. But in Mr. Garman’s forcefully moving performance, Paul’s faith in the truth of his revelation remains solid, suggesting that while his beliefs may have evolved, his commitment to exploring the true meaning of his religion has not. Still, one has the sad sense that Paul may soon discover that among the forms of hell on earth, loneliness is among the most agonizing.The ChristiansBy Lucas Hnath; directed by Les Waters; sets by Dane Laffrey; costumes by Connie Furr Soloman; lighting by Ben Stanton; sound by Jake Rodriguez; production stage manager, Marisa Levy; associate artistic director, Adam Greenfield. Presented by Playwrights Horizons, Tim Sanford, artistic director; Leslie Marcus, managing director; Carole Fishman, general manager, and Center Theater Group. At Playwrights Horizons, 212-279-4200, playwrightshorizons.org. Through Oct. 11. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.WITH: Emily Donahoe (Jenny), Andrew Garman (Paul), Philip Kerr (Jay), Larry Powell (Joshua) and Linda Powell (Elizabeth).