http://www.nytimes.com/2003/07/07/sports/tennis-federer-unleashes-torrent-of-tears-after-beating-philippoussis-for-title.html
TENNIS; Federer Unleashes Torrent of Tears After Beating Philippoussis for Title - The New York Times
PHILIPPOUSSIS  MARK,FEDERER  ROGER,TENNIS,WIMBLEDON TENNIS TOURNAMENT
July 7, 2003
1932
As he walked through the entrance to Center Court for the most important match of his life, Roger Federer, like all the would-be champions before him, passed under the words of Rudyard Kipling:If you can meet with triumph and disasterAnd treat those two impostors just the same.Though he is only 21, Federer does not have much more to learn about handling Wimbledon. He proved that conclusively over the last two weeks by hitting great shots under great pressure from the backcourt and the frontcourt and the grassy places in between. But he still has more to learn about handling Kipling's challenge.When he met with tennis disaster on Center Court a year ago, upset in the first round by the young Croatian Mario Ancic, Federer walked, dry-eyed, to the net and congratulated him. When Federer met with tennis triumph on the same famous stretch of lawn today by beating Mark Philippoussis, 7-6 (5), 6-2, 7-6 (3), in the final without allowing a break point, he dropped to his knees, thrust his arms in the air and was soon sobbing in his chair.There would be more tears when the fourth-seeded Federer spoke to the crowd, more tears when he held up the trophy that he had watched others hold up on television when he was a boy in the Swiss city of Basel.''I've cried a few times on big occasions,'' Federer said. ''Somehow in the first moment, I don't think I will, but then I just can't keep it like this. This tournament means so much to me.''He won his first title in 1998 by winning Wimbledon's junior event. He made his first banner headlines here in 2001 by beating the seven-time champion Pete Sampras in the fourth round on Center Court. Now, after playing two of the better back-to-back matches imaginable, he has won his first Grand Slam singles title here, too.But Federer may also end up meaning a lot to Wimbledon now that he has punched through his reputation for faltering in the Grand Slam events. He may not be the 17-year-old symbol of a nation, as Boris Becker was when he won the title, and he may not exude the Nordic mystery of Bjorn Borg or have the Big Apple mouth of John McEnroe. But there is something magnetic about Federer's tennis: an attractive blend of smooth moving and creative thinking, of tact and force that has the potential to cut across borders.He has already broken down barriers in his small, occasionally fractious country. The son of a Swiss father and a South African mother, Federer grew up in the German-speaking part of the country but moved to the French-speaking section to train in his early teens and, despite being mocked for his accent, learned French, too. He also speaks English and, thanks to his mischievous coach, Peter Lundgren, quite a few dirty words in Swedish.But Federer is most eloquent with his all-court game, which can leave one dreaming Sampras-sized dreams. Though Federer admits to enjoying watching videotape of himself playing -- ''because my tennis is different than the others'' -- he is not ready to hop on his own bandwagon.''Oh, this is, you know, just one of his seven; I'm so far away,'' Federer said of Sampras. ''I'm just happy to be on the board. It's so nice if I look at all the players who have won here. A lot have been idols to me. Just to be on the board with Borg and these people, it's just nice to be a part of history at Wimbledon and in Grand Slams in general.''Like Federer's victory over Andy Roddick in the semifinals, this match turned for good in the first-set tie breaker. Neither the unseeded Philippoussis nor Federer had a break point in the opening 12 games, but Philippoussis cracked first in the tie breaker, going for a typically monstrous second serve and double-faulting to go down, 4-6.Philippoussis saved the first set point with a first serve that Federer could not handle, but he could not save the second, running around a backhand and blasting a forehand into the net.Federer won the next three games to take command of the second set. He said he was thinking about Alinghi, which earlier this year became the first Swiss boat to win the America's Cup, building a big lead over Team New Zealand and holding it. Federer wanted to remind himself to do the same thing. ''I thought, 'Just take it, you know, and race away,''' he said.Philippoussis's resistance stiffened in the third set. But despite occasional efforts to chip and charge, he, like Roddick, never solved the puzzle of Federer's silken serve. And after saving two match points in the second tie breaker, Philippoussis hit a backhand return into the net, giving Federer his place in history.Kipling's words are not the only ones written on the wall outside Center Court. Another sign reads: ''No babes in arms. No smoking in the stands. No flags, banners, klaxons, rattles or oversized hats.''Yet none of the security guards seemed to mind when several fans unfurled a huge Swiss flag in the stands as Federer held up his trophy with tears streaming down his face. It is not every day that a Swiss man wins a Grand Slam singles title. In fact, it has never happened before, and he won it in such style.