https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/10/realestate/creating-new-windows-without-ruining-the-building.html
Creating New Windows Without Ruining the Building - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Windows,Brick and Tile,Cooperatives
June 10, 2017
2861
Q. A shareholder in our Greenwich Village co-op is combining two apartments and plans to create a few new windows as part of the renovation. The co-op board approved the work, but the building is almost 60 years old and has had various problems with the facade. Is it safe to have new windows carved out of the brick? It seems unnecessary and possibly problematic.A. Cutting a hole in a brick wall is not a terribly difficult task, so long as the opening is properly waterproofed, designed to fit a new window correctly and able to support the remaining bricks above those that have been removed, said Howard L. Zimmerman, a Manhattan architect. A registered architect or engineer should supervise the work.However, you mentioned problems with the facade. If such problems are not addressed before the work begins, adding a hole to a faulty wall “might aggravate an already aggravated situation,” Mr. Zimmerman said.Still, your neighbor is not punching holes in the wall willy-nilly. The co-op board approved the work, and presumably it considered the condition of the building before it signed off on the plan, and also consulted an engineer or architect. If the board’s approval process adhered to the governing documents, “there is not much you can do to stop the construction,” said Andrew I. Bart, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.Even though your options are somewhat limited, you could organize your neighbors to write a group letter to the board, expressing your concern about potential damage to the building. Include a report from an engineer or an architect supporting your position — otherwise, your case is flimsy. You could also look at the governing documents to see what other remedies are available to you, like calling for a special meeting to confront the board.“But ultimately, is it worth it?” Mr. Bart said. “You have to live with your fellow shareholders, and need to pick and choose your battles. While you may not like the project, perhaps you should move on and save your ammunition for a fight you can win.”