https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/11/world/americas/venezuelan-opposition-leader-is-sentenced-to-prison-over-a-protest.html
Venezuelan Opposition Leader Leopoldo López Sentenced to Prison Over Protest - The New York Times
Lopez  Leopoldo,Venezuela,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Human Rights Watch,Political Prisoners,Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,Maduro  Nicolas
Sept. 10, 2015
3982
CARACAS, Venezuela —  A judge on Thursday found the Venezuelan opposition politician Leopoldo López guilty of inciting violence and other charges stemming from his leading role in a large antigovernment protest, according to government television reports.Mr. López, a Harvard-educated former mayor of a wealthy section of Caracas, was sentenced to more than 13 years in prison, the television reports said.Critics said the trial was politically motivated and lacked basic guarantees of due process. Lawyers for Mr. López said they were barred from presenting any witnesses or evidence at the trial.“This has been a farce,” said José Miguel Vivanco, Americas director of Human Rights Watch, speaking by telephone from Washington. “It’s a kind of a caricature of a judicial procedure and in violation of fundamental principles of due process, of presumption of innocence.”The courts here have long been criticized for a lack of independence, and decisions have closely hewed to the dictates of the governing party under President Nicolás Maduro and his predecessor, Hugo Chávez.Mr. Maduro frequently calls Mr. López a monster during televised speeches.“This is something that happens when you have no independent judiciary,” Mr. Vivanco said.The charges against Mr. López, the leader of a small opposition party called Popular Will, stem from a large antigovernment protest on Feb. 12 of last year, which began with a peaceful march and rally.But after most demonstrators left, including Mr. López, a few hundred protesters lingered, throwing rocks and firebombs at police officers, soldiers and government supporters, in a seesaw street battle.A government supporter and a student protester were fatally shot. Demonstrators threw rocks at a building occupied by the national prosecutor’s office, breaking second-story windows; several police cars were set on fire.Mr. Maduro and other government officials quickly blamed Mr. López for the violence, although he had repeatedly called for nonviolent protest.Mr. López turned himself in several days later, and he has been held ever since in a military prison. He was charged with arson, vandalism, inciting violence and hatred and being part of a criminal organization.The case has drawn international attention and shined a light on the increasingly repressive actions of Mr. Maduro’s government as the country sinks deeper into economic and political crisis.Last year, a working group of the United Nations office of the high commissioner for human rights determined that the detentions of Mr. López and another opposition politician, Daniel Ceballos, were arbitrary, and it called for their immediate release.This year the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights expressed concern over lack of due process in the prosecution of Mr. López and Mr. Ceballos. The United States has repeatedly called for Mr. López to be released and sharply criticized his arrest and trial. Secretary of State John Kerry raised the case in a telephone call this week with the Venezuelan foreign minister, Delcy Rodríguez, officials in Washington said.On Thursday evening, Roberta Jacobson, assistant secretary of state for Western Hemisphere affairs, wrote in a Twitter post that she was “deeply troubled” by Mr. López’s conviction. Earlier in the day, outside the courthouse, witnesses said that pro-government demonstrators had thrown rocks and bottles at a group of Mr. López’s supporters. One López sympathizer collapsed and died, apparently of a heart attack, according to witnesses.At a rally of supporters last night, Mr. López’s wife, Lilian Tintori, said that after the judge announced the verdict her husband approached her, took her hand and said, “Give a message to Venezuela: ‘Stay calm.’ ”  