http://www.nytimes.com/2002/09/22/magazine/outstanding-alien.html
Outstanding Alien - The New York Times
SAVILLE  PETER,RECORDINGS (AUDIO),MUSIC,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,SPECIAL SECTIONS,ART
Sept. 22, 2002
8990
The entrance to Peter Saville's London home is deceptively unadorned. A run-down facade, overgrown with shrubs, masks a dazzling Day-Glo interior that shelter magazines have lined up to photograph. Tall velvet curtains and a baroque mix of modern furniture, Asian objets d'art and fluorescent artwork dominate the open plan. ''It's very neo-Performance,' don't you think?'' says Saville, 47, referring to the psychedelic 1970 film. It's certainly an appropriately eclectic environment in which to interview a pioneer of British style culture who is feted for his reinterpretation of disparate visual codes. But there is one off note: the Enyaesque CD of ocean sounds playing in the background.''It's naff, I know, but it relaxes me,'' Saville says. The recording certainly seems to be doing the trick: Saville may be long-term house minding (the place is owned by a fashion industry friend who lives mostly in Paris), but he's at home with all manner of subjects. The conversation jumps from the Pleasure Chest in Los Angeles -- ''the best fetish store in the world'' -- to the interior of the George V hotel in Paris, whose palette and patterns remind him of the American Express Corporate Card. His sentences are often punctuated with ''blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,'' which the otherwise deliberate Saville reels off as quickly as a tape recorder on fast-forward (a tic he shares with his longtime friend and collaborator, the photographer Nick Knight).But, as ever, the conversation with Saville returns to work. He walks me through an old exhibition catalog of his oeuvre, the contents of which help to explain why he is so revered by his peers (Creative Review readers this year voted Saville the most admired figure in the design world), why clients like E.M.I. continue to beat a path to his door and why he is the subject of a forthcoming book and a major exhibition in London.''I don't have a portfolio,'' says the floppy-haired graphics guru, juggling a glass of Champagne and a Marlboro Light. Flipping through the catalog, Saville's blue-chip fashion clientele emerges from the pages like so many store signs in a high-rent shopping district. Yohji Yamamoto. Jil Sander. Givenchy. Christian Dior. Then, of course, there are the groundbreaking album covers in which Saville successfully managed to converge his passion for art, fashion, music and style, in the process elevating an underappreciated skill into the realm of fine art. His reductionist hand is visible in the ultra-real renderings for recent Brit bands like Pulp and Suede. But it is Saville's neo-classical cover art for Joy Division, and later New Order, that cemented his place in the pantheon of pop culture, alongside his compatriot designers Neville Brody and Malcolm Garrett. As one of the founding members of Factory -- the Manchester movement, portrayed in the recent movie ''24 Hour Party People,'' that spawned Factory Records and the Hacienda nightclub -- Saville emerged as the default creative director for a style-obsessed generation.''I had just finished art school in '78 and had total freedom to express my own vision,'' Saville says. ''No client, no brief, no budget, no deadlines, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. The myth of Peter Saville is based mainly on those album covers for Factory, but that work was done in a weird autonomous zone.''Perhaps Saville's best-known work is the cover of the New Order album ''Power, Corruption and Lies.'' Saville had unsuccessfully trawled London's art galleries for a Renaissance painting of a suitably Machiavellian character. Frustrated, he found himself in the gift shop of the National Gallery buying postcards. ''I pulled out this card of the Fantin-Latour still-life of roses from the shelf,'' Saville recalls, ''and my girlfriend at the time just slid alongside me and said, 'You're not thinking of using that, are you?' I knew then I had to use it -- it's so much better than the bleeding obvious.''The design critic Rick Poynor concurs. ''It's doubtful that many New Order fans would have known much about Fantin-Latour or enjoyed the image as an oil painting,'' Poynor says. ''But by recontextualizing the image and contrasting it with the music, Saville achieved the sort of ambiguity and complexity of resonance more usually associated with art.''But if Saville is acknowledged for his modern appropriations and uncanny ability to read the culture, he also has the reputation of being a notoriously lousy businessman who works to his own schedule.''I just don't fit into the graphic business,'' Saville says. ''And I don't conduct my life in a businesslike, professional way.''Emily King, the editor of the forthcoming ''Designed by Peter Saville'' (Frieze), confirms that as an art director, Saville plays against type. ''Saville's story can be read as a refusal of commercial success,'' King says. ''The moments he has come closest to being able to carve up his talent for considerable profit are when he has behaved at his very worst -- the nocturnal schedule, the procrastination, the anxieties about the quality of his work.''Saville's inability to exist in the corporate world was demonstrated by his ill-fated association with the occult-sounding design group Pentagram. In 1990, Pentagram saved Saville from insolvency, but the marriage proved to be short-lived. ''I was only there for about two years, but I managed to drive the company around the bend with my willfulness,'' he says. ''Looking back, I probably wouldn't do anything differently. There was a philosophical divide between Pentagram and me, but there is a philosophical divide between any graphic design firm and me.''Another enabler, Aubrey Balkind, of the New York design firm Frankfurt Balkind, later sponsored Saville and his colleague Brett Wickens to move to Los Angeles and work on a doomed multimedia concept. ''Nobody had any idea what we were doing there,'' Saville says. ''Neither did we. We lived in the Sunset Marquis, we had no car, no salary, no visas, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It went on for months, until they finally gave me a visa for outstanding aliens, which I thought was apt. By the time it arrived, though, Frankfurt Balkind and I were parting company.''In the absence of any real work, Saville had maxed out his corporate card reinventing himself for L.A. ''Nobody got it at the time,'' he says. ''People were appalled by my house in the Hollywood Hills, with dark wood paneling and shag pile carpet, but it's very now. And my personal style mutated into what I guess people now call Gucci. It was '93, and it was obvious to me that's how you dress in L.A.''Those who know Saville insist that his personal style has not wavered since he was a middle-class teenager in Manchester obsessed with Roxy Music, Kraftwerk, early Armani men's wear and ''Bonnie and Clyde.'' ''For someone so fixated with the way that culture evolves, he has always worn exactly the same clothes and hairstyle,'' says Alice Rawsthorn, director of the Design Museum in London, which will house an exhibition of his work, ''The Peter Saville Show,'' opening on May 23. ''Warren Beatty, especially in 'Shampoo' and 'Bonnie and Clyde,' has influenced Peter's behavior as much as his wardrobe and hair. His other icons are two little-known British pop singers called Paul and Barry Ryan from the 1960's, who wore these neat little mod outfits of black polo necks, narrow lapeled jackets with white jeans and Chelsea boots.''If Saville's look has remained constant, it's probably because he's allergic to the idea of design for design's sake. ''We have a situation now where you want to clear the cultural space,'' Saville says. ''Designing things is vulgar. That's why I can't be bothered doing it anymore, why I do it by special appointment only. Next year will be the 25th anniversary since I left college, and as far as I'm concerned, I'll just take the gold watch and go. I don't want to be like Phil Spector: 'Hey, I have a great idea, let's get that old guy.'''If Saville sounds like a diva threatening to leave the stage, not everyone is buying it. ''For as long as I have known him, Peter has said that he's retiring, that he's bored with graphic design work,'' Rawsthorn says. ''Peter is this extraordinary combination of supreme solipsistic self-confidence and acute insecurity, and that's what powers his work.''While he may not admit to high expectations for his own future, Saville is excited about the retrospective exhibition and book, also slated for May. But the most important task, he says, is sifting through the mountains of printed ephemera he has collected over the years. ''The thing I feel most pressure about is making sense of this, curating the estate of Peter Saville,'' he says rather dramatically, pointing to three enormous piles of paper.Mixed among the stack of erotic imagery -- ''It's rarely found its way into my work, but it takes up a fair amount of my time,'' says the self-confessed porn junkie -- there are random musings, like ''London losing war on crack'' and ''Design is the new advertising.''Occasionally, he stops to make sense of a McNugget of pop posturing he's jotted down over the years. ''Sometimes it takes me minutes to work out what I was thinking,'' he says, trying to remember what prompted him to scribble down the words ''Free exchange of values and unregulated exchange of ideas.''''Oh, I know,'' he says. ''It was an idea for the trading of values on the stock exchange. Can you imagine? Warhol is up, but Louis Vuitton is down?''There are hundreds of similar skeletons for ideas -- a fictional German nuclear family for use in an art project, thoughts on repositioning CNN, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah -- waiting to be fleshed out. You get the feeling that it will be years before he finally allows himself to retire to the sounds of waves crashing: ''What can I say? I am an art director. It says so in my passport.''