http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/06/us/politics/how-donald-trump-uses-twitter.html
How Donald Trump Uses Twitter (Hint: Impulsively) - The New York Times
Social Media,Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Twitter
Oct. 5, 2015
2238
Donald J. Trump calls it his own version of a newspaper: a stream of boasts, taunts and opinions, delivered on Twitter at all hours of the day to his more than four million followers. Since 2009, he has used the social media platform to build his brand — and, now, to communicate with voters as a candidate for president. Below, a sampling of his tweets and an analysis of what makes them so Trumpian.A classic Trump tweet: touching on pop culture, justifying his own habits (he is a full-freight Coke drinker) and insulting strangers (the non-thin who prefer Diet Coke).Several Trump tweets are unexpectedly personal. He fondly quotes his mother and father and expresses gratitude for their wisdom (and the wealth they left him).Timed to defend his first debate performance and deflate the outrage against him, this summarizes Mr. Trump’s message of political outsiderism: I talk like you, not like them.Mr. Trump is unusually engaged with his followers, frequently responding to their tweets with a pithy comment or message of thanks — a relatively rare gesture for prominent people or presidential candidates on Twitter. The risk? Falling prey to pranksters, who have repeatedly tricked Mr. Trump into replying to their messages. (“Great,” he wrote when somebody playfully claimed that “my dad” — a British politician, ineligible to participate in United States elections — would vote for Mr. Trump.)Mr. Trump has a weakness for celebrity gossip, tweeting about the love lives of Katy Perry and John Mayer, or Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson (back in 2012). The upside: He taps into the zeitgeist. The downside: He can come off as frivolous.Mr. Trump delights in tweaking his rivals, but there is a political strategy behind the schoolyard taunts. He is careful to insult the candidate, not his supporters. Here, in fact, he is inviting those backing Rand Paul to give him a chance, even as he indirectly mocks the candidate.