https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/20/realestate/when-a-roommate-wont-pay-up.html
When a Roommate Won’t Pay Up - The New York Times
Renting and Leasing (Real Estate),Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Roommates
May 20, 2017
8859
Q. A year ago, I moved into an apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, with a roommate. Both of our names are on the lease. Last February, my roommate moved out. She found someone to take her room, charging her $200 less a month than the rent she paid. On March 6, I told the new roommate that her rent would go up by $200 on April 1, when the original lease expired. Come April, she paid me the lower rent anyway. She is supposed to move out on June 1, but has not yet committed. How can I ensure that she leaves, and can I deduct the difference from her security deposit?A. Because her name is not on the lease, your new roommate is not a tenant of the apartment — you are. Her rental agreement is a month-to-month contract that could change with 30 days’ written notice. “As far as the new roommate goes, she’s just that: a roommate,” said Jennifer Addonizio Rozen, a lawyer who represents tenants.Oral agreements are not binding. Yes, you told her that the rent was going up and that she needed to move out. But until it’s in writing, it’s your word against hers. If you want her to move out, you have to serve her with a 30-day written notice terminating the roommate agreement. If she has already paid her May rent and you have not given her notice yet, you cannot make her move out by June 1. Instead, serve her a notice sometime before May 31, terminating her agreement on June 30. If she is still in the apartment on July 1, you could sue her in housing court to remove her from the apartment, Ms. Rozen said.As for the rent increase, the same rule applies: Nothing is binding unless it is in writing. Write her a letter stating that you orally agreed that, as of April 1, her rent would increase by $200 a month. If she does not pay you an extra $200 with her June rent, then you could deduct that money from her security deposit when she leaves. However, if she does not pay the additional rent from April and May, and you deduct that from her security deposit, she could sue you. Without something to show in writing, Ms. Rozen said, “It would be difficult to convince a court that the rent was increased.”