https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/us/politics/trump-supreme-court-justices.html
Trump’s Supreme Court List: Ivy League? Out. The Heartland? In. - The New York Times
Appointments and Executive Changes,Presidential Election of 2016,Supreme Court (US),Trump  Donald J,Constitution (US),Roberts  John G Jr,Scalia  Antonin,Thomas  Clarence
Nov. 14, 2016
1511
WASHINGTON — When Donald J. Trump issued his final list of 21 potential nominees to the Supreme Court in September, he made a vow. “This list is definitive,” he said, “and I will choose only from it in picking future justices of the Supreme Court.”Note the plural: justices. So the promise applies not only to the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia in February, but also to any other Supreme Court nominations during the Trump presidency. Given the advanced age of some justices, retirements are a distinct possibility.Mr. Trump’s seemingly set-in-stone list has important clues about the president-elect’s judicial priorities, and it has a few surprises. The list manages both to reassure the conservative legal establishment and to represent a rebellion against it.In important ways, Mr. Trump’s candidates represent a sharp break from the current conservative justices, who all went to law school at Harvard or Yale and who all served on federal appeals courts in the Northeast or in California.If the list has a main theme, it is that there are plenty of good judges who went to law school at places like Notre Dame, Marquette, the University of Georgia and the University of Miami.About half of Mr. Trump’s candidates sit on state Supreme Courts, and almost all those who sit on federal appeals courts do so in the heartland. (The exception is Judge Margaret A. Ryan of the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, in Washington.)The résumés of the current justices, by contrast, reflect a legal profession that is deeply hierarchical, obsessed with credentials and dominated by lawyers on the two coasts. Mr. Trump’s list, like his campaign, is a revolt against the elites.At the same time, Mr. Trump’s candidates are, unsurprisingly, committed judicial conservatives. Mr. Trump credited two leading conservative policy groups — the Heritage Foundation and the Federalist Society — with helping to draw up his list.“You had an awful lot of conservatives during the campaign who were incredibly skeptical, to put it mildly, about Donald Trump,” said John G. Malcolm, a Heritage Foundation official who suggested a number of names that appeared on the list. “But they certainly cared a lot about the Scalia vacancy and the direction of the court. And that list was a very, very sober list, and it was greatly reassuring.”The list is a good reflection of Mr. Trump’s dual priorities, said William M. Jay, a lawyer with the firm of Goodwin Procter and a former law clerk to Justice Scalia. “It was consistent with the message he was trying to send: that he was not going to be naming establishment choices but that the establishment might well be happy with the people he chose from Alabama and Iowa and places like that,” he said.The top priority for conservatives, Mr. Malcolm said, is to avoid another disappointment like Justice David H. Souter, who was appointed by President George Bush in 1990 but whose voting record turned out to be decidedly liberal.Mr. Malcolm said his own first choice for the current vacancy was Judge William H. Pryor Jr. of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta. “If you are concerned about not wanting another David Souter,” Mr. Malcolm said, “he has a real titanium spine in terms of doing the right thing.”Judge Pryor has called Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision establishing a right to abortion, “the worst abomination of constitutional law in our history,” a comment he stood by at his confirmation hearing. He once ended a speech with a prayer: “Please, God, no more Souters.”Mr. Jay also singled out Judge Pryor, who went to law school at Tulane. “While Bill Pryor did not go to Yale,” he said, “there is a broad consensus that Bill Pryor is a smart, intellectual and fair judge who most conservatives would happily see on a Supreme Court shortlist.”Brian T. Fitzpatrick, a law professor at Vanderbilt and a former clerk to Justice Scalia, had praise for Judge Ryan, the military judge, who is a former clerk to Justice Clarence Thomas and a graduate of Notre Dame Law School. “She is just a tough-as-nails, no-nonsense kind of person,” he said. “She would be not a wishy-washy kind of conservative. People who don’t want any more Souters wouldn’t have to worry about her.”Both Mr. Jay and Professor Fitzpatrick said Justice Scalia would have been pleased to be succeeded by one of his former law clerks, Justice Joan Larsen of the Michigan Supreme Court. She went to law school at Northwestern, served in the Justice Department and taught law at the University of Michigan.“Joan Larsen has a very decent chance,” Mr. Malcolm said.Mr. Trump’s list has some striking omissions, among them Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and Paul D. Clement, who was solicitor general from 2005 to 2008 and often argues cases before the Supreme Court.Their perceived drawbacks say a lot about Mr. Trump’s priorities. Mr. Malcolm, who proposed both men for the list, drew some conclusions.In Judge Kavanaugh’s case, it probably did not help that he went to Yale Law School and sits in Washington. “They may have wanted to send a message that they are an outside-the-Beltway organization,” Mr. Malcolm said. “And then the other part of it, not quite as severe, was his opinion in one of the Obamacare cases.”Judge Kavanaugh dissented from a decision upholding the health care law, but he did so on jurisdictional grounds. Ideological purity would have required him to vote to strike down the law on constitutional grounds.“Some conservatives thought it was John Roberts-esque, trying to thread the needle,” Mr. Malcolm said, referring to Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr.’s 2012 opinion upholding the law. “And being John Roberts-esque doesn’t make many friends in conservative circles these days.”“For Paul Clement,” Mr. Malcolm went on, “the feeling was that we don’t want to take any chances on another David Souter. Therefore, we are going to make sure that we are going to appoint a judge and that it’s someone who has a written record.”Mr. Malcolm said Mr. Clement could satisfy skeptics with a stint on an appeals court. “Let him build up a body of work and then maybe nominate him to a second vacancy,” Mr. Malcolm said.But that would require Mr. Trump to enlarge a list he had said was firm. Could that happen? Perhaps.As his longtime stockbroker Alan C. Greenberg liked to quip: “Donald, your word is your bond. But your memory is short.”