http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/world/asia/taiwan-china-kenya.html
Taiwan Accuses Kenya of Illegal Deportations as More Are Sent to China - The New York Times
Taiwan,Kenya,China,Deportation,Immigration and Emigration,Beijing (China),Africa
April 12, 2016
3489
NAIROBI, Kenya — Usually prisoners want to get out of jail. But on Tuesday, a group of Taiwanese citizens did all they could to stay in — barricading themselves in a small cell as Kenyan police officers tried to storm in with assault rifles.The officers succeeded, however, in dragging the prisoners out — Taiwanese officials say after using tear gas, which Kenyan officials deny — and put them on a plane not for home, but for mainland China.A video circulating on the Internet of the encounter shows a group of young men bracing themselves against a prison door to try to keep the Kenyan officers out. “Sir! We are Taiwan people, Taiwan people!” one of them yells.The episode outraged Taiwanese officials, who accused Kenya of violating international law and trying to curry favor with China, which views the self-governed island as part of its territory.This would not be the first time an African nation did something contentious to please China, the new heavyweight on the continent. Zambia, South Africa and others have bent over backward — often provoking the ire of their own people — to keep China happy.Analysts say that for authoritarian governments, which is the case for many in Africa, Chinese support is like a dream. China drops billions of dollars on splashy infrastructure projects all across Africa without pressuring governments to improve democracy or human rights, like Western nations often do.In recent years, Chinese workers and Chinese money have transformed Kenya, building thundering new highways, bridges, malls, a flagship airport and a railroad; the Chinese are even helping on secretive national security matters, like installing electronic eavesdropping equipment for the Kenyans.According to Taiwanese officials, Chinese pressure explains why the Kenyan government deported several dozen Taiwanese nationals to mainland China in recent days, even though Taiwan considers itself politically separate from mainland China.The Taiwan and Kenya governments had conflicting information on how many Taiwanese were deported and when. Taiwan officials in Taipei said eight Taiwanese had been flown from Kenya to China on Friday and 37 on Tuesday.Mwenda Njoka, the spokesman for Kenya’s Interior Ministry, said eight Taiwanese had been deported on Monday and 16 on Tuesday. There were unconfirmed reports that one of the deported Taiwanese had American citizenship. Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman, said he was aware of the reports but could not comment further.Mr. Njoka said all the deportees were connected to a strange case in Nairobi, Kenya’s capital, in which the authorities discovered a house full of electronics and telecommunications equipment and then arrested dozens of Chinese and Taiwanese on suspicion of cybercrimes and other illegal activities.Even though many of the suspects were recently acquitted, all had violated Kenya’s visa policies, the Kenyan authorities said. Mr. Njoka insisted that they were deported, along with 12 Chinese suspects, to mainland China simply because the Kenyan policy is to return people to the country they flew from, and that all the Taiwanese had traveled to Kenya from China.Kenya does not have direct flights to Taiwan, though there are daily flights to Guangzhou, China, and regular flights to Hong Kong. “The Taiwanese are trying to draw us into a dispute with China,” Mr. Njoka said. “It’s their dispute, not ours.”This case has kicked up quite a ruckus in Taiwan and China. Zhang Zhijun, the director of the Chinese government’s Taiwan Affairs Office, indicated that the Taiwanese are being held on suspicion of of telephone and Internet fraud that targeted Chinese people.While Chinese authorities promised the deportees would be able to receive visits from family and Taiwanese officials, they face less likelihood of due process in China than in Taiwan.Last May, a court in the eastern Chinese province of Zhejiang held trials of two defendants accused of taking part in a phone-fraud scheme based in Kenya that had been orchestrated by Taiwanese ringleaders using mainland Chinese recruits, a Chinese newspaper reported at the time. It is unclear whether that case was related to the suspects sent to China.Antonio C. S. Chen, the official in charge of West Asian and Africa at Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, demanded that China return the Taiwanese who had been deported.China often intervenes to block international recognition of Taiwan. But such acts generally involve vetoing Taiwan’s participation in bodies like the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Rarely has it meant laying claim to Taiwan passport holders overseas.A spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs thanked Kenya during a regularly scheduled news conference on Tuesday.“Maintaining the One-China principle is an important prerequisite and a necessary basis for all countries in the world in developing relations with China,” the spokesman, Lu Kang, said. “We highly appreciate the Kenyan government’s long-term commitment to the One-China principle.”Kenya now finds itself in the same predicament as South Africa was a few years ago. After the South African government prevented the Dalai Lama from visiting in 2011, drawing international criticism, Archbishop Desmond Tutu said the government was behaving worse than it had under apartheid. South Africa, which receives huge amounts of support from China, was suspected of trying to placate Beijing, which views the Dalai Lama’s calls for more autonomy for Tibet as villainous.There is a symbiotic relationship between African governments and China, in which China secures good relations with countries that produce minerals or other natural resources necessary to keep China’s manufacturing-based economy going. In return, the African nations get favorable infrastructure deals with few strings attached.Though Kenya does not have huge amounts of natural resources like South Africa or Zambia, two of China’s key allies on the continent, it is strategically important because it has the largest economy in East Africa. Kenya does not maintain official relations with Taiwan and considers the island part of China, in line with Beijing’s position.The deportations have created a cross-strait challenge for Taiwan’s government just as it prepares for a crucial transition of power next month. Tsai Ing-wen won Taiwan’s presidential election in January, and her Democratic Progressive Party won control of the legislature for the first time.While her predecessor, Ma Ying-jeou, pushed for closer economic relations with China, Ms. Tsai advocates a more cautious approach to cross-strait ties.Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council, which handles cross-strait relations, said its head, Andrew Hsia, had contacted his Chinese counterpart, Mr. Zhang, through a hotline on Tuesday to express concerns about the deportations.Mr. Hsia said in a statement that the handling of the cases was not in accordance with previous cross-strait understandings and that it “seriously harmed our people’s rights.”“Today the mainland side is again forcibly taking 37 of our people to the mainland, disregarding our previous call to return the eight people who have already been sent to the mainland and the 15 who were in Kenya,” Mr. Hsia said.Mr. Hsia added, “This seriously harms the cross-strait mutual trust built up over the past eight years.”