http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/14/us/14houston.html
Houston's Newly Elected Gay Mayor Breaks a Barrier, to Little Fanfare - The New York Times
Parker  Annise,Houston (Tex),Homosexuality,Elections,United States Politics and Government,Mayors
Dec. 13, 2009
3514
HOUSTON — When asked why Houston became the first big city in the United States to elect an openly gay mayor, rather than New York or San Francisco, the woman who had broken that barrier, Annise Parker, raised her eyebrows and said her victory came as no surprise to people who live here.“I think the rest of America had the wrong impression of Houston,” Ms. Parker said after winning on Saturday night. “We are a diverse, amazing, international city.”Still, every election has its own unique, local dynamic, and Ms. Parker’s victory owed more to a series of small, gritty factors — from low turnout to the absence of a Republican contender —than to a huge groundswell of support for gay rights, political strategists here said.For starters, Ms. Parker, a Democrat, is no firebrand, despite her roots as a gay-rights advocate in the 1980s. She spent six years on the City Council and another six as city controller, steadily building a reputation as a policy maven who was honest about her sexual orientation but never pushed too hard for gay causes.Indeed, she won citywide election several times by avoiding the label of “the gay candidate.” During her mayoral campaign, she never emphasized sexual politics. When asked, for instance, if she would advocate for a referendum giving benefits to same-sex partners of city workers, she was quick to say it was not in her plans.“Once any candidate is able to build a career and a reputation as a policy wonk and someone dedicated to the city, rather than doing this for other reasons, she builds trust,” said Denis Dison, a vice president of the Gay & Lesbian Victory Fund, a national group that funneled about $400,000 into her campaign.That there was no credible Republican candidate in the race for the first time in three decades also helped Ms. Parker’s bid. Her opponent was Gene Locke, a Democrat and former city attorney, who was less well known than she was and had never won an election.The two were so close on the issues, most people could not tell them apart. Mr. Locke strived to be the law-and-order candidate, but he could not compete with Ms. Parker on the question of experience. There was also precious little anger at City Hall to tap into, since Mayor Bill White, who is running for governor, remains popular.“This was a race among Democrats, and for all intents and purposes these candidates were indistinguishable,” said Robert M. Stein, a political scientist at Rice University. “They could not find a single issue on which they could disagree.”Mr. Locke, who is black, also ran a flawed campaign. He was late to begin television advertising, a fatal mistake for a little-known candidate. With his promise to crack down on crime, he also tried to cobble together a coalition of black voters and conservative Republicans, some of whom, it was thought, might also object on religious grounds to a gay mayor.But Ms. Parker, it turned out, had more support in predominately Republican neighborhoods than he did, the Nov. 3 general election showed. Saturday’s election was a runoff.Ms. Parker was also extremely effective in painting Mr. Locke as a lawyer and a lobbyist, two words that have a negative connotation for many Houstonians. It was not hard to do, since Mr. Locke had made a fortune brokering stadium deals in the city and enjoyed the support of the business establishment.“Here’s the bottom line, or maybe the punch line,” Rick Casey, the Houston Chronicle’s political columnist, wrote Sunday. “In Houston, it is now harder for a lawyer to be elected mayor than a lesbian.”The efforts by some religious leaders and anti-gay advocates to raise Ms. Parker’s sexuality as an issue also backfired against Mr. Locke. Two members of his finance committee gave $40,000 donations to help pay for mailings urging voters to reject Ms. Parker because she was a lesbian.Those payments hurt Mr. Locke among liberal Democrats and did not appear to help him much among conservatives, who, pollsters said, seemed more worried about keeping taxes down than sexual mores. In short, the anti-gay vote never materialized.And Mr. Locke failed to mobilize black voters in large numbers, while gay voters, sensing a historic moment, were fired up. They not only showed up at the polls in droves, but also worked hard to get out the vote for Ms. Parker. “Her support was more loyal and more solid,” said Marc Campos, a strategist who consulted for Mr. Locke.In the end, it turned out that the Houstonians who were paying attention to the election — only about 16 percent of registered voters — did not seem to care deeply about Ms. Parker’s sexual orientation, several political scientists and strategists said.“It was a factor, but not enough of a factor to stop her,” said Jay Aiyer, the former chief of staff to Mayor Lee P. Brown. “We are talking about a candidate who has been in public life for 12 years. Everyone knows her. You had an entire race where no one ever questioned whether she was good at her job.”