https://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/13/realestate/13livi.html
A Lovely Stretch of Suburban Opulence - The New York Times
Westchester County (NY),Real Estate,Housing
Aug. 13, 2006
8868
AT first glance, Harrison, a  22-square-mile stretch of suburban opulence, looks as if it is only about emerald lawns and putting greens, turquoise swimming pools and endless vistas of tennis courts.Especially considering the direction that the town’s real estate has taken in recent years — with old estates being carved up into posh new developments, and affluent Wall Street types moving in, according to real estate agents —  it is not surprising that Harrison is often portrayed as an archetypal Westchester suburb for the privileged.The median price of a single family home in Harrison was $1.55 million as of July 30, more than twice the median for the county.“But it’s much more than just a community of big houses, stay-at-home moms and those kinds of things,” said Jennifer Wiener, who spent her teenage years in Harrison, left for college in 1989 and moved back several years ago with her husband, David, who works for a family firm in Mamaroneck that owns and manages apartment buildings.Mr. and Mrs. Wiener live on a hilltop in Harrison in a $3 million, six-bedroom colonial. And in keeping with the image of upscale Westchester suburbanites, they belong to the Old Oaks Country Club, one of half a dozen private clubs in Harrison.But they also rave about the local public schools, which their two older children — Julia, 9, and Zachary, 7 — attend, and the fact that both are already learning a foreign language, in this case  Spanish.“Harrison is a great place for a lot of reasons,” said Mrs. Wiener, a former nursery school teacher, whose third child, Olivia, is 18 months old. “It has a good school system, plenty of neighborhood parks and playgrounds, and lots of friendly, caring people, which is very important too.”Harrison, which has a population of close to 26,000, has had the unusual status of town-village, since a referendum in 1975, when the people of the Purchase section were proposing to secede, according to Joan Walsh, the town clerk. Situated 22 miles north of Midtown Manhattan, Harrison is a landlocked community — with Mamaroneck, White Plains, Rye, Scarsdale and North Castle at its borders.The municipality is home to the Westchester County Airport and also to a commercial strip in Purchase along Interstate 287 known as the Platinum Mile, where a number of large corporations have offices.Those companies, including Morgan Stanley, PepsiCo and MasterCard, which have lush compounds, contribute substantially to the tax base.What You’ll FindLittle land remains for new residential construction in Harrison, save for the old estates.In addition to the many stately single-family Tudors and colonials throughout the town on parcels of two or three acres (or larger), there are also older modest homes being torn down and replaced with higher-end residences.Lisa and Tom Jardine live in the product of such a tear-down. A former ranch-style home once stood on the property, but it was replaced by a Nantucket colonial with six bedrooms and twin peaked roofs, which the couple bought three years ago for $1.675 million.The Jardines, along with their four children — Thomas, 14, Hayden, 12, Sophie, 9, and Annie, 7 — moved to Harrison from Rye after they bought  a second home in Amagansett on Long Island. For their main house, they traded down from a larger house that had a pool and tennis courts “and was so big that everyone used to call it Camp Jardine,” Mrs. Jardine said.Besides Harrison’s stock of single-family homes — about 3,500, said James Calandruccio, the town’s assessor — there are three condominium complexes, three co-op buildings and several rental buildings.Enhancing the town’s physical beauty are PepsiCo’s 144 landscaped acres designed by the British gardener Russell Page, with some 40 pieces of 20th-century sculpture, including works by Auguste Rodin, Henry Moore and Alexander Calder. The manicured grounds of Manhattanville College and the expanse of land holding the State University of New York at Purchase also add a sense of open space to Harrison.In sharp contrast with the beauty of the rolling hills and scenic roads winding through most of the municipality is Halstead Avenue, a somewhat downscale commercial street that runs through Harrison from the border of Rye to the border of Mamaroneck. Near the Metro-North Railroad station, Halstead has two strip malls at either end, with small shops and restaurants in between.What You’ll PayNot surprisingly, Harrison’s opulence comes at a price.The median for a single-family home in Harrison as of July 30 was $1.55 million, according to Peggy Johnston, an associate broker with Coldwell Banker in Rye. That is more than twice the median for the county, which was $715,000 at the end of the second quarter of this year. The median for a house in Harrison last year was $1,525,000; five years ago, it was $992,000.The median price for a condominium in Harrison is $260,900, almost unchanged from $261,000 last year but up from $114,000 five years ago. For co-ops, the median is $229,000, Ms. Johnston said, compared with $227,500 last year and $94,000 five years ago.There are 137 homes currently on the market in Harrison, compared with only 11 at this time last year. So far in 2006, 67 home sales have closed; at this point in 2005, there had been 163 closings.Three houses now on the market reflect the range of prices. At the low end, a 55-year-old ranch with three bedrooms and two baths is listed at $585,000. A 20-year-old contemporary with five bedrooms and three and a half baths is listed at $2.1 million. And a new colonial with five bedrooms and seven and a half baths is selling for $4.099 million.The tax bill on the ranch is $8,600; on the contemporary, it is $25,792. For the newly built house, annual taxes have yet to be determined.The strong corporate presence in Harrison eases the tax sting somewhat for homeowners. Commercial properties, including six private golf courses and two hotels, carry about 35 percent of the tax bill in the town, which has a budget of $35.5 million, according to Mr. Calandruccio. What to DoHarrison lacks nightlife and shopping, but it compensates with recreation, according to Mrs. Jardine. Come fall, she and her husband, who is a sales trader for Bear Stearns, fill up their weekend calendar with soccer and football games run by the Harrison Recreation Department. In the spring, she said, it’s Little League.The recreation department also runs town pools and tennis courts, and it operates three community centers. Five different day camp programs are offered to residents during July and August.While there are only limited opportunities for shopping within Harrison’s borders, the town’s central location affords its residents easy access to both high-end and discount shopping in places like White Plains and Greenwich.“I take the best of each surrounding town,” Mrs. Jardine said. “I do the family food shopping at Whole Foods in White Plains, where I also go to the Westchester Mall. I take Pilates classes in Scarsdale, and when I need J. Crew, the Gap, Restoration Hardware or Victoria’s Secret, it’s Greenwich Avenue.”To see movies, the Jardines go to the City Center 15: Cinema De Lux in White Plains, making a sweep through a Target store in the mall in City Center before or after the show.Mrs. Wiener said her family prefers AMC Loews, a new 14-screen multiplex that recently opened in nearby Port Chester, where there are also several big-box stores, including Costco.The SchoolsThe public school system serves 3,450 students in kindergarten (a full-day program) through Grade 12 in four elementary schools, one middle school and a high school.Harrison High has its own planetarium with 60 seats, and a research program for students who are mentored by established scientists, said Carole Levy, the district’s supervisor of secondary school science.Out of 199 students graduating in June 2005, 74 percent attended a four-year college or university and 14 percent went to two-year colleges, said Scott Wood, assistant principal of the high school.On SAT tests in 2005, seniors scored an average of 535 on the verbal portion and 575 on the math. Statewide averages last year were 497 for verbal, and 511 for math.There are also private schools in the area.The CommuteRush-hour express trains on Metro-North Railroad’s New Haven line take about 40 minutes from Harrison to Grand Central Terminal. Monthly tickets cost about $184; a round-trip ticket during peak hours costs $17.Many commuters also drive down the Hutchinson River Parkway to the Cross Westchester Expressway, where they can easily enter highways leading south into the east and west sides of Manhattan.The HistoryAccording to a history written in the 1980’s by Charles Dawson, Harrison’s first historian,  the Siwanoy Indians   sold land to Peter Disbrow in 1662 and to John Budd in 1666, and again in 1695 to John Harrison.Unfortunately for Mr. Disbrow and Mr. Budd, neither filed claims with the provincial government of New York, but Mr. Harrison did.  Eventually, Mr. Harrison and four others involved with him in the purchase, known as “Harrison’s Purchase,” sold the land to the first Harrison settlers in 1724. The new owners were Quakers, who settled in Purchase, where they built a meeting house three years later.What We LikeAlmost every section of Harrison is lovely to look at — whether one is traveling by foot, on a bike, in a car or on a plane  taking off from Westchester County Airport.Going ForwardDuring rush hour, heavy traffic from the many corporations in the town adds to the usual to and fro of autos, detracting from the beauty of Harrison’s scenic back roads.