https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/20/fashion/my-crush-on-pope-francis.html
My Crush on Pope Francis - The New York Times
Francis,Roman Catholic Church,Christians and Christianity,Popes
Sept. 18, 2015
8938
The unusually broad appeal of the charismatic 266th pontiff, a.k.a. the Francis Effect, is well documented. Sparking new hope for the Roman Catholic Church through a more forgiving stance and a genial, media-friendly persona, Pope Francis has inspired lapsed parishioners to return, while extending, for lack of a better term, the fan base to those who aren’t Roman Catholic, Christian or even particularly religious.The Francis Effect moved me — a once-erstwhile Presbyterian married to a steadfast Roman Catholic — to have our baby daughter baptized in our local parish.And soon, Pope Francis will be on his way to the United States. The excitement I feel about my chance at seeing him during his Central Park procession next Friday, even across the barricades, is how a teeny-bopper must have felt awaiting the Beatles’ landing in New York in 1964.When I share this pro-Francis enthusiasm with others (He ministers to the poor! He likes pizza! He’s an environmentalist! He used to be a bouncer!), I find I’m far from unique in my affection. While no statistics exist to verify the phenomenon, it appears that, yes, the pope crush is a thing.As if to affirm the enthusiasm, a stories-high Pope Francis mural now looms over Lower Midtown, and phalanxes of pope bobbleheads nod “yes” from vendor displays citywide.But in the age of social media, nothing underscores someone’s crush-worthiness like a Twitter hashtag. Forget #bae and #wcw and make way for an upsurge in #popecrush — a hashtag that can be traced back to the early days of his papacy.The popularity of Pope Francis, who was born Jorge Mario Bergoglio in Buenos Aires, is often attributed to what seems like a relatively laid-back politic, and some even insist that he’s the “hip” pope.Never mind the absurdity of hipster Christians as a concept (Christ died for my sins? Cool story, bro). If anything, Pope Francis is the anti-hipster, earnest and self-deprecating. Though the Bible promises that all things can be made new, there are only so many ways to reinvent its ancient stories, and he brings them back to basics: mercy, humility, concern for the poor and for the vulnerable (including our planet).My daughter, named for her deeply devout, long-departed paternal great-grandmother, was baptized in a small family ceremony last autumn. After an exhaustive search for a christening gown that didn’t turn her into a bespangled miniature pageant contestant or come with a bonnet in which she resembled a figure from “The Handmaid’s Tale,” her father and I presented her for anointing, and a trickle of holy water from a silver baptismal shell sealed the sacramental deal.Our daughter has since become an inquisitive toddler, so I anticipate many questions as she grows. There’s “Mommy, where did I come from?” but there’s also “Mommy, where did we come from?”Nothing motivates you to get your spiritual house in order like becoming a parent. Faith is complex — especially in an interdenominational marriage — and my nascent, so-called “walk with the Lord” is more a series of stumbles, balks and the occasional face-plant. But sort it I must. If not for me, then for our girl.My proclaimed pope crush has opened up provocative discussions about faith among my friends. While reasonably skeptical about organized religion, my nearest-and-dearest are not without belief — along with the conventionally observant are also self-professed recovering Catholics, some who identify not as Jewish but Jew-ish, and members of the ever-growing Spiritual but Not Religious cohort. I understand their occasional blank stares, uncomfortable assumptions or uneasy questions.The cross as a symbol has become so fraught that it alone can no longer do the talking, but I can at least engage around what it means to me personally.Necessarily versed in critical dialogue-advancing qualifiers like inclusive, progressive and affirming, I have accepted that to be a modern Christian in largely secular circles is to be tasked with running defense for Team Jesus.Sometimes, when words fail me, I point to Stephen Colbert. For contemporary Christians, Mr. Colbert is our man on the inside, an emissary (I will stop short of saying “missionary”) among the mainstream news media.His recent GQ profile, in which his Roman Catholicism was addressed directly, served as a stirring example of interview-as-testimony. His Sept. 10 interview with Vice President Joe Biden, about how Mr. Biden’s own faith gave him a hand to hold after the loss of his son Beau, was as strong a statement about the healing power of religion as anything I’ve seen. (Mr. Colbert is planning an all-Catholic lineup for his show on Sept. 24, featuring Archbishop Thomas Wenski of Miami, the comedian Jim Gaffigan, the journalist Maria Shriver and the author Andrew Sullivan.)Alternatively, I can steer people to a recent BuzzFeed video called “I’m a Christian, but I’m Not … ” which presents a range of young people speaking from an all-embracing Christian space, which garnered an astonishing 11 million Facebook views within three days of its debut.The questions — and the suspicion behind them — are well founded, because the theological rift in the church, as showcased in the legal and social arena, feels less like a so-called culture war and more like an attempted hijacking of the heart of Christ, and, I daresay, at times an exodus from basic decency.But the news is not without encouragement, and Pope Francis is at the fore of many promising headlines. Earlier this month, he opened the door for women who have received abortions to seek forgiveness from their priest. “I am well aware of the pressure that has led them to this decision,” the pontiff wrote earlier this year. “I know that it is an existential and moral ordeal.”He has also called for easier access to annulments for Catholics who seek them, and urged a more welcoming standpoint on divorced parishioners.Some may call that too little, too late. But to those who feel that way, who may then urge me to abandon any support for such an archaic institution as the church, be it Roman Catholic or Protestant, I have my own question: If I abandon the church, then to whom am I abandoning it?In clerical parlance, the opening of a new church is called a “planting,” which I love, as it suggests that the church is a living, breathing thing that can grow and evolve. Just like us.Back when Pope John Paul II visited the city in 1979, my husband ditched his classes at Stuyvesant High School to see him at Shea Stadium, a transgression for which dispensation can safely be assumed. He counts it as one of his life’s most meaningful events.For him, for me, for so many of us who feel shunted aside in coverage of issues of faith, what religion represents is not control or a call to blind obedience or a cloak for corruption, but love and hope. Pope Francis, to us, is love and hope. Love for meaningful ties to tradition as well as hope for progress in the future.Crushes are Cupid’s deepest silliness made manifest, the ultimate in romantic caprice. But this particular crush also speaks to what religion has tendered since its inception: a font of promise, a place of refuge and rest and a reminder that even when we feel alone, we aren’t.So, yes, I have a crush on the pope — an affection that is larger than the crush itself. What seems like a lark is a reminder that as much as faith can present a conundrum, and feel at times like a chore, faith can also be a delight. What spiritual aspirant could deny room in her heart for that?