https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/11/podcasts/its-time-to-remember-whitney-houstons-brilliance.html
It’s Time to Remember Whitney Houston’s Brilliance - The New York Times
Podcasts
May 11, 2017
3177
It has been five years since Whitney Houston was found dead in a hotel room, of a drug overdose. She was one of the biggest pop stars of her time and a glorious singer — but we don’t properly remember her for that. Instead, she is considered a tragic figure. Her last years were a spectacle of demise: a coarse reality show with her husband, Bobby Brown, and the steady attrition of her voice. But unlike, say, Kurt Cobain or Amy Winehouse, attrition is not what you hear in her greatest vocal performances. It’s life. It’s joy. It’s artistry the likes of which we may never hear again.This week, we felt a reappraisal of Houston was in order. It’s a chance to remind everybody — and ourselves – of Ms. Houston’s brilliance. A chance to argue that the music is much greater and more important than any of the scandal. So we listen to some of her best recordings and live performances. And yes, we walk through the bad years, but only to remind ourselves of who we actually lost: the greatest singer of the rock ’n’ roll era.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.If you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying-glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the magnifying-glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.