http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/28/nyregion/28judge.html
Judge Who Gets Terror Case Is to Be Decided by the Spin of a Wheel - The New York Times
Mohammed  Khalid Shaikh,Courts,September 11 (2001),Crime and Criminals
Nov. 27, 2009
4891
At first glance, the wooden wheel looks as if it might have been used to call out bingo numbers in a church fund-raiser. But sometime soon, a federal magistrate judge in Manhattan could be spinning the wheel in open court, unlocking a small door on one of its sides, and pulling out a sealed envelope containing the name of a judge.That judge could well be charged with overseeing the trial of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four others accused in the Sept. 11 terror attacks. And that judge will have to consider questions as procedural as trial dates and as controversial and delicate as evidence gained through torture.The case could last years, and the judge who gets it will most likely be assigned security around the clock — for his or her lifetime.When Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. announced this month that the Obama administration would seek to have Mr. Mohammed and the others tried in civilian court in New York, he said that he was confident that “whatever judge is assigned to this case will maintain the dignity of the proceedings” and that the defendants would get a fair trial.For the moment, it is unclear whether the wheel will even be spun. Prosecutors could seek an indictment that would result in the case going to Judge Lewis A. Kaplan, who is presiding in the case of another suspected terrorist that is raising issues similar to those that could arise in the Sept. 11 matter.The question of who will preside over the case has become the subject of speculation in the chambers of judges and in the corridors of federal court on Pearl Street.“This entire case coming to New York is to demonstrate to the world that the system works — and part of that system is the wheel,” said Donna R. Newman, a lawyer whose clients have included Jose Padilla, the Brooklyn-born convert to Islam who was once designated as an enemy combatant (and was later convicted of conspiracy in federal court).Ronald L. Kuby, another lawyer whose clients have included terrorism defendants over the years, said: “As corny as it was watching that wooden bingo drum be spun, it did create a sense of impartiality. It would be a good thing in this case.”There are actually three wheels — labeled A, B, and C — that are used to assign most criminal cases. They sit in a row by the magistrate judge on the fifth floor of the courthouse.Wheel A is used for short trials; B for trials that are expected to last 6 to 20 days, and C for trials estimated to exceed 20 days.A judge who receives the Sept. 11 case may recuse him- or herself for a variety of reasons. The case would then be reassigned. In a recent case in Brooklyn federal court, for example, which uses a computer to assign cases randomly, it took four tries to assign a case involving a man charged in a Qaeda plot to set off bombs in the United States.The court’s chief judge, Raymond J. Dearie, who finally got the case, said that one judge assigned to the case was on senior status and was not supposed to be on the list of judges taking cases. A second judge had an irreconcilable conflict of interest that prevented her from sitting. And a third judge recused herself without explanation.“Take my word for it,” Judge Dearie said, “every judge in the courthouse would have liked to have had this case, fully realizing it’s going to be a real burden.”In Manhattan federal court, there are more than 20 active judges, along with a few on senior status (a sort of semiretirement), who appear to be eligible to receive the Sept. 11 case.Some have raised the question of whether a judge could volunteer for the Sept. 11 case. Under the court’s rules, a judge could offer to take the case only after it was randomly assigned to another judge. Mr. Kuby believes that would be inadvisable, saying, “Any judge who wants it should not have it.”“The only judge who would want this case is a judge who wants to stamp his or her mark on history,” he said, adding, “And the desire to do that tends not to make for the best judging.”If the wheel is not used, the Sept. 11 case could end up going before Judge Kaplan.Lawyers who have been mulling over this possibility presented the following premise: the judge has been handling the case of Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, a suspected terrorist charged with conspiring in the 1998 bombings of American Embassies in Africa. Like the Sept. 11 defendants, Mr. Ghailani spent time in the C.I.A.’s secret prisons and at Guantánamo.But it is less well known that Mr. Ghailani is also one of nearly two dozen defendants, including Osama bin Laden, who were charged in a broad indictment with conspiring to kill Americans “anywhere in the world, including in the United States.”That indictment is also before Judge Kaplan.Prosecutors could bring a superseding version of that indictment, in which they charge the Sept. 11 plot as part of Mr. bin Laden’s global conspiracy to kill Americans.“The government certainly has arguments that a superseding indictment and assignment to Judge Kaplan is appropriate,” said Michael G. McGovern, a former terrorism prosecutor in Manhattan.He added that prosecutors could validly say: “We indicted bin Laden. He’s the leader of this conspiracy. K. S. M. is the field general who carried it out.”Prosecutors had no comment.In yet another possibility, prosecutors would try Mr. Mohammed on a 1990s-era indictment in the so-called Bojinka plot to bomb American jetliners as they crossed the Pacific. Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy presided in a 1996 trial in which three others were convicted.But Mr. Holder’s recent comments make that seem unlikely. The attorney general said the Sept. 11 defendants would be “charged for what we believe they did, and that is to mastermind and carry out the 9/11 attacks.”