https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/movies/the-big-sick-review-kumail-nanjiani.html
Review: In ‘The Big Sick,’ Comedy Is Hard, Love Harder - The New York Times
Movies,The Big Sick (Movie),Nanjiani  Kumail,Gordon  Emily V,Kazan  Zoe,Showalter  Michael
June 22, 2017
6170
Love means having to say you’re sorry — early and often. That’s one of the truisms in “The Big Sick,” a joyous, generous-hearted romantic comedy that, even as it veers into difficult terrain, insists that we just need to keep on laughing. Outwardly, the story seems familiar: A really nice guy falls for a woman he may not be worthy of and nearly blows it. What gives the movie both fizz and sting — and shows that there’s plenty of juice and possibility left in the American romantic comedy — are its particulars, especially the comic Kumail Nanjiani, who plays a fictionalized version of himself, a Pakistani-American struggling to make it in stand-up while fumbling through the rest of his life.Mr. Nanjiani (who shares his name with his character) plays a 30-ish guy navigating these two seemingly irreconcilable worlds and identities. A fledgling Chicago stand-up, Kumail is a regular at a club where, alongside his comrades — played by the real-life funny people Bo Burnham, Aidy Bryant and Kurt Braunohler — he routinely tries to make a roomful of people laugh. One evening, he teasingly mixes it up with a customer, Emily (a wonderful Zoe Kazan), a jittery charmer with a mile-wide smile whom he soon makes moves on. Flirtation leads to one and then another night together, and before long, they’re frolicking in one of those time-is-passing montages.The real Emily is Emily V. Gordon, who’s married to Mr. Nanjiani. They wrote “The Big Sick” together — it was directed by Michael Showalter — creating comedy and drama from their lives. The story tracks the giddy start of their relationship, with its dazed smiles and intimacy, a romance that seems to collapse when she discovers that he hasn’t told his family about her. Kumail’s parents (Anupam Kher and Zenobia Shroff, both great), who live within dining distance, are trying to find him a wife and have been parading appealing prospects before him. He wants to please his folks, but he’s falling for Emily. He can’t decide what to do, so she breaks it off, but then falls gravely ill.The movie’s title is a giveaway: Emily’s sickness is big, as well as terrifying and confounding, and it lands her in an intensive care unit, hooked to life support. Before long, she is in an induced coma; Kumail’s doe eyes are watering; and you’re wondering, wait, isn’t this supposed to be a comedy? It is, and through sickness and nearly death, it remains a very funny one, too, producing a wide range of laughs, from staccato titters to abrupt guffaws and huge, body-shaking bursts. The ratio of jokes to screen time is satisfyingly high, and there are few stretches that aren’t enlivened by humor that, joke by joke, with silliness and caustic asides, also deepens the movie.In his stand-up, Mr. Nanjiani tells longish, confessional tales about, say, his attempts to be cool in school or watching a pornographic videotape in his parents’ home in Pakistan when the power went out. He can’t get the tape out of the VCR, so he decides he has to “pack my bags and walk the earth, which sucks because I love my parents and I’m 12 years old.” Taken out of context, of course, any given sentence in this kind of circuitous, long-form amble doesn’t sound especially funny. But Mr. Nanjiani builds the bit artfully, aided by a stealthy persona that comes across as perfectly ordinary until he deploys a puckish smile, revs up his adenoidal whine and gets his heavy eyebrows dancing.As he does in his stand-up, Mr. Nanjiani, who immigrated to the United States when he was a teenager, mines the comedy of cultural difference in “The Big Sick” with a light, sharp touch. In another, earlier bit, he talks about a roller-coaster ride, which he calls the scariest experience of his life, adding, “and I grew up in Pakistan.” In the movie, he drops a few terrorist-themed jokes so lightly that you’re caught off guard as much by his casual delivery as by the actual gags. You sense that he’s probably heard every ugly joke about Muslims imaginable, and so he’s learned how to get there first, staking a claim on a contested subject, finding humor and strength in other people’s stupidity.In some ways, “The Big Sick” plays like an extended version of one of Mr. Nanjiani’s anecdotal tales, though one streaked in tears and featuring a cast that includes the perfectly paired Holly Hunter and Ray Romano as Emily’s parents. Mr. Showalter, whose movies include “Hello, My Name Is Doris,” isn’t much of a visual stylist — the look of this movie is basically functional plus — but he’s terrific with actors and understands that even minor characters should be people, not background. In “The Big Sick,” you vividly see the person in each role, from nurse (Myra Lucretia Taylor) to would-be bride (Kuhoo Verma), which enriches the emotional texture and underlines that there’s something at stake.Ms. Kazan’s work here is pivotal, especially given that she needs to make a lasting, expressive impact with Emily before the character disappears, and the narrative center of gravity shifts squarely to Kumail. In other words, you need to fall for Emily as much as Kumail does while she pokes and prods him, encouraging him to come out and play. When he’s offstage, Kumail can seem as if he were waiting for something to happen, and when her parents arrive in Chicago, he recedes, turtle-like, creating a recessiveness that makes some of his deadpan discomfort even squirmier. Mostly, Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Kazan look and sound — and, importantly, feel — like people, like people you know and might fall for.I fell hard for both Ms. Kazan and Mr. Nanjiani and “The Big Sick,” which tells a great story with waves of deep feeling and questions of identity and makes the whole thing feel like a breeze. Comedy is said to be hard; mostly, I think, by comics. Romantic comedy is apparently even tougher, at least from recent onscreen evidence. Few filmmakers know how to fit contemporary men and women, straight or gay, into narrative forms that were developed once upon a time. In “The Big Sick,” Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon vault over that hurdle with openness and delight, revitalizing an often moribund subgenre with a true story of love, death and the everyday comedy of being a 21st-century American.