https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/08/world/australia/australia-same-sex-marriage.html
Australia’s Parliament Rejects Public Vote on Gay Marriage - The New York Times
Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Australia,Referendums,Legislatures and Parliaments,Turnbull  Malcolm (1954- )
Nov. 7, 2016
4799
SYDNEY, Australia — A bill that would have allowed a national plebiscite on legalizing same-sex marriage in Australia was defeated in Parliament on Monday. The vote in the Senate ended hopes for a change in the country’s marriage laws in the near future.Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull asked lawmakers in September to support a bill for a nonbinding public vote to be held in February, in part to appease conservatives from his Liberal Party-led coalition. Mr. Turnbull had favored parliamentary action to decide the issue, which he said would lead to legalization. But conservatives in his party had pushed for a plebiscite.In a speech to the Senate on Monday before the parliamentary vote, Attorney General George Brandis implored the senators who spoke against the bill to “stop playing politics with gay people’s lives.” “Get out of the way and let us have the plebiscite that would deliver marriage equality in Australia in less than 100 days,” he said.The plebiscite, which would have cost about $140 million, would have asked Australians if the Marriage Act should be revised to allow same-sex couples to marry. Mr. Turnbull, whose election district is the site of Sydney’s annual Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras parade, had said he was sure that Australians would vote for change. Recent polls show that around 70 percent of Australians want to see same-sex marriage legalized.But on Monday, a majority of senators from the Greens and from the Labor Party, along with lawmakers from smaller parties, joined together to block the plebiscite, by a vote of 33-29.It was unclear what action supporters of legalization might take next. Mr. Turnbull had resisted discussing the issue ahead of the Senate vote.Although the Greens and Labor support legalizing same-sex marriage, they oppose holding a plebiscite, calling it a possible platform for hate speech. Instead, they advocate deciding the issue in Parliament.“We know a plebiscite is divisive,” Penny Wong, a senator from the Labor Party, said on Monday during the debate. “It will give those who oppose equality a multimillion-dollar, taxpayer-funded megaphone to spread a message of intolerance.”Ms. Wong, who is gay and who spoke about her two young children during the debate, described the plebiscite as a “mechanism dreamed up by those in the coalition who oppose equality.” It is the wrong way to achieve same-sex marriage, she said.Other senators described the bill as a waste of hundreds of millions of dollars. In the past, some conservative lawmakers have said that they would not vote for a change to the Marriage Act if their constituents voted against it, regardless of the national outcome of the plebiscite.On Monday, Jacqui Lambie, an independent senator from Tasmania, invoked her “sacred Christian traditions” and a belief that a marriage was between a man and a woman.Pauline Hanson, a senator from Queensland for the right-wing One Nation party, had moved that the plebiscite take place at the same time as the next national election, which must be held by November 2019. “We cannot afford it,” she said, referring to the likely cost of the plebiscite. She also questioned whether a change to the Marriage Act would harm children. “Where are the rights of the child?” she asked. “Where are the rights of that child to be brought up in a home that they should have the balance between a male and a female?”The bill has long been mired in party politics.A former prime minister, Tony Abbott, who once studied for the Catholic priesthood and whose sister is gay and wants to marry, proposed in August 2015 that a public vote be held. He declared then that marriage was only between a man and a woman and ruled out allowing lawmakers to vote on the issue directly.But in September 2015, after a series of disastrous opinion polls, the deeply conservative Mr. Abbott lost his office to Mr. Turnbull.Mr. Turnbull was left with a rump of disaffected conservatives who had been supporters of Mr. Abbott. After losing seats in the national elections on July 2, Mr. Turnbull also faced a weakened government, which does not have a majority in the Senate. The Liberals are the more conservative of Australia’s two major parties.The Australian Christian Lobby, an advocacy group opposing same-sex marriage that has more than 50,000 members, said the defeat of the plebiscite bill had given it more time to campaign against changes to the Marriage Act.But Rodney Croome, a campaigner for legalization, said that a new bill could be introduced, and that lawmakers could be convinced that the weight of public opinion approved the changes, before the next national election.“More than two-thirds of Australians support marriage equality,” Mr. Croome said in an interview. The majority of lawmakers want change, he said, and just a handful need to be persuaded to defy party lines for the Marriage Act to be revised.