https://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/18/realestate/18LIVI.html
Preservation, vs. Live and Let Build - The New York Times
Yonkers (NY),Housing,Buildings (Structures)
March 18, 2007
8830
COMING upon Park Hill, a stately 19th-century neighborhood of mansions and bungalows on a 300-foot-high wooded plateau overlooking the Hudson River, is like discovering a never-never land.It is perched, almost symbolically, above the poverty-ridden southwest section of Yonkers, New York’s fourth-largest city, with just under 200,000 residents, on cliffs that afford a far different, more bucolic view of the surrounding countryside.Developed in 1888 by the American Real Estate Company of Manhattan, it was one of the first planned suburban communities in the area, and its Victorians, Gothic Revivals and Georgian colonials were advertised to attract  city-weary New Yorkers.Since that time — notably in the years after World War II —  more modest Cape Cods and ranches have sprung up among the grander of Park Hill’s 1,200 or so properties. Nowadays, there is even some new construction, on lots relatively free of the large old trees that define the rest of the neighborhood.The old-new divide is reflected in residents’ attitudes toward preservation. According to petitions circulated several years ago, about half see a need to regulate renovations and new construction through the use of  municipal landmark designations. They argue, among other things,  that this would help maintain higher property values.But there were enough opponents to this approach four years ago to defeat a preservation proposal. Although debate then was sometimes rancorous, said Shelley Weintraub, president of the Park Hill Residents’ Association, which represents about 400 families, “we’re going to give it a second shot.”Ms. Weintraub has lived for the last eight years in a four-bedroom Arts-and-Crafts-style bungalow with her husband, Lee, who sat on the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission under Mayors Edward I. Koch and David N. Dinkins. She said the group in favor of landmark status had hired a historian to prepare a new application and would reintroduce the proposal after trying  to “educate” the opposing faction about preservation.But judging from the stance of one opponent, Rosemary J. Uzzo, that process may prove challenging. Ms. Uzzo, a former director of public information for the Yonkers schools who has lived in her English Normandy home since 1965, feels the neighborhood should be allowed to evolve, unimpeded by external forces.“You can’t always go back to the way things were,” she said, “and maybe it’s better to let the old mix with the new.” Noting that the city already oversees planning and zoning through various boards, Ms. Uzzo said current controls were enough to prevent “shacks” from going up. “A new house may not be historic,” she said, “but so what? It will look like houses look today.”What You’ll FindClose-set single-family homes line Park Hill’s narrow streets, though there are a few two-family dwellings near the outskirts, where the neighborhood yields to more densely populated Yonkers. There is also a five-story Tudor-style rental, as well as two condominium complexes, totaling 225 units.Most single-family houses were built between 1890 and the 1930s on 50- by 100-foot lots, although some larger homes occupy multiple lots. Last year, a house tour sponsored by the Park Hill Residents’ Association featured a Colonial Revival built in 1898 with a domed elliptical dining room; a 1912 brick Georgian Revival; a 1907 American Foursquare colonial with an elaborate oak interior; and a 1903 Shingle-style home.Colin Cooke, a commercial still-life photographer, says he had several reasons for moving to Park Hill, among them its proximity to Manhattan and the diversity of the neighborhood’s housing stock.“Because of the variety of the architecture,” Mr. Cooke said, “a lot of creative types have gravitated here.” He and his wife, Elizabeth, a yoga teacher, live with their sons, Ian, 10, and Dillon, 6, in a 1907 Arts-and-Crafts-style home painted cream, sage green and mocha. The four-story, 2,600-square-foot structure cost them $350,000 in 1998.Especially compared with other Westchester locales, he said, Park Hill is affordable.One reason for that is the persistently afflicted public school system, which has for decades had a dampening effect on property values. The school district’s troubles came to a head in the mid-1980s, when a federal judge found the racially divided city guilty of intentional segregation in its housing and education. Although desegregation was imposed shortly after the finding, the district continues to suffer from chronic budget deficits and teacher strikes.The Cooke boys both attend the public schools. “We thought we’d give it a try,” Mrs. Cooke said, “at least for elementary school.” The Cookes, who are white, say having their children in racially integrated classrooms is important to them.Their house has two side lots, which they are seeking to preserve as open space through a conservation easement. They bought one lot from a developer who had been planning to build on it and, Mr. Cooke said, “might not have appreciated the historical value of this area.” He said other neighbors were similarly buying up land, hoping to preserve it.What You’ll PayA neighborhood record was set 18 months ago with the sale of a 12,000-square-foot Normandy Tudor for $2.5 million, according to Jane McAfee, a broker for Houlihan Lawrence.An 1890 neo-Classical colonial in need of work, with seven bedrooms and  three baths, recently sold for $715,000, she said, and an updated four-bedroom 1920s colonial in good condition went for $685,000.Now on the market, a 97-year-old colonial with eight bedrooms is listed at $1.195 million; a 1951 Cape Cod with three bedrooms is listed for $619,000; and a 1920s three-bedroom colonial is for sale at $539,000.One new arrival, Holland Utley, the design director for Glamour magazine, says she and her partner, Loretta Friedman, a chiropractor and nutritionist, moved last year from a sixth-floor walk-up rental in the Chelsea section of Manhattan to a five-bedroom, 99-year-old colonial that cost them about $750,000.They began their search in Pelham, but chose Yonkers, Ms. Utley said, because houses in Park Hill were far less expensive. “With the savings,” she added, “we had some money left over for renovations.”Another draw is that taxes in Yonkers are about half those in Pelham, whose highly regarded schools have driven up property values. For example, taxes on the four-bedroom colonial that recently sold for $715,000 were $8,990; on a similar house in Pelham, Ms. McAfee said, they would be two or three times that.What to Do“Sometimes I feel like we live on an island,” Ms. Utley said, “especially because there aren’t any good local shops or restaurants close by and we have to drive everywhere.” But what the neighborhood lacks in amenities, it makes up for in parks and clubs.The private Racquet Club on Park Hill advertises swimming, tennis, bowling and social activities, “to help turn neighbors into friends.”On the neighborhood’s edge, the Leslie Sutherland Park offers a 20-mile unimpeded vista encompassing everything from Midtown to the Hudson shoreline, stretching almost to the Tappan Zee Bridge.As for dining, the area around Getty Square on the river offers a variety,  but it is not close by. Theaters and shopping are even farther away, on the eastern edge of Yonkers in the Cross County Shopping Center, an open-air mall dating back to 1954.The city is considering a $3.6 billion plan to transform the downtown near the waterfront, but approval of that is  months, if not years, away. A minor league baseball field is envisioned, as well as theaters and housing. But getting there from Park Hill would still involve a drive.The CommuteDepending on traffic, it is a 30-minute drive to the West Side of Manhattan from Park Hill, via the Saw Mill River and Henry Hudson Parkways.Metro-North Railroad provides 30-minute service from Yonkers’s Getty Square Station to Grand Central Terminal. Monthly tickets are $197.24 if bought on the Web, slightly more if bought at a station.The SchoolsSome opt for the public schools, but many, like Kim Fader, a resident since the late 1980s, send their children elsewhere. Her daughter, Sophie, 16, attends the Horace Mann School in the Riverdale section of the Bronx. When her son, Benjamin, 21, now in college, was starting kindergarten, the city was battling a teachers’ strike, and Ms. Fader enrolled him in the Dobbs Ferry system, paying tuition there and ferrying him.“Clearly,” she said, “the public school system in Yonkers has been a big challenge, and it continues to be.”The district — comprising 29 elementary schools, 5 middle schools and 5 high schools — has an enrollment of 24,708. In the year ending in 2006, average SAT scores were 430 on the verbal and 427 on math, versus state averages of 493 and 510. The HistorySince the American Real Estate Company began building on Park Hill,  many well-known figures have been residents —  among them, in the 1910s and 20s, the English actor Richard Bennett and his daughters, Joan and Constance. During that era another resident, Dennis O’Brien, the United Artists counsel, had guests including Charlie Chaplin, George M. Cohan and Mary Pickford.A SnapshotLove it or hate it, the wealth of well-preserved architecture makes Park Hill stand out, especially in an era of new homes built to identical floor plans.Going ForwardThe question is whether the neighborhood will retain its old-fashioned look, and as Ms. Uzzo put it, that is “a tough call.” Lee Ellman, Yonkers’s planning director, says historic designation would “put teeth in efforts to enforce historic preservation,” by requiring approval of new roofs and windows, and tree removal.Two neighborhoods have municipal landmark designation: Cedar Knolls, which consists of 140 homes near Bronxville; and Halcyon Place, about 18 homes on Warburton Avenue on the west side of town. An effort to make a landmark of Lawrence Park West, also near Bronxville, failed at the same time as the Park Hill bid.