https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/25/sports/football/ny-giants-kicker-josh-brown-domestic-violence.html
Giants Break Silence on Josh Brown’s Suspension Over Arrest - The New York Times
Football,Brown  Josh (1979- ),Domestic Violence,New York Giants,Mara  John K
Aug. 24, 2016
3648
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Giants co-owner John K. Mara on Wednesday defended the team’s decision to re-sign kicker Josh Brown despite Brown’s 2015 arrest on a domestic violence charge and a statement by Brown’s former wife to the police that he had been physically violent with her on numerous occasions.The charge against Brown, who has been suspended for one game by the N.F.L., was dropped days after his arrest. The N.F.L. said its investigation could not corroborate the statements made by Molly Brown, Josh Brown’s wife at the time of the arrest.Mara, who said the Giants were aware of what Molly Brown had told the police, said the team had made similar inquiries into the matter before signing Josh Brown to a two-year, $4 million contract in April.“Based on the facts and circumstances that we were aware of at that time, we were comfortable with our decision to re-sign him,” Mara said. “Nothing has happened in the meantime to make us question that decision.”Brown was suspended last week for the Giants’ opening game of this season for violating the N.F.L.’s personal conduct policy. Giants management had been silent on the suspension until Wednesday.Mara conceded that perhaps he should have spoken sooner.“There are privacy issues here,” Mara said. “There are sensitive, emotional issues that affect families, and it is very difficult to discuss those in public and make a situation even worse than it already is.”Mara said the team had received complaints from fans about Brown’s remaining on the team, but he insisted that the team took the issue of domestic violence “very seriously” and put every player and employee through a training program on domestic and sexual abuse.“This is an issue that is very personal to a lot of us,” he said.Mara continued: “I have four daughters and seven sisters, and I know I have to face each one of them. These are not easy decisions. It is very easy to say, ‘The guy has been accused, get rid of him, terminate him.’ But when you are sitting at the top of an organization and you are responsible for a lot of people, you better make more informed decisions than that.“A lot of times there is a tendency to try to make these cases black and white. They are very rarely black and white; you very rarely have a Ray Rice video. There are allegations made, you try to sort through the facts, and you try to make an informed decision. That is what we did here.”Mara declined to get into specifics about Josh Brown’s situation and went out of his way to avoid questioning or affirming the veracity of Molly Brown’s statements to the police. The couple have divorced since the arrest, and Mara said Josh Brown had been to counseling for a few years.“We are pretty confident that he has been very diligent about that,” Mara said. “He has been a good citizen since he has been here. He has had conversations with a number of us on the management end, including myself, and I am confident that he is going to continue to conduct himself in a manner that we expect him to do.”Brown, 37, made the Pro Bowl last season when he converted 30 of 32 field-goal attempts. Nonetheless, the Giants this week signed Randy Bullock, a former kicker for the Houston Texans and the Jets. Bullock could be cut before the season begins — many kickers will become available when rosters are trimmed at the end of the preseason — or he could remain with the Giants into the season.The Giants have said that Brown and Bullock are competing for the kicking job in the long term. On Wednesday, Mara called that a football decision.“That will be up to the coach,” he said.