https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/realestate/when-a-your-renovation-damages-a-neighbors-apartment.html
When Your Renovation Damages a Neighbor’s Apartment - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Ovens and Stoves,Restoration and Renovation
July 15, 2017
2854
Q. During renovations of our Gramercy Park co-op, some dust filtered into our neighbor’s apartment. Our contractors went in there, moved her stove, and patched an open hole in her wall. After this was done, she claimed that one of her burners had stopped working. I don’t know if her stove was working before my contractors visited her apartment, but I offered to pay for the stove repair as a good neighbor. She now claims that her stove is broken beyond repair and wants a new stove and any alterations to her kitchen as a result. She has provided no evidence of the damage to her stove. What is my responsibility?A. You may be responsible for damaging your neighbor’s stove, but it would depend on what you said to your contractors. If you told the contractors to go fix the problem next door, then the contractors would have been acting as your agent and you would be liable for damage that happened as a result of the work he did. But if the contractors went over to clear the dust and patch the wall independently, without your input and nothing in your work agreement with him authorized him to do that, then he was acting outside of your control and the damage is his responsibility, said Eric D. Sherman, a real estate lawyer in the Manhattan offices of the law firm Pryor Cashman.But even if the liability is yours, there are limits. Let’s say you did tell the contractors to remove the dust and patch the hole. That would have been the neighborly thing to do. And you would be responsible only for reasonably foreseeable damages — if a leg of the stove snapped, for example, when the contractors moved the appliance. You wouldn’t be responsible for unforeseeable damages, like a crack in the window on the other side of the kitchen caused by vibrations produced when the stove was moved.Your offer to pay to repair the stove was another neighborly gesture, but it does not make you responsible for all future problems associated with the stove. If your neighbor continues to insist that you pay for a new stove, ask her to prove to you that the demise of the stove was the direct result of the work the contractors did in her apartment.