https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/books/review-harry-crews-a-childhood-memoir.html
Harry Crews’s ‘A Childhood’ Vividly Evokes a Depression-Era America - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Crews  Harry,A Childhood: The Biography of a Place (Book)
June 29, 2017
9424
The most indelible scene in American literary memoir, for this reader at any rate, occurs about two-thirds of the way into Harry Crews’s “A Childhood: The Biography of a Place” (1978).He’s describing hog-killing season in southern Georgia, where he grew up not far from the Okefenokee Swamp. The year is 1940. Neighbors have come to help Crews’s impoverished family put a year’s worth of meat in their smokehouse.The careful description of the slaughter and the making of sausages and headcheese goes on for pages, as Crews evokes “the steaming smell of excrement and the oily, flatulent odor of intestines and the heavy sweetness of the blood.”Then it happens. Crews was 5 and playing a game called pop the whip with a gaggle of children. He popped loose from the spinning line and flew screaming into a boiler of water that was being used to scald pigs.He was quickly yanked out, but little matter.“I reached over and touched my right hand with my left, and the whole thing came off like a wet glove. I mean, the skin on the top of the wrist and the back of my hand, along with the fingernails, all just turned loose and slid on down to the ground.”This is merely the beginning of the ordeal, made worse by the fact that “out of panic and terror and ignorance and love” someone wrapped him in a sheet that stuck to his body, which had been peeled like a tomato. He survived only because his head did not go under.“A Childhood” covers just the first six years of this gifted novelist’s life, but it is a nearly Dickensian anthology of physical and mental intensities. His father, a tenant farmer, died of a heart attack before Crews was 2. His stepfather was a drunk who sometimes pulled out his shotgun.About the time and place, Crews writes: “I knew for certain it was not unusual for a man to shoot at his wife. It was only unusual if he hit her.”Not long before the scalding Crews contracted polio, so severely that his heels drew back tightly until they touched the backs of his thighs. He was told, incorrectly, he’d never walk again.Those in the Crews family, like everyone they knew, barely scraped by. “The world that circumscribed the people I come from,” he writes, “had so little margin for error, for bad luck, that when something went wrong, it almost always brought something else down with it.”Crews sought solace in an unusual place: the pages of the Sears, Roebuck catalog. It was the only reading material in his house other than the Bible. He gravitated toward it because the faces in it were perfect, without the scars and blemishes of everyone he knew.“The people in the catalog had no such hurts,” he writes. “They were not only whole, had all their arms and legs and toes and eyes on their unscarred bodies, but they were also beautiful. Their legs were straight and their heads were never bald and on their faces were looks of happiness, even joy, looks that I never saw much of in the faces of the people around me.”He became a writer in part, he suggests, because of the pleasure he found in making up stories about the people in the catalog.Anyone who has read much of Crews’s fiction knows he has an affinity for grotesques. Some of his men and women become freakish performance artists to escape their circumstances. Herman Mack, the protagonist of “Car” (1972), for example, commences to eat an entire Ford Maverick.His best novel might be his first, “The Gospel Singer” (1968), about a prosperous faith healer who returns to his hometown. Or it might be “A Feast of Snakes” (1976), a Flannery O’Connor-meets-Robert Altman fantasia about people who gather in Georgia for an annual snake roundup.“A Childhood” is the best introduction to his work. It explains so much of where Crews was coming from in his blood-tinted fiction. About the way people looked at him when he had polio, he writes: “I hated it and dreaded it and was humiliated by it. I felt how lonely and savage it was to be a freak.”This memoir has a foot in another world, a weird, old Depression-era America. Crews writes with knowledge and feeling on a wide series of topics, from farming to factory work (his mother later takes a job at a cigar-making factory) to food and sex.There’s a remarkable section about the lengths men would go to, while selling mules, to make old ones seem young. Their schemes, which included the recapping and staining of teeth, would make a used-car salesman blush.He explains that poor men in Georgia wanted large families partly because “a large family was the only thing a man could be sure of having. Nothing else was certain.”Harry Crews died in 2012 at the age of 76. His novels, which are mostly out of print, aren’t for everyone, despite my abiding fondness for several of them.This memoir is for everyone. It’s agile, honest and built as if to last. Like its author, it’s a resilient American original.