https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/08/us/politics/super-pacs-take-on-new-role-organizing-voters.html
‘Super PACs’ Take On New Role, Organizing Voters - The New York Times
Political Action Committees,Presidential Election of 2016,Campaign Finance,Political Advertising,Jindal  Bobby,Paul  Rand,Bush  Jeb
July 7, 2015
7661
IOWA CITY —  College students supporting Rand Paul for president were out in force going door to door in this university town recently, using their iPad Minis to help identify Republicans committed to voting for the Kentucky senator in next year’s Iowa caucuses.And when Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana visited the state the same week in June for town-hall-style meetings in Waukee, Council Bluffs and Sioux City, his supporters collected voters’ names and emails with an eye toward caucus day.But the Paul and Jindal campaigns were not behind these time-honored grass-roots organizing efforts. Instead, in a twist that shows how even retail politics is being transformed by a flood of loosely regulated big money, the two candidates’ courtship of voters is being carried out by “super PACs,” which are using their abundant war chests to move into the nuts and bolts of campaign operations.In previous election cycles, super PACs — which can raise unlimited donations from corporations and individuals alike — largely channeled money from wealthy donors into political advertising. But now they are branching out into what had seemed a fundamental function of a campaign committee: organizing voters one at a time.Candidates “are pushing as much of the stuff as they can over to the super PACs because that’s where the real money is,” said Terry Giles, who recently quit as the campaign manager for Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, to start a super PAC that will support him.The practice of having super PACS, which can be entirely financed by a single billionaire, take over such operations allows campaigns, which may raise only $2,700 from any one donor, to outsource the costly, labor-intensive work of recruiting activists and building lists of supporters.It could also allow second-tier candidates to be more competitive, prolonging the nominating process. And in the general election, a Republican nominee whose organizing is paid for by a super PAC might level the playing field with Democrats, whose allies in labor have traditionally given the party an edge in mustering volunteers to help turn out voters.But there are risks to outsourcing a field campaign. Candidates, who are legally forbidden to coordinate with super PACs, are in danger of being cut off from their most ardent supporters as they head into caucus and primary elections.“As a campaign, you have absolutely no idea” how you’re doing, said Nick Ryan, the president of a super PAC supporting Mike Huckabee, a former Arkansas governor. “That would scare me to death. You’d be disconnected from the very base of your campaign, the people who are most passionate about you.” (Still, Mr. Ryan hesitated to rule out any grass-roots campaign work aside from recruiting volunteers to support Mr. Huckabee.)Tina Goff, who recruited leaders in all 99 Iowa counties on behalf of a super PAC supporting Mr. Carson before he even declared his candidacy, turned down an offer of a job with his campaign. “It would have been great to travel around with Dr. Carson,” she said, “but I felt like I had created an infrastructure here and I wanted to continue what I was doing.” She said she was now hiring 25 people to knock on doors in Iowa after paying $40,000 for a list of Republican caucusgoers from the state party.Even for candidates who do not have fund-raising problems, relying on super PACs offers another way to manage expectations and perceptions.In Iowa, where Jeb Bush faces stiff resistance from conservatives, a senior Republican strategist said that before Mr. Bush announced his candidacy, his team discussed leaving some of the field organizing to a super PAC established by his aides. That would spare Mr. Bush’s campaign some embarrassment should he perform badly in Iowa during the caucuses by giving his campaign distance from the effort.Several campaigns have welcomed outside organizing efforts in Iowa, which will hold the first nominating contest on Feb. 1. The farthest along are efforts for Mr. Paul, Carly Fiorina and Mr. Carson.An outside group that supports Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, who is expected to announce his candidacy next week, collected cards at a recent political forum in Des Moines from voters pledging to caucus for the candidate. A spokesman for the group, Our American Revival, said it would continue to organize on Mr. Walker’s behalf in Iowa and other states.So far, only super PACs supporting Republicans appear to be organizing the grass roots, although outside groups that back Democrats, including labor unions and nonprofits, have long performed tasks like registering voters and canvassing neighborhoods. (A super PAC aimed at generating grass-roots support for Hillary Rodham Clinton, Ready for Hillary, closed up shop once Mrs. Clinton formally entered the race.)“It’s no surprise that super PACs would at some point evolve into the organizational side of politics,” said Chris LaCivita, a senior adviser to Mr. Paul. He called it a predictable outgrowth of an era that since 2002 has banned unlimited donations to party committees, and in which wealthy donors have rechanneled support to outside groups, which are less accountable.Ms. Fiorina, the former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, may have turned over more traditional campaign tasks to a super PAC than any other candidate: lining up endorsements, answering reporters’ questions about her business career and opening field offices in early primary states like South Carolina. The primary reason is her difficulty raising money for a full-fledged campaign. She reported pulling in just $1.4 million in May and June.The super PAC, Carly for America, which said Monday that it had raised $3.4 million, “is running a grass-roots organization focused on building support in early states,” said Katie Hughes, a spokeswoman.The group organizing for Mr. Paul, Concerned American Voters, has pledges of “multiple millions” from wealthy donors in Silicon Valley, said Jeff Frazee, its president. It has had 40 full-time field workers in Iowa since June 1, knocking on doors during the day and making phone calls at night.But that effort illustrates the potential for duplication and clashing agendas between super PACs and campaigns. Mr. Paul already had a network of activists in Iowa, many of whom supported campaigns by his father, Ron Paul. Asked about the super PAC, the campaign’s state director, Steve Grubbs, said in a text message: “Not commenting on this. Wish I could.”Concerned American Voters is separate from another super PAC backing Mr. Paul, called America’s Liberty PAC, which the senator officially endorsed. Before he announced his candidacy, Mr. Paul sought donations for America’s Liberty PAC from about 15 tech investors but was rebuffed, said Scott Banister, who hosted the meeting at a San Francisco restaurant.That was because the donors were talking among themselves about shifting support from TV advertising, the focus of America’s Liberty PAC, to a grass-roots campaign.“I’m not convinced that TV ads are really as effective as they were,” said Mr. Banister, an early investor in PayPal, adding that interactive communication with voters mattered more. “Grass roots is just kind of old-school interactive,” he said.Mr. Frazee said he was inspired by Barack Obama’s upset victory over Mrs. Clinton in Iowa eight years ago. “He was able to win with a very organized ground game,” he said. “That’s been our strategy.”In Iowa City, Ani DeGroot, a college student on summer break working for Concerned American Voters, approached Timothy Anderson, who was mowing his lawn.“Will you support Rand Paul?” she asked after he had shut down the mower.“I probably will,” he said.“Fantastic,” Ms. DeGroot said. “Are there any issues that are most important to you?”“I wish we would just get out of all these wars and being policemen to the world,” said Mr. Anderson, a human resources manager.Ms. DeGroot entered his responses into her iPad Mini supplied by the super PAC. At a future date, another Paul supporter might call on Mr. Anderson to urge him to volunteer, or even to speak for Mr. Paul at his precinct caucus. The vote may be less than seven months away, but it is never too early to begin organizing.