http://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/26/business/breaking-up-again-overview-t-pullback-will-break-itself-into-4-businesses.html
BREAKING UP AGAIN: THE OVERVIEW; AT&T;, IN PULLBACK, WILL BREAK ITSELF INTO 4 BUSINESSES - The New York Times
AT&T CORP,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,TELEVISION,CELLULAR TELEPHONES,TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS,COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET
Oct. 26, 2000
9816
Running out of time with impatient investors, AT&T yesterday pulled back from an expensive three-year effort to become the first one-stop shop selling long-distance, wireless, cable television and Internet services across the nation as a single package with a single bill. It announced that instead it would break itself into four parts.The nation's eighth-largest company, which only two decades ago dominated the telephone business and ranked with General Motors and Mobil among the nation's very largest companies, will become four much smaller businesses competing against many formidable, and sometimes larger, rivals.AT&T announced that it would create three companies with four publicly traded stocks. Under the plan, for which AT&T will seek shareholder approval, it will spin off its cable television operation, the nation's biggest, and its wireless unit, among the nation's biggest, as separate companies over the next two years. It will leave control of most of the company's global communications network and the unit that serves business customers in the hands of the core AT&T. That company will also control AT&T's consumer unit, which is dominated by its shrinking long-distance business. The consumer business will have its own publicly traded stock, starting next year.AT&T aimed its announcement yesterday at the investment world -- AT&T's stock is among the most widely held. The company made less mention of the plan's effect on its millions of customers. But it is clear that AT&T's units, operating separately but all using the AT&T brand, would deliver just about the same range of services. And customers could benefit as the newly freed AT&T units begin to compete against one another and to expand their product lines, possibly offering better prices and new choices for services including residential high-speed Internet access.AT&T's customers are unlikely to notice much immediate change as the plan becomes reality. The AT&T name on their bills will stay the same, at least for a few years, and their services will not change in the short run. Prices are not likely to change quickly, either.Some consumer advocates worried yesterday that the breakup would leave too much power in the hands of the Bell phone companies -- BellSouth, Qwest, SBC and Verizon -- which still dominate local communications markets in most of the nation and which have begun to enter the long-distance arena.Investors in AT&T were not delighted. Concerns about the plan, especially the fact that the separated units would pay a lower combined dividend than the company does now, were one reason. Also, while AT&T announced earnings for the third quarter that exceeded predictions yesterday, it also released forecasts for the fourth quarter that fell short of analysts' expectations. The financial announcements helped send AT&T's shares down about 14 percent, to $23.38.AT&T's roots stretch to 1887, when Alexander Graham Bell founded the Bell Telephone Company. In 1984, under pressure from the Justice Department, the company divested its local phone holdings as seven ''Baby Bells.'' In 1996, the company spun off its communications equipment operation as Lucent Technologies.Deregulation in 1996 allowed new competition, and the proliferation of the Internet and other new technologies created a race in which communications companies have scrambled to get bigger.AT&T wanted to top them all by offering customers everything they needed in communications services. AT&T has spent more than $90 billion since C. Michael Armstrong took over as chairman three years ago to become the nation's biggest cable company. The idea was to use cable systems to deliver phone service and high-speed Internet access as well as interactive television. Coupled with the wireless unit, the cable systems gave AT&T a broader portfolio than any other communications carrier.In the end, however, financial markets did not appear to support that strategy, or at least its execution. AT&T's stock has languished recently. The plan announced yesterday is based on the notion that those operations would be worth more on their own than as a whole.With $62.4 billion in revenue last year, AT&T ranked eighth on Fortune magazine's most recent list of the nation's biggest companies. Without the cable, wireless and consumer units, AT&T would have ranked 41st.The new plan is as potentially complex as the 1984 breakup. But in the 1980's, because the overhaul was forced by antitrust pressure, the government oversaw carefully crafted ground rules and timetables to try to reduce consumer confusion.This time, with the overhaul prompted by market pressures, the government will not manage the process. Few, if any, regulatory hurdles appear to stand in the way of AT&T's plan. But that reflects the fact that in important ways, the communications landscape is much different now. Back in 1984, AT&T and its seven ''Baby Bell'' spinoffs had few competitors. Now, the rise of competition means that consumers have a variety of alternatives, and many people have become used to choosing among them.Some consumer advocates expressed concerns about the plan.''This is a cataclysmic marketplace event that reflects the failure of deregulation policy; it's terrible for consumers,'' said Gene Kimmelman, co-director of Consumers Union's Washington office. ''There will not be a unified AT&T wire to carry local, long-distance, cable and broadband services. Nobody in long-distance has come up with a viable, cost-effective strategy to challenge the Bells. This restructuring truly demonstrated that the long-distance market and local market, for the majority of consumers, will be ceded to the Bell monopolies.''But Mr. Armstrong, in a statement, said the deal ''creates a family of four national service providers that will be even better equipped to bring American families and businesses a new generation of broadband communications and information services.''AT&T said yesterday that the consumer unit would begin trials next year of high-speed Internet access over standard telephone wires using a technology known as digital subscriber lines, or D.S.L. AT&T has mostly shunned such systems in the past, partly because D.S.L. is the main competitor to cable modem technology. AT&T, as the biggest cable company, had a big interest in cable modems' success.AT&T held up the D.S.L. initiative as an example of the benefits that the units' new independence could hold for consumers. Ultimately, however, AT&T seemed more focused yesterday on investors than on consumers.  The company highlighted the potential business benefits of the plan.Most important, AT&T expects investors to give the separate units a higher value on their own than they did when the units were part of AT&T. That is because some of AT&T's diverse units are typically judged by investors by different financial results. Mature operations, such as the long-distance telephone business, are generally valued based on their earnings per share. Newer units that are growing more quickly,  like cable and wireless, are generally valued by their cash flow, or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.The company announced yesterday that it earned $1.44 billion, or 38 cents a share, in the third quarter, excluding special charges, down from $1.63 billion, or 50 cents a share, during the comparable period last year. That exceeded the consensus estimate of 36 cents a share by analysts polled by First Call/Thomson Financial, a financial research firm. Including all charges, AT&T said it earned $1.32 billion, or 35 cents a share, down from 50 cents a share during the third quarter of 1999.Aside from any particular quarter's results, the larger financial problem that AT&T's plan is meant to solve is that investors have appeared to judge the company mostly by its earnings per share (as well as revenue growth), denying the company full credit for the cash flow growth in the cable and wireless businesses. AT&T is hoping that on their own, the cable and wireless businesses will be compared with their industry peers and will thus enjoy greater favor with investors.Nonetheless, some communications experts said the overhaul plan was misguided.''This is one of the silliest reorganizations in communications,'' said Howard Anderson, founder of the Yankee Group, a communications research firm, and senior managing director of YankeeTek, a venture capital firm based in Boston. ''They have essentially genuflected to the financial markets when in reality staying the course would have gotten them to where they want to be. AT&T would have been in much more horrible straits had they not done the cable mergers, had they not done wireless. They have the pieces. It belongs as one company. They have listened to the wrong angel here talking about shareholder value.''Mr. Armstrong himself agrees that AT&T's expansion into the cable market was essential. But he sees the plan as part of the same overall strategy that he has had all along.''There seems to be a lot of fun to write that this is a reversal or a repudiation of our strategy,'' he said at a meeting with analysts in Manhattan yesterday morning. ''I find that not only wrong but offensive.''In an interview later, Mr. Armstrong said: ''Once I got here and realized that we needed a strategy, I realized that the challenge was really whether there would be an AT&T. That was what the risk was. And here I was at the helm of an American icon and the outcome of everything could be no AT&T.''He added, ''It's the outcome that will count. And the thing that keeps me charged up, smiling and hopefully rising above it is that I'm convinced the outcome is going to be successful.''