https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/05/nyregion/fight-awaits-de-blasio-on-opening-upper-east-side-trash-transfer-site.html
Fight Awaits de Blasio on Opening Upper East Side Trash Transfer Site - The New York Times
de Blasio  Bill,Upper East Side (Manhattan  NY),Waste Materials and Disposal,Pledge 2 Protect
Feb. 4, 2014
4908
Among the many pressing issues Mayor Bill de Blasio will contend with in the coming four years is one that will be waiting practically outside his door.Since 2006, New York City has planned to revitalize an unused garbage transfer station on a bend in the East River, just three blocks north of Gracie Mansion on the Upper East Side. It would cut the amount of Manhattan’s trash hauled to other boroughs for processing and use barges and reduce truck traffic in getting the waste to out-of-state landfills.But opening the marine transfer station, at East 91st Street, has become a protracted issue involving race, class and geographic equity, with Mr. de Blasio’s future neighbors contesting the plan on several fronts. To support their sides, supporters and opponents each point to Mr. de Blasio’s campaign message of bridging the gap in the “tale of two cities.”With litigation having slowed but not stopping the project, a community group says it will soon release a study to try to win over Mr. de Blasio, who supports the transfer station’s reopening. Its reconstruction began last year and is to be completed in 2016.The group, called Pledge 2 Protect, declined to reveal what the report would say. But a member, Carol Tweedy, said the report would give Mr. de Blasio reason to “hit pause.”Manhattan does not have an operating trash transfer station, so advocates of the 91st Street plant contend that its return is a matter of fairness, because other areas now suffer with the smell, pollution and traffic of trucks carrying Manhattan’s garbage for processing.Ms. Tweedy, who is executive director of Asphalt Green, which has a sports complex next to the old station, said that argument boiled down to, “You have a terrible problem in some communities, so let’s put that problem somewhere else.”She responds, “That’s supposed to represent borough equity?”Ms. Tweedy said some advocates of revitalizing the plant think the neighborhood “seems like it’s rich, white people, so stick it to them.” Instead, the opponents say it is a racially and economically diverse, densely populated community.Gavin Kearney, director of the Environmental Justice Program at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest, which supports the project as part of the city’s solid waste management plan, said Pledge 2 Protect’s impending report was a stalling tactic.“That’s probably the most analyzed waste transfer station, I don’t know about in the world, but certainly in New York City,” Mr. Kearney said. “The city has met with that community on numerous occasions to hear their concerns to figure out how to address them. There’s a bigger context here, maybe in part the notion of putting a piece of municipal infrastructure in a wealthy neighborhood.”As a member of the City Council, Mr. de Blasio voted for the city’s solid waste plan, which included the reopening of the 91st Street station, two waste transfer stations in Brooklyn and one in Queens. Work continues on all four, with two expected to open this spring, to handle some of the 44,000 tons of trash collected in the city every day.During last year’s race for mayor, Mr. de Blasio reaffirmed his support for the East 91st Street station, though he added, “I believe residents have valid concerns that must be addressed in the implementation process.”Recently, his chief spokeswoman, Marti Adams, said in an email that the mayor, who will soon be moving into Gracie Mansion with his family, “will not walk away from the five-borough plan.”For decades, the bulk of the city’s trash has been processed at transfer stations in north Brooklyn, the South Bronx and southeast Queens, neighborhoods now burdened, backers of the city’s waste plan say, with garbage truck traffic, foul-smelling refuse and high asthma rates.On a recent weekday morning along Metropolitan Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, commercial garbage trucks traveled up and down the road virtually nonstop.“It’s crazy,” said a local resident, Kate Yourke, standing outside Public School 132, which her son attends. “There’s sort of a feeling of helplessness.”The East 91st Street station would process up to 1,600 tons of trash a day. By comparison, about 7,000 tons are driven daily to and from transfer stations in north Brooklyn. The Upper East Side station, unlike some of the city’s transfer stations, would be enclosed, with odor controls and garbage trucks’ dropping off their loads inside, reducing the release of emissions into the air.“We’re on the verge of being able to radically fix our solid-waste problem in a way that’s equitable, that’s progressive,” said Eddie Bautista, executive director of the New York City Environmental Justice Alliance. “That falls in with all the other things de Blasio has said.”Still, around the East 91st Street site, concerns remain over the health, environmental and quality-of-life effects. Opponents have handed out surgical masks at nearby subway stops and recruited grade-school students to draw protest signs and to help send “Dump the Dump” postcards to elected officials.They have hired public relations companies to sharpen their message, and have filed a series of lawsuits, the last two of which are challenging in federal court the Army Corps of Engineers’ decision to issue a construction permit.To date, no judge has ruled against the waste management plan, although legal efforts have helped delay the completion of the East 91st Street station by several years.“This transfer station is a thing from the past,” said George Morin, who has lived at 90th Street and York Avenue for more than 30 years, and is president of an anti-transfer station group, the Gracie Point Community Council. “The community does not want it. We started to express that and we’ve been successful holding it back.”When asked whether Pledge 2 Protect had an alternative to offer to the reopening of the station, its president, Kelly Nimmo-Guenther, declined to answer before its report was released.She and other opponents have pointed out that some of those living near the site include residents of public housing.Pledge 2 Protect has hired the Black Institute, an advocacy group focused on issues affecting minorities and founded by Bertha Lewis, a former chief executive of Acorn who has known Mr. de Blasio, she said, since he ran for his district school board in Brooklyn more than a decade ago.“Bill and I hardly ever disagree, but on this one issue, we do,” Ms. Lewis said, “and I just want him to slow down, so we can say, Here, let’s look at this thing again from a different lens.”Ms. Lewis said she hoped to speak to the mayor about it and also planned rallies and a campaign that would be “visible and unusual.”“You want to solve the problem of environmental racism, first of all, cop to it,” Ms. Lewis said of the other side. “But don’t tell me now that you’re going to put this particular marine transfer station smack dab in the middle of poor people, black and brown people, public housing people, and somehow claim that is some type of virtue.”