https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/01/books/review/robert-f-worths-a-rage-for-order.html
Robert F. Worth’s ‘A Rage for Order’ - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Worth  Robert F,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),A Rage for Order: The Middle East in Turmoil  From Tahrir Square to ISIS (Book),Rage for Order  A (Book)
April 25, 2016
9437
A RAGE FOR ORDERThe Middle East in Turmoil, From Tahrir Square to ISISBy Robert F. Worth259 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.This is the book on the Middle East you have been waiting to read.“A Rage for Order: The Middle East in Turmoil, From Tahrir Square to ISIS,” by Robert F. Worth, tells the story of the 2011 Arab Spring and its slide into autocracy and civil war better than I ever could have imagined its being told. The volume is remarkably slender for one of such drama and scope — beautifully written, Worth’s words scudding easily and gracefully across the pages. It is also a marvel of storytelling, with the chapters conjuring a poignancy fitting for the subject.Worth, a former correspondent for The New York Times, employs the familiar journalistic conceit of telling the history of the Arab Spring by presenting the stories of different individuals whose lives became caught up in it. While the method is timeworn, it has rarely been done with such skill.Worth has chosen his subjects perfectly. Their experiences exquisitely capture the awe of the revolutions and the anguish of the unravelings that followed. Often, reducing grand events like the Arab Spring to portraits of unconnected individuals fails to encompass the wider canvas of events. Here, the vignettes allow the reader to grasp the totality far better than a “bird’s eye” version of history might. In large measure, that is because so much of what happened in the Arab world since 2011 has been about human psychology.Scholars, experts and policy makers have been struggling to explain the events of the Middle East in 2011, but the simplest answer remains the best. The people of the Arab world got fed up with their circumstances. After decades of failing economies, callous governance and social systems that no longer fit the globalizing world around them, they took to the streets to demand change. But as Worth’s stories show, they were united in opposing the old system but divided in what they wanted to come next. Many had thought only in the vaguest of banalities, but nonetheless insisted that paradise must somehow follow the fall of the regime.That has been the history of revolutions. Bringing down the ancien régime is often the easy part, even if it is never really easy. But that accomplishment is primarily psychological. Mubarak lost his nerve. He did not order the army to shoot the protesters. We don’t know why. Perhaps because the army decided that it could preserve its privileges even without Mubarak and might not have shot had Mubarak ordered it to do so. In any case, it is the psychology that proved decisive and that remains so elusive.Those same powerful emotions carried the people of the Middle East from the ecstasy of revolution to the agony of civil war. With nothing to take the place of the decrepit regimes, Syria, Libya and Yemen collapsed into chaos. Chaos bred fear, fear bred violence and violence bred revenge and anger and more violence. All three countries are now trapped in self-inflaming conflagrations that could easily burn on for decades. Egypt chose a different path, preferring to return to the wonted pain of dysfunctional autocracy and avoid civil war (although civil war seems even still to be creeping up on the Egyptians out of Sinai and Libya). Only Tunisia bravely tried to create something like democracy, and there is still a long way to go before a conclusion can be reached about its ­experiment.Worth evokes all these intricacies by masterfully tracing the paths of a handful of representative figures as they make their way through the false dawn of the revolutions and on into the darkness that followed. Some of his subjects are famous, like Muhammad Beltagy — once the great hope of Egypt’s moderate Islamists — and Rached Ghannouchi and Beji Caid Essebsi, the two Tunisian leaders who preserved something of their revolution. Others are unknowns: a Libyan interrogator, a Yemeni tribesman, a Kuwaiti volunteer for (then defector from) ISIS.For my money, the most powerful chapter of all is the story of two Syrian women, best friends since childhood, one an Alawite and the other a Sunni. Their story begins with the two of them clinging to each other as Syria slides into civil war. But over time, the fear and anger that engulf their country swallow them too. Although neither ever takes any action against the other, they end up ferocious enemies, both rewriting the history of their friendship to justify their new hatred.It is an archetypal tale of how the fall of the state tears communities apart, reducing them to warring identity groups in ways that few ever consciously desired to happen. This is a fundamental truth lost to most Americans watching the immolation of the Middle East from a seemingly safe distance. We console ourselves that their wars are the product of “ancient hatreds” or badly drawn borders. Worth’s book dispels those mirages.In the Middle East, as in countless other civil wars, the savagery is driven by mere anarchy. Worth’s characters, like so many people in the region today, fear constantly for their lives and those of their families. They hear rumors of evil men killing any who are not like them — who are the “others,” whether that be Sunni or Shia in Iraq, Sunni or Alawite in Syria, Cyrenaican or Tripolitanian in Libya, or some other difference. They band together with those like themselves for safety, and then lash out in what they perceive to be justified acts of self-defense. Killings beget revenge killings, and the most vicious see in the violence an opportunity for gaining power that can be achieved only by further killing. How many of the men and women who are the heroes of Worth’s tales can possibly stand in the face of such purposeless slaughter?Though set amid chaos, Worth’s stories interweave effortlessly, each providing a counterpoint to the others — but softly and gently, without beating the reader over the head. This subtlety is critical in allowing him to capture the complexities of the region. Thus, the two women whose friendship is torn apart by the Syrian maelstrom stand in contrast to the two Tunisian power brokers, brought together in hope of preventing the same devastation from engulfing their own country. These friendships provide a clean backdrop to better highlight the differences: the powerful versus the powerless, the centrifugal versus the centripetal, trying to stem the tide versus riding it. In turn, the relative success of Ghannouchi is contrasted with the utter failure of Beltagy. The disillusionment with revolution of Worth’s Libyan mirrors the disillusionment with jihad of his Kuwaiti. They mingle in the reader’s mind like the music of a well-rehearsed orchestra, creating a score greater than the sum of its parts.All great works of fiction are works of great philosophy, pondering the fundamentals of humanity. Few volumes of nonfiction ever achieve this, but Worth’s does, touching essential truths about the human condition. The Middle East he sketches for the reader is a Hobbesian state of nature, a war of all against all. His subjects must struggle as best they can against the impersonal forces of the collective will and of circumstances far beyond their control.The writing in “A Rage for Order” is so beautiful and the storytelling so easy that you won’t realize how much you are learning as you read. But there is no escaping the import of the stories. No way to read this marvelous book and not understand far more than you did before about this troubled region and the people struggling to find their way back to quiet lives.