https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/08/nyregion/montauk-gives-bravos-summer-house-a-cold-reception.html
Montauk Gives Bravo’s ‘Summer House’ a Cold Reception - The New York Times
Summer House (TV Program),Montauk (NY),Bravo,Reality Television
Jan. 8, 2017
8818
MONTAUK, N.Y. — The summertime crowds packed up and left after Labor Day, and the next summer-share season is months away. That leaves mostly the year-round Montaukers to weigh in on a cable-television reality series called “Summer House.” And they are not waiting to watch the first episode before offering their reaction: frosty.“It’s not very popular in this town,” Linda Knips, a practitioner of reiki, a Japanese a stress-reduction and relaxation technique, said of the series. “This has become a town associated with coming to party. The show amplifies that. That’s not the real town.”“Summer House” is about nine people in pursuit of sand, surf, sun and sex, not necessarily in that order. They share a house with sunset views, a kitchen counter that can be danced on at 4 a.m. and rent as low as $45,000 a month. Bravo, the cable network that will broadcast “Summer House” starting Jan. 16, promises “boozy brunches, beachfront thrills, rosé parties, charity galas, bonfires and jaw-dropping hookups.”So a preview on Bravo’s website has scenes in beds in which no one is paying attention to the sheet thread counts. The preview shows the inevitable lip locks — one messy kiss involves a third party that looks like layer cake. The cast’s preferred way of working off calories might well involve some other person.To Montaukers, there is a disconnect between the Montauk on the show and the Montauk that does not decamp once Labor Day arrives — a place filled with families, fishermen and carpenters. Their idea of the place is at odds with a monologue in the preview by one of the house-sharers, Kyle Cooke.“Everybody’s heard of the Hamptons — that’s like your mom’s friend who wears pearls,” he said. “My group of friends, we go to Montauk. Montauk is like your mom’s friend’s daughter, who’s a little promiscuous — and by ‘a little,’ I mean a lot.”So much for the idea that Montauk was a casual hamlet at the far end of the Hamptons — more informal, more relaxed, more down to earth. There was a time when Andy Warhol and Mick Jagger could go almost unnoticed, as could the Ponzi schemer Bernard L. Madoff.As Emily Jane Fox wrote in Vanity Fair last year, “Montauk was a place where cod fishermen, artists, waitresses, rock stars, deckhands, and an occasional billionaire in board shorts surfed together in the morning and drank beers together at night. ‘A drinking town with a fishing problem,’ locals say, over and over.”Now Montauk is a popular destination in spite of itself, and it has its problems: real estate that sells for Hamptonesque prices; restaurants that are very, very chic and very, very crowded; and “Summer House.”“I thought it was about bad behavior,” said Victoria Phillips, who has spent weekends in eastern Long Island for 25 years, “and I don’t want to encourage that.”As a reality series, “Summer House” is different from scripted shows set in Montauk like “Revenge,” a nighttime soap opera on ABC from 2011 to 2015, or “The Affair” on Showtime, now in its third season. Bravo’s website says that in “Summer House,” “the crew is bringing the party to Montauk.” The Long Island newspaper Newsday said “Summer House” was also bringing “Jersey Shore-esque” hot tub scenes.The hot tub appears to be in perhaps the most distinctive architectural feature of the shingle-sided house, a two-story octagonal wing. The house — with four bedrooms, four and a half baths, a two-car garage and a swimming pool — is at the far edge of a 1,755-acre state park, but the only way in or out involves crossing the Long Island Rail Road tracks just north of Montauk Highway. In the Hamptons, the more expensive houses are south of the highway, closer to the Atlantic Ocean.The house has a water view from the upper level, but the water is not the ocean, it is Napeague Harbor, which leads to Napeague Bay and, eventually, to Long Island Sound. On the way a boater could pass Gardiners Island, one of the largest privately owned islands in the country.But Paul Monte, president of the Montauk Chamber of Commerce, said the party was not in Montauk, because the “Summer House” house is really not in Montauk, even though some real estate sites say it is. A few place it in East Hampton, but while it is technically in the Town of East Hampton — a sprawling jurisdiction that reaches all the way to Montauk — it is far from what most Hamptonites think of as East Hampton.As for being in Montauk, the word at the Montauk Post Office is that the house is in Amagansett.“That’s Hollywood — Hollywood can film anywhere and say it’s Montauk,” said Larry Cantwell, supervisor of the Town of East Hampton.He said the Town of East Hampton had denied permits for “Summer House” to tape scenes on public property. Concerns about congestion, not content, dictated the denials, he said, adding that July and August, the months for which the show sought the permits, are always the busiest, with traffic the heaviest and beach crowds the thickest.Allowing a television show crew, any crew, on some already crowded streets would have been too much, Mr. Cantwell said. He said the town had encouraged other shows that use the town as a backdrop to avoid shooting outdoors in July and August. He said most had complied.A spokeswoman for Bravo emailed an upbeat statement from Steven Weinstock, an executive producer of “Summer House” and a chief executive of True Entertainment, one of the production companies behind the program. “Production, cast and crew all had very positive and respectful interactions with the community,” he said.“East Hampton understandably set certain limitations for filming during high season,” he said, “and we planned our shoots from Day 1 with respect to their guidelines.” He said that the communities and businesses that had allowed the cameras in “were great partners” and that residents “who participated in the show also gave us terrific feedback.”Whether Montaukers will watch “Summer House” is an open question.“We don’t care,” Bruce Howard, a postal worker in Montauk, said.He laughed and said, “Of course we care,” adding, “I think they’re doing a bad number on us.”