https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/sports/ncaafootball/bob-stoops-oklahomas-football-coach-since-99-steps-down-on-a-high-note.html
Bob Stoops, Oklahoma’s Football Coach Since ’99, Steps Down on a High Note - The New York Times
Football (College),Stoops  Bob,University of Oklahoma,Coaches and Managers
June 7, 2017
9370
Bob Stoops is retiring as Oklahoma’s football coach, the university said Wednesday in a statement. He is stepping away, less than three months before the season, from a team expected to contend for the national championship.The announcement came as a surprise: Stoops had coached Oklahoma since 1999 and, at age 56, seemed to have the support, the energy and — perhaps most important — the players to keep running one of the country’s most storied college programs.Oklahoma is coming off back-to-back Big 12 titles; the Sooners went 11-2 last season, defeating Auburn in the Sugar Bowl and ending the season ranked No. 5, and they will have their star quarterback, Baker Mayfield, back for one more season.The offensive coordinator Lincoln Riley was named the team’s new coach. Riley, 33, joined Stoops’s coaching staff before the 2015 season. This will be his first college head-coaching position.Stoops will stay on at Oklahoma as a special assistant to the athletic director, according to the university’s statement.In the statement, he dismissed the notion that his health was a factor in his decision to retire, saying, “Now is simply the ideal time for me and our program to make this transition.”Stoops ended his tenure with more wins than any other coach in Sooners history, having surpassed revered names like Bud Wilkinson and Barry Switzer with 190 victories. Stoops led Oklahoma to the national championship in 2000, his second season, and competed in three other title games. Two seasons ago, the Sooners played in the College Football Playoff semifinals.Stoops’s teams never failed to post a winning record, and only four times did they fail to win at least 10 games. Under Stoops, Oklahoma went 11-7 in the Red River Rivalry versus its archrival, Texas.Stoops did all this at a time when many of Oklahoma’s traditional advantages could have eroded in a landscape in which the flow of money into college football has made national contenders of previously under-the-radar programs like Oregon and Texas Christian. Realignment forced many teams — including Oklahoma, whose rivals expanded when the Big 8 Conference morphed into the Big 12 a few years before Stoops arrived — to reckon with new competitive realities.Oklahoma’s program was punished by the N.C.A.A. roughly a decade ago after several players were found to have received inappropriate payments from a local car dealership. More recently, Stoops and other Oklahoma officials were criticized for the way they handled the case of Joe Mixon, a former star running back who punched a woman in the face and was effectively suspended from the team for what would have been his freshman season. (Mixon entered a guilty plea while maintaining his innocence in a criminal prosecution, and he settled a lawsuit.)Stoops’s career, and the manner in which he is ending it, represents a throwback. In an era in which coaches jump from place to place, hoping to climb the ladder to a program with the resources to compete for national titles, Oklahoma represented Stoops’s only head-coaching job. And in an era in which sky-high expectations have shortened coaches’ margins for error, his was the longest active tenure at any Football Bowl Subdivision team, a stay matched only by Iowa’s Kirk Ferentz.Ferentz and Stoops came up together as assistants — along with other luminaries like Kansas State Coach Bill Snyder and Barry Alvarez, the former Wisconsin coach — at Iowa under Hayden Fry. Before taking over the Sooners, Stoops was the defensive coordinator under Steve Spurrier at Florida, which won the 1996 national title.Oklahoma replaced the longest-tenured head coach with the youngest in Riley, who runs the passing-centered Air Raid offense that he learned as an assistant at Texas Tech.“His decision to step down at this time,” Oklahoma’s president, David Boren, said of Stoops, “was motivated partly by his belief that he has the right successor already in place.”Stoops, quoting from Ecclesiastes (or, if one prefers, the Byrds) — “To everything there is a season” — sounded notes distinctly uncommon in the adrenalized, workaholic lifestyle of contemporary football coaching.“The coaching life is like a relay race, and I’m thankful for my turn and am confident as I pass the baton,” he said, referring to Riley and going on to refer to his wife. “Carol and I intend on staying in Norman — it is our home.”