http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/04/theater/reviews/rodgers-hammersteins-cinderella-at-broadway-theater.html
‘Rodgers & Hammerstein’s Cinderella’ at Broadway Theater - The New York Times
Theater,Osnes  Laura,Clark  Victoria,Beane  Douglas Carter,Bartlett  Peter,Rodgers  Richard,Long  William Ivey,Louizos  Anna,Rodgers & Hammerstein's Cinderella (Play),Brokaw  Mark,Harris  Harriet,Fontana  Santino,Hammerstein  Oscar II
March 3, 2013
8812
OMG, everybody, they’re doing instant makeovers at the Broadway Theater. First, this scruffy fox and raccoon suddenly turn into total studmuffins in satin suits. And then — this is the best part — this girl’s lame, retro peasant-chic outfit is transformed, right before our eyes (and while she’s singing), into a red-carpet ball gown. Make that two ball gowns: one white and one gold.You may have gathered by now that “Cinderella,” that ultimate and most enduring of makeover shows, is back in town. Specifically, it’s “Rodgers & Hammerstein’s Cinderella” (Broadway productions wear their labels on the outside these days), a work that started out as a made-for-television musical in 1957 and has since been restyled more often than a nervous movie star during Oscar week.To my surprise the Academy Awards came to mind quite often as I watched this glittery patchwork of a show, which has a new book by Douglas Carter Beane and is directed by Mark Brokaw. It wasn’t just the parade of big-skirted, Technicolor dresses in the ball sequence that inspired such reflections, or the presence of a fairy godmother (poor Victoria Clark) in a humped, sparkly number that would have sent Joan Rivers into overdrive.No, the main and most affecting parallel is how these two productions were confronting the knotty problem of being both traditional and up to date in a culture that has no tone to call its own. Like this year’s Oscar host, Seth MacFarlane — who croons like the 1950s and quips like the 2010s — this “Cinderella” wants to be reassuringly old-fashioned and refreshingly irreverent, sentimental and snarky, sincere and ironic, all at once.Allow me to add quickly that this “Cinderella,” which stars an earnestly pretty Laura Osnes in the title role and an appealingly goofy Santino Fontana as her prince charming, is by no means as long or embarrassing as the Oscars (although the second act does drag on for 10 minutes longer than it needs to). But for a show that’s hawking T-shirts that read “I can be whatever I want to be” (a Hammerstein lyric), it doesn’t seem to know quite what that is.Such uncertainty may not bother the little girls in tiaras (you can buy your own in the lobby) who are the show’s target audience. Or even the grown-ups from different generations who have warm childhood memories of one of three television versions of “Cinderella”: the first one from 1957, starring Julie Andrews (who had just wowed Broadway as Eliza Doolittle); the 1965 version that introduced a dewy Lesley Ann Warren (that would be my “Cinderella”); and a 1997 remake with Brandy.The keynote songs from the original have been retained. And anyone who swooned however many decades ago over “Ten Minutes Ago,” the prince and Cindy’s musical equivalent to Romeo and Juliet’s “palmers’ kiss” scene, will find that it is sung quite fetchingly here.But a lot has been added and deleted. (Extensive revisions, by the way, have been made in every version of this “Cinderella” that followed its inception.) Some lesser-known songs from the Rodgers & Hammerstein catalog have been jimmied in (including “Now Is the Time,” a rousing call for social change that was cut from “South Pacific”).There’s been a whole lot of fiddling with the plot too to give it politically progressive substance and those mandatory messages about self-esteem and self-empowerment. The prince’s parents (played by Ginger Rogers and Walter Pidgeon in 1965) have been eliminated, replaced by a devious and manipulative regent figure, Sebastian (the droller-than-droll Peter Bartlett), who tricks the naïve prince, called Topher, into signing bills that repress and rob his people.So when Cinderella finally gets the chance to talk to her dream date at that immortal ball, instead of whispering sweet nothings, she says, “You need to open your eyes to what’s happening in your kingdom.” (Maybe she should be renamed Che-erella.)Like the reinvented cartoon fairy-tale heroines of the past several decades, from Disney’s “Little Mermaid” onward, this Cinderella is no passive damsel waiting for a rescuing knight. She takes charge of her destiny, so much so that she doesn’t lose that glass slipper; she hands it to the prince. It’s a conscious choice, see; she controls her narrative. And, by the way, the prince must undergo a similar process of re-education, which will allow him to conquer his self-doubts and introduce democracy to his kingdom.Since such revisions have been overseen by the quip-meister Mr. Beane (whose new work, “The Nance,” opens this spring), they are often presented with a wink and a nod and invisible quotation marks. Unfortunately not everyone shares the same approach in this regard.Mr. Fontana probably strikes the best balance between earnestness and archness. The silver-voiced Ms. Osnes seems to believe unequivocally in her character, which is winning in its own way but doesn’t quite match up with Mr. Fontana. The ever-stylish Harriet Harris, as the vain and frivolous stepmother, bizarrely appears to be playing an embittered middle-aged Joan Crawford heroine.Ann Harada and Marla Mindelle are amiable but oddly tentative as the stepsisters, who in this version are not ugly. (How un-PC would that be?) Ms. Mindelle’s character, a secret friend to the downtrodden, is in love with the town revolutionary (Greg Hildreth).Of course no one’s really going to “Cinderella” for its politics. They go for the songs (among Rodgers and Hammerstein’s most confectionary) and the dances (a lot of mock-medieval capering, choreographed by Josh Rhodes). And the scenery (by Anna Louizos), which in this version includes a “Beauty and the Beast”-like forest through which walks a “Lord of the Rings”-style giant tree creature who appears in the very first scene.And, oh yes, the dresses, which have been left to the capable and industrious hands of William Ivey Long. The showstoppers in this version aren’t the songs so much as those instant costume changes from rags to riches by our girl Cindy. And did I mention that fabulous wedding dress that Ms. Osnes — who bears a passing resemblance to the former Kate Middleton — wears in the finale? That one brought down the house.Early in the show Sebastian, sensing unrest among the starving populace, suggests to the prince they come up with “a distraction.”What kind?, the prince asks.“A royal wedding,” Sebastian answers.And does that work?“Like a dream,” Sebastian says, “every time.”That could well be this show’s producers talking.