https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/14/podcasts/the-daily/the-daily-germany-the-last-defender-of-the-liberal-west.html
‘The Daily’: The Rise of the Far Right in Europe - The New York Times
The Daily,Merkel  Angela,Europe,Germany
March 14, 2017
4301
Listen to ‘The Daily’: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherThe rise of the far right in Europe. Why the populism that put Donald J. Trump in the White House is starting to sweep across the Continent, as voters there confront similar questions of national identity and immigration.On today’s episode:We talk with Amanda Taub and Max Fisher, who write the Interpreter column for The New York Times, about the perception — and reality — of what’s driving this political change in Europe.Background reading:• Alison Smale on German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s precarious place in Europe’s fast-changing political order. • Alissa J. Rubin on how this week’s election in the Netherlands is serving as a test of its tolerance for Muslim immigrants.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’t enough, we can even text.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called “Podcasts”; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”