https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/us/california-today-jerry-brown-michael-bloomberg.html
California Today: Brown and Bloomberg, an Unlikely Team - The New York Times
California Today
July 12, 2017
57
Good morning.(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Today’s introduction comes from Adam Nagourney, our Los Angeles bureau chief.In some ways, they could not be more different.On one coast, there is Jerry Brown, the governor and a California fixture, a leader of the Democratic opposition to the Trump White House.On the other side of the country is Michael Bloomberg, the former Republican New York mayor, a billionaire businessman and philanthropist who has arguably been as active outside of Gracie Mansion (or more precisely City Hall; Mr. Bloomberg declined to live in Gracie Mansion) as he was when he was in political power.In combining forces on climate change, these two men have sought to present themselves as a high-profile team in opposition to President Trump on this issue. On Tuesday, Mr. Brown and Mr. Bloomberg announced they would lead a group of states, cities and businesses in pledging to adhere to standards set by the Paris climate pact — after Mr. Trump announced that the United States would withdraw from the agreement.In truth, these two men are not as dissimilar as they might appear. Mr. Brown is 79; Mr. Bloomberg is 75. Both can be, shall we say, irascible. And both won considerable support by being viewed as something of a free spirit: playing by some rules of politics, while happily flounting others. Mr. Bloomberg, who doesn’t exactly fit the profile of what most people might consider a Republican, left the party to become an independent as he thought about running for president.“It’s an interesting character study,” said Kevin Sheekey, Mr. Bloomberg’s top political adviser. “One guy is Jerry Brown — a California leftist. The other is the global king of capitalism. That doesn’t make sense. But when you think about it they are remarkably similar and their success has come from their similarities.”Might this cross-country lineup make a difference? Well, at the very least two big names from the two coasts guarantees that what might otherwise have been just another news release gets a bit of notice. That is no small matter in these hectic days.“They have a remarkable power to coordinate U.S. forces — business, environmental, state, local, corporate — in a way no two other individuals could,” Mr. Sheekey said. “That really is the game at this point.”(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)• A proposal to extend California’s signature climate initiative has set off anger among some environmental groups. [The Associated Press]• It’s pretty much a lock: Los Angeles will host the Olympics in either 2024 or 2028. [The New York Times]• Mills College, a women’s school in Oakland, is struggling financially. Rather than admit men to raise money, it fired tenured professors. [San Francisco Chronicle]• “Lives will be at risk.” President Trump’s budget would cripple a global tsunami warning system. [Los Angeles Times]• Experts said a near miss at San Francisco International Airport could have led to one of the deadliest aviation disasters ever. [The Mercury News]• A huge amount of money has flowed into Silicon Valley’s start-up system. It’s now on the verge of a messy blowout. [Opinion | Bloomberg Businessweek]• “What we’ve found so far is that sativas go well with whites, indicas go well with reds” — co-marketing wine and marijuana in Sonoma County. [NPR]• The hype machine is humming ahead of a fight between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Conor McGregor. [The New York Times]• Jim Bush died at 90. The track and field coach led U.C.L.A. to five N.C.A.A. titles. At times, his outspokenness nearly overshadowed his record. [The New York Times]• “Bumblebee,” a spinoff from the “Transformers” franchise, is getting $22 million in tax credits to film in California. [Los Angeles Times]• The Supreme Court’s decision to hear a case about wedding cakes gives heat to Bekah Brunstetter’s new play, “The Cake.” [The New York Times]• David Choe, the muralist who struck it rich with Facebook stock, is making people apply and interview to attend his new show. [LA Weekly]On Sundays, the 1970s come alive in Golden Gate Park.That’s when roller skaters strap on eight wheels and strut their stuff on a patch of asphalt in the park known as Skatin’ Place.The origins of the gathering date to the late 1970s, when thousands of skaters used to descend onto park streets during the heyday of roller disco.Later, city officials agreed to make Skatin’ Place, at Sixth Avenue and John F. Kennedy Drive, an officially recognized outdoor rink.It’s free and open to the public all week, but Sunday afternoons are the main event.A group of roughly 50 roller skaters, of both the in-line and quad varieties, dance and glide to the sounds of funk music. Flamboyant attire is encouraged.“I believe that the skaters at Skatin’ Place are the remnants of what’s left of the Summer of Love,” said David Miles, who has been roller skating in Golden Gate Park for nearly four decades.Mr. Miles, 61, said he was one of those “crazy maniacs” whose love of roller skating never faded.“To be outside in the sun and the wind and to be just kind of lost in the love of skating,” he said, “to me that’s the ultimate freedom.”Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. Follow him on Twitter.California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.