https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/us/politics/trump-freedom-kids.html
USA Freedom Kids Are in Dispute With Trump - The New York Times
USA Freedom Kids,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Popick  Jeff (1962- )
July 27, 2016
7030
A patriotic song-and-dance routine by a trio of young girls at a Donald J. Trump rally in Pensacola, Fla., in January drew huge numbers of views online.But now, the manager of the group, known as USA Freedom Kids, says the campaign broke a verbal agreement over the chance to perform a second time. He is considering a lawsuit.The manager, Jeff Popick, 54, a real estate developer in Marco Island, Fla., said on Tuesday that more than six months of back-and-forth with the Trump campaign had hit an impasse.“It really is rather mind-boggling that he has outright forsaken the USA Freedom Kids,” he said in a phone interview. His plan to sue was first reported by The Washington Post.A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, did not immediately respond to an email requesting comment.Mr. Popick wrote the lyrics for “Freedom’s Call,” the song the three girls — including his 9-year-old, Alexis — performed at the rally. The lyrics, sung to the tune of the World War I song “Over There,” included lines such as:President Donald Trump knows how to make America great: Deal from strength or get crushed every time.The video was viewed millions of times and was shared widely on social media. It drew ridicule from some online commentators. Mother Jones magazine called it “an apparent bid to land on the military’s torture playlist.” Others said it evoked North Korea-style patriotism.In an email to a Trump aide on June 5, Mr. Popick said the girls took the criticism and lack of acknowledgment from the Trump campaign to heart, and that one of the girls was bullied because of the video.Mr. Trump “is no stranger to untruthful journalism and venomous attacks from the liberal media; however, our little girls were not,” Mr. Popick wrote in the email, which was provided to The New York Times.Mr. Popick started the group two and a half years ago. He said his daughter and the other girls were natural performers who could not get enough of being on stage. They’ve had gigs at local sporting events and performed outside the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland last week during the Republican National Convention.Mr. Popick said he had even reached out to Hillary Clinton about a performance before she declared her intent to run for president.“We were saying to her, she’s an accomplished woman and I’m sure the girls would love to perform with her,” he said. He did not hear back.After Mr. Trump announced his candidacy last summer, Mr. Popick contacted various members of the campaign staff. He said he asked for $2,500 for the Jan. 13 appearance in Pensacola, but a staff member instead offered a table to sell the group’s merchandise outside the event. But when they arrived, there was no table, Mr. Popick said, calling it a breach of contract.Even so, the campaign asked the group to perform again, he said.About two weeks later, a campaign staff member called him and asked if the group could perform at an event in Des Moines the next day. Mr. Popick said he agreed it would be “huge exposure,” so he quickly bought nonstop flight tickets to Chicago for himself; his wife, Debbie; his daughter and two other girls.But when they landed, planning to make the roughly five-hour drive to Des Moines, Mr. Popick was told that there would be no performance at the event. The group went instead as guests of the campaign, the girls wearing their costumes. Mr. Popick said he was not reimbursed for their travel costs.In the months afterward, he said he contacted the campaign by text, phone and email, but could not get an answer about another performance, Mr. Popick said. He hired a lawyer and planned to file the lawsuit in the coming weeks, he said.Mr. Popick said on Tuesday that it was “maybe a bad decision on my part” to get the group involved in politics. He said he planned to cut “Freedom’s Call” from the group’s coming debut album.“This group is not Donald Trump’s kids,” he said. “It’s America’s kids, and that’s where we’re going to get back to.”Mr. Popick, a former New Yorker, said he had admired Mr. Trump’s business acumen for decades, but he did not say whether he would support him in November.