https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/australia/malcolm-turnbull-gay-marriage-vote.html
Australia’s Leader Calls for National Gay Marriage Vote - The New York Times
Australia,Turnbull  Malcolm (1954- ),Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Referendums,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Law and Legislation,Plebiscite,Legislatures and Parliaments
Sept. 14, 2016
9081
SYDNEY, Australia — Australia’s divisive debate over same-sex marriage returned to Parliament on Wednesday when Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull implored lawmakers to support a bill that would ask Australians to vote on the issue.“If ever there is an issue to be put to a plebiscite, this is one that can be and should be because it is a very straightforward question,” Mr. Turnbull said. “We put our faith in the Australian people, and we know that their answer, whether it is yes or no, will be the right answer.”Mr. Turnbull needs the support of Parliament to pass the bill, which calls for a plebiscite — a national, nonbinding ballot — to be held on Feb. 11. The bill, he said, would ask Australians, “Should the law be changed to allow same-sex couples to marry?”He added, “This is a simple question.”The speech on Wednesday was the first time Australians had heard the details of the bill, and the first time that Mr. Turnbull, the leader of the Liberal Party-led conservative coalition, had outlined his agenda on same-sex marriage since his government was re-elected on July 2.But many in Parliament think that the bill calling for a plebiscite is doomed. A national poll would cost about $138 million, including funding for the “yes” and “no” campaigns, and its result would be nonbinding. No matter how Australians vote, lawmakers could opt against changes to marriage laws. And many lawmakers who support gay marriage say the plebiscite is not the right platform and instead favor a direct vote by lawmakers on the issue in Parliament.Mr. Turnbull said that his party won the elections after campaigning to allow Australians to vote on same-sex marriage. The majority of Australians support changes to existing marriage laws that say marriage must be between a man and a woman.But the conservative coalition was returned with such a slim majority that Mr. Turnbull’s status within his own party was weakened, and the coalition party’s hold on Parliament was reduced to a one-seat majority in the lower house, the 150-seat House of Representatives. Mr. Turnbull must also woo a disparate band of independents in the upper house, the Senate, to pass bills into law.A bloc of politicians, some of whom support gay marriage, have said they will not vote in favor of allowing a plebiscite, possibly scuttling hopes for any change.The plebiscite is a “platform for prejudice and a megaphone for hate speech,” Bill Shorten, the leader of the opposition Labor Party, told Parliament on Monday. The “no” campaign would probably torment teenagers struggling with their sexuality and could push some toward suicide, he said.But Mr. Shorten has not declared whether the Labor Party would support the plebiscite when lawmakers vote on the bill, which will be debated in the coming weeks.Adam Bandt, a member of the centrist Greens party, deplored Mr. Turnbull’s decision to allocate government funds to both sides of the debate. Taxpayer money for the “no” campaign would allow bigots to spread hate speech, he said. Mr. Bandt favors a direct vote by lawmakers on the issue.And even one of Mr. Turnbull’s own party members, Dean Smith, a West Australian Liberal senator, said he would abstain from voting for the plebiscite, or cross the floor and vote against it.“As the first openly gay Liberal to serve in federal Parliament, speculation about my motivation is to be expected,” he said. But the issue should be decided directly by lawmakers, Mr. Smith said, not by a nonbinding public vote.Even without outside dissent, Mr. Turnbull has had to corral his own party members, some of whom are deeply conservative. Some did not support his ascension as leader after he toppled Tony Abbott, a former seminary student, nor do they want changes to Australia’s marriage laws.Mr. Turnbull became prime minister one year ago. His tenure has been marked by falling opinion polls and general disarray, including a close-call election that he thought he would win convincingly.In an unusual show of unity, his party members agreed on Monday in a cabinet and party room vote to allow the bill on the national plebiscite to be sent to Parliament. They also agreed to spend $11 million on public debate, equally split between the “yes” and the “no” camps.Before his elevation to leader, Mr. Turnbull firmly favored a vote in the Parliament for change to the marriage laws. In Parliament on Wednesday, he told lawmakers that he and his wife, Lucy, had been married for more than 36 years and would both vote to allow same-sex couples to marry.His constituents, in the seat of Wentworth, a district that hugs Sydney’s shoreline on the south side of the Harbor Bridge, are possibly Australia’s most urbane. The district is Australia’s most densely populated. Each year the area hosts the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, and Mr. Turnbull is Australia’s first sitting prime minister to march with revelers.“Our society would be stronger if more people were married and there were fewer divorces,” he said. “We are a government committed to marriage.”He said Australia had abolished laws that discriminate against same-sex couples, including tax, welfare and pension payment laws. The question of a change to marriage law concerns conscience, sometimes informed by faith, he said, adding that these views must be heard and respected.