http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/26/movies/three-times-tells-three-stories-of-love-each-illuminated-by-an-inner.html
'Three Times' Tells Three Stories of Love, Each Illuminated by an Inner Light - The New York Times
TAIWAN,HOU HSIAO-HSIEN,MOTION PICTURES,THREE TIMES (MOVIE)
April 26, 2006
4292
The light that streams through windows and down from overhead lamps in the Taiwanese director Hou Hsiao-hsien's hypnotically beautiful cinematic trilogy "Three Times" doesn't just illuminate faces and objects; it seems to fill them up, as if they were lighted from within.In one of the film's three stories, the light floods the face of a young woman who looks longingly at the world through a window, just before she steps into the sun. In another story, a soft light gently brightens the small white flowers of an orchid plant and the pale cheeks of a courtesan, two ornamental creatures locked behind glass in a brothel.Both the woman at the window and the courtesan are played by the actress Shu Qi, who appeared in Mr. Hou's 2001 film "Millennium Mambo" and may be best known to Western audiences as the leggy knockout in the action flick "The Transporter."In this, only the second of Mr. Hou's films to secure distribution in this country, Shu Qi plays three women living in three historical periods, separate moments that define both their relationships to the larger world and to their lovers, played in each story by the equally striking actor Chang Chen. Although the stories work on their own, they also complement one another, so much so that the last story, "A Time for Youth," seems less like an ending than a beginning.The film opens in 1966 with "A Time for Love," a delicate romance about a pool-hall hostess, May, and the young army conscript, Chen, who woos her. Much like the songs that waft over the soundtrack and the dust motes that bob in the light, the two initially seem destined to drift in and out of each other's sightlines.When May takes the job at the pool hall where she first meets Chen, it's to replace another lovely young woman who once worked there; months later, yet a different attractive woman, in turn, replaces May (comeliness being an apparent requisite for the gig). Unlike Chen, who spends much of the story purposely moving from one location to another, May seems in limbo, unbound by a sense of place.May's counterpart in the second story, titled "A Time for Freedom" and set in 1911, is Ah Mei, a courtesan who lives and works inside the shadowy confines of a brothel and could not be more tethered to her historical moment. Ah Mei yearns to leave the brothel where she has lived most of her life, but her best chance at liberation, a wealthy patron active in Taiwan's revolutionary struggle against its Japanese occupiers, is either too busy or too much a coward to hear her strangulated cry for freedom. Having styled the story like a silent movie, complete with title cards, to avoid having the actors speak in a historical dialect, Mr. Hou makes its silence enormously eloquent.The third story, "A Time for Youth," set in 2005, is the most diffuse of the three stories and the most ambiguous. This time, Shu Qi plays an epileptic musician who casually begins an affair with a photographer, Zhen, leaving her female lover alone in their bed.Much as he does in the second story, which directly echoes both the themes and visual style of his 1998 masterpiece, "Flowers of Shanghai," Mr. Hou appears to be revisiting or perhaps even redressing "Millennium Mambo." But like the 2001 film, in which Shu Qi played another casualty of the modern world, floating from one lover and booming nightclub to the next, the story never coheres, perhaps because this moment in time is itself too hard to grasp.Given that the most perfectly realized of the three stories, "A Time for Love," takes place when the filmmaker was about the same age as its two lovers, it could well be that Mr. Hou's own time may not be that of today's youth. That said, while he can seem more at ease in the past than the present (witness "Flowers of Shanghai" and the equally sublime "Puppetmaster," from 1993, both highly recommended and available on DVD), and can seem unmoored in more contemporary settings, Mr. Hou nonetheless moves across time with fluid grace.Unlike those filmmakers who regard the present like some eternal now, without either a past or a future, and unlike those who approach history like reverential museum visitors, he never loses sight of where -- or when -- we are.Three Times  Opens today in Manhattan.Directed by Hou Hsiao-hsien; written (in Mandarin and Taiwanese dialect, with English subtitles) by Chu Tien-Wen; director of photography, Mark Lee Ping-Bin; edited by Liao Ching-Song; art director, Wang Chih-Liang; produced by Hus-fu Chang, Wen-Ying Huang and Ching-Song Liao; released by IFC Films. Running time: 135 minutes. This film is not rated.WITH: Shu Qi (May, Ah Mei and Jing) and Chang Chen (Chen, Mr. Chang and Zhen).