http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/26/us/politics/26threat.html
Accusations Fly Between Parties Over Threats and Vandalism - The New York Times
Threats and Threatening Messages,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Vandalism,Republican Party,United States Politics and Government,Reform and Reorganization,Tea Party Movement,House of Representatives,Perriello  Tom,Giffords  Gabrielle,Driehaus  Steve,Slaughter  Louise M,Stupak  Bart,Schmidt  Jean
March 25, 2010
7913
IVY, Va. — The authorities here confirmed Thursday that a gas line had been deliberately cut at the home of a brother of a Democratic congressman who voted for the health care bill, making it potentially the most dangerous of many acts of violence and threats against supporters of the bill in the last week.The house had been mistakenly listed on the blog of a Tea Party activist as the home of the congressman, Tom Perriello, a first-term Democrat representing southern Virginia. But the damage that took place on Tuesday was no blunder, the authorities said.“We do now believe that it was a deliberate act of vandalism and that the supply hose was intentionally cut,” said Lee Catlin, a spokeswoman for Albemarle County, where fire marshals have been investigating the incident along with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. “Our investigators do believe that the leaking gas could have posed a danger if there had been an ignition source.”The incident, along with several other acts of vandalism and threats to at least 10 Democratic lawmakers around the country, on Thursday set off heated accusations of incitement on Thursday between the two parties in Washington. While the New York City police investigated a white powder that was sent to the office of Representative Anthony Weiner, along with a threatening letter that the police said referred to the health care bill, Democrats accused Republicans of using heated rhetoric that encouraged extremists. Republicans in turn accused Democrats of politicizing the issue.At the same time, the vandalism threatened to be a public relations disaster for the fledgling Tea Party movement, which has tried to argue that it is, in the words of Dick Armey, the chairman of the umbrella group FreedomWorks, “more well-mannered” than protesters on the left.Leaders of the movement tried to contain the damage on Thursday, denouncing the violence and distancing themselves from those behind the acts. Some suggested that outsiders were responsible. In Colorado, where Representative Betsy Markey was among the Democrats reporting threats, Lesley Hollywood, the director of the Northern Colorado Tea Party, said, “Although many are frustrated by the passage of such controversial legislation, threats are absolutely not acceptable in any form, to any lawmaker, of any party.”The threats and property damage, which have led to stepped-up security for some members of Congress, have been widespread around the country.In Cincinnati, protesters demonstrated outside the home of Representative Steve Driehaus, another Democrat who voted for the bill, after his home address was published on a conservative blog. Mr. Driehaus has received a death threat, and someone threw a rock into the headquarters of the county Democratic Party. Pictures of nooses were faxed to the offices of at least two Democratic congressmen, Bart Stupak of Michigan, and James E. Clyburn of South Carolina.In Tucson, the full-length glass door to Representative Gabrielle Giffords’s office was shattered by what her staff believes was a shot from a pellet gun or air pistol. A brick was thrown through the glass door of the Monroe County Democratic Committee in Rochester. The white powder sent to Mr. Weiner’s district office in Kew Gardens, Queens, was pronounced nonhazardous by the police, but the office had to be closed for much of the day.Some Democrats accused the Republicans of stoking anger on the right with their fierce language during the health care debate. After a brick was thrown into Representative Louise M. Slaughter’s Congressional office in Niagara Falls, N.Y., and a telephone message mentioning snipers was left on an answering machine at her campaign office, she issued a statement accusing Republicans of “fanning the flames with coded rhetoric.”Ms. Slaughter referred, among other things, to a Twitter message in which Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice-presidential nominee, urged her followers, “Don’t Retreat, Instead - RELOAD!”Mr. Perriello, who won his seat here in 2008 by knocking out a Republican incumbent in one of the closest races in the nation, in a district that Senator John McCain had carried in the presidential election, said that the threats and acts of vandalism undermined democracy — in a way that he had seen overseas.“I think people have to realize what it means to say in a Democracy that ‘I will kill your children if you don’t vote a certain way,’ ” said Mr. Perriello, 35, a graduate of Yale Law School who worked on national security issues and conflict resolution in areas like Afghanistan, Darfur, Kosovo and Liberia before he was elected to Congress. “What’s at stake here is the sanctity of our democracy.”He took issue with a statement by Representative John A. Boehner, the House minority leader, in which Mr. Boehner condemned the violence and threats as unacceptable but said the anger behind it should be redirected to registering voters and volunteering on political campaigns.Mr. Perriello said that that statement simply sent the wrong message.“No, the answer is, we want those people to go to jail who are committing a crime,” he said. “We want all those other good, law-abiding people who are adamantly opposed to health care to join our campaigns.”But some Republicans accused Democrats of using the issue for political gain. Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia, the Republican whip, told reporters on Thursday that he had also been the subject of threats and that a shot was fired through a window of his campaign office building in Richmond this week, but that he had chosen not to publicize the incident.“It is reckless to use these incidents as media vehicles for political gain,” said Mr. Cantor, who delivered a stern-faced statement on the issue but did not take questions. “To use such threats as political weapons is reprehensible. By ratcheting up the rhetoric, some will only inflame these situations to dangerous levels.”Representative Jean Schmidt, Republican of Ohio, released a profanity-laced voicemail message left in her Ohio office in which the caller accused Republicans of racism for blocking the health care measure, said he wished Ms. Schmidt had broken her back in a car accident and said he would have shot anyone who spit on him during weekend protests at the Capitol.“We released this call to show that is not just Democrats receiving them,” said Bruce Pflaff, a spokesman for Ms. Schmidt.Ms. Giffords, at least, said she would uphold Arizona’s tradition of self-protection.“I have a Glock 9-millimeter, and I’m a pretty good shot,” she said.