https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/22/upshot/prescription-drug-costs-are-rising-as-a-campaign-issue.html
Prescription Drug Costs Are Rising as a Campaign Issue - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Sanders  Bernard,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Sept. 21, 2015
3268
Both Bernie Sanders and Hillary Rodham Clinton are trying to make the rising cost of prescription drugs an issue in the presidential campaign.Mr. Sanders introduced a bill in Congress this month, spelling out a host of policy changes to drive down drug costs. Mrs. Clinton tweeted on Monday that her plan would be released Tuesday, and her campaign has released some details.Here’s why prescription drugs are bubbling up to the top of the Democratic health care agenda: Drug prices are bubbling up. Per capita drug spending increased by more than $100 last year, a big jump. At the same time, a growing share of Americans are being asked to foot the bill for their medicines, even if they’re insured. The Affordable Care Act, which has expanded insurance coverage, didn’t do much to counteract those trends.Voters have clearly noticed the higher drug costs. This year, a survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation asked people to identify health issues that they thought should be top priorities for the president and Congress. The No. 1 issue was making drugs for serious diseases affordable. The No. 2 issue: lowering the cost of prescription drugs. A follow-up survey in August found that 24 percent of people said that they or a family member had declined to fill a prescription because of the cost.Mr. Sanders said that hearing about this difficulty in obtaining needed medicines motivated his proposal. “It is totally absurd that if somebody does have health insurance and they walk into a doctor’s office and the doctor writes a prescription, they can’t fill it,” he said in an interview. “What sense is that?”Both candidates’ proposals include provisions that would allow Americans to import drugs from Canada, and that would allow the Medicare program to negotiate with drug makers when purchasing medications for the program. The Sanders plan also would require companies to share more information about their research and development costs, and increase penalties on pharmaceutical companies found guilty of fraud. The Clinton plan would impose a requirement that drug companies spend a set percentage of their revenues on research and development, and would cap the amount insurance companies could ask customers to pay each month for their medications to $250.After years in which Americans’ spending on drugs barely increased, last year they popped: Nationwide, spending on drugs increased by 12 percent when adjusted for inflation, according to federal government estimates.A lot of that increase came from the introduction of some very expensive and popular new treatments for the chronic liver disease hepatitis C. But costly new drugs for cancer, multiple sclerosis and autoimmune disorders also explained the change, according to an analysis from the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, which tracks the pharmaceutical industry. (The government numbers don’t count all drugs — some cancer medications and other drugs given by doctors aren’t included — but the number measures how much the country is paying for drugs sold through pharmacies, and that amount is rising.)Just as the new and expensive treatments are entering the market, fewer older brand-name drugs are going generic. The process of going generic has historically led to lower prices. Industry analysts say that drug companies are also aggressively lifting their pricing. Sometimes, companies are putting in big price increases for long-established generic drugs, as my colleague Andrew Pollack recently wrote about.Americans have long paid the highest prices for drugs. Because the United States gives drug makers long periods of patent exclusivity and lets a multitude of insurers each negotiate with drugmakers on price, drug spending here is, on a per capita average, roughly double the amount spent in many developed countries. That difference explains one of the planks of the candidates’’s drug proposals: to allow Americans to import Canadian drugs back into the United States.Even Medicare, the government insurer for older Americans, doesn’t negotiate on drug prices in a unified way; instead, individual private plans each haggle for separate discounts. Both Mr. Sanders and Mrs. Clinton have talked about shifting to a system where Medicare negotiates as a monolith.When drug costs go up, people tend to feel the change more acutely than they do increases in other parts of the health care system, even though prescription drug costs represent only a small portion of overall health care spending in the country. Government estimates suggest that prescription drug spending makes up only about 10 percent of federal spending on health care. There’s even research suggesting that use of pharmaceuticals often lowers other kinds of health care spending.High drug costs are increasingly a problem even for the well insured. Most plans sold in the new Obamacare marketplaces include hefty deductibles for drugs of hundreds or even thousands of dollars a year. Even people who get their health insurance from large corporations, which tend to have the richest benefits, are expected to pay a growing share of their drug bill out of their pockets. Data from the Kaiser Family Foundation, which conducts a large survey of employers about their benefits, show the trend clearly. More than 40 percent of employers now ask their workers to pay deductibles of $1,000 or more. At small companies, more than 60 percent buy such plans.A few employees every year get sick enough that they spend their deductibles on doctor or hospital care. But many more take prescription drugs, meaning that the cost of medications is an expense they encounter every month.A growing number of plans are also adding special deductibles for drugs only. And insurance companies have been trying to discourage patients from choosing the most costly drugs by asking them to pay bigger co-payments even after they’ve used up their deductibles, meaning patients who need such drugs may be paying a big bill all year long.“They are having to pay the full cost of their prescriptions, not just the co-payments; I think that’s the thing that’s changed,” said Murray Aitken, the executive director of the IMS institute. “The very real explanation is people are having more exposure to the full cost.”