https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/26/sports/basketball/in-las-vegas-korean-basketball-leagues-draft-promises-money-and-culture-shock.html
In Las Vegas, Korean Basketball League’s Draft Promises Money and Culture Shock  - The New York Times
Basketball,Korean Basketball League,Draft and Recruitment (Sports),South Korea,Las Vegas (Nev)
July 24, 2015
1023
LAS VEGAS —  Tommy Smith, in his quest to remain employed as a professional basketball player, joined dozens of other free agents in a single-file line this month at Desert Oasis High School, a boxy structure set amid rocks, cactus and molten heat about 10 miles south of this city’s shimmering strip of casinos.Smith, 34, had made the four-hour drive from his home in Phoenix for the start of a four-day spectacle run by the Korean Basketball League, and he soon spotted a familiar face: that of Smush Parker, the former Los Angeles Lakers guard whose own odyssey had landed him here, also at age 34, in hopes of landing another job.“Yeah, I know Smush,” said Smith, a 6-foot-10 power forward. “We shot a cellphone commercial together in Mongolia.”The Korean Basketball League, or K.B.L., essentially relocates to Las Vegas every July when dozens of officials — executives, coaches and scouts from each of the league’s 10 teams — descend en masse for an invitation-only tryout, held this year at the high school, followed by an import draft, which this year was held Tuesday in a grand ballroom at the Palms Casino Resort.“The American players are a lot different from the Korean players,” said S. J. Kimm, the chief operating officer for the Seoul Samsung Thunders. “Their whole style of play is different. We’re trying to supplement what we don’t have.”Teams are permitted two international players apiece, so they come to the United States to round out their rosters. Players come because 20 contracts are up for grabs, and the pay is excellent: $30,000 a month for first-round picks and $20,000 a month for second-round picks, all tax free.Still, the entire exercise felt a bit strange. No other basketball league in the world comes to Las Vegas in July to stage a draft at a casino.“I’m not really sure what to make of any of this,” said Matt Bouldin, a 27-year-old guard who arrived at the high school to register on opening night.Bouldin, a former star at Gonzaga, soon joined more than 120 other players in the high school auditorium, where Jonathan Kim, in his first act as master of ceremonies, took the stage and welcomed everyone to the orientation. He stepped away from the dais as the lights dimmed and a six-minute highlight video flickered on a large screen: forwards from Jeonju KCC Egis soaring for dunks; guards from Busan KT Sonicboom swishing 3-pointers; fans of Wonju Dongbu Promy going bonkers.It was all new to Smith, who had traveled the world playing basketball but could not name one team from the K.B.L. It was safe to assume that he was not alone.“Maybe I should learn them,” he said.Next up was Montgomery Paek, a lawyer for the league who went over the standardized player contract, page by page. He used the word “important” no fewer than a dozen times. It was important that the players print their names legibly on Page 1 and sign their names on Page 18. It was important for them to know that the contract runs from August through February, covering the league’s 54-game season. It was important for them to understand that they would undergo drug testing.“Even marijuana can void a contract,” Paek said. “Does anyone have any questions?”A hand shot up. It belonged to Rashad McCants, a former first-round pick of the Minnesota Timberwolves who was most recently playing in Venezuela.“Are the contracts negotiable?” he asked.The short answer was no. If nothing else, McCants was now easily identifiable to the league officials in attendance. It was unclear whether that was a good thing.Kim reappeared to emphasize the tryout’s strict attendance policy. The league expected players to report for roll call the following morning at 8.“If you’re not giving 100 percent, you’ll get a warning,” Kim said. “If you’re slacking for any reason, we’re going to assume you don’t want to play for K.B.L.”Kim reminded the players to remain in the gym throughout the day. If they could not be located, they would be disqualified.“Let your coach know when you have to use the bathroom,” Kim said. “See you tomorrow.”‘A Very Sensitive Area’The following morning, Kimm, the director of the Thunders, joined other league executives in the bleachers to watch the first of two days of full-court scrimmages. The coaches and scouts from the franchises occupied a neat row of courtside tables, each bedecked with a team banner.“We’re the blue one,” Kimm said.The Thunders were engaged in an overhaul after finishing in last place. The draft promised to be another important step for the team. Kimm said the Thunders would need to choose wisely, though. He cited an incident from last season involving Davon Jefferson, a Californian who was playing for the Changwon LG Sakers. Before a playoff game, Jefferson stretched during the national anthem — a show of disrespect. There had been others. The Sakers cut him two days later.“Unfortunately, he made some cultural mistakes,” Kimm said. “That’s a very sensitive area.”So the Thunders were searching for a team-first player. The league was also monitoring the style of play at the tryout. Already, officials had reprimanded Andre Smith, a burly forward, for failing to play team basketball in one of the scrimmages. Smith seemed mystified by the episode.It was early, but one player had grabbed Kimm’s attention.“This guy,” Kimm said, pointing at a name on the roster. “Joe Jackson.”Jackson, 23, was coming off a solid season with the Bakersfield Jam of the N.B.A. Development League after a four-year career at the University of Memphis. A 6-foot point guard, Jackson knew he was at a disadvantage. Most teams wanted larger guards, so Jackson tried to play big. In his first game, he scored 21 points, shot 9 of 13 and rose for a dunk that left several team officials cheering from their chairs.Afterward, Jackson spoke of his dream of playing in the N.B.A. But he also needed to make money. One month’s salary in Korea would nearly double what he had made in the D-League last season, he said. He recalled a recent conversation with Elijah Millsap, a former D-League teammate who signed with the Utah Jazz in January.“He was telling me, ‘Don’t get so caught up in the N.B.A.,’ ” Jackson said. “So I have to listen. It can mess your mind up. You get to worrying about it so much, and you stop playing your game. Honestly, if you’re good, you’re going to get noticed. You’re going to get what you’re worth.”Like Jackson, Bouldin played well in his first game. But as he sat against a wall near a baseline, Bouldin was still processing the past 24 hours — and his future. He and his agent were speaking with a team from Italy, and Bouldin wanted to make sure he found the right fit. He was finally healthy after dealing with a series of injuries. He hoped to use his next contract to advance his career.“I’ve only heard great things about the K.B.L.,” Bouldin said. “But I don’t know how respected it is. Is Real Madrid going to sign me because I averaged 40 in Korea?”He was under the impression that if a team selected him in the draft, he would still have time to weigh his options.“They don’t sign guys at the draft, do they?” he asked.Well, see, that was the thing. The expectation among league officials is that if a player shows up for the draft, he intends to finalize his contract on the spot. In fact, seconds after each team makes its pick, the player is escorted into a private room next door — the so-called K.B.L. legal room — where Paek, the lawyer for the league, hands the player a contract and a pen. Agents are barred from attending. Bouldin tried to absorb this information.“There’s a lot of stuff I don’t understand,” he said.A Limit on Tall PlayersNot so long ago, the tryout was the sole province of big men. Because South Korea already had its share of guards, the league typically turned to the United States for post players. But some officials said they thought the game was losing its speed and finesse, so a new rule was introduced this year: Each team could draft only one player taller than 6-4.“We want the games to be exciting and fun for Korean fans,” said Jaemin Lee, the league’s executive director for basketball operations.It was good news for guards like Jackson and Bouldin, who would have previously had no shot of getting drafted, but bad news for Tommy Smith, the forward from Phoenix. Half the jobs for players his size were suddenly gone, and he was competing for a contract with 25 players who already had K.B.L. experience. (All of them, it should be noted, were required to go through the tryout and re-enter the draft.)“It’s really difficult to establish yourself if you’re new,” Smith said. “These teams are already familiar with all the guys who played in the league last season.”Consider, for example, the odd experience of Ricardo Ratliffe, a K.B.L. veteran. In his first scrimmage at the tryout, Ratliffe played a total of five minutes, missed his only shot and was still considered the heavy favorite to be the first player selected.It was Monday, the second full day of scrimmages. Smith folded his long, lean frame into a seat in the bleachers and tried to get comfortable. His team was not scheduled to play for another six hours. He had barely touched the ball in his first game. Guards were not exactly making entry passes their priority.With time to kill, Smith occupied himself by identifying former teammates and opponents. See No. 87? That was Gary Flowers. Smith played against him in the Dominican Republic. No. 37? Bald dude with the jumper? Tim Pickett. They were in training camp together with the Golden State Warriors. No. 7? A guard named Anthony Roberson.“Played with him in Qatar,” Smith said.For Smith, little has gone according to plan since the Chicago Bulls made him a second-round draft pick in 2003. Cut by the Bulls before he appeared in an N.B.A. game, Smith began a productive career overseas that was interrupted in 2009 when he was convicted of aggravated assault. He spent more than two years in prison. He now runs a foundation aimed at teaching children life skills.“I don’t want anyone to go through what I went through,” he said.At the same time, Smith has managed to sustain his basketball career, most recently with Alliance-Tech Khartsaga in Mongolia. In Las Vegas, Smith reconnected with Parker, his co-star in the cellphone commercial. Parker said he did not plan to return to Mongolia any time soon.“You can quote this as Smush Parker saying, ‘Yo, Mongolia was the worst basketball experience ever,’ ” Parker said. “I would advise nobody to ever go there.”At the tryout, Parker wore his copper-colored braids in a bun and celebrated his successful 3-point tries by spanking himself. Parker really wanted to go to Korea, which, despite some recent problems — including two separate point-shaving scandals — remained a desired destination.“They know how to treat American players over there,” said Leo Lyons, a K.B.L. veteran who hoped to return. “You can go through hell in Europe sometimes. And then you go to Korea, and they’re on time with the money. They treat you well. You can just focus on basketball. It’s all good.”Draft DayOn the morning of the draft, Smith awoke in a panic because he thought he had overslept. He texted his agent, Kevin Seo.“Kevin, my alarm didn’t go off,” Smith wrote. “Can I still come?”Smith arrived in plenty of time. After making his way past rows of blackjack tables and an army of slot machines at the Palms Casino Resort, he took an elevator to a ballroom on the second floor. There was a stage at the front of the room and a huge banner on the wall: “2015 K.B.L. Tryout & Draft.”As the players settled into their assigned seats, the draft order was determined by a complicated process that involved a steel drum, 250 miniature Ping-Pong balls, several brass eggs and dozens of anxious team officials.After the Samsung Thunders won the lottery, Kim, the event’s M.C., went through roll call one final time. Ira Clark, a league veteran, appeared to be a no-show until he burst through the doors with seconds to spare. He raised his arms triumphantly and used some colorful language as he high-fived his fellow draft prospects en route to his seat. Several executives looked mortified.When the Thunders, as expected, selected Ratliffe with the top pick, Clark jumped to his feet.“Champion!” Clark shouted as Ratliffe made his way to the front of the room. “My dude! I’m going to stand up for you, bro! Champion!”As league officials scrambled to muzzle Clark’s enthusiasm, Ratliffe disappeared to the K.B.L. legal room, where he signed his new contract. He returned minutes later to don a team jersey and baseball cap for a photo op on the stage. The ballroom filled with applause.One after another, teams selected post players in the first round, including Andre Smith, who went third to the Incheon ET-Land Elephants (so much for being reprimanded), and Lyons, who went 10th to Ulsan Mobis Phoebus. Smith approached his agent, Ben Pensack.“I might have signed away my first kid back there,” Andre Smith said.But as teams began to turn their attention to guards in the second round, it was clear to Tommy Smith that his prospects were dimming.“I’ll be all right,” Smith said. “Hopefully, I’ll have some other opportunities.”With the 13th pick, the LG Sakers, fresh off their failed experiment with Davon Jefferson, drafted Bouldin. As he was making his way to sign his contract, the Goyang Orions selected Jackson at No. 14. Jackson, who grew up in a tough part of Memphis, said it was a life-changing moment. He suddenly had a six-figure deal.“I don’t know if you can understand where I came from,” he said. “I’m just thankful right now.”As the proceedings came to a close, most of the players, including McCants and Parker, had gone undrafted. Parker remained seated for several minutes before he retrieved his maroon suitcase at the back of the room. He was headed home to Brooklyn.Bouldin, meanwhile, wrapped his arms around team officials so he could pose for photos. Jin Kim, the coach of the LG Sakers, said he appreciated Bouldin’s versatility and expected that he would be a good teammate.“Because we had trouble last year, that was one of the priorities,” the coach said through an interpreter.Before the tryout, Bouldin had barely heard of the league. Now that he was bound for Korea in early August, he was warming to the once-improbable idea.“I told my parents, and they were pretty excited,” said Bouldin, who glanced at his new jersey. “Pinstripes.”