http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/02/theater/reviews/bonnie-clyde-with-laura-osnes-and-jeremy-jordan-review.html
‘Bonnie & Clyde,’ With Laura Osnes and Jeremy Jordan - Review - The New York Times
Theater,Wildhorn  Frank,Osnes  Laura,Ost  Tobin,Jordan  Jeremy,Bonnie & Clyde (Play),Menchell  Ivan,Black  Don
Dec. 1, 2011
8811
That Clyde Barrow is such a cutup. Why, the boy will do most anything to stir up his sluggish fellow Americans: slap at them, tickle them, shoot them in cold blood. He’ll even punch his fist clean through a wall and drive a big old car right onto the stage, just to try to get a rise out of somebody. But Clyde, honey, t’ain’t nothing you can do to raise the pulse of something that’s as near to dead as the show you’re in.“Bonnie & Clyde,” which opened on Thursday night at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater, is a modest, mildly tuneful musical biography of Clyde Barrow and Bonnie Parker, the kissin’ outlaws from Texas who hijacked the American imagination during the Great Depression. It portrays its title characters (played by Laura Osnes and Jeremy Jordan) as restless, libido-charged young ’uns who are about to suffocate from the grayness of their dreary lives.So they quarrel a lot (their favorite form of foreplay) and then have sex (offstage, just in case you want to bring the children). They stick up banks, leave a trail of dead bodies and drive real fast (also offstage, since a $6 million budget can only stretch so far). But they just can’t seem to shake the torpor that makes every day in their lives — and every scene in this production from the composer Frank Wildhorn, with a book by Ivan Menchell and lyrics by Don Black — feel like the one that came before it.Remember the advertising tag line from the much acclaimed, much-reviled 1967 movie that was also called “Bonnie and Clyde” and starred Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty? It went, “They’re young, they’re in love, they kill people.” That pretty much sums up what goes on in this show too. There’s even a fair amount of onstage bloodletting, as there was in Arthur Penn’s film.That movie’s carnage factor — and especially the visual poetry it brought to such violence — was what most raised the hackles of old-guard critics. Somehow, though, when blood geysers out of a body in this version, all you’re likely to think is, “Well, who’s going to clean up that mess?” Directed and (sort of) choreographed by Jeff Calhoun, “Bonnie & Clyde” manages to make that triple-threat lure of sex, youth and violence seem about as glamorous as — and a lot less dangerous than — Black Friday at Wal-Mart.Making multiple murders feel like just another manifestation of mortal ennui can be a conscious artistic choice of course. (Think of “Badlands,” Terrence Malick’s 1973 movie about a numbed-out serial killer.) I doubt that’s what the creative team here is going for, though Clyde does make some grim existential statements about the randomness of life and death.Instead, this show has repackaged the tale of Bonnie and Clyde as a Story for Our Time, with implicit parallels between the lost ideals of one American era of privation and unemployment and our own. “This country’s had its day,” Clyde snarls. That pronouncement is reflected in Tobin Ost’s weathered wooden sets, overlaid with Aaron Rhyne’s video projections, which summon the Dust Bowl images of photographers like Dorothea Lange. There is even — heaven help us — a breadline tableau, in silhouette, somewhere along the way. (There are also projected pictures of the real Bonnie and Clyde, a bad idea, since they bristle with a gritty individuality that no one onstage possesses.)You can understand then why Clyde, the son of a sharecropper, and Bonnie, a two-bit waitress with movie-star fantasies, might want to break away and go wild. (We meet their childhood selves, played by Kelsey Fowler and Talon Ackerman, who show up to remind them of the dreams they once dreamed.) And it makes sense that members of a down-and-out public would see Bonnie and Clyde as radiant and exciting creatures.Whether theatergoers will share that vision is another question. Mr. Jordan, a rising musical star who won terrific notices for the Broadway-bound Disney musical “Newsies,” has a great baby-gangster face that brings to mind a dewier John Garfield or perhaps all the Dead End Kids rolled into one. He exudes a naturally intense presence, and he works hard at making Clyde seem both wholesome and menacing.But for all their semiclad spooning and sparking and aspiringly fiery fights, this Bonnie and Clyde don’t seem convincingly hot for each other or for the thrill of being on the run. Ms. Osnes is a lovely young woman of fashion-model proportions and an instinctive, accessible elegance that reads Ingénue. (She was perfect as the romantic lead in the current revival of “Anything Goes.”)I don’t think ingénue was what Bonnie Parker was about. Ms. Osnes brings to mind a Bennington girl slumming with rough trade on her semester off. And while she has in past performances proved herself an incisive and expressive dancer (it’s her foremost tool in defining character), here she’s allowed nary a step.She does get to sing the show’s most classically Wildhornesque number, a second-act pump-up-the-volume soul barer called “Dyin’ Ain’t So Bad.” For the most part, though, Mr. Wildhorn — who is best known for hard-sell power ballads in shows that include “Jekyll and Hyde,” “Dracula” and last season’s short-lived “Wonderland” — is politely restrained for a production that you might have expected to bring out his most lurid side.His musical template is humbly of the people this time, which means a little bit gospel, a little bit ragtime, a little bit country-western. But the numbers — even the kind of evangelical call-and-response song that usually gets audiences whooping and clapping along — all seem to flat-line in the end. Tellingly the show’s best song is a slender, shimmering hymn to small and ordinary pleasures, nicely performed by Melissa van der Schyff as Blanche, the pious wife of Clyde’s brother, Buck (Claybourne Elder, sweet and empty).Partly because Mr. Calhoun’s staging (with the help of Michael Gilliam’s lighting) tries to approximate cinematic crosscutting, you find yourself thinking of Penn’s movie and the incisive characterizations provided by a cast that included Gene Hackman and Estelle Parsons as Buck and Blanche. Such comparisons are definitely not to this musical’s advantage.To its credit this show’s criminal renegades are not presented as misunderstood kids, victims of a dream-squelching society. Mr. Jordan’s Clyde and Ms. Osnes’s Bonnie are, it is made clear, serious egomaniacs, who regularly quarrel (in one of the script’s limp running jokes) about who should get top billing in news accounts of their crimes. Like so many young folks today, they just want to be stars.If only the Bravo network had been around then to meet Bonnie and Clyde’s special needs by coming up with a series for them — “Real White Trash of West Dallas,” maybe. Think of all the lives that might have been spared.BONNIE & CLYDEBook by Ivan Menchell; lyrics by Don Black; music by Frank Wildhorn; directed and choreographed by Jeff Calhoun; music supervision/arrangements and orchestrations by John McDaniel; sets and costumes by Tobin Ost; lighting by Michael Gilliam; sound by John Shivers; projections by Aaron Rhyne; hair and wig design by Charles LaPointe; makeup by Ashley Ryan; fight director, Steve Rankin; technical supervisor, Neil A. Mazzella/Hudson Theatrical Associates; production stage manager, Paul J. Smith; associate director, Coy Middlebrook; music director, Jason Howland; music contractor, David Lai; general manager, Bespoke Theatricals. Presented by Kathleen Raitt, Jerry Frankel, Jeffrey Richards, Barry Satchwell Smith, Michael A. Jenkins, Howard Caplan, Bernie Abrams/Michael Speyer, Howard Kagan, Barry and Carole Kaye, Terry Schnuck, Nederlander Presentations, Corey Brunish/Brisa Trinchero, Alden Badway Podell/the Broadway Consortium, Patty Baker, Bazinet and Company, Uniteus Entertainment, Ken Mahoney and Jeremy Scott Blaustein, in association with Stageventures 2011 Limited Partnership, Infinity Stages 1 , Robert G. Bartner/Ambassador Theater Group, BGM, Broadway Across America, Michael D. Coit, Mary Cossette, Ronald Frankel, Lloyd Fruge, Bruce Robert Harris/Jack W. Batman, Cynthia Stroum, DSM/Gabriel Kamel and Irving Welzer. At the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan; (212) 239-6200; telecharge.com. Running time: 2 hours 20 minutes.WITH: Laura Osnes (Bonnie Parker), Jeremy Jordan (Clyde Barrow), Melissa van der Schyff (Blanche Barrow), Claybourne Elder (Buck Barrow), Joe Hart (Sheriff Schmid), Louis Hobson (Ted Hinton), Kelsey Fowler (Young Bonnie) and Talon Ackerman (Young Clyde).