https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/arts/design/when-art-collecting-is-a-family-affair.html
When Art Collecting Is a Family Affair - The New York Times
Rogers  Victoria,Art,Kickstarter,Brooklyn Museum,Blacks,Greenwich Village (Manhattan  NY)
June 29, 2017
9333
Victoria Rogers, who has spent the past year as director of arts for the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter, is one of those people who juggles so many commitments — from work to nonprofit activities to social engagements — that you may feel a little lazy or unpopular by comparison.Art collecting is one of her many pursuits, as evidenced by her crowded Greenwich Village apartment, a studio that is trying, with the addition of a partition, to be a one-bedroom. Pieces by Hank Willis Thomas, Yinka Shonibare and LaToya Ruby Frazier are all on view, demonstrating her passion for work by black contemporary artists.At only 27, Ms. Rogers may be among the youngest trustees of a major American museum, serving in that role at the Brooklyn Museum since last July. Ms. Rogers is also a trustee of Creative Time, having been brought on at both institutions by the Brooklyn Museum’s director, Anne Pasternak. As Ms. Rogers put it, “Anne wants to take risks, and maybe I’m one of them.” In what passes for her free time, she also serves on the global council of the Studio Museum in Harlem.Ms. Rogers grew up in Chicago with notable parents: John W. Rogers Jr., the founder of Ariel Investments, and Desirée Rogers, White House social secretary for the Obamas and, until recently, chief executive of Johnson Publishing. (They are divorced.)The younger Ms. Rogers is leaving Kickstarter for Stanford, where she will begin an M.B.A. program in the fall, but she is keeping her New York apartment with the art in place. As the insistent ping of text messages rang out on her phone, she talked about her premier wall, a narrow space between two tall, gracious windows facing a leafy street.It’s an eclectic lineup: Lorna Simpson’s drawing “Natural Brown” (2013); Émile Bernard’s oil on canvas “Vue de Pont-Aven” (1887); two 1930s fashion sketches; a 2013 untitled work by Bruce High Quality Foundation; Brian Dettmer’s “Surgical Nursing” (2007); and, on a table below, two 2014 vases by Kara Walker.How do these all fit together?I fall in love with things and collect them without a grand strategy. They also all have a deeper story, where I am supporting a friend, or connecting to a personal relationship or a cause beyond the aesthetic object.What’s a good example of that?I love Lorna’s work — [“Natural Brown”] is a quiet one, but it came out of my relationship with the artist Wangechi Mutu. It was sold to help Wangechi support L.B.G.T.Q.I.A. [lesbian, bisexual, gay, transgender, queer, intersex and asexual] people throughout Africa. She’s super cool. And the Bruce High Quality piece, that’s a picture of me and a friend, who was their studio manager. She had the Bruces Bruce-ify it.That landscape painting by Émile Bernard looks like the outlier here.It’s the first piece I bought. I was 18 and in high school. I was doing a paper about Sotheby’s for my AP economics class. I went to New York with my dad, and I had checked it out in advance as something I was interested in. We got a fancy paddle. I have a very different mind-set about collecting now, but it was the first thing that went up in this apartment, even before the couches.How did you find the fashion illustrations?When my mom was working in D.C., I would go vintage shopping with her. Her tastes have changed since I’ve become a little more knowledgeable, and more involved with art. She follows a lot of artists that I like. I think initially she was thinking about what matches the couch, but now she’s becoming a big supporter of young African-American artists, as I am.The family that collects together stays together?I have a Derrick Adams in my bedroom, and she now has his work, too. And I helped my mom select a Theaster Gates piece for her house. Sometimes we’ll split a work, get it together, and then see who has the wall space for it.