http://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/01/us/the-2000-campaign-the-inquiry-fbi-widens-investigation-into-debate-leak.html
THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE INQUIRY; F.B.I. Widens Investigation Into Debate Leak - The New York Times
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION,MAVERICK MEDIA,BUSH  GEORGE W,LOZANO  YVETTE,GORE  AL,MCKINNON  MARK,RECORDINGS (VIDEO),DEBATING,PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000
Oct. 1, 2000
2344
Correction AppendedOfficials with the Bush campaign said today that they did not believe that an employee of the campaign's advertising firm, who has drawn the attention of F.B.I. investigators, was involved in sending confidential debate-preparation materials to the Gore campaign.The Bush campaign officials' defense of Yvette Lozano, an administrative assistant at the firm, Maverick Media, came as law enforcement officials said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had broadened its inquiry into the matter over the last several days and that investigators were expanding the number of people at whom they were taking a close look.One Justice Department official said the bureau had not ''singled out'' a prime suspect and was, in fact, still trying to determine whether any federal law had been violated.Ms. Lozano was fingerprinted twice by the bureau, most recently on Thursday, the same day she turned over the computers in her home and office to investigators, campaign officials said.The bureau began focusing on Ms. Lozano because a security videotape revealed that she took a package to the post office from which the materials were apparently sent on the day they were put in the mail.But Ms. Lozano said in several interviews with news organizations this week that the package contained khaki pants that her boss, Mark McKinnon, the campaign's chief media adviser, was returning to the Gap. Mr. McKinnon said the same thing.Several campaign officials said they had no reason to doubt them.''Yvette is a great employee,'' said Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for the campaign. ''She's always been loyal to the governor, and we have no doubt she had nothing to do with it.''But Karen P. Hughes, the campaign's communications director, spoke about Ms. Lozano differently than she had earlier in the week. Ms. Hughes, who had previously cast Ms. Lozano as the victim of a politically motivated investigation, told reporters repeatedly today that Ms. Lozano was an employee of Maverick, not the campaign itself, and that she had never met her.Ms. Lozano did not return a telephone message left on a machine at her home in Austin today. Chris Gunter, a lawyer she hired late this week, also did not return a message left at his Austin office today.In another development today, the F.B.I. interviewed the campaign's chief strategist, Karl Rove, one of a limited number of senior advisers who had legitimate access to the debate materials. The bureau had previously interviewed several of the others, including Mr. McKinnon.The bureau's investigation concerns an Express Mail package received on Sept. 13 by a former congressman, Thomas Downey, who was helping Mr. Gore prepare for the presidential debates. It contained a videotape of one of Gov. George W. Bush's debate practice sessions and a thick briefing book.Mr. Downey has said that after he realized the materials were confidential, he gave them to his lawyer, who gave them to the bureau.And ever since, the matter has been the subject of considerable intrigue and suspicion, involving charges and countercharges. Several  Bush advisers said the materials may have been stolen from the Austin offices of Maverick Media, which they said were not as secure as their campaign headquarters and which were next to a film editing facility used by Republicans and Democrats.They also sought to focus attention on the Gore campaign's suspension last week of a low-level employee who had bragged to a friend about having a mole in the Bush camp. Gore aides said that the employee had been kidding.Democrats in Texas, meanwhile, speculated that the sending of the materials was a dirty trick by the Bush campaign to embarrass the Gore campaign. Several Bush advisers said today that they did not understand the logic of that.''This intrigue is so ridiculous -- they must think someone was at the grassy knoll, too,'' Ms. Hughes said today.Ms. Hughes was with Mr. Bush at his ranch near Waco to help him prepare for his first debate with Vice President Al Gore on Tuesday night in Boston. Mr. Bush said, ''I'm confident that no one who supports my candidacy would have mailed the tape.''But when asked if that meant that he was confident that nobody on his campaign's payroll was involved, he said, ''I have no idea.''According to law enforcement officials and several of Mr. Bush's aides, F.B.I. investigators have visited Maverick Media several times and talked to almost all of the employees and volunteers there, some of whom, like Mr. McKinnon, have worked for Democrats in the past.Several Bush advisers said today that Mr. McKinnon, like Ms. Lozano, had been fingerprinted, but that no one else had. Mr. McKinnon said that both he and Ms. Lozano had offered to take polygraph tests, but that the F.B.I. had not taken them up on it.''I'm in the middle of a Kafka novel,'' Mr. McKinnon said in a telephone interview today. ''I know I didn't do anything. And I believe with all my heart and soul that Yvette didn't do anything.''Mr. McKinnon met Ms. Lozano in 1990, when both of them worked for Ann Richards's successful Democratic campaign for governor. Mr. McKinnon was the communications director. Ms. Lozano was a volunteer. She later became a baby sitter for his children, and in June 1999, he hired her at Maverick Media.Professional acquaintances said that Ms. Lozano, 30, a single woman who lives at home with her parents, was not capable of subterfuge.An official with the Bush campaign said today that two other people who work for Mr. McKinnon at Maverick Media had also come under close scrutiny, and law enforcement officials said they would be re-interviewing many of the people at Maverick over the next few days.They said that while the situation was still only under investigation, potential charges included mail fraud, making false statements to a federal agent or theft from a federally funded activity, given that general-election campaigns receive public financing.Correction: October 2, 2000, Monday  A credit yesterday for a picture of Mark McKinnon, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, misspelled the photographer's surname in some copies. He is Mathew Sturtevant, not Sturevant.