https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/arts/television/on-hbos-girls-a-kitty-genovese-plot-proves-eerily-timed.html
On HBO’s ‘Girls,’ a Kitty Genovese Plot Proves Eerily Timed - The New York Times
Television,Girls (TV Program),Genovese  Kitty,Moseley  Winston,Dunham  Lena,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Sex Crimes
April 6, 2016
9642
It was one of those rare moments on television when a sitcom anticipates the morning news.On Sunday’s episode of “Girls,” the show resurrected the story of Kitty Genovese, the 28-year-old bar manager attacked outside her Queens apartment in 1964. The next day, news broke that Winston Moseley, the man who stalked, raped and killed her, had died in prison at age 81.“This is one of those stories that has haunted us for years,” said Sarah Heyward, a producer and writer on “Girls,” who wrote the episode. “I grew up knowing this story. A lot of New York women grew up knowing this story.”Though Ms. Heyward, 31, and the “Girls” creator, Lena Dunham, 29, were both born decades after Ms. Genovese’s death, they spent years searching for the right moment to connect the dots between the decades-old cautionary tale and the show’s modern take on New York singledom.“This is the nightmare story of what can happen to a woman who lives alone in New York,” Ms. Heyward said. The Genovese story persists, she added, because “many of the problems presented by the case remain relevant today,” like sexual assault and the bystander effect.But the “Girls” writers didn’t know just how relevant Genovese’s story would be when the episode aired. “This is one of the weirdest coincidences the universe has yet [to] serve up in my short time here on earth,” Ms. Dunham wrote on Instagram on Monday. “Last night’s @girlshbo was about the Kitty Genovese murder. Today we learn her killer has died.”“Girls” conjured Ms. Genovese by way of a fond parody of immersive theater projects: Hannah, played by Ms. Dunham, attends a play called “38 Neighbors,” in which audience members are set free to roam through the units of an apartment building, where they encounter actors — including Hannah’s former boyfriend Adam (Adam Driver) — who play the neighbors ignoring Genovese’s screams. The attack is rendered with an abstract tableau in the courtyard below: A couple of white dummies posed in a grappling position, lit with blinking red lights and piped with a recording of a woman’s screams. And as the characters of “Girls” move throughout the play and prove more interested in acting out their own minute psychodramas than bearing witness to the crime, Ms. Genovese’s tragedy forms the backdrop for a tragicomic tour through the conflicted state of female empowerment.“It’s ‘Girls,’ ” Ms. Heyward said. “Our characters have to be self-involved and focused on their own problems.”In “Girls” world, the single woman is less at risk of physical threat than a kind of soft social erasure. As Hannah navigates the rooms of the play, she watches as her old friend Jessa (Jemima Kirke) couples up with her ex-boyfriend Adam; her best friend, Marnie (Allison Williams), glibly dismisses Hannah’s relationship problems; and her new boyfriend, Fran (Jake Lacy), is repelled by her odd brand of sexual self-expression.Before attending the play, Hannah sat in the principal’s office of the school where she teaches, listened to her boss reprimand her for insulting other teachers in class and then opened her legs to reveal her bare vagina — a bid to shock him into silence before he could discipline her.“Honestly, men are so afraid of the female vagina, we should be, like, galvanizing and using this tactic to literally win wars,” Hannah explains to Fran. The title of the episode, “Hello Kitty,” draws a bawdy connection between these very different situations involving female bodily autonomy and societal punishment.Ms. Heyward said that she knew that not all “Girls” viewers would be so steeped in Genovese lore, so she threaded the script with historical details about the case. Before the play begins, an usher quickly delivers a succinct back story to the play’s audience. Later, Hannah’s lines annotate the play in real time. “I was doing some Wikipedia-ing last night, and I had completely forgotten the fact that Kitty was a lesbian,” Hannah says. “Do you think that may have been a factor in what happened to her? Wouldn’t surprise me. Another woman deemed unacceptable by society and left to die for her sins.”Ms. Heyward said that the details were part of the point. “A lot of newspapers didn’t mention the fact that she was gay. It made her a less ‘perfect’ victim, so they erased it,” Ms. Heyward said. “We were really glad we got that line in there, to help to humanize this person who’s turned into such an emblem. We were amazed that it was left out of the story for so long.”