http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/15/arts/music/ringo-starr-cancels-north-carolina-show-also-citing-bias-law.html
Ringo Starr Cancels North Carolina Show, Also Citing Bias Law - The New York Times
Music,North Carolina,Transgender and Transsexuals,Discrimination,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Bathrooms and Toilets,Law and Legislation,Boycotts,Springsteen  Bruce,Buffett  Jimmy,Lauper  Cyndi,Pop and Rock Music,Starr  Ringo
April 14, 2016
3582
Following Bruce Springsteen’s lead, Ringo Starr will not be performing in North Carolina any time soon. The former Beatles drummer announced that he was canceling a scheduled June 18 concert in Cary, N.C., in protest of a  law that limits bathroom access for transgender people and eliminates local anti-discrimination ordinances based on sexual orientation.“I’m sorry to disappoint my fans in the area, but we need to take a stand against this hatred,” Mr. Starr wrote in a statement on Wednesday. “All you need is love,” he added.Last week Mr. Springsteen scrapped a show in Greensboro in a display of solidarity against the law. He called the option of not performing in the state “the strongest means I have for raising my voice in opposition to those who continue to push us backwards instead of forwards.”The singer Bryan Adams then canceled a show in Biloxi, Miss., citing similar legislation there, and explained that he “cannot in good conscience perform in a state where certain people are denied their civil rights due to their sexual orientation.”Other performers, including Gregg Allman and Jimmy Buffett, have condemned the law, but said that their concerts would go on. “These shows were booked and sold out long before the governor signed that stupid law,” Mr. Buffett said. “I am not going to let stupidity or bigotry trump fun for my loyal fans this year.”Cyndi Lauper, who is scheduled to perform in North Carolina this summer, said she would protest the law, known as HB2, in person — and onstage. “The best way I know how to make a difference is what I have strived to do my whole life and that is show up for my family, friends, and fans in the L.G.B.T. community,” she said in a statement. “So, for that reason I think the best way I can do my part is to turn my show in Raleigh on June 4th into an entire day to build public support to repeal HB2.”She said all profits from the show, including commissions for her manager and agent, would be donated to efforts to repeal the law.