https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/18/sports/basketball/d-league-select-teams-2-week-quest-for-minutes-eyes-and-contracts.html
2-Week Quest for Minutes, Eyes and Contracts - The New York Times
Basketball,National Basketball Assn,Draft and Recruitment (Sports),National Basketball Assn Development League,Morrison  Scott (Basketball Coach)
July 17, 2015
3616
LAS VEGAS —  Scott Morrison, the coach of the D-League Select team at the N.B.A. summer league, delivered a pregame speech on Thursday that was mostly boilerplate. He reviewed opposing personnel, advising his defenders to avoid leaving their feet on pump fakes. But he also reminded them that it was the playoffs, so the stakes were higher.“The longer we play,” Morrison said in the locker room, “the more eyes are on us.”For many of the N.B.A. Development League journeymen on the 12-player rosters, that was the key takeaway. They knew the bleachers at Cox Pavilion would be cluttered with scouts and executives from professional teams near and far. Contracts were up for grabs, a prospect that was even more vivid because of one player’s absence.Casey Prather, a forward, had agreed to a deal with a club from Australia’s National Basketball League, which meant that he would be supporting his D-League teammates from the bench.“At the end of the day,” Morrison continued, “whether it’s summer or winter, that’s what the D-League is for and that’s what we’re all here to do: look for the next step. So we’re happy for Casey. But that also means there are opportunities for other guys to step up and take his minutes.”The players gathered at the center of the room and extended their arms: One! Two! Three! Together! Then, as independent contractors in pursuit of two common goals — a victory and, perhaps more important, gainful employment — they boarded a freight elevator to the court.At summer league, everyone is searching for something. Recent draft picks want to gain experience and prove their worth. Second-year players hope to solidify their roles. Free agents long for training-camp invitations and contracts. But nearly all players are affiliated, for at least two weeks, with N.B.A. teams — all of them, that is, except for the D-Leaguers.“Being an older vet, summer league’s not exactly my favorite thing to do,” said Taylor Griffin, a 29-year-old forward who spent last season with the Santa Cruz Warriors, who won the D-League championship. “But if it can help you get a job, you’ll do it.”Griffin was joined by the likes of Hasheem Thabeet, the No. 2 overall pick in 2009, whose well-chronicled struggles had him toiling most recently with the Grand Rapids Drive, and Scotty Hopson, a guard who set a franchise record last season when he scored 52 points in a game for the Sioux Falls Skyforce.Hopson, 25, explained the delicate calculation behind his decision to play for the D-League Select team.“Best opportunity,” he said, “for the most minutes.”The D-League has fielded a team for seven consecutive summers. Chris Alpert, the league’s vice president for basketball operations and player personnel, said that Las Vegas had long provided an invaluable stage for the league’s players and coaches and that they did everything they could to make the most of their two weeks here.Alpert and his staff, for example, spent months assembling the roster. Alpert estimated that he had exchanged nearly 1,000 text messages with Morrison, the coach of the Maine Red Claws.“We’re looking for talented players, first and foremost,” Alpert said. “But you also want to make sure you get good character guys, because in order for them to come together so quickly, you’ve got to have players who are willing to buy into the system and work hard. These guys have done that.”Griffin said his perspective had changed since he made his summer league debut with the Phoenix Suns in 2009.“When you’re that young, you’re just trying to figure it all out,” he said, “and how to handle yourself in Las Vegas with a $1,000 per diem in your pocket.”These days, Griffin considers himself older and wiser, but it still took his agent to persuade him to play for the D-League Select team. His agent’s argument? Griffin would be playing with experienced teammates who were more likely to play unselfish basketball. (Many young players tend to shoot as if the ball were coated in lava.) Griffin would also be free of the politics of potentially getting buried on the bench behind draft picks.It was the same rationale used by Justin Dentmon, a 29-year-old point guard who was set to play for the Boston Celtics’ summer league team — until they selected two point guards in the draft last month. The Celtics informed Dentmon that he was still welcome to play for them but that his minutes might be limited. He appreciated that they were upfront with him. “I was going to stay home, but then the D-League called,” Dentmon said. “I just thought, ‘Why not?’ ”Dentmon’s odyssey has included a bit of everything, including stops in Israel, Italy, Lithuania, China, Venezuela, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. Here at summer league, that tends to be the norm rather than the exception — but Dentmon is better-traveled than most. Named the D-League’s Most Valuable Player in 2011-12, after an outstanding season with the Austin Toros, Dentmon has barely caught a whiff of the N.B.A., playing a total of 95 minutes in eight games with the Mavericks, the Toronto Raptors and the San Antonio Spurs.He recalled his first summer league experience, with the Memphis Grizzlies in 2010. After he played sparingly, he said, an assistant coach told him that he was not ready for the N.B.A. Dentmon disagreed with that assessment — and still does, five summers later. He described returning to the N.B.A. as the “ultimate dream,” but he has yet to crack the code.“These young players don’t know that it’s such a grind,” Dentmon said. “So much of it takes the right timing and the right fit.”Against the Mavericks on Thursday, Dentmon took the floor with ample motivation. He lives in the Dallas area and has spent parts of three seasons with the Texas Legends, the Mavericks’ D-League affiliate. Yet he did not receive a call from the Mavericks about playing for their summer league team, he said.So he played as if he wanted to make a statement. He scored a game-high 31 points and sank 6 of 10 3-pointers, but it was not quite enough as the Mavericks handed the D-Leaguers their first loss of the week, 104-88.“I felt like I should have been on their team,” Dentmon said, “but those are things you can’t control.”Dentmon said he hoped to have his future plans lined up within the next month, either by securing a spot at an N.B.A. training camp or by signing with a team overseas. The search seldom stops. He did, however, already have his weekend mapped out.“I’ll probably relax by the pool somewhere,” he said.