https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/business/delta-flights-canceled.html
For Delta Passengers Facing Delays, No Calm After the Storm - The New York Times
Delays (Transportation),Airlines and Airplanes,Delta Air Lines Inc,Atlanta (Ga),Airports
April 7, 2017
3330
For Delta Air Lines, the dark clouds started to roll in on Wednesday.It was the midway point in what turned into a challenging week for the airline — one that saw about 3,000 flight cancellations and many more disgruntled customers.When thunderstorms descended there on Wednesday, air traffic controllers at the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport put a hold on incoming air traffic. The delay, common during severe weather, lasted a few hours, but its effects lasted for days.The Atlanta airport is Delta’s biggest and busiest hub, and the delays left the airline facing a sudden, heavy backlog — not only of passengers, but of flight crews — and it affected airports across the country. A Delta spokesman, Morgan Durrant, said the crews’ own disrupted transit schedules were the primary cause of the delays that lingered into Friday.That led to scenes of mayhem like the one witnessed on Friday by Jake Williams, 40, a computer security expert who was scheduled to fly from Augusta, Ga., to Atlanta, and then on to Orlando to deliver a lecture.He said he and dozens of other passengers had already boarded a Delta plane at Augusta Regional Airport early Friday morning when he learned the flight crew was lacking a key member: the pilot.“The flight attendant came and said, ‘Just a few minutes; we hope to find a pilot, and then we’ll take off,’ ” he said, adding that passengers were repeatedly told to sit tight for just 15 more minutes.Eventually, he said, the frustrated passengers deplaned and asked to retrieve their checked luggage so they could find other routes to their destinations. But then the bags were delayed.“Things got so heated with the 40-plus passengers who deplaned that they eventually called the marshal service,” he said. “To keep the peace, I guess.”On Wednesday, some Delta workers in airports like the one in Nashville tried to cheer delayed passengers with free pizza. The move was praised by many customers on social media.But the mood had soured by Thursday, with some passengers complaining that they had been stranded in airports overnight.Gil West, Delta’s chief operating officer, issued a statement on Thursday thanking passengers for their patience.“Customer call volumes remain high, and Spring Break travel means re-accommodation opportunities are limited,” he said in the statement. “Our employees are doing all they can, picking up extra flights, working overtime and going above and beyond for our customers on the phone and in gate areas.”On Friday, the company released another statement apologizing for the continued delays and explaining that customers whose flights were canceled, and who did not travel, were entitled to a refund.The company will work with other disrupted passengers on a case-by-case basis, Mr. Durrant said. That would include people like Mr. Williams, who left two checked bags behind when he rented a car to get to Orlando faster than his delayed flight would have.In a telephone interview while he was driving to Florida, Mr. Williams said he remains unsure what, if anything, the company will do to make up for the inconvenience. “It was a total lack of communication,” he said.