https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/02/sports/tennis/Bouchard-Ensures-a-Big-Day-at-French-Open-for-Canada.html
Bouchard Helps Ensure a Big Day for Canada - The New York Times
French Open (Tennis),Verdasco  Fernando,Tennis,Bouchard  Eugenie,Murray  Andy (1987- )
June 1, 2014
9406
PARIS —  Eugenie Bouchard is in a hurry.“I want to be the best player I can be as quickly as possible, because one day I will wake up and I will be 30,” she said Sunday.Bouchard is 20. But if accelerating her rise is the goal, she is well on her way.She needed only 52 minutes to knock out eighth-seeded Angelique Kerber of Germany, 6-1, 6-2, and capture a spot in the quarterfinals at the French Open.A surprise semifinalist at the Australian Open in January, Bouchard earned her first WTA title the week before the French Open and has won her last nine matches.“I feel like since the beginning of the year I have been improving my game,” said Bouchard, who is seeded 18th. “Since Australia, I’m at a different level from there.”Her rout set the stage for a dominant day for Canadian tennis. Eighth-seeded Milos Raonic defeated Marcel Granollers, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3, to become the first man representing Canada to reach a Grand Slam quarterfinal in the Open era.Raonic will have to carry the banner of all of North America on the men’s side. The last American man in the draw, 10th-seeded John Isner, lost to sixth-seeded Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4.With his blistering serve, Raonic, 23, has had his greatest success on hardcourts, but he said his coaches Ivan Ljubicic and Riccardo Piatti had helped him adjust to the slower conditions of clay while maintaining what worked for him on hardcourts.Still, Raonic said, if he had been asked if he thought his first Grand Slam quarterfinal would come at the French Open, “I probably would not have answered that way.”His next challenge will be trying to solve Novak Djokovic. The No. 2 seed, Djokovic beat 13th-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, 6-1, 6-4, 6-1, reaching the quarterfinals for a 20th consecutive Grand Slam tournament.Djokovic said Raonic was playing “the tennis of his life.”“There is evident improvement in his game, and he feels more confident on the court,” Djokovic said. “You can feel that.”The two met in the semifinals in Rome two weeks ago, with Djokovic prevailing, 6-7 (5), 7-6 (4), 6-3.Raonic said he was “very eager” to face Djokovic again after playing him so closely. Raonic is 2-14 against top-five players in his career, both victories coming against Andy Murray.Murray himself was very eager to play — in this case, to resume his third-round match against Philipp Kohlschreiber, which was suspended by darkness Saturday night with the fifth set tied at 7-7.Struggling to sleep, Murray was ready to play at 4 or 5 a.m., he said. Kohlschreiber could not sleep much either.“I was sweating a lot,” he said.Kohlschreiber, who trailed by two sets to one and by 4-2 in the fourth before rallying Saturday, acknowledged that he “didn’t have any clue” how to handle a match resuming at such a crucial moment.“It could be over so fast: You can have eight great points, and you’re the winner, or the other way around,” he said.When the match began again, about 16 hours after it was suspended, Murray struggled to get first serves in. He faced a break point at 9-9, but Kohlschreiber could not take advantage.In the 21st game of the set, Murray trailed by 30-15 on his serve when he hit the net cord at the end of a long rally and the ball dropped over the net. He held in that game and broke Kohlschreiber in the next to end the match, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, 4-6, 12-10.On Monday, Murray will face 24th-seeded Fernando Verdasco, who beat 12th-seeded Richard Gasquet, 6-3, 6-2, 6-3, in a third-round match that had also been suspended. Murray last played Verdasco in the quarterfinals of Wimbledon in 2013, with Verdasco taking the first two sets before Murray came back to win in five.Bouchard has a Wimbledon rematch of her own in the quarterfinals, against 14th-seeded Carla Suárez Navarro, who beat Bouchard, 7-5, 6-2, in the third round there last year.Seventh-seeded Maria Sharapova looms in that half of the draw. She dropped her first set of the tournament Sunday but rallied to defeat 19th-seeded Samantha Stosur, 3-6, 6-4, 6-0. She improved to 16-1 on clay this year and will play Garbiñe Muguruza, who beat Serena Williams in the second round, in the quarterfinals.Having taken down a top-10 opponent for the fourth time in the past year, Bouchard is not intimidated by what lies ahead.“I believe I can play with the best girls out there,” she said.