https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/sports/tennis/at-wimbledon-martina-hingis-and-sania-mirza-reach-the-top-from-disparate-paths.html
Martina Hingis Returns to Top of Wimbledon, With Help From a Breakthrough - The New York Times
Tennis,Hingis  Martina,Mirza  Sania,Vesnina  Elena,Makarova  Ekaterina,Muslims and Islam,India,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament
July 11, 2015
6514
WIMBLEDON, England — For Martina Hingis, it was a return. For Sania Mirza, it was a breakthrough.Hingis and Mirza, the top seeds in the women’s doubles draw at Wimbledon, won the final, 5-7, 7-6 (4), 7-5, over second-seeded Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina, mounting an improbable comeback to cap a dominant run since they joined forces four months ago. Since then, Mirza has risen to No. 1 in the world and Hingis to No. 2.Makarova and Vesnina had led by 5-2 in the third set before Hingis and Mirza stormed back, reeling off five straight games before being interrupted at 5-5 when the Centre Court roof was closed because of fading light. Hingis served out the win to love, and when Vesnina’s final return hit the net, Hingis and Mirza leapt into each other’s arms.“On the side of Sania, it feels like living it all over again,” said Hingis, who retired in 2007 and returned to the tour two years ago after being inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame.For Hingis, 34, the title is her first in women’s doubles at a Grand Slam since 2002, when she won at the Australian Open with Anna Kournikova. It is Hingis’s 10th career Grand Slam women’s doubles title, the first having come at Wimbledon 19 years ago, when she was 15.“I always believed in it,” Hingis said of her ability to reach the top of the sport again. “Without that, you can’t come out here and play and compete at this level. I always felt like I had one of the best volleys in the world, one of the best backhands in the world, so you got to believe in something if you want to win.”Referring to Mirza’s most feared weapon, Hingis added, “I have the best forehand from the other side.”Hingis has a chance to add to her Wimbledon haul on Sunday when she and Leander Paes compete in the mixed doubles final.Mirza, 28, now has a long-awaited maiden Grand Slam title in women’s doubles in a career full of firsts for women’s sports in India. Even in the often overlooked realm of doubles, Mirza has maintained a presence as one of her country’s most famous female athletes, a position that has brought her attention and scrutiny surpassing that faced by many top singles players, including criticism early in her career from Indian Muslim clerics who thought she should not wear a skirt while playing.“I never said I was a perfect Muslim; I just said I was a practicing one,” Mirza said. “And then they couldn’t handle the fact that I was nonapologetic about the fact that I was a woman, and that I don’t really care what you think of me playing tennis.”From the outset, Mirza’s path to a career as an elite tennis player was an unlikely one. The courts she played on as a child were made of cow manure, and many members of her extended family discouraged her from playing, fearing that spending time in the sun could hinder her hopes of finding a husband.“I started playing when I was 6, and the first thing that my aunts said was, ‘She’s getting so dark, and no one’s going to marry her,’ ” Mirza recalled. “In that part of the world, the lighter-skinned you are, you’re supposed to be prettier. Then I come here, and everyone wants to be tanned, and they go to the tanning booth.“As I kept playing, when I was 11, 12, they said: ‘What is wrong with you guys? Do you really think she’s going to play Wimbledon? That’s for people from outside this world.’ It was that kind of attitude. A lot of people later came back to us and apologized, because they were family.”With her success and outspokenness, Mirza has inspired many young girls in a region where sports are often an option only for boys.“Every time I step on the court, I’m doing things no Indian woman has done, in tennis or in sport, back home or in that part of the world,” Mirza said. “I would like to think that I’ve inspired a few girls to pick up tennis rackets — not just tennis rackets, but to do whatever they believe in which is out of the box, so to say. I think that everybody knows Wimbledon; even a person who doesn’t know about tennis knows about Wimbledon.”Though she understands the larger significance of her playing, Mirza said, she plays first and foremost for herself.“Of course, it’s great to be this ambassador for sport and as women for doing all these things, but that’s not something that I’m obviously thinking of,” she said. “I’m trying to win because we want to win. This is what we play for, really. I mean, I hope it inspires a lot of girls, and makes them believe they can be Grand Slam champions, too.”