https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/books/joe-biden-new-book-promise-me-dad.html
Joe Biden’s New Book to Be Released in November - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Biden  Joseph R Jr
July 17, 2017
3111
In November 2014, six months before Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s son, Beau, died after a battle with brain cancer, the family gathered in Nantucket, Mass. During what would be his final Thanksgiving, Mr. Biden told his father: “Promise me, Dad. Give me your word that no matter what happens, you’re going to be all right.” Those words have inspired the title of the former vice president’s upcoming book.On Monday, Flatiron Books revealed that the acquisition, which was first announced in April as part of a joint deal with Mr. Biden’s wife, Jill Biden (details about her book have yet to be given), would be titled “Promise Me, Dad: A Year of Hope, Hardship, and Purpose” and be released on Nov. 14. In it, Mr. Biden will reflect on that painful year and the challenges he faced fulfilling his political duties while mourning the death of his son.“I hope my own story will strike a chord with other Americans who have walked the same path I have,” he said in a statement. “I have always been fortunate to have an incredible support system around me, and I understand how many people in this country go through far worse than I have, with far less support.”This fall Mr. Biden will also embark on a tour, traveling to 19 cities across the country, starting with New York on Nov. 13, to host panel discussions with local leaders. (The events will be overseen by Creative Artists Agency, which represents Mr. Biden.) He hopes to start conversations that go beyond “the 24-hour news cycle and 140-character arguments,” a statement said. Tickets, which go on sale July 28, will include a copy of his book.“‘Promise Me, Dad' is unlike any other book I’ve read by a political figure, thanks to Vice President Joe Biden’s willingness to be deeply personal on the one hand, and candid about political life on the other,” said Bob Miller, the president and publisher of Flatiron Books. “It’s that rare book by a politician that will truly have lasting resonance.”“Promise Me, Dad” will be edited by Colin Dickerman, the editorial director of Flatiron Books.