https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/nyregion/de-blasio-mayor-new-york-germany-trip.html
De Blasio Back in New York After Much-Criticized Trip to Germany - The New York Times
Elections  Mayors,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,de Blasio  Bill,Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Germany,New York City
July 10, 2017
2155
If there were a German word for frustration at a local politician repeatedly casting about for a bigger and more important stage for himself, it would capture the sentiment of elected leaders, police officials and political observers in New York toward Mayor Bill de Blasio as he returned from a surprise trip to Germany over the weekend.Police officers, preparing for the funeral of a colleague shot dead last week, grumbled. The president, who once called Mr. de Blasio “probably the worst” mayor in city history, retweeted critical comments. And the tabloids blared with taunting headlines.Mr. de Blasio’s travels to Hamburg, where he spoke at a nonviolent political demonstration against the G-20 meeting of world leaders and visited his son, who is living abroad this summer, would probably have raised curiosity under most circumstances.But the timing of his trip — he left the day after the ambush killing of a city police officer as she sat in her mobile command unit in the Bronx — drew criticism from even some staunch supporters. It threatened to reopen wounds between Mr. de Blasio and the Police Department that the mayor had worked assiduously to salve since the last time officers were gunned down in an apparently targeted killing, in December 2014.And it also demonstrated, in stark terms, a political reality that the mayor knows well: His fortunes have been improving as he heads toward re-election, and with few challengers, he now appears to have broad latitude to behave in whatever way he sees fit.That has created something of a de Blasio Unbound, free to disregard criticism from various parts of the spectrum, including police unions, commentators, Democratic and Republican rivals — and, of course, the lacerating series of tabloid headlines: “And Don’t Come Back,” The New York Post shouted Friday; “Mayor Phones It In,” The New York Daily News remarked Saturday; and, finally, The Post’s welcome-back front page to the mayor, “Deutsch Bag.”“That’s what’s frustrating for me about him not having an opponent,” said Christina M. Greer, a professor of political science at Fordham University. “There’s a certain level of accountability that is not there.”Mr. de Blasio, back in New York on Monday, defended the trip, saying it was important to let people in other parts of the world know that many Americans disagree with President Trump, who attend the G-20 meeting in Hamburg.“This was a particularly meaningful moment,” Mr. de Blasio said, “and bluntly, what a lot of people wanted to know was that the cities of America, that the states of America were not going to follow along with President Trump on issues like climate change.”Many New York elected officials groused about the apparent fruitlessness of the travel — it was not tied to a job-seeking economic mission or other possible city business — and the perception that Mr. de Blasio was being disrespectful to a police force in mourning over the loss of an officer. But none would do so on the record, to avoid picking a fight with the newly emboldened mayor.The small number of declared challengers to Mr. de Blasio were less reticent.“Absolutely wrong for him to go to Germany; actually, outrageous, in view of a police officer being assassinated,” said Sal Albanese, a former city councilman who is running against Mr. de Blasio in the Democratic primary.While the mayor was addressing a crowd of Germans in Hamburg, Mr. Albanese noted, he himself was campaigning in New York — and had his car towed.Nicole Malliotakis, the presumptive Republican nominee, spent the weekend visiting all five city boroughs and on Monday attacked the “misguided arrogance” of the mayor’s trip. “Are you using City Hall as merely a soapbox for a run for the 2020 national Democratic ticket?” she asked in a statement.President Trump, for his part, retweeted a brief Fox News segment that included an attack on Mr. de Blasio by the head of the city’s police sergeants’ union. Mr. Trump himself did not comment on the mayor’s trip.The voyage was also a convenient way for the mayor to visit his son, Dante, who is spending the summer in Germany, without having to pay for a plane ticket; the airfare was picked up by the rally organizers. Dante appeared in photographs with the mayor at official events during the trip, and Mr. de Blasio began his speech at the rally by pointing out his son’s presence.The mayor also gave a nod to the police during his speech, but he did not refer directly to the killing of the officer, Miosotis Familia.Mr. de Blasio traveled to Germany with Penny Abeywardena, the city’s commissioner for International Affairs; Eric F. Phillips, his press secretary; and a staff member, Jonathan Viguers. Their travel and stay at the modest 25hours Hotel Hafencity were paid for by the rally organizers. The cost of the mayor’s detail fell to the city; the Police Department declined to provide the number of officers who traveled with Mr. de Blasio, citing security issues.On Monday, the mayor visited the family of Officer Familia and later attended a viewing at the World Changers Church in the Bronx, where the funeral was to take place on Tuesday.