https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/t-magazine/australian-chefs-london-bill-granger.html
The Culinary Wizards From Oz - The New York Times
London (England),Restaurants,Granger  Bill,Graham  Brett (1979- ),Gyngell  Skye (1963- ),Chefs
Oct. 23, 2015
3843
DESPITE A NATIONAL OBSESSION with gardens, England is a country whose food has traditionally had very little to do with what grows in them. In the past decade, as the words ‘‘local,’’ ‘‘seasonal’’ and ‘‘vegetable-driven’’ have pervaded restaurants around the world — as New York and Los Angeles have become awash in organic kale chips and wheat-grass margaritas, and Copenhagen in foraged kelp and wood sorrel — London has stubbornly remained a place where meals have starred meat. It’s not that the city is short on good food — the idea that you can’t find superlative fare in London is a cliché that went out with the turn of the century — but it is true that its best-known chefs (Fergus Henderson, Marco Pierre White and Heston Blumenthal among them) specialize in food that sticks to your ribs, to animals battered or roasted from nose to tail.So while for the rest of us, a garden- or forest-to-table menu is a fact of life, to Londoners, it’s still relatively novel. The city’s growing field of lighter, brighter and markedly vegetable-centric restaurants is crowded and diverse, but several of the most celebrated have in common something important: They are helmed by chefs from Australia, who are collectively introducing Londoners to a cuisine marked by an unfussy approach; to fresh herbs and raw greens and the humblest of roots; and, belatedly, to avocado toast, the pork belly of the 2010s.These chefs and their peers follow in a relatively brief tradition of people who’ve radically changed the British palate by exposing it to food from elsewhere: the cookery writer Elizabeth David, who introduced the vibrant flavors of the Mediterranean in the 1950s; Ruth Rogers and Rose Gray, who began serving seasonal, authentic Italian food at London’s River Café in 1987; and, most recently, the Israeli transplant Yotam Ottolenghi, who made a whole generation of Brits familiar with theretofore unheard-of ingredients like za’atar and pomegranate molasses.But the best equivalent of the influence the Australians are wielding in the U.K. today may be that which Alice Waters has had on the U.S. since the 1980s, when her farm-fresh, vegetable-heavy nouvelle California cuisine began to change how East Coasters (and, eventually, the rest of the country) ate and considered food. Here are the three chefs to know now.You might expect the basement kitchen at the Ledbury, Graham’s Michelin-starred fine-dining restaurant, for which it can take months to get a reservation, to have the kind of militaristic air we’ve come to associate with establishments that offer a certain caliber of tasting menu. And yet the tone is more summer-camp-mess-hall than ‘‘Yes, chef,’’ with Graham gently needling his line cooks about their wild, lads-on-tour holidays and for the way they pronounce ‘‘herbs’’ — which he harvests from his own backyard garden, along with lemon cucumbers and mustard flowers.The easygoing 36-year-old, who opened the Ledbury in 2005, grew up in Newcastle, a small seaside city two hours north of Sydney, where he got his start at a casual fish restaurant. While his approach to food today is rigorous and formal, centered around small, tightly composed courses, his flavors are simple and intensely pure. A late-summer salad, served only during the short tomato season, may look like a relic of ’90s-era modernist food styling — precise, carefully arranged rectangles and half moons of heirloom varieties, punctuated with dots of ricotta and gelée and crowned with an ovoid of tomato sorbet — but it tastes like the essence of a garden, evoking sun-dappled grass, a plot of rich soil, clusters of fat, fragrant, dusty fruits on the vine.Graham tries not to rely on butter, cream and starch as much as possible, working instead to source the best ingredients and then to extract as much flavor from them as possible, taking cues from, say, Japanese cuisine — one of the Ledbury’s signature dishes features a square of crisp-skinned mackerel atop creamy avocado and a bite of shiso-laced tartare cut from the same fish.His latest project tackles the very definition of English cooking: the pub. The Harwood Arms, in the sleepy residential neighborhood of Fulham, may look like nothing special, but it serves an extraordinary Scotch egg made with local, sustainably hunted venison and chanterelles with carrots cooked in hazelnut oil. The chef in the Michelin-starred kitchen is a Brit who got his start at the Ledbury — but Graham is the ‘‘director.’’ And on the roof? A garden.It’s no surprise that Gyngell, a Sydney-sider and a former food editor at British Vogue, counts Alice Waters as a major influence: Gyngell’s first restaurant, Petersham Nurseries Café, for which she earned a Michelin star, was literally in the middle of a garden, and her new restaurant, the year-old Spring, is modeled after Waters’s revolutionary Chez Panisse in that it sources the vast majority of its ingredients from a single biodynamic farm called Fern Verrow in Herefordshire. Waters, says Gyngell, ‘‘represents to me everything that’s good about food: the conviviality, the sharing, the generosity of spirit.’’And, like Waters, Gyngell is interested less in classical or complicated technique than she is in making food that is straightforward, simple and fresh, the kind you can eat every day without feeling gluttonous: crisp whole radishes dressed only in olive oil and flaky sea salt; a hearty, rustic monkfish bouillabaisse; fresh almond ice cream. Spring, which is located in Somerset House, a Georgian-era public building on the Strand, is one of the most beautiful dining rooms in London, its stately framework made ethereal with pastels and white marble, blond wood and blond leather, and light fixtures that look like elegant, upside-down bouquets of balloons, all designed by Gyngell’s sister to reference the palette of their mother’s paintings. Eating at Spring is a holistic experience, deeply pleasurable and luxurious without being ostentatious or facetiously opulent. Gyngell aims not to dazzle, but to teach you what she knows best: how to eat well, in every sense of the word.You could call the 46-year-old Granger the Jamie Oliver of Australia, where he is a beloved cookbook author and television personality, if his rise to national fame didn’t predate Jamie Oliver’s by several years: It might be more accurate to call Oliver the Bill Granger of England. In 2011, the chef, whose career began in his native Sydney with the opening of a homey, open-all-day restaurant called Bills, debuted a similarly casual, breezy place in Notting Hill called Granger & Co. In the years since, he has opened two other branches in London (plus outposts in Hawaii, Japan and Korea): airy rooms with olive-green banquettes and terrazzo counters, warm service and exotic-sounding but uncomplicated citizen-of-the-world food like fried zucchini with tahini yogurt; linguine with chiles, prawns and arugula; and turmeric chicken with slaw and peanuts. Heavily inspired by the cuisine and culture of Sydney, where Asian immigrants make up a large percentage of the population, he borrows liberally and creatively from the palates and techniques of Japan, China, Vietnam and Thailand in particular.Among Granger’s greatest offerings is his reinterpretation of what breakfast should be in a country where breakfast has, until relatively recently, meant a full English, with sausage and bacon and eggs, plus mediocre coffee. At Granger & Co., there’s instead the distinctly beachy ‘‘fresh Aussie,’’ with jasmine-tea smoked salmon as well as avocado toast (Granger is often credited with starting the craze) and almond-milk flat whites. Two of the most popular breakfast dishes are plays on the trendy ‘‘grain bowl’’: chicken-fat-fried brown rice, topped with raw vegetables, and buckwheat with goat’s milk kefir and rose harissa. ‘‘When I first opened, people were really conservative with what they’d eat for breakfast. At dinner they’d eat the most exotic things, but at breakfast they wanted what they knew,’’ says Granger. ‘‘Now I find we’re all much more adventurous.’’