https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/arts/design/andrew-wyeth-love-letters-auction.html
Newly Surfaced Andrew Wyeth Love Letters Are Headed to Auction - The New York Times
Wyeth  Andrew,Archives and Records,Auctions,Art,Skinner Inc,Moore  Alice
Feb. 8, 2017
9329
Newly rediscovered letters from the painter Andrew Wyeth, which date to the late 1930s and are headed to auction this spring, reveal his emotions as his works first attracted attention from New York critics and buyers. In a batch of his unpublished writings to his girlfriend, Alice Moore, which correct previous scholarship on the painter, he credits his success partly to her.“Knowing you I know has brought maturity into my work and I feel now that I am really on the way to do big things,” he wrote to Ms. Moore in 1938.About 40 of Wyeth’s love letters to her will be offered in May through online bidding at Skinner auction house in Boston, with an estimate of $80,000 to $120,000.Wyeth and Ms. Moore started dating in Maine, where both of their families had vacation homes, when he was about 20 and she was a recent graduate of Vassar College. In the letters, he told her of his struggles to produce book and magazine illustrations and paintings in watercolor and egg tempera, which depicted fishermen, African-Americans, birds and Wyeth family members. He described the reviews of his first New York gallery shows; the writer and illustrator Morgan Dennis had concluded that Wyeth already ranked as “the greatest water colorist in America.”Wyeth told Ms. Moore that he wanted to marry her “if I do make good,” but he felt that “you don’t really love me.” (Her side of the correspondence has not been found.) The letters contradict the account of the relationship given in Richard Meryman’s 1996 biography, “Andrew Wyeth: A Secret Life,” which said that Ms. Moore was “some ten years older” than Wyeth, and that “when she wanted to get married, he fled.”The couple apparently stopped dating in spring 1939, a few weeks before Wyeth met his future wife, Betsy James. Ms. Moore married a New Hampshire optometrist named Wendell Triller, and her family long kept Wyeth’s pages tucked under a bed.The family sold them a few years ago to the auction consignors, the owners of Marine Arts Gallery in Marblehead, Mass., who have shown them to a handful of scholars. Audrey Lewis, a curator at the Brandywine River Museum of Art in Chadds Ford, Pa., said she will be able to use the letters’ insights while researching this year’s celebrations of the centennial of Wyeth’s birth.