http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/05/world/middleeast/ambassador-robert-ford-is-retiring.html
U.S. Representative to Syrian Opposition Is Retiring - The New York Times
Ford  Robert S,Syria,United States International Relations,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,United States
Feb. 4, 2014
4028
WASHINGTON — The United States’ top representative to the Syrian opposition, Robert S. Ford, is planning to retire from the State Department and is expected to leave his post soon, department officials said on Tuesday.The officials provided no information on his successor.As the American ambassador in Damascus, Mr. Ford was active in challenging President Bashar al-Assad’s crackdown on the emerging political opposition in Syria.In September 2011, a pro-government mob tried to break down the door when Mr. Ford went to a meeting with Hassan Abdel-Azim, an opposition figure in Damascus. An American Embassy security detail was sent to the scene, but two of the vehicles were attacked with iron bars and concrete blocks and destroyed. After four hours, the Syrian police finally arrived, and Mr. Ford was able to return to the embassy.The next month, Mr. Ford was recalled to the United States because of threats to his safety.He returned to Damascus that December, but in February 2012, as the security situation in Syria sharply deteriorated, the American Embassy was closed. He later became the chief American envoy to the moderate Syrian opposition and played a central role during the first round of the peace talks in Geneva this month.Secretary of State John Kerry had picked Mr. Ford to serve as the next ambassador to Egypt. But Egyptian authorities made it known that they did not welcome his appointment, and the White House never formally nominated him for that post.Mr. Ford has also served as ambassador to Algeria and did multiple tours as a diplomat in Iraq, including as a representative of the American occupation authority in Najaf, where he was briefly held at gunpoint in 2003 by the Badr Corps militia.Mr. Ford’s decision to retire comes as the Obama administration’s policy has increasingly come under challenge. Syrian government officials blocked progress at the recent Geneva talks, American officials say, and the Assad government has been slow to get rid of its chemical arsenal under an accord reached last year.James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, told Congress on Tuesday that Mr. Assad’s position had grown stronger since that agreement was reached and President Obama withdrew the threat of military force.Mr. Assad, he said, “is actually in a strengthened position than when we discussed this last year, by virtue of his agreement to remove the chemical weapons, as slow as that process has been.”