https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/29/business/dealbook/valeant-bet-was-a-huge-mistake-hedge-fund-chief-ackman-says.html
Valeant Bet Was a ‘Huge Mistake,’ Hedge Fund Chief Ackman Says - The New York Times
Ackman  William A,Pershing Square Capital Management,Pershing Square Holdings,Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc,Stocks and Bonds,Hedge Funds
March 29, 2017
3261
It is rare that William A. Ackman, the brash activist investor, apologizes for anything. As a successful hedge fund manager, Mr. Ackman has made billions of dollars for himself and his investors with bold and counterintuitive bets.But this week he conceded that his firm’s biggest wager yet — on Valeant Pharmaceuticals International — was “a huge mistake” that has cost his hedge fund firm, Pershing Square Capital Management, “a tremendous amount.”“I deeply and profoundly apologize,” Mr. Ackman added in an annual letter to investors.It was an unusual moment of contrition for Mr. Ackman and a stark contrast to his emphatic support of Valeant in recent years.Mr. Ackman staked his own reputation on Valeant even as the company faced steep challenges and regulatory scrutiny for its aggressive pricing tactics. He went to bat for Valeant when its executives were questioned during a Senate hearing. He loaded up on the stock when everyone else was selling.In May 2015, he said Valeant’s acquisition strategy, which it was pursuing with Pershing Square’s financial support, resembled “a very early-stage Berkshire,” referring to Berkshire Hathaway, the conglomerate run by Warren E. Buffett. And late last year, he even held a four-hour marathon conference call to defend the company, taking swipes at the news media and those on Wall Street who he said relished “betting against him.”But the investment in Valeant ultimately led Pershing Square to double-digit percentage losses for two years in a row. After reaching a high of $257 a share in mid-2015, Valeant’s share price plunged to $12.11 a share on March 13. That was the day when Mr. Ackman finally decided to throw in the towel and sell his firm’s entire stake in Valeant, resulting in a $4 billion loss.In his annual letter to investors, released on Tuesday evening, Mr. Ackman took the blame for the bad bet, acknowledging that the investment had “damaged the record of success of our firm.”“My approach to mistakes is that I personally assume 100 percent of the responsibility on behalf of the firm while sharing the credit for our success,” he added.Mr. Ackman also threw a jab at the very same Valeant executives he once praised.“In retrospect, we misjudged the prior management team, and this contributed to our loss,” he said.In a separate letter, the board of Pershing Square Holdings, a publicly traded version of Mr. Ackman’s hedge fund, reaffirmed its support for Mr. Ackman.“The lessons learned from the investment have been discussed at length in prior communications,” Anne Farlow, the board’s chairwoman, wrote in the letter.The board said it undertook a formal review of Mr. Ackman’s performance last year, examining in particular his investment processes with regard to Valeant. In the end, Ms. Farlow said, the board concluded that it was in the best interest of the firm for Mr. Ackman to remain in charge of investments.It was not so long ago that Valeant was one of the favorite stocks among hedge fund managers. Mr. Ackman began buying shares in 2015 and has told investors that he bought the stock at an average price of $196 a share. Around the same time, Valeant began to draw scrutiny for its unusual accounting practices, and it quickly became a political lightning rod for its aggressive drug pricing policy.But Mr. Ackman stood by the company, joining Valeant’s board together with another Pershing Square executive. They recruited 10 new directors, refinanced some of the company’s $30 billion in debt and installed a new chief executive, Joseph C. Papa.None of this was enough to stop the company’s unraveling. By the end of last year, Pershing’s stake in Valeant had lost 19.2 percent of its value, contributing to the firm’s overall loss of 13.5 percent for 2016. In 2015, Pershing Square Holdings lost investors 20.5 percent.In a concession for the poor performance, Mr. Ackman recently offered investors a new fee structure that would allow them to recover some of their losses before paying new performance fees. Like most other hedge funds, Pershing has charged investors 2 percent of overall assets under management for administration and 20 percent of any gain.Mr. Ackman struck a more positive tone for the year ahead, pointing to new opportunities and saying, “We are well positioned for a strong recovery.” The firm sold its holdings in Canadian Pacific Railway and Zoetis, the former animal health care arm of Pfizer, last year, freeing capital to make new investments.And Ms. Farlow added that Pershing recently applied to move its public listing to London from Amsterdam, which would open the door to more investors if it were added to London’s main stock index.Pershing Square Holdings was down 2.5 percent for the year as of Tuesday.