https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/06/realestate/restoring-a-connecticut-farmhouse.html
Restoring a Connecticut Farmhouse - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Restoration and Renovation,Munshani  Suni (1961- ),Interior Design and Furnishings,Easton (Conn)
Dec. 4, 2015
2836
For 22 years, Suni Munshani, a technology entrepreneur who lives in Easton, Conn., with his wife, Tina, and daughter, Saira, dreamed of owning a country home. He had in mind a particular place, set on 10 rolling acres with farm buildings, paddocks and a pair of Asian katsura trees that gave off the odor of caramelized sugar in the fall.Mr. Munshani, 54, who is the chief executive of Protegrity, a company that produces data security software, could almost smell those katsuras. But if he wanted to inhale their scent in earnest, he had only to cross the little river that bordered his yard. The place he coveted belonged to his neighbor, a Standard Oil heiress named Ruth Thomas Bedford, who raised thoroughbred horses there.Mr. Munshani did not hide his passion. Sixteen years ago, he approached Ms. Bedford about buying the spread. “I’d like to be the custodian,” he recalled telling her. “And in my lifetime, this property will never be subdivided.”When Ms. Bedford died in June 2014 at the age of 99 and the horse farm was put on the market, he repeated that message to her estate’s trustees. The place had been listed at $995,000; Mr. Munshani secured it with a check for $775,000.His next mission was to restore the farm, where not only thoroughbreds but also llamas, monkeys and cows once roamed. (A friend of Ms. Bedford’s, who tended the horses, lived there for 30 years with a private menagerie; Ms. Bedford visited daily, but made her home on the Connecticut shore.) The project has so far cost almost $1 million, Mr. Munshani said, adding that he estimates spending $4 million to $6 million by the time he’s finished.Working with Mark Finlay, an architect in Southport, Conn., and Kelly Mittleman, an interior designer in Redding, Conn., Mr. Munshani began by renovating the 1935 main house. The 1,600-square-foot building, which was originally fitted out with three bedrooms, has been reconfigured on the same footprint with two bedrooms, a small reading nook and a basement yoga studio with heated floors.Some materials and decorative objects were sourced directly from the property. A felled oak tree was milled for kitchen floorboards, and the horse barn turned out to be a trove of oddly glamorous 1930s farm implements, including a pitchfork with brass accents and a Western saddle someone had unaccountably embellished with a mirror. Both objects now hang on the walls of the house.Other interior features are nonnative, like the blue bathroom tiles Mr. Munshani had imported from a company in Spain after a visit to the Alhambra during a family vacation. The living room coffee table holds Japanese-style tamari balls, impregnated with spices and wrapped in multicolored threads. The framed antique flour sacks that hang in the reading nook were found in Paris.For the exterior, Mr. Munshani replaced damaged portions of the original cedar siding and painted the walls an intense red inspired by Swedish farmhouses. His consultants and 13-year-old daughter all complained that the color looks like nail polish, to which he suggested, “Throw some snow on it and then tell me you don’t like it.”Mr. Munshani is unsure about going so far as to restore horses to the farm. But then what to do with the barn, a Ritz-Carlton for thoroughbreds, with its polished wood stalls and engraved brass nameplates? Here once munched pampered creatures with names like Belle Rivere and I’m Tired. He is thinking about other uses.He is also thinking about using the place to grow gooseberries for jam, and maybe tossing in some apple and quince trees.“I love gooseberries, and you can’t find them easily,” said Mr. Munshani, who is originally from Calcutta, India. “You can find blueberries and raspberries everywhere.”