https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/10/us/marine-corps-raheel-siddiqui.html
20 Marines Face Discipline After Muslim Recruit’s Death Is Ruled a Suicide - The New York Times
Siddiqui  Raheel,Hazing,United States Marine Corps,Draft and Recruitment (Military),Muslim Americans,Muslims and Islam,Suicides and Suicide Attempts,United States Defense and Military Forces,South Carolina
Sept. 9, 2016
4272
The Marine Corps has concluded an investigation into the death of a Muslim recruit, Raheel Siddiqui, saying that he committed suicide at a training camp where hazing and abuse took place.A statement said that the investigation had identified 20 trainers at the Parris Island, S.C., camp for possible legal or administrative action — a reflection of the wider investigation that was prompted by Mr. Siddiqui’s death on March 18. Some commanders, senior advisers and drill instructors have already been let go, the statement said.“Siddiqui’s death was the result of suicide,” a statement said. “Additionally, the investigations revealed departures from the policies and procedures established for Marine Corps recruit training.”The investigation focused on allegations of abuse and maltreatment at the recruiting depot on Parris Island and found that there was recurrent physical and verbal abuse of recruits by drill instructors, and insufficient oversight.The statement also said that a drill instructor had been assigned for duty while already under investigation for previous allegations of assault and hazing. Among the measures that have been taken in the wake of the investigation were suspensions of personnel who are under investigation for recruit abuse, hazing or maltreatment.The family of Mr. Siddiqui, who was 20, said in an interview in June that they did not believe the official explanation they were given about his death: that he had fainted, sought medical attention, and then jumped 40 feet to his death off a stairwell or balcony.Shiraz K. Khan, a lawyer for the Siddiqui family, said in a statement on Friday that the family was reviewing the findings of the investigation to determine the “next course of action.”But he said the family did not believe Mr. Siddiqui committed suicide and that there was a lack of evidence: “They feel it couldn’t be further from the truth.”The commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Robert B. Neller, said the Corps would “take every step necessary to prevent tragic events like this from happening again.”The case is still under investigation by the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, said a spokesman, Ed Buice.“At this time we acknowledge the efforts of the United States Marine Corps,” Mr. Khan said. “However, there are too many questions that remain unanswered. We will work with N.C.I.S. as they move forward with their investigation.”Mr. Siddiqui had arrived at the camp 11 days before he died. He had yearned to be a jet mechanic in the Marines, and eventually an F.B.I. agent, saving money and helping his close-knit family to a better life. He had been recruited while studying robotics and engineering at the University of Michigan-Dearborn.“He liked challenges and didn’t want something easy,” said his sister, Sidra Siddiqui, in an interview in June conducted at the family’s Taylor, Mich., home. Recalling why he chose the Marines over other services, she said, “He liked the respect that the Marines got.”“My brother wasn’t a quitter,” she said.Protests from the family and demands by Representative Debbie Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, came as the investigation into Mr. Siddiqui’s death widened.Ms. Dingell said on Friday that she was visiting Parris Island to meet the new leadership there and to be briefed about some of the changes that have been made.She urged the Marine Corps to hold accountable those responsible for Mr. Siddiqui’s death.“Private Siddiqui was a son, brother and class valedictorian who believed this country represented freedom and opportunity,” she said in a statement. “As a young Muslim man, he truly understood the value of freedom of religion, and all he wanted was to defend the ideals our nation holds dear.”