https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/podcasts/historys-crucial-role-in-the-films-all-eyez-on-me-and-the-beguiled.html
History’s Crucial Role in the Films ‘All Eyez on Me’ and ‘The Beguiled’ - The New York Times
Podcasts
June 29, 2017
4189
What responsibility to the details of history does a movie have when it’s set on a Southern plantation in the middle of the Civil War? That wasn’t really a question we had planned to aim at Sofia Coppola’s “The Beguiled.” But her film — which is a remake of Don Siegel’s psychological thriller from 1971 about a house full of Confederate girls and women drawn to a wounded Union soldier, played by Clint Eastwood — makes a small but crucial change: The character of the women’s slave named Hallie, played in the original film by Mae Mercer, is omitted. Coppola has said she didn’t want to get the history wrong. But what does she lose by erasing an aspect of it? Is this is a correction, an omission or an act of artistic cowardice?Speaking of history and responsibility: We saw the 2Pac movie! “All Eyez on Me” tells the story of Tupac Shakur and how the child of persecuted black revolutionaries became one of the best and most scandal-plagued rappers in history. The movie features some of Shakur’s greatest hits, along with depictions of the biggest hip-hop figures of the early 1990s — including Snoop Dogg, Suge Knight, Biggie Smalls, Afeni Shakur and Faith Evans — and culminates in Shakur’s unsolved murder in 1996. The movie’s not very good. But it doesn’t necessarily have to be. Because during yet another time when the safety of black men’s lives and bodies seems dubious in certain parts of the country, the sustained belief in the mythology of Tupac, not only as an artist, but as a corporeal figure, seems as vital in death as it was in life.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.If you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying-glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the magnifying-glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.