http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/14/nyregion/mta-chief-opposes-ban-on-eating-in-the-subways.html
M.T.A. Chief Opposes Ban on Eating in the Subways - The New York Times
Transit Systems,Food,Metropolitan Transportation Authority,Lhota  Joseph J,Perkins  Bill,Rats,New York City,Subways
Feb. 13, 2012
7684
It did not take long for Joseph J. Lhota, the new chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, to find himself at the center of two of the most contentious quality-of-life issues for subway riders: the tendency to eat on the subway and the prevalence of rats that feast on the crumbs.Mr. Lhota’s stance on rats was well known; when he was a deputy mayor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called him the “rat czar” for his work increasing awareness about the city’s rodent problems.His stance on subway eating was less transparent; during his State Senate confirmation hearing on Jan. 8, he noted his surprise when he learned that it was permitted. He later told reporters that if people had to eat in the subway, they should take the food with them.But with a bill in Albany proposing to forbid riders to eat in the subway, Mr. Lhota has refined his position: no way would he support such a ban.Mr. Lhota said in an interview that he watched too many children eating breakfast items, like bagels and muffins, on the subways every morning to ban food.“I do not support the bill,” Mr. Lhota said. “It severely hurts and impacts minority communities. I don’t want to deny the kid the only time that day he’s going to get food.”State Senator Bill Perkins of Harlem introduced the bill, which calls for violators to be fined up to $250.Both Mr. Lhota and Mr. Perkins have worked for more than a decade on fixing the city’s broader rat problem. In November 2000, Mr. Perkins, then a city councilman, held a so-called rat summit at Columbia University that Mr. Lhota spoke at. Mr. Perkins said that back then they spoke frequently about issues of rat removal, and he credits Mr. Lhota with helping make the rat conference happen.Mr. Lhota was not nearly as effusive in his assessment of Mr. Perkins. “The idea that we worked together in the past goes far beyond the reality,” Mr. Lhota said. “As a legislator, he does nothing but talk and talk and talk, and he does nothing.”The presence of rats has been a problem for the cash-poor transportation authority, which has reduced the number of subway car cleaners. Its 2010 budget called for 1,030 car cleaners, 151 fewer than in 2008. The Transport Workers Union Local 100 has been running a campaign, New Yorkers Deserve a Rat-Free Subway, since September.Gene Russianoff, staff attorney of the Straphangers Campaign, noted that in a recent survey riders reported seeing rats on about 1 in 10 subway platforms. He compared seeing rats in the subway to seeing “an abandoned lot” or a broken window.“It doesn’t give you a sense of confidence that people in charge of the system are really in charge of it,” Mr. Russianoff said.Riders rushing home on Monday who munched on and carried all types of food seemed skeptical about the proposed ban.Charles Cunningham, a security guard who carefully carried back to work a slice of pizza that was quickly cooling in the drafty 42nd Street station at Eighth Avenue, said he did not eat on the subway. But he said he did not support a ban because some day on the subway he “might want to eat a bag of peanut M&Ms.”Tanya Wilson, who was taking four Crumbs cupcakes to her mother, said that where she lived, in Washington, the Metro banned food and “it’s a lot cleaner.” But she said that children often violated the rules and that she was skeptical it would work here.“How would you have the people enforce it?” she asked.Mr. Perkins said he met Mr. Lhota for breakfast on Feb. 3 at Sylvia’s in Harlem to discuss the bill; he recalled that Mr. Lhota indicated he would offer his support. Mr. Lhota denied that claim, and added that he was adamantly opposed to the idea of a $250 fine. Still, Mr. Perkins is hopeful his ban may pass.“If that’s his position, I’m sorry to hear that,” Mr. Perkins said. “I think there is a great need for us to control eating in the subways to get control of the rodent infestation. We’re still trying to convince him.” 