http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/08/sports/tennis/08men.html
Andy Murray Finishes Off Rafael Nadal to Reach U.S. Open Final - The New York Times
Tennis,United States Open (Tennis),Nadal  Rafael,Murray  Andy (1987- )
Sept. 7, 2008
9047
In a few nimble bounds — what was a step or two more after 26 hours of waiting for his chance? — Andy Murray raced from behind the baseline and tracked down Rafael Nadal’s drop shot, blasting a two-handed backhand winner past the No. 1 player in the world.And with that last bullet pulled from an impressively diverse arsenal, Murray took his biggest step yet.Playing on two courts over two days, Murray shrugged off the effects of Tropical Storm Hanna and a rejuvenated Nadal. He charged into his first Grand Slam final at 21, sending Nadal home in the resumed United States Open men’s semifinal, 6-2, 7-6 (5), 4-6, 6-4, in Arthur Ashe Stadium on Sunday.As Britain’s newest hope, Murray will meet the four-time defending Open champion, Roger Federer of Switzerland, in Monday’s final. Never mind that Murray has six career titles to Federer’s 55, nor that Federer has won 33 straight matches at the Open, including his semifinal that finished Saturday afternoon and gave him more time to rest.“I played well enough to beat the No. 1 player in the world over two days,” Murray said, “and I’ve beaten Roger in the past.”Murray has won two of the three matches he has played against Federer, and his ranking will rise to a career-high No. 4 on Monday. Once buckling under the national pressure — the last British player to reach an Open final was Greg Rusedski in 1997 — Murray is now flexing his confidence, his improved fitness and his biceps with each match.Even the actor Will Ferrell seemed to feel the power Sunday, when he was shown on the scoreboard imitating Murray’s arm curl.Murray had just scampered to another short Nadal shot in the fourth set, flicking a backhand winner and spinning around to hold his serve. Murray was so relaxed on the changeover, he looked up and laughed at his favorite actor, hamming it up for the crowd.Few people saw Murray put on a show Saturday at Louis Armstrong Stadium, where he and Nadal started 90 minutes after Federer and Novak Djokovic began their semifinal next door at Arthur Ashe Stadium.Nadal and Murray were told of the plan an hour before they were to begin, and suddenly Murray had taken the first two sets from Nadal, the reigning champion at the sport’s last three biggest events: the Olympics, Wimbledon and the French Open.When the rain came at 2:41 p.m. Saturday, Nadal held a 3-2 lead in the third set and was up a break. He said he was thankful to regroup, and was classy after his defeat Sunday when talking about the wrench in scheduling.“It wasn’t the best moment because it was a semifinals of the U.S. Open, but at the same time, never is a good moment, no?” said Nadal, a 22-year-old Spaniard. “I tried my best, I wasn’t very fresh during all the tournament.” He added of Murray, “He beat me because he was better than me.”Standing far behind the baseline, Murray anticipated Nadal’s left-handed kick serves and his topspin-laden ground strokes, then countered with clever change-of-pace shots that kept Nadal off balance. Last November, Murray fired Brad Gilbert as his coach and hired two coaches and two fitness trainers. Murray, who is from Scotland and had trained in Barcelona, Spain, since he was 15, trained with his new team last December at the University of Miami, where he did 400-meter sprint repeats on a track.“The pain that you feel off the court, when you’re running around the track, is much worse than anything you feel on the tennis court,” Murray said. “When you go into matches and you’ve worked hard, you don’t have any excuses when you get on the court. You just think about tennis.”In the past, Murray would become distracted by muscle cramping or by his emotions. But he survived a five-set match in the third round here, coming back from two sets down to another left-hander, Jürgen Melzer of Austria. He needed four hours to beat Juan Martín del Potro in the quarterfinals.Murray said he was not upset by the postponement Saturday night. “I slept absolutely fine, I didn’t feel nervous,” he said.When the players stepped on Ashe Stadium at 4:30 p.m. Sunday, Nadal sprinted and skipped, ready for his comeback. Capitalizing on his break in the third set Saturday, Nadal finished the set and gained momentum early in the fourth.Nadal was serving the second game, and it turned into a dazzling 22-point, 15-minute epic that featured eight deuces and seven unsuccessful break points for Murray. When Nadal held to tie the set at 1-1 and two minutes later broke Murray, it appeared he would surge to the fifth set.“It was almost slipping away slightly,” Murray said.But he was not deflated, only energized. He got the break back in the sixth game. With Nadal serving at 4-5 to keep the match going, Murray got lucky with a net cord in the first point. But he caused his own luck by striking a wicked one-handed slice backhand to set up match point.The only major title Murray has won was the United States Open boys championship in 2004. That was when he first fell in love with New York. “It was the first time I ever stayed in a five-star hotel,” Murray said. “We got to eat in the same restaurant as the pro players here.”Now he is a star here, big enough of a draw to meet Will Ferrell and big enough of a talent to meet Roger Federer in the final.