https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/01/sports/baseball/jim-bouton-brain-disease.html
Jim Bouton, Author and Former Pitcher, Struggles With Brain Disease - The New York Times
Baseball,Bouton  Jim,Brain,Books and Literature,Ball Four (Book)
July 1, 2017
7104
GREAT BARRINGTON, Mass. — The old knuckleballer grips his favorite pitch with three fingernails. Most pitchers use two, but for him that makes the pitch wobbly, impossible to control. Jim Bouton, 78, uses his ring finger, too. This is the grip he showed Johnny Carson four decades ago on the set of “The Tonight Show,” and the grip he displayed for a recent visitor in his backyard, high up in the Berkshires.Bouton still throws a couple of times a week. He built a concrete-block backstop in a sunlit corner of the yard, and he hits the strike zone most of the time. His hat does not fall off anymore, as it did in his Yankees days, back when he threw hard and beat St. Louis twice in the 1964 World Series. In a 15-minute game of catch, his knuckler hit the glove every time.That’s not ideal, exactly; the best knuckleballs often zig and zag away from the mitt. But if it doesn’t quite dance the way it did for the Seattle Pilots, it remains Bouton’s pitch — slower now, but authentically him.It is good for Bouton to have company, said his wife, Paula Kurman, who has a doctorate in interpersonal communications from Columbia. They have been married for 35 years and have lived here for more than 20, among the foxes and black bears, surrounded by pine trees. A cloud might roll by, straight through the screened-in porch, and there are no other homes in sight. Their children are grown and live elsewhere.Bouton had a stroke five years ago this Aug. 15. They know the date because it was the 15th anniversary of the death of Bouton’s daughter, Laurie, in a car accident.“The body knows, you know?” Kurman said, softly. “The body knows.”Bouton’s body was largely unaffected by the stroke. But his mind, the one whose pointed and poignant observations produced the classic memoir “Ball Four” in 1970, will never be the same. This weekend in New York, at the convention for the Society of American Baseball Research, Bouton went public about his brain disease: cerebral amyloid angiopathy, which is linked to dementia.Bouton had a smaller stroke before his 2012 episode, which was treated immediately with blood thinner. That was “catastrophic,” said Dr. Alec Kloman, a neurologist at Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield, Mass., and led to a hemorrhage in the frontal lobe. The hemorrhage dissipated, but in the aftermath, Bouton’s language skills were essentially wiped out. He had to relearn how to read, write, speak and understand.Kurman had worked with brain-damaged children many years before, and recognized troubling signs in her husband: repeating questions, difficulty organizing and categorizing information. A visit to Kloman confirmed that Bouton was suffering from more than the aftereffects of a stroke. He had mild cognitive impairment.“The fear is that over time, 80 percent of patients progress into a demented stage in the next five years,” Kloman said. “It’s a shot across the bow. You’re being warned that something is coming.”Bouton does not watch much baseball anymore, but he is engaged in the news and can still summon tales from the old days, though sometimes he repeats himself. A framed photograph of him with Yogi Berra and Mickey Mantle hangs on a wall near the kitchen.He remembers that his mother, Trudy, first encouraged him to take notes on his zany baseball life. Those notes — mostly on the Pilots in 1969, their only year of existence before they moved to Milwaukee — formed the foundation for “Ball Four,” which was edited by the sportswriter Leonard Shecter.“Some of the players I didn’t really like that much, but I was listening to them, and they became interesting,” Bouton said, sitting in an armchair on the porch. “I had no idea. They were funny, interesting characters.”“I think he came, over the years, to love them,” said Kurman, who was seated nearby. “As each one died, he got really teary about it. He realized how deeply they were part of him.”Bouton nodded. Turning the notes into a book, he said, was the best thing he ever did.“I didn’t know the value of it,” he added. “I was just really sharing the nonsense. Every once in a while, I would transfer the notes to audio and send in my tapes. I’d call Shecter and say, ‘Is this interesting?’ And he’d say: ‘Are you kidding? Keep going!’”The book was a smash. Often cited as the first “tell-all” book by an athlete, it was really so much more — a coming-of-age journey, of sorts, described by an insider who thought of himself as an outsider. It was the only sports book named to the New York Public Library’s list of Books of the Century.It also launched a new life for Bouton as a kind of rebel-celebrity. Released by the Houston Astros in August 1970, he attempted a comeback with an independent team — he visited Carson on a day off — and made five starts for the Atlanta Braves in 1978. His book was spun off into a short-lived sitcom, and Bouton also starred in a Robert Altman film, “The Long Goodbye,” with his friend Elliott Gould.For a few years, Bouton worked for WCBS in New York.“I was a TV guy; I did the news with sports and stuff,” he said. “And then one day, I’m in the newsroom, getting my script ready to go, and Geraldo Rivera walked in with John Lennon!”Bouton paused, changed the subject briefly, and then picked up the story again.“So Geraldo was hanging out with — what’s his name again?” he asked.John Lennon.Bouton shook his head.“John Lennon. Isn’t that ridiculous, that you can’t come up with it?”Life is like that these days for Bouton and Kurman. She calls his condition a pothole syndrome: Things will seem smooth, his wit and vocabulary intact, and then there will be a sudden, unforeseen gap in his reasoning, or a concept he cannot quite grasp.Rote memorization remains: Yes, the author of “Ball Four” can still tell you how many balls are in a walk, he can still recite his Army number — BR18609797 — and he still proudly states that he once won 21 games in a season.But Bouton does not know the year — he recently guessed 1982 — or his age. His major league record was 62-63, but he could not process a question about whether his career win total was closer to 50 or 300.“The blessing is there’s no physical pain,” Kurman said. “The awful blow is the very thing which enabled him to write ‘Ball Four’ is mangled — something he prides himself on, and he’s not going to get back to that level again.”Bouton has written other books, including “Foul Ball,” in 2003, about his efforts to save a ballpark in Pittsfield. Now his brain damage has eroded the communication skills that once came so naturally and vibrantly.“I can’t write a simple sentence,” he said, before Kurman pointed out that he could.“But it’s garbled,” Bouton continued. “It’s not interesting. I almost have to explain why it sounds so flat.”Kloman said he sees more and more such cases now, in people from Bouton’s generation and the baby boomers born a few years later. It is staggering, he said, and sobering to deal with conditions that cannot be prevented or cured. The cost of care can be crippling to families.In her work with brain-damaged children, Kurman said, her boss would tell her to think about what remains, not what is lost. It is a lesson she applies now. Her husband can still make her laugh, still make her think. He has taken up painting again; he once studied at the Art Institute of Chicago.And he can still pitch.“You need to learn that the person is still that person, and you have to focus more on what he can do, rather than what he can’t do,” she said. “And then you adjust.”