https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/us/video-police-shooting-philando-castile-trial.html
Experts Weigh In on Video of Philando Castile Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Castile  Philando (1983-2016),Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Yanez  Jeronimo (1988- ),Minnesota
June 21, 2017
1329
The police officer who fatally shot Philando Castile along a Minnesota road was acquitted of all charges last week, but newly released video of what happened that day has opened new debate over the case and how a seemingly routine traffic stop so abruptly turned deadly.We asked experts in the law, police procedures and officer training to view the dashboard camera video of the encounter between Officer Jeronimo Yanez and Mr. Castile: an episode that lasted only seconds. They offered their takes on what they saw, frame by frame.Here is some of what they said.Officer Yanez radios to a colleague that Mr. Castile, a driver inside a car he has followed, matches the description of a robbery suspect from several days earlier, but he walks up to the Oldsmobile calmly. A second officer approaches on the other side.Officer Yanez tells Mr. Castile his brake light is out, and Mr. Castile hands over his insurance card. During the brief conversation, Mr. Castile calmly tells Officer Yanez, “Sir, I have to tell you I do have a firearm on me.”Officer Yanez yells at Mr. Castile not to reach for his gun. Mr. Castile tries to assure him that he is not. Officer Yanez fires seven shots; later, he will say he thought Mr. Castile was reaching for his gun. Mr. Castile’s girlfriend has said he was trying to pull out his identification, as the officer had requested. The video camera — mounted on the police car behind Mr. Castile’s car — does not give a view of what happens in the front seat or where Mr. Castile is reaching.Officer Yanez calls for an ambulance and keeps his gun pointed into the car. Diamond Reynolds, Mr. Castile’s girlfriend, begins broadcasting the scene on Facebook from the passenger seat. Another officer removes Ms. Reynolds’s young daughter from the car.