https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/20/opinion/campaign-stops/the-trump-affront-to-latinos.html
The Trump Affront to Latinos - The New York Times
Hispanic-Americans,Immigration and Emigration,Presidential Election of 2016,Republican National Convention,Republican Party,Trump  Donald J
July 20, 2016
7016
Los Angeles — WHEN I was growing up in Los Angeles in the late 1960s and early ’70s, one of my most prized possessions was my father’s United States history textbook.Having obtained only a grade-school education in Guatemala, my father had come to Los Angeles at the age of 21 and earned an associate degree at a community college. Hence the textbook, which I still have: a crimson-bound tome filled with the Pilgrims, the founders, Manifest Destiny, the Civil War, women’s suffrage.Each election was illustrated with a map of the Electoral College results. Adams beating Jefferson. Lincoln over McClellan. I believed then that the story of the United States of America belonged to me, despite the absence of Latinos in those textbooks, and despite the Spanish spoken in our home, and the border crossing in my family history.Soon, we will enter a new name into the history books: Donald J. Trump, the real estate mogul and entertainer who began his campaign with a screed against Latin American immigrants and who grew in popularity as he promised Americans that he would seal off the country from Mexico.The nomination of Mr. Trump by the Republican Party will endure in the memory of Latinos in this country for generations to come. Our future historians will write about the Trump campaign and the nativist anger it unleashed with the same sense of hurt that African-Americans feel when they look back on the cruelties of Jim Crow, and that Asian-Americans experience as they contemplate the injustice of the Chinese Exclusion Act.The Republican convention that began Monday in Cleveland with an hour of testimony about the innocent blood spilled by “illegal aliens” only deepened the insult. Each speaker served as an echo of the words Mr. Trump uttered a year ago when announcing his candidacy at Trump Tower in New York: “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best,” he said. “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.”“Only Trump mentions Americans killed by illegals,” said one of the convention speakers, Jamiel Shaw Sr., whose son was murdered by an immigrant in Los Angeles in 2008. “Trump is sent from God.”Some 11 million people live in the United States as undocumented immigrants. Many speak English as their primary language, and nearly all pay federal and local taxes. But in the vision offered by the Republican Party this week, they are a scourge murdering Border Patrol officers, or unlicensed drivers who drink to excess and kill American citizens.“No one listened until Donald Trump,” said another speaker, Sabine Durden, whose son died in a 2012 road collision involving an immigrant driver. “Build the wall, and Americans need to come first.”Against these crimes and calamities, consider the rhythms of everyday life in the United States. The labor of Latino people is an essential part of that: from the raising of children to the building of homes and the defense of our country, in laboratories, lettuce fields and lecture halls.More often than not, American industry and ambition can be traced to a border crosser, to a man or a woman who took risks to come to this country, with documents or without.The Trump convention began by slandering an entire generation of border crossers. When it did offer a nod to the immigrant experience, it came from a naturalized, Italian-born actor, Antonio Sabato Jr. Mr. Sabato, whose muscled physique once earned him a job modeling Calvin Klein underwear, castigated those unable to follow in his footsteps. “Others who want to come to the U.S. should follow the same rules,” he declared.Back in 2000, when immigration reform seemed imminent, the Republican convention in Philadelphia offered a multicultural vision of a “kinder, gentler” America. I covered that gathering for The Los Angeles Times, and while walking the convention floor I encountered Rosario Marín, a Mexican immigrant and a Republican city councilwoman from a Los Angeles suburb, Huntington Park.“Hola, Héctor,” she said, and gave me a hug.As president, George W. Bush appointed Ms. Marín as treasurer of the United States. You can still see her signature on millions of dollar bills, each with a grammatically correct Spanish accent over the “i” in her surname. Mrs. Marín has attended every Republican convention since 1996, but she told Fox News Latino that she would not attend this week’s gathering.“He’s insulted me,” she said of Mr. Trump, “the people I love, the community I represent.” She also vowed never to vote for “the little orange man.”“I’m in mourning,” said Ms. Marín. “It’s been very painful.”Millions of Latino Americans, like Rosario Marín, will remember the affront of this moment in the voting booth. And they will remember it long afterward, when they send their children to school, telling them study harder because of Mr. Trump and all that he represents. One day, those children might add a chapter of their own to the United States history textbooks of the future.