https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/05/nyregion/ex-prisoner-alexander-bonds-officer-miosotis-familia.html
Ex-Prisoner Finally Found Stability Before Killing Police Officer - The New York Times
Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Bonds  Alexander (1982-2017),Attacks on Police,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Bronx (NYC),Police Department (NYC)
July 5, 2017
7142
After a lifetime of trouble, Alexander Bonds finally seemed to have everything under control. At 34, he had escaped New York City’s shelter system and moved into his own apartment in the Bronx. He had a girlfriend, and a job at a fast-food restaurant. His five-year stint on parole was almost up, and he had not had a run-in with the police in years.But in recent weeks, something was off. He was hospitalized in June for a breakdown after making an ominous call to his sister.“He kept saying he was going to kill someone,” Nancy Kearse, his aunt, said, recalling the episode. “He was very angry.”He had been out of the hospital only a week when that rage erupted in a heinous and seemingly random act of violence. Early on Wednesday, Mr. Bonds was walking down a street in the Bronx when he pulled out a gun and fired through the window of a police truck, killing the officer who was sitting in the passenger seat, Miosotis Familia. He ran a short way before he was shot and killed by responding officers.The New York City police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, said in a message to officers that Officer Familia was “assassinated without warning,” and the shooting evoked comparisons with attacks on police officers in Dallas, Baton Rouge and Brooklyn, where two and half years ago a man with a similar profile  shot and killed two officers as they sat in their car.Less than 24 hours after the latest attack, investigators were piecing together the events that led up to the shooting. They had begun analyzing posts to Facebook in which Mr. Bonds speaks passionately about abuses he suffered in prison and appears to express anti-police sentiments, and delving into his yearslong battle with mental health issues.As they learned of the shooting, friends and relatives of Mr. Bonds were struggling to comprehend how a man who had seemingly come so far could so suddenly have pivoted to violence.“They do paint him as a really bad person, and I get it,” Ms. Kearse said. “My heart really goes out to that family, but he is no cop killer.”As investigators work to determine a motive, they will certainly focus on circumstances that led to what relatives described as a mental breakdown Mr. Bonds suffered in June. At the time, his sister had talked him into checking himself into a hospital in the Bronx, Ms. Kearse said, but she could not remember which one.It is unclear how long he spent at the hospital or why he was discharged. In New York, mental health services typically will not provide inpatient treatment for more than a few days unless it can be proved that patients present an immediate threat to themselves or other people.Ms. Kearse said Mr. Bonds had been given diagnoses of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and had been hospitalized on and off for years. When he was taking his medications, she said, he could be serene and almost never exhibited violent tendencies.But if he stopped taking them or, worse, had a few drinks, he could go wild.“Once he gets into that zone,” she said, “you can’t even medicate him and he becomes stronger than an ox.”There is a family history of mental illness, she said. After Mr. Bonds’s father died of a heart attack when Mr. Bonds and his two siblings were still young, his mother, Deborah Kearse, had a breakdown and was institutionalized for a period. Mr. Bonds and his brother, John, were placed into foster care. His sister, Ryan, went to live with her aunt.Deborah Kearse was placed in an assisted-living facility in Lower Manhattan. Since his release from prison, friends said, Mr. Bonds had spent time volunteering at the facility, making sandwiches for the residents and trying to forge a relationship with his mother.Mr. Bonds’s trouble with the law began in adolescence.In addition to low-level criminal activity, there were flashes of violence.In 2001, when he was 18, he was with a group of four other people who attacked a police officer in Queens, a law enforcement official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to describe the case, which has been sealed. Wearing brass knuckles, Mr. Bonds punched and kicked the officer, the official said.In 2006, he was convicted of robbing a person at gunpoint in Syracuse and was sentenced to a maximum of eight years in prison. It was his second stint in state prison in two years; the first time he completed an intensive boot camp for drug offenders and was released after seven months.The second time was different. Mr. Bonds was incarcerated in maximum-security prisons like the Attica Correctional Facility, where his fellow inmates described daily brutality by corrections officers.“If you’re an inmate at Attica, you’ve had some form of abuse happen to you,” said Sean Caraballo, 36, who became friends with Mr. Bonds in prison and kept in touch after they had both been released. “It wears on you, has an effect on you.”In a video that Mr. Bonds recorded and posted on Facebook in September, he accused guards of beating, raping and murdering inmates, particularly a guard he called Preacher, who he said organized fights between inmates “like we savages.”“Police be killing them and saying the inmates killed them,” Mr. Bonds said. (Inmates in New York State prisons often refer to correction officers as police.)In other videos, he criticizes police brutality and suggests he would stand up for himself in any encounter with officers in the streets. Investigators are closely examining all of his social media content in search of other inflammatory statements.Friends said he had never spoken of committing an act of violence against a police officer.“He was aware about police brutality and aware of Black Lives Matter, but I wouldn’t say he was angry or upset,” said another friend who served time with Mr. Bonds at Attica, who would only identify himself as Jason G.The last time Jason G. saw Mr. Bonds was at his birthday party in mid-June. Mr. Bonds had to work and could not stay for long, but stopped by to offer best wishes and a hug.Since leaving prison, Mr. Bonds had taken control of his life, friends said. He met with his parole officer as required on June 20 and was scheduled for another meeting on July 11, according to a parole official.For four years, he was able to stay out of trouble. Then, on the evening of the Fourth of July, while many New Yorkers were launching fireworks and tending barbecues, Alexander Bonds was working himself into a frenzy.Starting around 9 p.m. his girlfriend made several panicked calls to 911. She described him as “manic” and “paranoid,” according to a law enforcement official familiar with the calls. She tried to follow him as he walked the streets in the area near his home in the Foxhurst neighborhood of the Bronx, but she could not keep up. “He just takes off,” the official said.Hours later and three miles away, a surveillance video captured him dressed all in black walking westbound on West 183rd Street. He strolled up to the passenger-side window of a police truck where Officer Familia was sitting, pulled out a Ruger .38 and fired once through the glass.