http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/24/nyregion/rapperbobby-shmurda-pleads-not-guilty-to-promoting-prison-contraband.html
Rapper Bobby Shmurda Pleads Not Guilty to Promoting Prison Contraband - The New York Times
Shmurda  Bobby (1994- ),Rikers Island Prison Complex,Gangs,Smuggling,Prisons and Prisoners,Rap and Hip-Hop,GS9,Bronx (NYC)
July 23, 2015
9868
Ackquille Pollard, better known as the Brooklyn rapper Bobby Shmurda, has been accused of having his girlfriend smuggle a knife into the prison where he is being held on gang conspiracy and gun charges, and then lying to a grand jury, prosecutors said.Mr. Pollard, 20, faces felony and misdemeanor charges of promoting prison contraband, perjury and criminal possession of a weapon, according to a statement from the Bronx district attorney’s office. He pleaded not guilty on Thursday.After his plea, Mr. Pollard was sent back to the Rikers Island jail complex. His next hearing is scheduled for October. If convicted, prosecutors said, he could face up to seven years in prison.On June 21, prosecutors said, Mr. Pollard’s girlfriend, Kimberly Rousseau, visited him at the Anna M. Kross Center on Rikers Island, and she gave him a sharp metal object that she had hidden in her bra. Later, prosecutors said, Mr. Pollard lied to a grand jury about the episode.Kenneth J. Montgomery, Mr. Pollard’s lawyer, did not immediately return calls for comment.Prosecutors said Mr. Pollard, a rising talent who landed a seven-figure record deal last year and climbed the charts with his hit “Hot Boy,” was a “driving force” in a Brooklyn gang known as GS9, or G Stone Crips, which sold drugs and was involved in street violence.Mr. Pollard was arrested in December in that case, and his bail was set at $2 million. He could face up to 25 years in prison, if convicted.Ms. Rousseau, 18, has been charged with felony and misdemeanor counts of promoting prison contraband and a misdemeanor count of criminal possession of a weapon. In an arraignment on Wednesday, she pleaded not guilty and was released on her own recognizance, with a hearing scheduled for August.