http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/10/politics/a-different-timpanist.html
A Different Timpanist - The New York Times
PRYOR  BILL,COURTS,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
June 10, 2005
5137
WASHINGTON, June 9 - On the day in 1973 that the Supreme Court made abortion legal, the Pryor family of Mobile, Ala., discussed it at the dinner table. Laura Pryor recalls that she and her husband, both teachers in Roman Catholic schools, were "very upset." But they had little idea what an impression the talk made on their 10-year-old son, William."We did not realize until later in life," she said, "until he was much older, how much we had influenced him on that."William H. Pryor Jr., now 43, grew up to become the straight-talking attorney general of Alabama, a man who once called the Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision "the worst abomination of constitutional law in our history." On Thursday, the Senate voted 53 to 45 to confirm Judge Pryor to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, covering Alabama, Florida and Georgia, 16 months after Mr. Bush installed him on the bench temporarily while Congress was in recess.To his detractors, Judge Pryor, the last of three judges whose confirmations were assured by a bipartisan agreement, is "an ideological warrior," in the words of Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. In a court brief, Judge Pryor once asserted that a right to same-sex relations would also confer a right to bestiality and necrophilia, views that critics say are extreme and make him unfit for a lifetime appointment.But to his supporters, who include black civil rights leaders in his home state, Judge Pryor is a welcome departure from so many nominees who do the classic Washington two-step, dancing around controversy. When Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, asked Judge Pryor during his confirmation hearing if he regretted the abomination remark, he did not take the bait."No," the judge replied evenly, "I stand by that comment."Senators appeared shocked. Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, said the room was so quiet "you could hear a pin drop." At that moment, Judge Pryor broke a barrier, daring to talk about what Mr. Schumer described as "fervent personal beliefs" -- and clearing the way for future nominees to do so -- while advancing the cause of religious conservatives, as he has done his entire adult life."That would be vintage Bill," said Charlie Condon, the former attorney general of South Carolina, who with Judge Pryor founded the Republican Attorneys General Association, dedicated to electing fellow Republicans and promoting limited government. "Bill has a very keen intellect, and he's intellectually honest."William Holcombe Pryor Jr. was born April 26, 1962, to parents who were "John F. Kennedy Democrats," in his mother's words. In the sixth grade, he worked on a political campaign, passing out fliers and going door to door for a local candidate. "Even then," Mrs. Pryor said, "he was a Republican."His father, William H. Pryor Sr., was the band director in the local Catholic high school, and so it was no surprise that the younger Mr. Pryor, an award-winning timpanist, would enter college majoring in music. But when he came home for the summer, his mother spied him watching C-Span, and knew he was headed in another direction."I asked him, 'Son, are you sure you're majoring in the right thing?"' Mrs. Pryor recalled. "And he said, 'Mom, I've been wondering the same thing myself."'He switched to legal studies, and began a fast ascent through Republican politics and conservative legal circles. He founded one chapter of the conservative Federalist Society while in law school at Tulane University, and another while practicing law in Birmingham. "He's known as the Johnny Appleseed of the Federalist Society," said a friend, Algert Agricola, a lawyer in Montgomery.In 1994, when Mr. Sessions was running for attorney general, Mr. Agricola introduced him to Mr. Pryor. Mr. Sessions won, and hired Mr. Pryor as his deputy. When Mr. Sessions joined the Senate in 1997, Alabama's governor, Fob James, appointed Mr. Pryor to succeed him. He was 34, the youngest attorney general in the country.He earned the admiration of state civil rights leaders by becoming the only white statewide official to campaign for the repeal of a provision in the Alabama Constitution barring interracial marriage. "He put his political career on the line," said Alvin Holmes, a black state legislator. "He thought it was racist."Outspoken and ambitious, Mr. Pryor, who is married and has two daughters, was also overtly political. He founded the Republican attorneys general group to counter what he regarded as the activism of his Democratic counterparts, particularly their suits against tobacco companies. Once, he ended a speech with the prayer, "Please, God, no more Souters" -- a reference to Justice David H. Souter, whose nomination to the Supreme Court by the first President Bush is regarded by many conservatives as a mistake.But Mr. Pryor was careful not to take his conservative activism too far. He was successful in overturning a federal order barring student-led prayer in Alabama's public schools, yet rejected the argument of Mr. James, the former governor, that teacher-led prayer was acceptable because the Bill of Rights did not apply to the states.He pressed to keep a monument to the Ten Commandments at the Alabama state judicial building, yet prosecuted the chief justice, Roy S. Moore, for disobeying a federal court order to remove it. Later, in a speech titled "Christian Duty and the Rule of Law," Mr. Pryor argued that he "had a moral duty, as a Christian, to obey the federal injunction."The speech was reflective of a thread running through Judge Pryor's life and career -- his strong Catholic faith. When he was very young, his mother said, the family lived on a dead-end street, just down the block from their church and the Catholic school. "Bill was constantly around priests and nuns and brothers," Mrs. Pryor said, which was why to her, at least, his answer to Mr. Specter did not come as a surprise.Still, she said, "It makes me very proud."