https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/02/t-magazine/art/maggi-hambling-artist-home.html
The Surprisingly Lively Home of a Controversial Artist - The New York Times
Art,Great Britain
March 2, 2017
2823
Maggi Hambling is an artist who has long been preoccupied by death — but her South London studio couldn’t feel more alive. The lobby, for starters, is painted an exuberant shade of ocher — and filled with small clusters of paintings, sketches and a large Rococo-style papier-mâché mirror. A wooden chair, carved in the shape of an elephant, guards the open-plan kitchen and living quarters — which are also home to toy parrots, Mexican masks, cowhide rugs and a contorted Euphorbia plant called Esmeralda. The two-story duplex is spirited, engaging and fiercely unusual — much like its owner.“So, you’ve spotted I’m not a minimalist,” roars Hambling, expelling a puff of smoke from a Marlborough Menthol cigarette. “I still occasionally think of throwing everything out, but can’t quite get around to doing it.” This is the first time the Suffolk-born painter and sculptor, 71, has opened the doors to her Clapham Old Town abode, which she purchased at the start of 1984 in search of “more space and light.” Even back then, the area was gentrified and filled with well-to-do individuals who surfed the nearby high street for ceramic knickknacks and artisanal bread on the weekends. “I always preferred to say I lived in Battersea because it had far more street cred,” Hambling confesses with a wry smile. “But in the end I just had to accept it.”Hambling shares the Victorian property with Tory Lawrence, her partner of 33 years, who is also an artist. Recently, it has become something of a city bolt-hole for the pair, who now spend most of the week at their 17th-century house in Saxmunham, a rural town in East Suffolk. “In London, everything seems to be concertinaed into one short bit of time,” Hambling says. “In Suffolk you get the sense of a whole day. Also, the light is better.” Invariably, the county’s bucolic landscape and dramatic coastlines have inspired much of her six-decade-strong oeuvre — from her large public sculpture “Scallop,” which was erected on Aldeburgh beach in 2003 as a tribute to the iconic composer Benjamin Britten, to her distinctive oil-on-canvas depictions of breaking waves and perturbed seas.Evocative portraits are perhaps her most popular — and controversial — works. She drew her former lover, Henrietta Moraes — a captivating beauty and notorious alcoholic, known as the Queen of Soho — shortly after her passing, once in the hospital morgue and then again in her coffin. Her dear friend George Melly was also the subject of a series of works that documented the British jazz singer on the precipice of death and after it. She speaks of these pieces in a lower, more serious register. “My art is a response to what happens in life. George Melly said I would go down in history as Maggi ‘coffin’ Hambling because of my habit of drawing dead people,” she says. “The truth is, I’ve found it rather therapeutic to go on painting them after death. It’s like grieving in a positive way, rather than just being negative.”Hambling spends the majority of her time in her converted loft studio — the beating heart of the house. The space feels sparse in comparison to the frenetic décor that surrounds it. Sunshine penetrates a large skylight, casting shadows on old cigarette butts that litter the floor. One half of the room contains a number of painted canvases propped up in a large wooden frame. The other showcases several maquettes, including one of “Scallop” and an early incarnation of “The Rising Wave,” from 2010. A wooden table covered in old Polaroids, press coverage and tubes of acrylic paint stands at the center. “The studio is real life. This is where I’m really alive,” Hambling says, adding, “My work is my best friend.”This week, she is installing a new survey of works at Marlborough Fine Art gallery in London. Titled “Edge,” the show comprises paintings and sculptures that address a spate of highly charged themes and issues, including the Aleppo crisis, grave political unrest, global warming and even the death of Leonard Cohen. “Anger really gets me going,” she says, eyes as wide as saucers. “The absolute horror of Aleppo, the way that we continue to mess up the planet, the rise of the far right — I feel as though we’re on the edge more than ever before.” She draws my attention to a photograph of an oil painting from the show, named “2016.” It portrays a boat full of trafficked migrants, adrift on the sea — epitomizing its titular year and the fateful events that unfolded within it. “That wasn’t based on a photo or news footage, that came from in here,” Hambling says, tapping her head. She is also keen to point out that a bulbous, lurid-pink bronze carving, “Politician” (2015), is not, in fact, a study of Donald Trump. “Everybody bloody thinks it is, but I made it in 2015. Though it is completely hollow on the inside,” she guffaws.After an intense day in the studio, Hambling typically winds down with “a malt whiskey or a can of Special Brew,” and the British television soap “Coronation Street,” in the comfort of her living room. “It feels good in there because there are lots of things to touch,” she says. “I’m sure many people wouldn’t throw together a green velvet sofa with all those bizarre masks and elephant figurines and such, but if I like something, I love it for itself.” The most treasured possessions in her madcap trove are undoubtedly the paintings — bought or gifted from artists including Sebastian Horsley, Cedric Morris, Roger Hilton and her late mentor Lett Haines. “To me, they’re like people, friends around the place — they jolly things up, like bird song,” she concludes.