https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/04/us/politics/marco-rubios-donor-obstacles-no-base-and-another-floridian-is-running.html
Marco Rubio’s Donor Obstacles: A Limited Base and Another Floridian - The New York Times
Rubio  Marco,Presidential Election of 2016,Campaign Finance,Bush  Jeb,Republican Party,Political Action Committees,Florida,United States
July 3, 2015
2369
WASHINGTON —  In the nearly three months since he announced that he was running for president, Senator Marco Rubio has been enjoying his moment. Republicans have talked up his potential. Democrats have called him a threat. He has been in the top tier of many polls.But one of the biggest measures of his success — whether he impresses Republican donors as much as he does the party’s leading operatives and opinion shapers — has been harder to discern.Mr. Rubio has a notable disadvantage in the congested, fragmented field of Republican candidates: He has no natural national base of support to draw on, the way Senator Ted Cruz does with evangelical Christians or Senator Rand Paul does with libertarians.And Mr. Rubio has been cut off from some of the financial support he received in his home state, Florida, when it elected him to the Senate in 2010: Many of the wealthy donors who propelled him to national political fame are sticking by Jeb Bush, the former governor.Bent on mitigating those deficits, Mr. Rubio has been on a cross-country fund-raising binge, spending little time meeting voters and far more at dinners and receptions in the homes of an eclectic set of patrons — from Larry Ellison, the software developer who hosted a few dozen barefoot Rubio supporters at his Japanese-inspired compound outside San Francisco, to Rick Harrison, a Las Vegas pawnshop owner best known for his role on the History Channel’s “Pawn Stars.”In his private appeals for money, Mr. Rubio avoids overtly drawing comparisons with Mr. Bush. But those who have heard him say that the implied contrast could not be more obvious: He embodies the future of the Republican Party, while Mr. Bush represents the past.“The differences are clear and don’t even really need to be mentioned,” said George Seay, a Dallas investor who has hosted two fund-raisers for Mr. Rubio this year.Some differences, however, need to be stated.In Las Vegas a few weeks ago, Mr. Rubio got across a simple message, recalled Mr. Harrison: “The other guys have a lot more money than me.”The first glimpse of how much all this fund-raising has paid off — and the clearest sign yet of how viable a force Mr. Rubio will be against well-financed primary opponents — will come over the next week or so when the candidates and their “super PACs” begin reporting how much money they raised in the second quarter, which ended Tuesday.Mr. Rubio’s supporters say they believe a credible sum to have in his campaign bank account when candidates report their totals would be in the neighborhood of $10 million. His super PAC, they said, should have roughly twice that.But not all has been going as smoothly as hoped. The campaign canceled two fund-raisers last month in Florida because not enough donors had committed. A top Washington-based fund-raiser for Mr. Rubio, Carmen Miller Spence, just resigned her position with the campaign. A Rubio spokesman declined to comment on Ms. Spence’s exit but said the canceled events would be rescheduled.“All my friends — all my friends — it seems everybody over 70 is for Jeb Bush,” said Gay Gaines, a Rubio supporter who has held fund-raisers at her Palm Beach home. “It’s not that I don’t think Jeb is fabulous — I do. But I said to all of them: ‘You know what worries me? The millennials. They’re not going to want another Bush.’”“It kills me,” she added.Mr. Rubio has some very generous benefactors: Norman Braman, a billionaire auto dealer, is expected to give him $10 million, though the senator’s supporters say they do not know when that money is coming, or whether all of it will materialize.And if Mr. Rubio finds himself largely shut out of the Bush network, he has made inroads with another powerhouse fund-raising machine: Mitt Romney’s operation, which raised $1 billion in the 2012 presidential campaign. Many of Mr. Romney’s former advisers and donors feel loyalty to Mr. Rubio, who threw himself into Mr. Romney’s campaign.“He, from the get-go, was very willing to do whatever we asked him to do, no ego, was able to excite crowds and create crowds,” said Tagg Romney, Mr. Romney’s oldest son. “You learn a lot about a person and what they’re willing to do and how they handle themselves. And he was great.”Mr. Rubio’s campaign manager, deputy campaign manager and New Hampshire strategist worked on one or both of Mr. Romney’s presidential runs. The Rubio campaign’s ad agency, Poolhouse, was founded by two Romney campaign veterans. Another former Romney aide, Garrett Jackson, recently hosted a fund-raiser for Mr. Rubio in Texas.And last month, at a retreat for Republican donors that Mr. Romney arranged in Utah, he praised Mr. Rubio’s turn at the microphone. “There was a point in his remarks where I felt something in my heart and I said, ‘Yeah, that’s the America I know and love,’ ” said Mr. Romney, who is hosting Mr. Rubio and the senator’s young family this weekend at the Romney summer home in Wolfeboro, N.H.But other presidential candidates attended the event, and Mr. Romney’s praise stopped well short of an endorsement.Mr. Rubio has also worked to cultivate ties with several billionaires who are expected to pour huge sums into the 2016 campaign: He headlined a forum for Americans for Prosperity, the group backed by the industrialists Charles G. and David H. Koch, last week in New Hampshire. And he signed on to an effort in Congress to limit online gambling, a priority of the Las Vegas casino magnate Sheldon Adelson.The focus on money has been relentless, not only in drumming it up but also in holding on to it with a tight fist. Mr. Rubio’s campaign is run out of an old townhouse on Capitol Hill, and his campaign manager, Terry Sullivan, proudly posted on Twitter a picture of the Southwest jet he and Mr. Rubio were about to board in Las Vegas.