https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/04/us/politics/who-won-the-debate.html
Who Won the Debate? Maybe No One, Analysts Say - The New York Times
Debates (Political),Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Rubio  Marco,Cruz  Ted,Kasich  John R,United States Politics and Government
March 4, 2016
8522
There were insults, genitalia jokes and even some discussion of foreign policy on Thursday night in the 11th Republican presidential debate. Commentators and pundits thought that Donald J. Trump weathered attacks from both sides, that Senator Ted Cruz delivered a crisp performance, that Senator Marco Rubio had some of the best zingers and that Gov. John Kasich stuck to playing the grown-up in the room. At the close, many wondered if the face-off would make much difference. And some said that, in the end, there were no winners.“Cruz the winner. Rubio solid and feisty at times, but role seemed reversed with Cruz from last debate. Kasich hit his marks. Trump was Trump.” — Guy Benson, political editor of Town Hall“Cruz, Kasich and Rubio all playing one game: issues, ideology and résumé. Trump playing game of top dog. Only one matters in this G.O.P. primary.” — Omar Wasow, politics professor at Princeton University“Cruz winning this debate.” — Laura Ingraham, conservative radio host, who has supported Mr. Trump “Governor Kasich was absent from the early portion of the debate, but rebounded nicely when being able to engage in a foreign policy discussion. He refused to join the Cruz-Rubio alliance and instead took the high road, while stressing compromise and negotiation.” — Aaron Kall, director of University of Michigan debate program“Sad to report Cruz’s snotty command to Donald to not interrupt won’t play as well as either Trump’s ‘lyin’ Ted’ or Rubio’s yoga crack.” — Ana Marie Cox, political correspondent for MTV News“Debate ratings – Cruz: diligent. Kasich: shticky. Rubio: brutal vs. Trump. Trump: obviously, dangerously psychotic.” — Rick Wilson, Republican political strategist“The most important thing that happened tonight is Trump vowing to provoke the most serious civil-military crisis in U.S. history since 1860.” — Tom Nichols, professor at Naval War College“Tonight I heard a few firsts in a U.S. presidential debate: penis size, yoga, a candidate insulted as ‘little.’” — Kyung Lah, CNN national correspondent“My party is committing suicide on national television.” — Jamie Johnson, ex-aide to former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas“They’d all vote for Trump. Game over.” — John Dingell, former Democratic congressman from Michigan