https://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/30/business/30leonhardt-responses.html
Reader Responses - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
May 30, 2007
2816
The following are excerpts of reader responses to David Leonhardt's May 30 column on Lou Dobbs:Thank you so much for your piece on Lou Dobbs. One name pops to mind whenever I've watched any portion of Dobbs' show- Joseph McCarthy. While he certainly doesn't have the bully pulpit or power of subpoena that McCarthy once had, he certainly does his best to stir up needless fear in the same manner. It's about time that someone called him out for his uneducated rants. - Christopher Banks"Accountability" has been displaced by "responsibility" in America these days: even when admitting guilt, there seems to be no consequences for the culprits. - Juan Ramón de AranaIt is refreshing to read someone who obviously strives to be balanced with open ears for all sides, and actually goes through the painful but essential process of sorting through data and facts to find a measure of truth and convey it well. Kudos.I'm a Marine and veteran of Iraq and I must admit I find Mr. Dobbs' direct, occasionally blunt, railing against the elites and comfortable corner-office and corporate-cubicle set on target -- but I also get a queasy discomfort with his hyper-immigration focus, and as someone from Irish immigrant stock, I know the "No (insert ethnic group) need apply" signs are an American tradition all too much a part of our history too. - Paul KaneAll the illegal immigrants should have been put in jails or deported if the law enforcement agencies, which we pay taxes for, had done their jobs. Then the percentage of illegal immigrants in jails would be much higher. The law agencies should also be arresting and penalizing the businesses that continue to hire and employ illegal immigrants. But sadly, they don't! - Rich Van RiperHe's a racist and it's obvious. He also has no attachment to the truth.I was with you 100% until the second to last paragraph. I did graduate from high school, and even self educated myself after that. As someone who hand digs holes and does carpentry I'm in direct competition for jobs with illegal immigrants, Mexican laborers are some of the nicest, hardest working people I've ever met. I'm headed out to work with one in another 3 hours, digging holes, but they do depress  my wages. I separate my deep liking for Mexicans and appreciation for their friendship and hard work, from the economic reality that they depress my wages. - Robb CadwellRobb, I won't presume to tell you something about your own life. I'm sure you're right. More broadly, I think the main point of the economic studies on this topic is that, for most workers, the benefits that come from illegal-immigrant workers -- less expensive housing, landscaping, babysitting, etc. -- outweigh the effect on wages. The opposite seems to be true for high-school dropouts — and, doubtless, for other individual workers, too. But there are certainly aspects of this issue that are very open to debate. Thanks for such a thoughtful note. — David LeonhardtThank you for that bit of fact-checking on Lou Dobbs. - Julio HuatoDobbs plays to the ignorant gallery, but, since when are "illegal immigrants" (Dobbs label, according to your report) and "non-citizen" and "immigrants" (your labels) all interchangeable when it comes to counting prison populations? Similarly, when did "natives" come to mean "legal residents"? - Doug BorsomThere aren't any stats on illegal immigrants in prison, per se. But we know illegal immigrants are a subset of non-citizens. So the number of illegal immigrants would actually be lower than the number of non-citizens. There's more here: http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/30/business/30leonside.html – David LeonhardtI used to like Dobbs but really got very sick of him when he started slamming immigrants viciously. Where is Ted Turner in all of this? - Frank MorrisseyBy picking on a strand of the whole tapestry of which illegal immigration is but an element, you engage in a practice as deplorable as that which you condemn in Mr. Dobbs.  Cheap illegal labor is but a facet of the myth that we've been sold by the ruling elites that we are doing well, that our incomes are sufficient and that the country is headed in the right direction.  Mr. Dobbs may not have a clear enough picture of the entire problem, but in my infancy, when immigration was enforced, unions were strong and tariffs were high, in other words before neo-cons and globalization, it only took one parent to earn enough to provide for a family.Lou Dobbs gives voice to the middle class which has to shoulder the burden of providing the sterling elites who own the majority of this country, and have their elected officials encysted in their vest pockets, with higher returns on their investment while their taxes fund benefits and programs for illegals recruited by employers who not only break the law but shirk their obligations while their paid lobbyists pass the cost to us. So who cares if Mr. Dobbs misses a note here and there, on the whole, his rendition of the symphony of truth seems to be correct on tempo, note and tone - Carlos RodriguezAs I exercise at the YMCA, I shake my head in disbelief at the "facts" about immigration and other issues espoused by Lou Dobbs and his lackies.  (Often the only TV sets that work are carrying CNN).  Thank you for exposing him as a fact-twister and sensationalist.Shame on CNN.  It's a badge of honor that he finds you frankly offensive. - M. McCarthyPut simply:  Bravo! While I basically endorse the general lines of criticism that Lou Dobbs often dishes out, I think he's becoming just a bit too much of a legend in his own mind.  In fact, he's starting to bear a prickly resemblance to Peter Finch's character in the 1976 film "Network".Presentation style is one thing, but foundational facts are quite another.  I have long suspected that Dobbs' integrity is not above plasticizing facts to fit his spiel.  Now you've caught him cold on one such incident and, what a surprise, he's slithering away.Televised news seems to pitch only two types of stories these days; stories selected and presented to anger the viewer, and stories selected and presented to scare the viewer. Since returning to broadcast news from a stint as face man at a failed Internet startup, Dobbs has honed his style to present either such type of story with imperious authority.  Unfortunately, he's often being liberal with his facts. -Ken TanakaAlthough it was clear you were treading very carefully, this was still the best refutation of shoddy journalism that I can remember reading in a mainstream outlet. I hope you do more of this. - Jim RoscoeExpressions of disgust about what passes for news on TV these days is long overdue, and it is high time that we muzzle blowhards such as Lou Dobbs and Bill O'Reilly.  These are men who play fast and loose with the facts, and though there is amusing irony in such punditry when performed by someone like Stephen Colbert, it is chillingly "Brave New World" when it is actually meant to pass for news. — Peter HourdequinFinally someone has taken Lou Dobbs to task for his distortions of the facts regarding the admittedly pressing problem of illegal aliens. Unfortunately he is one of the bigots controlling the debate at the present time.  I hope your article calls attention to his odious tactics and helps illuminate the facts he has such a difficult time "reporting." - C. PivikWhile I find Dobbs populism refreshing, I am reminded by history that there is thin and scary line between populism and demagoguery, and I think you nailed it.  the most important thing in his case or concerning the musings of some of our presidential candidates is for the media and others to closely monitor the "fear factor" and expose it in a public way.- Lonnie Soury