https://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/12/world/europe/russian-judge-delays-trial-of-dead-lawyer.html
Russian Judge Delays Trial of Dead Lawyer - The New York Times
Magnitsky  Sergei L,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Russia,United States International Relations
March 11, 2013
8079
MOSCOW — Justice delayed is justice denied, of course, but for a corpse?In an unusual trial of a dead man that opened in Moscow on Monday, a judge granted the defense a delay of one week, far short of the two months the defense had requested previously. It probably did not help that a defense lawyer appointed by the Moscow bar association failed to show up.Posthumous trials are rare in international practice. When a suspect dies the question of guilt or innocence is usually seen as moot.The one here, though, is unfolding in an unusual context. It is the latest, and perhaps most bizarre, in a series of cases against dissident figures, including members of a feminist punk band who were tried last summer for performing a prank concert in a cathedral.In the case on the docket Monday, the defense filed a motion asking for a delay until May, citing the need for more time to study the materials in the case against Sergei L. Magnitsky, a whistle-blowing lawyer. He is accused of tax evasion in a case that has roiled Russian-American relations.Mr. Magnitsky died three years ago when he was 37 years old in a Russian jail while awaiting trial. His advocates say that he was jailed for investigating hundreds of millions of dollars possibly stolen by corrupt police officers and bureaucrats in a fraudulent tax case, and that he was beaten and denied medical care.The United States Congress brushed aside the Russian criminal charges against Mr. Magnitsky last year and used his name on a human rights law barring Russian officials associated with his imprisonment and death from traveling to the United States.In response, the Russian Parliament passed a law banning adoptions of Russian orphans by American parents. Also in response, Russian prosecutors refiled the tax evasion charges.In court on Monday, a prosecutor, Slobodin Ryaznichenko, agreed to the delay requested by the defense, but argued two months was too long. “The prosecution views this as an effort by the defense to draw out the trial,” Mr. Ryaznichenko said.Judge Igor B. Alisov agreed and set a new trial date for next Monday.Prosecutors are also trying in absentia Mr. Magnitsky’s former client, William F. Browder, once the largest portfolio investor in Russia and the largest foreign investor in the national energy company Gazprom. Mr. Browder now lives in London. His court-appointed lawyers also did not show up.As a result, the trial opened Monday in a small ground floor courtroom, with blond wood benches, dignified with a Russian flag hung on the wall behind the bench and packed with journalists staring curiously at the empty cage where defendants typically sit in Russian courts.Under Russian law, posthumous prosecutions are allowed, but not with the idea of going to trial. The intention is to allow relatives to clear the names of loved ones they believe were wrongly accused.Tatyana N. Rudenko, Mr. Magnitsky’s aunt, in a telephone interview, called the trial of her dead nephew “mean and cynical” and said the family needed no court to determine his reputation after death.“He was a warm person,” she said. “He had a family and he had a favorite cat, and he had a big aquarium that his children loved.”