https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/16/world/australia/pauline-hanson-muslims-senate.html
Pauline Hanson, Australian Senator, Urges End to Muslim Immigration - The New York Times
Australia,Hanson  Pauline,Turnbull  Malcolm (1954- ),Muslims and Islam,Muslim Veiling,Discrimination,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis
Sept. 15, 2016
2959
SYDNEY, Australia — Two decades ago, Pauline Hanson prompted outrage when she said that Australia was in danger of being swamped by Asians in her first speech in Parliament.This week, she has done it again.As a newly elected senator, Ms. Hanson, the leader of the One Nation party, called for an end to Muslim immigration and a ban on the burqa, and she told members of Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull’s Liberal Party that she planned to “give them a kick up the backside.”But this time, the response from the conservative coalition, led by the Liberal Party, has been carefully calibrated. Although many disagree with Ms. Hanson’s far-right stances, the coalition is treading warily: The government may need her vote, and those of her fellow party members, to ensure their bills pass through the splintered upper house.“Pauline Hanson was elected by the people of Queensland to represent their interests in the Senate,” said Julie Bishop, the foreign minister and one of Mr. Turnbull’s most senior lawmakers. “She is entitled to her views.”Ms. Bishop, speaking Wednesday on ABC television after Ms. Hanson delivered her first speech in the Senate following national elections on July 2, said that Australians “believe in open debate.”“I understand there are people who support her views and are concerned about the issues she raised,” Ms. Bishop said, adding that she did not agree with many of Ms. Hanson’s opinions.Ms. Hanson’s address on Wednesday was her second maiden speech. She was first elected to the Parliament, in the House of Representatives, 20 years ago but left in 1998. She founded the One Nation party, and its members, along with seven other independent senators, hold enough sway in the 76-seat Senate to barter with the prime minister.The problem for Mr. Turnbull will be corralling that bloc or working with the opposition Labor Party to pass laws.“Turnbull’s position is extremely problematic,” said Peter Chen, a political science professor at the University of Sydney. “His strategy, the best one he can come up with, is governing with the support of the Labor Party.”Before the elections, Mr. Turnbull had said that Ms. Hanson was not a welcome presence in politics. But that was before he narrowly scraped back into power.Mr. Turnbull dissolved both houses of Parliament in May, calling a double dissolution election, in which all Senate seats were open for a vote, instead of the usual half. His aim was to increase the government’s majority and its chances of having legislation passed through the Senate, where he said he believed it would be harder for dissenting lawmakers to retain their seats. He was wrong.The coalition lost three Senate seats and now holds 30, and One Nation, which previously had no Senate seats, won four. The opposition Labor Party holds 26, and the Greens party, the next biggest voting bloc, has nine.Smaller parties, including the independent Nick Xenophon Team, Family First, the Liberal Democrats and the Jacqui Lambie Network, also secured seats in the Senate, which is home to the largest number of independents not aligned with a major political party in more than a decade.In the 150-seat House of Representatives, the coalition has a majority of just one seat.On Wednesday, senators from the Greens party filed out of the chamber as Ms. Hanson spoke.“In my first speech, in 1996, I said we were in danger of being swamped by Asians,” Ms. Hanson said. “Now we are in danger of being swamped by Muslims, who bear a culture and ideology that is incompatible with our own.”She said Muslims are “prominent in organized crime, with associated violence and drug dealing.”She added: “I call for stopping further Muslim immigration and banning the burqa as they have done in many countries around the world.”The government should prohibit the sale of infrastructure assets to overseas interests, especially Chinese buyers, cut welfare payments and change family law, she said in her wide-ranging speech, which reflected sentiments that often appeal to voters who have tired of Australia’s two mainstream political parties.When Ms. Hanson delivered her speech, Penny Wong, a senior Labor Party senator, was absent from the chamber.“I chose not to attend,” Ms. Wong told ABC radio on Thursday. “We, as Australians, should reject the views she puts forward. I think she peddles prejudice and fear. There is no community that has been made stronger by prejudice and fear.”Professor Chen said that two decades after Ms. Hanson first entered federal politics, voters were no longer as shocked by what she said.“But does that mean she is a more serious problem?” he said. “She has four senators in the Australian Parliament. People voted for her. You have to take that seriously.”