https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/magazine/how-to-drain-a-swamp.html
How to Drain a Swamp - The New York Times
Wetlands,Army Corps of Engineers,Everglades (Fla)
June 9, 2017
8963
“Dig canals,” says Jim Vearil, a civil engineer who spent nearly 40 years working for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in Florida. Unless your swamp is very small, you’ll need something like an amphibious excavator. But before you roll out the heavy equipment, do what Vearil calls “basic reconnaissance.” Figure out where the water originates and how it moves through the landscape. Study topography. Investigate the composition of the soil. Determine rainfall and runoff.Ask yourself: What hypothetical situation does my drainage system need to withstand? A five-year flood or the bigger 100-year storm? For the Army Corps, this decision is dictated in part by cost and the likelihood humans might die. Dredge out the large canals first and, in some cases, supplement them with levees. Excavate an artery-like network of smaller canals feeding into the main ones. Try to work with the water’s natural flow patterns. Use gravity but don’t rely on it. “Sometimes you need to lift the water up and out,” Vearil says, and that requires pumps. Empty your main channels into a water body like a river or, in the case of the Everglades, the Atlantic Ocean. Install one-way flap gates, so water can flow out without flowing back in when a storm surge hits.Manage your expectations. “People tend to be overly optimistic about draining swamps,” Vearil says. “The Everglades are a good study of that.” In 1847, the federal government commissioned a man named Buckingham Smith to survey the millions of acres of wetlands, which he described in a subsequent report as “worse than worthless.” By the early 20th century, the state began building what would eventually become 1,800 miles of canals, dams and levees that now reroute 1.7 billion gallons of water daily. Prepare for unintended consequences. Once dry, Florida’s peat soils ignited in smoldering muck fires. In many places, the ground sank. The water table dropped. Saltwater invaded. Soils oxidized. Aquatic species disappeared.Keeping moisture out will be more of an ongoing project than a one-and-done job. A marsh is inclined to stay a marsh. Sometimes it’s best to recognize that water has its own kind of claim on a place. Drain a swamp, and you may have to reverse course. In the last 30 years, state and federal agencies have begun restoring Florida’s so-called liquid heart by giving water back. “It turns out,” Vearil says, “swamps are not worthless.”