https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/magazine/everywhere-you-look-weve-downgraded-real-problems-into-mere-issues.html
Everywhere You Look, We’ve Downgraded Real Problems Into Mere ‘Issues’ - The New York Times
Klam  Matthew,Oxford English Dictionary (Book),Junk English (Book)
July 18, 2017
2896
There are a great many problems in this world. Among them is the way we talk about problems. Perhaps understandably, the thorniest ones make us cautious and avoidant. So we toss linguistic blankets over them until they become nothing but unexplained lumps in the room.This month, for instance, in Hamburg, Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin took their relationship to the next level by spending more than two intimate hours together in a closed-door meeting — the Group of 20 equivalent of the fantasy suite in ‘‘The Bachelor’’ — flanked by diplomatic handmaidens. The secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, was there, as was the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, who later recounted that the two leaders had agreed ‘‘that all of these issues, including antiterrorism efforts, fight against organized crime and hacker activities in any of their manifestations’’ would be dealt with by a ‘‘bilateral working group’’ consisting of the United States and Russia. Of course, the “issues” to which Lavrov referred included the real possibility that a bilateral working group had already been formed to subvert our last presidential election — an ‘‘issue’’ whose magnitude Lavrov’s word choice did not seem up to the task of expressing.This is what makes ‘‘issues’’ the perfect word for the current moment. It is a word that acknowledges problems without actually addressing them, that minimizes them in hopes that they’ll just drift away. It’s a hedge and a dodge, at once overly punctilious and contemptuously dismissive; it’s contingent, euphemistic, underhanded and easily weaponized. Our culture has all kinds of prohibitions against plain speech, but we’ve long treated agenda-driven spin as just business. Entire television channels are devoted to repositioning bad situations and ugly truths as ‘‘controversial issues’’ — mere topics of discussion, hypothetical problems, rhetorical games.‘‘Issue’’ can mean almost anything. The Oxford English Dictionary offers roughly 40 definitions, arranged in about two dozen categories and subcategories. The word traces back to the Middle English and Old French for ‘‘exit,’’ and before that to the feminine past participle (issir) of the Latin exire, meaning to ‘‘go out’’ or ‘‘go forth.’’ But from there, things get increasingly slippery. In law, ‘‘issue’’ came to refer to the decision handed down at the end of court proceedings and then to the actual point of contention between the parties involved.By the late 18th century, people had begun to ‘‘take issue’’ with things, which meant raising an argument against them; by the 1990s, we had begun to ‘‘have issues,’’ which meant being neurotic. Issues can refer to concerns, topics of discussions, fundamental questions. (‘‘Let’s stick to the issues.’’) It can denote errors, difficulties, struggles, conflicts, complaints. (‘‘My issue with this is. . . .’’) It can indicate psychological and emotional problems, festering resentments, longstanding feuds. (‘‘That guy has issues.’’) It can refer to a problem itself (‘‘the homelessness issue’’) or to the cause that is built around it. (‘‘My main issue is homelessness.’’) A political ‘‘issue’’ can be a widely contested topic, or — more and more often — one that’s mainly of interest to a particular group, one in a collection of pet projects. To call something an issue can suggest not just that it’s a niche concern but that there’s a lack of agreement over whether it’s even a concern at all — whether it matters or exists in the way some people claim.There are many words we put in front of ‘‘issues’’: ‘‘women’s,’’ ‘‘race,’’ ‘‘L.G.B.T.Q.,’’ and so on. They tend to function, intentionally or not, as big, rippling flags, signaling to anyone outside their scope that the problem can be respectfully ignored. Let somebody else worry about it: the people whose ‘‘issue’’ this is. (Never mind who made it an issue for them in the first place; it’s theirs to solve now.) To call something a ‘‘woman’s issue,’’ for instance, is to relegate it to the presumably small and narrow subset of human concerns of interest exclusively to women. ‘‘Women’s issues’’ might be used to mean ‘‘problems women are likely to face,’’ or it might be used to mean ‘‘problems women enjoy caring about’’ — as if problems were a matter of taste, like enjoying romantic comedies.There is something incontinent about ‘‘issues.’’ They leak and seep into everything, uncalled-for and unbidden. They are inherently distasteful, messy and gross. They make it O.K. to look away, to disengage: To say that a person ‘‘has issues’’ is to say that person may not be worth bothering with at all, lest you wind up with issues, too. ‘‘Issues’’ clear the path for all the terrible things that might have been avoided had we only called them by their actual names to begin with. In ‘‘Junk English,’’ a 2001 book by Ken Smith, the author complains that the very word ‘‘issue’’ has become ‘‘a synonym for problem and an example of good intentions gone bad.’’ At first, he writes, the euphemism was used out of what felt like politeness or discretion: ‘‘Fat people had weight issues. Couples who threw cookware at each other had relationship issues.’’ But the same euphemism could also be used to deny responsibility for bad things or evade their badness entirely. ‘‘Does smoking kill people? That’s a problem — but it’s called a serious health issue. Did we miss important clues before the attacks of September 11? That’s a problem — but it’s called a significant security issue. Fear not, these issues will be addressed — unlike problems, which would actually have to be solved.’’In 1999, the writer Matthew Klam published a short story titled ‘‘Issues I Dealt With in Therapy,’’ about a wedding guest in crisis. Over a weekend at an East Coast resort, at the lavish wedding of one of his oldest, most disliked friends, he watches the advance team for Al Gore scout the location for the vice president’s expected arrival.The story deals with issues of aspiration, envy and the end of American meritocracy; it confronts the contradictions between democracy and capitalism, between liberal Western values and unchecked self-interest. The narrator veers between two polar-opposite stances: On one side, there’s envy at his friend’s heady social and professional climb, and on the other, deep disdain at the anti-egalitarian, un-self-conscious vulgarity of the wedding and its display of status. He is alternately jealous, self-righteous, self-pitying, insecure and superior. Lacking a center or a worldview, he is buffeted by his emotional reactions to external things. Of course, he’s at a wedding. He’s expected to behave himself. What’s more, he’s expected to behave as though none of it were getting to him, as if there were nothing remarkable about the excess around him or his reactions to it. He’s in hell, basically, basting in his own issues.Something like that, I think, is how we’ve reached the place where we are today. Maybe if we, unlike this helpless wedding guest, could call things by their names, we might be shocked by what that plain truth accomplishes. Maybe if we stopped being quite so cautious, we could confront reality. Maybe if we cared as much about content as form, we wouldn’t be so vulnerable — so at risk of being harmed by all the threats we’ve assiduously denied even exist. But at some point, we seem to have chosen another path. We grew afraid to state anything unequivocally, lest we be called on to equivocate later; we refused to describe what we saw. We told lies of omission and pretended that nothing very terrible could be happening around us. We turned concrete problems into airy, abstract, possibly unresolvable ‘‘issues.’’ Then we gerrymandered the issues, set them apart from our common concerns and gently massaged them into the scenery until they were drained of all urgency. We left reality — and real problems — to be defined by the most ruthless, unscrupulous players.It’s no surprise, then, that everything is at issue now. We’ve arrived at a polarized, blue-pill/red-pill place where reality has splintered into countless alternatives, each one tailored to someone’s particular tastes and beliefs. Even basic, verifiable facts are now potential points of contention — possible issues. Everything is debatable, which means everything — from other people’s beliefs to objective reality — can be dismissed as someone’s tendentious pleading for a specialized cause.And in a climate like that, we’re definitely going to have some issues.