http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/11/upshot/the-problem-with-a-euro-fix-whats-in-it-for-the-dutch.html
The Problem With a Euro Fix: What’s in It for the Dutch? - The New York Times
Greece,International Monetary Fund,Connecticut,Netherlands,Taxation,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),Euro (Currency),United States Economy,Economics (Theory and Philosophy)
July 10, 2015
7488
Economists agree: If the eurozone does not break up, it will have to move closer together. They’re right. But it’s easy to understand why Europeans are not eager to heed their advice.Basically, the proposition of European integration is that the Netherlands should end up like Connecticut. And even though Connecticut is a lovely place, the Dutch have good reason to be wary of that. It’s expensive to be Connecticut, because Connecticut has to pay for Mississippi and Alabama.Large, economically diverse areas can successfully share a single currency if they have deep economic links that make it possible for troubled regions to ride out crises. That means shared bank regulation and deposit insurance, so banks don’t face regional panics; a labor market that lets people move from places without jobs to places with them; and a fiscal union, which allows the government to collect taxes wherever there is money and spend it wherever there are needs.The United States shows that this approach can work: America’s 50 economically diverse states share a currency quite comfortably, in part because of our banking union (Washington State did not have to bail out Washington Mutual on its own when it failed), our fluid labor market (as oil prices rise and fall, workers move in and out of North Dakota) and our fiscal union (states in economic pain benefit from government programs financed by all states). Nevada does not need to devalue its currency to restore its competitiveness relative to California in a severe recession; instead, Nevadans can collect federally funded unemployment insurance and, if necessary, move to California.If the Greeks had similar options available in 2008, they would be much better off today. But the European Union’s centralized budget equals only about 1 percent of Europe’s G.D.P., compared with more than 20 percent for the American federal government. A much more centralized E.U. budget, with much more money flowing through Brussels the way it flows through Washington, could provide similar macroeconomic stability to Europe by creating a fiscal union.But the American fiscal union is very expensive for rich states. According to calculations by The Economist, Connecticut paid out 5 percent of its gross domestic product in net fiscal transfers to other states between 1990 and 2009; that is, its tax payments exceeded its receipt of government services by that amount. This is typical for rich states: They pay a disproportionate share of income and payroll taxes, while government services are disproportionately collected in states where people are poor or old or infirm.The obvious question, then, about a fiscal union is: What’s in it for the Netherlands (or Austria or Luxembourg)? Is it worth making the euro “work” if that entails devoting several percentage points of your economic output to fiscal transfers to poorer countries, indefinitely, the way Connecticut does to poorer states? Germany has its own reasons to view a large, indivisible eurozone as a source of geopolitical strength, but those benefits are less obvious for the smaller rich countries that must also go along.Austan Goolsbee, an economist at the University of Chicago, offered one reason rich European countries might sign up for a fiscal union: They like a trade advantage they get from the euro. If each European country had its own money, northern European countries’ currencies would strengthen and southern ones would weaken. That would make exports from places like the Netherlands more expensive and less competitive. Some Dutch exporters might be willing to accept fiscal transfers if that’s what it takes to keep the currency advantage.But exporters’ gain from a shared currency is consumers’ loss. The same policies that make it easy for Dutch and German companies to sell their goods abroad make it expensive for Dutch and German consumers to buy imported goods. For those consumers, keeping the euro and instituting a fiscal union would be a double whammy: They’d keep overpaying for imported goods, and they’d be paying extra taxes to finance the union.Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel Prize-winning economist at Columbia University, favors maintenance of the eurozone with closer banking and fiscal integration, including a eurozone-wide income tax to finance safety-net programs. He offers three arguments for why rich countries should be willing to sign up, even though this system would cost them more in taxes than they get back in payments.“One is, I’d say it’s ethical,” he says. “It’s solidarity, the European project.”His other two arguments appeal more to self-interest. Without further fiscal integration, geographic adjustment in the eurozone will have to lean on labor mobility. If the Greeks can’t get safety-net payments financed by Europe-wide taxes, many of them will just move to places like the Netherlands, where they might be able to live better even if their Dutch isn’t very good. Additionally, he argues that fiscal integration will promote greater economic equality, and therefore greater macroeconomic stability and fewer crises.These arguments, or arguments like them, have carried the day in the United States. You could just as easily ask “What’s in it for Connecticut?” and yet voters and officials in states like Connecticut express little desire to unwind the fiscal union; the strong sense is that we’re all Americans and we’re in this together.For better or for worse, this is not the prevailing attitude in Europe.The ethical argument for fiscal integration is undermined because Greece and Spain are actually not so poor. If countries like the Netherlands are going to give away their wealth to needier places out of ethical obligation, there are more deserving recipients outside the eurozone. Greece is not even the poorest country within the eurozone, which is why arguments that fiscal integration is ethically necessary are met with skepticism in relatively poor countries like Estonia and Slovakia; they fear fiscal transfers will flow away from them toward countries that are richer but more profligate (i.e., Greece).Then there are the arguments from self-interest. A more economically integrated Europe would be more economically stable because it could respond more effectively to crises like the one in 2008. That would certainly lead to higher economic output in places like Greece. But would it really mean better economic performance in already high-performing countries? It certainly feels counterintuitive to tell a wealthy, well-governed country like the Netherlands or Austria that its economy will become more stable if it becomes more integrated with Greece’s.Further, an economic union can promote economic stability only if it is politically stable, so market participants can have confidence that fiscal transfers and bank guarantees will remain in place. Magnanimous attitudes like the ones expressed by the people of Connecticut (or a lack of awareness about how many of their tax dollars are being spent in other states) aren’t just necessary for the adoption of a fiscal union; they’re a key to making it work over the long run.The simultaneous necessity for — and revulsion at — greater fiscal integration in Europe helps explain one aspect of the continuing Greek negotiations that, at first, looks mysterious from the outside. Before this week’s crisis, the Greeks and other European governments were not actually that far apart on the substantive terms of a continued Greek bailout; they disagreed a bit, at the margins, about how much fiscal austerity Greece must implement and how much debt restructuring it should get. Yet Northern European governments looked poised to push Greece out of the eurozone over those small disagreements, and may still do so in the future.If the only viable option for maintaining the eurozone in the long run requires deeper fiscal links; and if those deeper fiscal links will mean large, indefinite fiscal transfers away from rich countries; and if rich countries entered the eurozone in the first place only because they didn’t believe they would need to make such transfers, then is it hard to understand why those rich countries might not be eager to resolve the Greek crisis in a way that keeps Greece inside the zone?“Clearly, they’re not at the sense of solidarity that we have as a nation,” Mr. Stiglitz said. “If you are going to get stabilization policies that work, you’re going to have to get outside the mind-set of ‘why should I help my neighbor?’ ”If the response is “Why this neighbor?” your continent may simply not be cut out for a deeper fiscal union.On the other hand, it’s worth noting that Connecticut never explicitly signed up for this neighbor-funding arrangement, either. Like the eurozone, the United States wasn’t much of a fiscal union at the time of its founding. Fiscal centralization came gradually over the centuries, often in response to crises like the Great Depression.It’s possible that countries like the Netherlands and Austria could gradually stumble toward financing their neighbors as Connecticut has. But if the gradual American process has to be the model, we will all be long dead before the eurozone is fixed.