http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/world/americas/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva-brazil-corruption-trial.html
‘Lula,’ Brazil’s Ex-President, Will Be Tried on Corruption Charges - The New York Times
Brazil,Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Bribery and Kickbacks,Corruption (Institutional),Workers' Party (Brazil),Moro  Sergio (1972- ),Rousseff  Dilma,Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras
Sept. 20, 2016
6939
SÃO PAULO — The judge overseeing the investigation into the colossal scandal around Brazil’s national oil company accepted corruption charges on Tuesday against the nation’s former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, setting the stage for a trial of one of Latin America’s most influential political figures.The decision, by Judge Sérgio Moro in Curitiba, adds to the problems of Mr. da Silva, 70, who was president from 2003 to 2010. Plagued by scandals, his leftist Workers’ Party lost the presidency in August when the Senate impeached Mr. da Silva’s handpicked successor, Dilma Rousseff, in a power struggle that has consumed the political establishment.The move to put Mr. da Silva on trial comes amid a national debate over whether prosecutors are overreaching  in their efforts to ensnare him. Delton Dallagnol, a prosecutor in the case, last week called Mr. da Silva the “ultimate commander” of bribery and kickback schemes aimed at maintaining his party’s grip on the presidency, but failed to offer hard evidence of his claim.Judge Moro seemed to nod at those concerns, cautioning that his decision to put the former president on trial was not the equivalent of a “conclusive ruling.” Mr. da Silva has lashed out at Judge Moro for releasing intercepts of his private telephone conversations, arguing that the move reflected bias and efforts to prevent him from running again for the presidency.The charges against Mr. da Silva involve claims that he and his wife, who will also go on trial, illegally received about $1.1 million in improvements and expenses from a construction company for a beachfront apartment. In return, prosecutors claim that the company, O.A.S., was able to obtain lucrative contracts from Petrobras, the state-controlled oil giant.Mr. da Silva and his lawyers have consistently said that he did nothing illegal in connection to the apartment.“Prove I’m guilty and I’ll go on foot to the police station,” Mr. da Silva told reporters after prosecutors charged him. Referring to his popularity in the country, which remains relatively resilient despite his legal problems, he said, “Only Jesus Christ beats me here in Brazil.”Mr. da Silva ranks among the leading contenders as the next presidential election, in 2018, draws closer, according to opinion surveys. But if Judge Moro finds him guilty of the charges, he may not be eligible to run.Prosecutors in São Paulo filed corruption charges against Mr. da Silva in March, contending that he sought to conceal ownership of the apartment. Mr. da Silva will also stand trial in a separate case on charges of obstructing the investigation of the graft scheme around Petrobras, which involved about $3 billion in bribes.Judge Moro made his ruling the same day that Ms. Rousseff’s successor, Michel Temer, defended her impeachment in an address to the United Nations General Assembly.