https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/11/us/politics/special-elections-house-republicans.html
Special Election Fights Expose House Republicans’ Squabbles With White House - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Elections  House of Representatives,Republican Party,National Republican Congressional Committee,Trump  Donald J,Georgia,Montana,Handel  Karen C,Ossoff  Jon,Priebus  Reince R,Gianforte  Greg (1961- ),Stivers  Steven E
May 11, 2017
4530
WASHINGTON — The House Republican campaign arm is increasingly at odds with the White House over how best to retain the party’s congressional majorities and, more broadly, who is in charge of the midterm campaign effort as Republicans spend millions of dollars in special elections to retain House seats in conservative-leaning districts.President Trump’s decision to tap four House Republicans for top administration posts forced the National Republican Congressional Campaign to defend open seats amid a fierce backlash against the president from energized liberals. Two of those races, in Georgia and Montana, have been surprisingly competitive, and as Republicans scramble to hold the seats, senior Republican officials have begun sniping.The friction came into view this week after Representative Steve Stivers of Ohio, the National Republican Congressional Committee chairman, told The New York Times that he had lobbied the White House to appoint some House Democrats from Republican-leaning districts to the cabinet or ambassadorial posts, in hopes that the party could flip the seats.“They have not availed themselves of those opportunities,” Mr. Stivers said of Mr. Trump’s administration.After reading the Times article, Mr. Trump’s chief of staff, Reince Priebus, complained angrily to associates that Mr. Stivers was not treating the White House with respect and should not have publicly shared his request, according to three Republicans directly familiar with Mr. Priebus’s criticism.Officials close to Mr. Priebus also called one of the top aides to Speaker Paul D. Ryan to vent about Mr. Stivers’s statements.Mr. Priebus, who is highly sensitive about press portrayals of himself and the political stewardship of the White House, saw the anecdote as an example of congressional Republicans’ not offering Mr. Trump the deference he is owed as the head of the party.Mr. Stivers subsequently apologized via email to Mr. Priebus.Further, last month Mr. Stivers asked asked the Republican National Committee for financial assistance with the special elections. In discussions with the R.N.C. chairwoman, Ronna McDaniel, Mr. Stivers intimated that the national party should feel partly responsible for the Georgia and Montana seats because Mr. Trump created the vacancies by appointing the Georgian Tom Price as health secretary and the Montanan Ryan Zinke as interior secretary, according to Republican officials familiar with the conversations.Word of the request got back to Mr. Priebus and his associates, who bridled at the nature of Mr. Stivers’s appeal in part because they feel that the administration has been generous to House Republicans, the officials said. Mr. Trump headlined a March fund-raising dinner for the National Republican Congressional Committee that brought in $30 million. Late last month, the president was the keynote speaker at a fund-raiser in Atlanta for Karen Handel, the Republican nominee in the race to replace Mr. Price.Other Republicans, however, say that Mr. Stivers did not demand anything of the R.N.C. The R.N.C. is still expected to transfer money to the House campaign committee for the special elections.The race to replace Mr. Zinke in Montana will be decided on May 25, and both parties believe the Republican nominee there, Greg Gianforte, enjoys an advantage.The runoff between Ms. Handel and the Democrat Jon Ossoff for Mr. Price’s old seat, which will take place on June 20, is more unpredictable. Mr. Ossoff received just over 48 percent of the vote in the first balloting last month, energizing Democrats and anti-Trump Republicans. The two House campaign committees, along with a handful of outside groups, have poured money into the race, making it the most expensive in the House’s history.Tensions between the White House and the party campaign committees are hardly novel, and they often flare when a president is saddled with flagging approval ratings. But the strains are mounting quickly in this case in part because Mr. Trump, an unconventional political leader, lacks the sort of relationships with Republican officeholders that most presidents enjoy upon entering the Oval Office.Further, in this White House, there is no go-to political point person — a role that Karl Rove and David Axelrod filled in previous administrations — and no high-ranking official overseeing the president’s role in the party and campaigns. Mr. Priebus has tried to play that part, but as the top aide to an impulsive and improvisational president, he has other responsibilities that consume his time.Mr. Priebus did not respond to requests for comment.In a statement, Mr. Stivers said he had not meant to be critical of the administration and played down the back-and-forth.“The White House, the R.N.C. and the N.R.C.C. enjoy a great relationship,” he said. “They’ve been nothing but helpful to us. We both share the same goal: an expanded House Republican majority.”The conflict between the White House and the House campaign committee is not simply a matter of Washington intrigue: Should Democrats win the 24 seats they need to recapture the House, they could besiege Mr. Trump with investigations.“This White House needs the House more than the House needs the White House,” said former Representative Tom Davis of Virginia, who once led the House Republican campaign arm. “If the House changes hands, Democrats get the gavels. And if Trump thinks this is bad now, wait until Democrats can match their rhetoric with subpoenas.”The White House, Mr. Davis said, “needs to worry about winning these two specials and keeping the House.” And Mr. Stivers, he said, “has every right and duty to go to the White House and say, ‘You created these open seats; you need to help us.’”