http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/06/nyregion/a-court-rule-directs-cases-over-friskings-to-one-judge.html
A Court Rule Directs Cases Over Friskings to One Judge - The New York Times
Scheindlin  Shira A,Search and Seizure,Courts and the Judiciary,Racial Profiling,Police Department (NYC),Suits and Litigation (Civil)
May 5, 2013
1420
After an attempted police stop in 1999 led to the shooting of an unarmed Guinean immigrant named Amadou Diallo, a civil-rights group sued the New York Police Department over the stop-and-frisk practices of its elite Street Crime Unit. From one of the wooden wheels used to assign cases in Federal District Court in Manhattan, a judge’s name was drawn: Shira A. Scheindlin.More than a decade later the effects of that random assignment are still felt, as new stop-and-frisk lawsuits are routed directly to Judge Scheindlin in courtroom 15C.Indeed, long after the unit had been disbanded, Judge Scheindlin has come to exercise near exclusive jurisdiction in deciding whether the Police Department’s policies adhere to Fourth Amendment restrictions for officers conducting street stops.In January she ruled that the police were unconstitutionally stopping tenants and guests outside Bronx apartment buildings on suspicion of trespassing. She is now in the midst of hearing a broader nonjury trial over the police’s street-stop practices. Next up is a case examining stops in public housing projects.In a city with dozens of Federal District Court judges, it is striking that a single judge has so many opportunities to rule on one of the Police Department’s signature crime-fighting tactics — a development that has frustrated city officials.The police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, groused that the city faced an uphill battle before Judge Scheindlin, whom he accused of favoring the civil rights lawyers. “In my view, the judge is very much in their corner and has been all along throughout her career,” he told The Wall Street Journal last month.The reason the stop-and-frisk issues continue to land in Judge Scheindlin’s courtroom is that civil rights groups, sometimes at the judge’s suggestion, have designated the subsequent cases as “related” to similar cases harking back to the long-closed 1999 lawsuit. That designation instructs a court clerk to automatically forward the case to a specific judge.At one point, a top city lawyer tried to convince Judge Scheindlin to relinquish a new stop-and-frisk case against the city. “The Court should return this case to the wheel for random assignment,” the lawyer, Celeste L. Koeleveld, said. The judge did not.The “related-case rule,” as it is known, calls for some cases to be steered toward the same judge. The language of the court rule leaves it to the discretion of individual judges to accept the case as related or not. It instructs judges to consider whether placing the cases in the same courtroom would result in conserving judicial resources, allow more efficient litigation or serve the convenience of the various parties.The rule calls for related cases to have a “similarity of facts and legal issues” or to stem from the “same transactions or events.” But cases are not related merely because they involve identical legal issues or litigants.Asked about the possibility of judge shopping, plaintiffs’ lawyers in these cases note that the court rules require lawyers to alert judges to the possibility of a related case.“It would make no sense to have different judges handle the three stop-and-frisk cases,” one of the lawyers, Christopher T. Dunn of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said. “They involve a common police tactic, nearly identical legal issues, overlapping evidence and closely related remedies.”Mr. Dunn added, “These are precisely the types of cases to have before a single judge.”In a brief interview, Judge Scheindlin, who was nominated to the bench by President Bill Clinton, declined to discuss the related-case rule in the context of the various stop-and-frisk cases. But speaking generally, she observed that “some judges are less inclined to accept a case as related, some judges are more inclined to accept it as related.”In open court, the matter has rarely been discussed. But it did arise in late 2007. Although the 1999 lawsuit had been settled, the plaintiffs returned to court in that case to accuse the department of a surge in racially motivated street stops under the policing practices of a new mayoral administration.In court, Judge Scheindlin suggested a route other than trying to reopen the old case.“If you got proof of inappropriate racial profiling in a good constitutional case, why don’t you bring a lawsuit?” she asked. “You can certainly mark it as related.”At another point, she said, “For $350, you can bring that lawsuit,” a reference to the filing fee.About a month later, the lawyers filed Floyd v. City of New York, now at trial in her courtroom.