https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/03/sunday-review/how-the-15-minimum-wage-went-from-laughable-to-viable.html
How the $15 Minimum Wage Went From Laughable to Viable - The New York Times
Minimum Wage,Income Inequality,States (US),Presidential Election of 2016,Sanders  Bernard,Trump  Donald J,California,New York State,Organized Labor,Fast Food Industry,Labor and Jobs,United States Politics and Government,Law and Legislation,United States,Shopping and Retail
April 1, 2016
9511
BACK in November 2012, when Alterique Hall, an $8-an-hour McDonald’s cashier in New York, joined 200 fast-food workers in the first one-day strike for the Fight for $15 campaign, many scoffed at their demand for $15 an hour as pie in the sky. Frustrated with his meager pay, Mr. Hall said, “It’s time for a change.”Three and a half years later, that change is starting to arrive. Last Monday, Gov. Jerry Brown of California announced a deal with state lawmakers to raise California’s minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2022 — a move expected to lift pay for five million workers. And late Thursday Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York reached a deal with legislative leaders to adopt a $15 minimum wage in New York City in 2018 and in its suburbs in 2021, with a $12.50 minimum in upstate New York.“Once California and New York go, it is likely that more states will follow,” said Paul K. Sonn, general counsel of the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for low-wage workers.In New Jersey, Democratic lawmakers have warned Gov. Chris Christie that if he vetoes a $15 statewide minimum, they will ask voters to approve a constitutional amendment that sets a $15 floor. And in Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser has announced plans to push the City Council to embrace the idea. The Legislatures in Connecticut and Massachusetts are also weighing $15.All this momentum might seem startling at a time when the traditional union movement is on its heels, with the percentage of private-sector workers in unions sliding to 6.7 percent. Indiana, Michigan, West Virginia and Wisconsin have all enacted anti-union, right-to-work laws since 2011. At least the Supreme Court’s 4-4 decision last week saved the nation’s public-sector unions from a crushing defeat that would have hobbled their finances.“There’s still a lot of pro-labor, pro-worker sentiment,” said Michael Kazin, a historian at Georgetown University who has written about populism and popular movements. “Inequality is a big issue nowadays. The Fight for $15 has become the way that civil rights was in the early ’60s — it’s an issue you can’t avoid. For politicians — or at least Democratic politicians — you want to be on the right side.”Fifty-nine percent of Americans, including 84 percent of Democrats and 58 percent of independents, support a $15 minimum wage, according to a survey by the Public Religion Research Institute, a nonpartisan research group. Just 32 percent of Republicans do.The movement for a $15 floor has been partly fueled by the same frustration over wage stagnation and income inequality that has spurred the campaigns of Donald J. Trump and Bernie Sanders. More than 50 million workers earn less than $15 an hour, and many Americans are upset about the loss of millions of factory jobs and the explosion of low-paying service-sector jobs. Mr. Sanders has championed a $15 minimum, but Mr. Trump has attacked the idea, at one point saying that wages are too high. Hillary Clinton has called for a $12 minimum, leaving states and cities to go to $15 if they like.The issue has motivated thousands of protesters to join the Fight for $15’s periodic strikes: What started in one city ultimately swelled to protests in 150 American cities. By many measures, it has become the biggest labor protest in decades, with a wide spectrum of supporters, from college students and inner-city workers to janitors and nursing-home aides. The movement helped to get voters in the Seattle suburb of SeaTac to approve a $15 minimum wage, and not long after in Seattle itself and San Francisco, followed by Los Angeles and Pasadena.“These victories made people believe this wasn’t some crazy demand,” said Mary Kay Henry, president of the Service Employees International Union, which has spent millions of dollars underwriting the Fight for $15. “These incremental victories began to add up, and $15 moved from a demand to a standard. Now the fight is, how fast can you get it.” She added that private employers, including Nationwide Insurance, Facebook and U.P.M.C., Pittsburgh’s largest hospital chain, have increasingly embraced a $15 minimum.In California, two union groups were pushing for referendums to create a $15 minimum by 2021. Worried about a divisive, expensive fight, Mr. Brown embraced compromise: phase in $15 by 2022, giving businesses time to adjust. Employers with fewer than 26 workers would be granted a one-year delay, and the governor could suspend increases if California’s economy stumbled.Business groups and some economists warn that a $15 minimum will foster such stumbles. “Fifteen is going to be extremely difficult for retailers to work into their business model,” said Bill Dombrowski, president of the California Retailers Association. He said Internet competitors were already hurting many retailers, and “now you have the Legislature putting an additional burden on brick-and-mortar stores.”David Neumark, an economics professor at the University of California, Irvine, estimated that raising the state’s minimum to $15 would reduce employment among the least skilled by 5 percent to 10 percent. Critics of minimum-wage increases predict that workers will be replaced by automation and that businesses will need to raise prices, hurting sales and causing more layoffs. “There’s no question that a minimum-wage increase will help more people than it hurts,” he said. “But it takes a lot of people getting a $300 raise to offset someone losing their job.”But Michael Reich, an economics professor at the University of California, Berkeley, said an increase to $15 would have little effect on jobs. He acknowledged that it could lead to more automation and higher prices and less sales volume at some businesses, but, he said, those effects “would be more than offset by increases in consumer purchasing power. That all results in a very small effect on the economy.”Holly Dias, a $10-an-hour Burger King cashier in Sacramento, hailed the plan for a $15 minimum. “There are days where I have to choose between buying formula or diapers, paying rent or buying monthly bus passes — these are choices mothers shouldn’t have to make,” said Ms. Dias, who receives food stamps and Medicaid to help her and her 5-month-old son. “Maybe this will mean I won’t have to be on public assistance.”