https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/nyregion/when-soft-serve-isnt-enough-add-cotton-candy.html
When Soft Serve Isn’t Enough, Add Cotton Candy - The New York Times
Ruimilk Soft Icecream (Queens  NY),Ice Cream and Frozen Desserts,Cotton Candy,Frozen Yogurt,Social Media,Flushing (Queens  NY)
June 20, 2017
7693
Marie Sullivan and Burton Eggertsen were walking off a dim sum lunch when they stopped to study the colorful menu in the window of Ruimilk Soft Icecream — a shop in Flushing, Queens, that combines soft-serve ice cream with cotton candy art.Curiosity satisfied, and with no room for dessert, the two kept walking. But 30 seconds later, they were back. Mr. Eggertsen looked at Ms. Sullivan.“Just for the Instagram,” he said, fatalism in his voice, and in they walked.Ms. Sullivan, 32, ordered the Miss Kitty — a cup of soft serve enshrouded in a white cotton candy cloud with edible ears, eyes, whiskers and pink bow.“I don’t even need the ice cream,” she said. “I literally said, ‘I have to get that Hello Kitty, for the Instagram likes.’”Ms. Sullivan, who lives in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and works as a prop stylist, did, in fact, post a photo of the dessert on her Instagram account. It garnered 67 likes in two days.At 136-49 Roosevelt Avenue, sandwiched between a video-game store and a bubble tea counter, Ruimilk appears no more than six feet wide. Most customers linger for only a moment by the three small tables, which serve as set furniture for customers as they photograph their confections.Proud parents photograph their children holding the desserts as if they were trophies or straight-A report cards. On a recent Saturday, two little girls in full-skirted dresses showed the camera all of their teeth. The same afternoon, a toddler with a bowl cut sat smiling as she waited to devour the Hello Kitty clone on the table in front of her. Once the photo was taken, the child took a bite out of Hello Kitty’s head.Christine Huang, an accountant who lives in Queens, arrived with some young family members after finding out about Ruimilk on Facebook. Her children, Tatiana Xu, 12, and Travis Xu, 13, sat on cushy black stools. Tatiana posed with the Yellow Chick — a yellow cloud of cotton candy with black M&M eyes — while Travis posed with the Panda Rui before eating it headfirst.Ms. Huang’s nephew, Ayden Huang, 7, his feet in yellow Crocs, stood nearby holding the Rainbow — a cup of soft serve topped with tricolor cotton candy in the shape of an inverted tornado.The engineer behind Ruimilk is Nian Geng Lin, 27, of Fuzhou, China. Inspired by a South Korean trend he noticed — there, street vendors treat cotton-candy-spinning as an art form — Mr. Lin opened the shop about a year ago. His goal was, and still is, to bring “happy smiles” to customers’ faces, he said in Chinese through a translator. He added that he chose to open his business in Flushing because of the area’s ethnic diversity.The shop sells juices and smoothies made from natural ingredients, but the presentation of the drinks looks much more synthetic: The Galaxy beverage series features swirling colors illuminated by a flashing light planted inside the cup. Each drink is named for a city famous for its impressive skyline: the New York, the Seoul, the Tokyo, the Hong Kong, the Los Angeles.Other cotton-candy-and-soft-serve options include the Baymax, a white creature that resembles the Abominable Snowman, and the Air Balloon, a hot-air balloon fashioned with the help of Pocky biscuit sticks.A walk down Roosevelt Avenue with the Tutu Hoop — a classic cone made less classic with the addition of a pink cotton candy tutu, a sprinkling of popping candy and a drizzle of fruity red syrup — will earn some warranted stares.