https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/20/world/asia/hong-kong-legco-china-swearing-in.html
Hong Kong Legislators Stop Pro-Independence Lawmakers From Taking Oath - The New York Times
Hong Kong,China,Legislatures and Parliaments,Youngspiration (Hong Kong Political Party),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Leung  Sixtus,Yau Wai-ching (1991- ),Lau Siu-lai (1976- ),Lau Siu-lai
Oct. 19, 2016
6627
HONG KONG — Dozens of Hong Kong politicians loyal to the Chinese government prevented three newly elected lawmakers who support greater autonomy from Beijing from being sworn in to the local legislature on Wednesday.Hours earlier, the Hong Kong government, in a rare legal challenge, had tried to block two of the new representatives, who demand outright independence from the Chinese mainland, from taking their seats on the Legislative Council.Those lawmakers, Sixtus Leung and Yau Wai-ching, had been scheduled to be sworn in on Wednesday morning after the oaths they took last week were declared invalid. Both had declared allegiance to a “Hong Kong nation” and then replaced the word China with “Shina,” considered derogatory by some.The next day, the Hong Kong government denounced, without specifying names, members who “spoke or acted in an offensive manner that harmed the feelings of our compatriots.” On Tuesday, it sought, but failed, to obtain an injunction barring Mr. Leung, known as Baggio, and Ms. Yau from taking the oath again on Wednesday. The third lawmaker, Lau Siu-lai, who supports greater autonomy, had also had her oath declared invalid but was not named in the government’s request for an injunction.Shortly before Mr. Leung, Ms. Yau and Ms. Lau were to be sworn in again on Wednesday, dozens of pro-establishment politicians walked out of the legislature, ending the meeting for lack of a quorum. They demanded an apology from Mr. Leung and Ms. Yau, who attributed the discrepancies in their oaths to their accents.“Their excuse wouldn’t even fool a 3-year-old,” said Martin Liao, a legislator and a Hong Kong delegate to the National People’s Congress, China’s legislature. “We have made a request in an open letter to the two legislators to apologize to Chinese people all over the world, but so far we have not received a positive response.”The move prompted cheers from dozens of protesters outside the Legislative Council, who were waving Chinese flags and calling Ms. Yau, 25, and Mr. Leung, 30, “Chinese traitors,” and provoked an outcry from pro-democracy legislators.“They’re preventing legislators from exercising their constitutional rights and conspiring with the government to weaken Hong Kong’s separation of powers,” said James To of the Democratic Party.Speaking to reporters on Wednesday evening, Mr. Leung denounced both the request for an injunction and the lawmakers’ walkout. “The government’s use of the judicial process to override the decision of a legislature set a bad precedent, and what the Beijing loyalists did was colluding with it,” he said.Ms. Yau and Mr. Leung are the first open advocates for the former British colony’s independence to be elected to the legislature. Their party, Youngspiration, was formed after the Chinese government refused in 2014 to grant Hong Kong greater public participation in the election of its leader and prompted street protests, known as the Umbrella Movement, that lasted two and a half months.The High Court declined the government’s request for an injunction but has agreed to consider an application for a judicial review that could unseat Ms. Yau and Mr. Leung even if they are sworn in this month. That hearing is set for Nov. 3.