https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/us/politics/comey-trump-fbi-live.html
Updates and Reactions to F.B.I. Director Comey’s Firing - The New York Times
Comey  James B,Trump  Donald J,Appointments and Executive Changes,United States Politics and Government
May 9, 2017
4541
■ President Trump has fired James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, the White House spokesman Sean Spicer said on Tuesday.■ Mr. Comey was delivering a speech in Los Angeles when he learned he had been fired.■ His dismissal drew a quick rebuke from Democrats and concern from several Republican lawmakers.■ Several lawmakers called for a special counsel to take over the investigation into Russian meddling in the election.Mr. Comey was addressing a group of F.B.I. employees in Los Angeles when a television in the background flashed the news that he had been fired.In response, Mr. Comey laughed, saying he thought it was a fairly funny prank.Then his staff started scurrying around in the background and told Mr. Comey that he should step into a nearby office.Mr. Comey stopped addressing the group. He proceeded to shake hands with the employees he had been speaking to. Then he stepped into a side office, where he confirmed that he had been fired. At that point, he had not heard from the White House.Shortly thereafter, a letter from Mr. Trump was delivered to the F.B.I.’s headquarters, just seven blocks from the White House.Mr. Comey’s day had begun in Florida, where he spoke to a group of police officers. He then flew to Los Angeles, where he was also scheduled to speak at a diversity meeting.— Michael S. SchmidtMr. Comey’s firing immediately fueled calls for an independent investigator or commission to look into Russia’s efforts to disrupt the election and any connections between Mr. Trump’s associates and the Russian government.Calls to appoint an independent prosecutor have simmered for months, but until now, they had been voiced almost entirely by Democrats.Mr. Comey’s firing upended the politics of the investigation, and even Republicans were joining the call for independent inquiries. Read more »In a sign of the F.B.I.’s intense interest in Mr. Trump’s advisers, a grand jury in Virginia recently issued subpoenas for records related to the former White House national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, according to an official familiar with the case.Mr. Flynn is being investigated for his financial ties to Russia and Turkey.Grand jury subpoenas are a routine part of federal investigations and are not a sign that charges are imminent. And it was not clear whether the subpoenas, first reported by CNN, were related to Mr. Comey’s firing.— Matt ApuzzoIn an instance of bizarre timing and optics, the White House announced late Tuesday night that Mr. Trump will meet in the Oval Office with Sergey V. Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, on Wednesday morning.At 7:57 p.m., F.B.I. employees received an email from Attorney General Jeff Sessions officially announcing their new boss. “The president of the United States has exercised his lawful authority to remove James B. Comey Jr. as the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,” the email read.“By operation of law and effective immediately, deputy director Andrew McCabe assumed the position of acting director of the F.B.I. As you well know, the F.B.I. is an exceptional law enforcement and intelligence agency. It is made so by you, the devoted men and women who work tirelessly to keep our country safe. Thank you for your steadfast dedication and commitment during this time of transition.”— Rebecca R. RuizSenator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, said Mr. Trump had called him earlier on Tuesday to inform him of the firing.“I simply said to him, ‘Mr. President, in all due respect, you’re making a very big mistake,’” Mr. Schumer recalled at a hastily arranged news conference Tuesday evening. “And he didn’t really answer.”Mr. Schumer said the first question the administration must answer was, “Why now?”“This investigation must be run as far away as possible from this White House and as far away as possible from anyone President Trump has appointed,” he said of the inquiry into ties between Mr. Trump’s associates and Russia.He called for a special prosecutor to investigate those ties and said that firing Mr. Comey continued a “deeply troubling pattern” from the administration, citing the removals of Sally Q. Yates as acting attorney general and Preet Bharara as United States attorney in Manhattan.— Matt FlegenheimerMr. Trump took to Twitter late Tuesday to respond to Mr. Schumer’s criticism, citing a comment Mr. Schumer made in early November, shortly after the F.B.I. briefly reopened its inquiry into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server.Senior White House and Justice Department officials had been working on building a case against Mr. Comey since at least last week, according to administration officials. Mr. Sessions had been charged with coming up with reasons to fire him, the officials said.— Michael S. SchmidtSenator Bob Casey, a Democrat who is up for re-election next year in Pennsylvania, a state Mr. Trump won, said, “This is Nixonian.”He called for the deputy attorney general, Rod Rosenstein, to “immediately appoint a special counsel to continue the Trump/Russia investigation.”Mr. Casey drew a direct link between Mr. Comey’s dismissal and the F.B.I.’s investigation into Russian involvement in the election.“On March 20, Director Comey said, ‘I have been authorized by the Department of Justice to confirm that the F.B.I., as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating the Russian government’s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election, and that includes investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government, and whether there was any coordination between the campaign and Russia’s efforts,’” Mr. Casey said.“This investigation must be independent and thorough in order to uphold our nation’s system of justice.”— Matt FlegenheimerThe Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum used Twitter to issue a not-so-subtle rebuke to the idea that Mr. Comey’s firing was “Nixonian.” Despite Nixon’s firing of the Watergate special prosecutor in October 1973 and the resignations of the attorney general and deputy attorney general in the “Saturday Night Massacre,” he never fired the F.B.I. director, the library said:Some of the reaction to the firing broke down along party lines. Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said Mr. Comey’s handling of the Clinton email investigation was:— Matt FlegenheimerSenator Richard M. Burr, a North Carolina Republican and chairman of the Intelligence Committee, which is investigating Russia’s role in the election, was among the few Republicans to openly criticize Mr. Comey’s firing. His voice is important because his committee’s inquiry has been the party’s principal justification for resisting calls for a special prosecutor.And Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona expressed concern about the timing.Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois raised concerns about the firing and how it would affect the investigation into Russian election meddling.“Any attempt to stop or undermine this F.B.I. investigation would raise grave constitutional issues,” he said. “We await clarification by the White House as soon as possible as to whether this investigation will continue and whether it will have a credible lead so that we know that it’ll have a just outcome.”— Matt Flegenheimer“I don’t think it will have an impact, certainly not on the Intelligence Committee’s work,” said Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a Republican on the committee. Asked whether Mr. Comey’s firing would fuel calls for a special prosecutor, Mr. Rubio demurred, saying, “That’s somebody else’s decision to make.”— Emmarie HuettemanIn an interview on Fox News, Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine and a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, noted that Mr. Trump did not “fire the entire F.B.I.”“He fired the director of the F.B.I.,” she said. “And any suggestion that this is somehow going to stop the F.B.I.’s investigation of the attempts by the Russians to influence the elections last fall is really patently absurd.”— Thomas KaplanFacing a maelstrom of criticism, the White House took its case to President Trump’s favorite arena: prime-time television.Kellyanne Conway, whose recent absence from the airwaves was mocked on last weekend’s “Saturday Night Live,” jousted with Anderson Cooper of CNN in an extended and sometimes awkward interview, at one point saying repeatedly, “It’s not a cover-up.”On Fox News, the deputy White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, was asked by Tucker Carlson why the White House had not waited to announce Mr. Comey’s firing until Mr. Comey himself had been notified. “Why sit on it?” Ms. Sanders replied.Cable news coverage was dominated by helicopter footage of Mr. Comey’s motorcade on a freeway in Los Angeles, where he was headed to the airport. The footage — standard in Los Angeles-area local news — offered a strange echo of the memorable low-speed chase involving O. J. Simpson in 1994.— Michael M. GrynbaumReporters at the White House were taken by surprise when Mr. Spicer, the press secretary, poked his head into the briefing room and, after a bit of prodding, read a one-sentence statement about the firing.The news quickly spread to other reporters in the building, who had begun preparing for the end of the day. A few minutes earlier, the White House press office had declared “a lid,” indicating that the president would not be traveling or appearing for the rest of the day.Within minutes, dozens of reporters had descended on the small office where the press assistants for the White House sit. The assistants indicated that Mr. Spicer might come out to talk to reporters later in the evening.— Michael D. ShearIn the final days of the presidential campaign, while Democrats were criticizing Mr. Comey for publicly reopening the Clinton investigation, Mr. Trump had his back. He said that what Mr. Comey had done “took guts.” Those actions are now at the heart of Mr. Comey’s firing.In an Oct. 28 interview with Lou Dobbs, Mr. Sessions, then a senator from Alabama, said he supported Mr. Comey’s decision to send a letter to Congress just days before the election about newly discovered emails related to the Clinton investigation.Mr. Sessions said Mr. Comey “had an absolute duty, in my opinion, 11 days or not, to come forward with the new information that he has and let the American people know that, too. So she is under criminal investigation.”— Matt Apuzzo and Adam Goldman■ The firing raised the specter of political interference by a sitting president in an existing investigation by the nation’s leading law enforcement agency, and it immediately ignited Democratic calls for an independent prosecutor to lead the Russia inquiry.■ Mr. Trump’s decision drew instant comparisons to President Richard M. Nixon’s firing of the special prosecutor looking into the Watergate burglary that would eventually bring him down.■ Read Mr. Trump’s letter to Mr. Comey, and the memos from top Justice Department officials recommending his dismissal.■ Mr. Comey’s ouster was the culmination of a slowly unfolding and toxic dynamic between him and the president.■ A memo recommending the dismissal, written by Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, focused on the continuing fallout from Mr. Comey’s handling of an F.B.I. inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server as secretary of state.■ Investigations into the Clinton campaign’s emails and possible Trump campaign ties to Russia dominated much of Mr. Comey’s time at the F.B.I.■ In the F.B.I.’s 109-year history, only one director had been fired — until Tuesday. In July 1993, President Bill Clinton fired William S. Sessions, who had been nominated to the post by President Ronald Reagan in 1987.■ Shortly before Mr. Comey was fired, the F.B.I. sent a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee clarifying testimony he had delivered last week about how classified information ended up on the laptop of the disgraced former congressman Anthony D. Weiner.■ Finally, read our investigation, published in April, of Mr. Comey’s involvement in the two investigations tied to last year’s election.