http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/11/politics/11specter.html
Bork Hearings Resurface as Impediment to Specter - The New York Times
CONGRESS,SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE,SENATE,SUPREME COURT,REPUBLICAN PARTY,BORK  ROBERT H,SPECTER  ARLEN,JUDGES,APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES,COURTS,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,FILIBUSTERS AND DEBATE CURBS
Nov. 11, 2004
5107
Correction AppendedWASHINGTON, Nov. 10 - Many liberal women have never forgiven Senator Arlen Specter for his pointed questioning of Prof. Anita F. Hill, whose accusations of sexual harassment against Judge Clarence Thomas, then a Supreme Court nominee, riveted the nation. But conservatives have never forgiven him for crossing party lines to defeat another Supreme Court nominee, Judge Robert H. Bork.Now, 17 years later, those conservatives are about to exact their revenge. Emboldened by their role in re-electing President Bush, conservatives are making Mr. Specter -- whose brusque independence has earned him the nickname Snarlin' Arlen on Capitol Hill -- a test case of their political power. As they try to keep Mr. Specter, a centrist Pennsylvania Republican who supports abortion rights, from heading the Senate Judiciary Committee, they are demanding a steep concession: support for changing a century-old Senate rule that permits judicial nominations to be blocked by filibuster."I would be shocked if conservatives don't extract a pound of flesh from Senator Specter," said Richard A. Viguerie, the Republican consultant, who is circulating strategy memos on the issue. He added, "Republicans have long memories. We'll never forget what he did to Judge Bork."Mr. Specter, a former prosecutor whose sharp legal mind brings him respect, if not affection, from colleagues, is choosing his words carefully. In an interview, he promised to consider all judicial nominees within 30 days. But he did not commit to a rule change, saying only that filibusters were "an unwise practice."Asked if he fears the chairmanship is slipping from his grasp, the senator replied with characteristic dryness. "Fear," Mr. Specter said, "is not in my lexicon. I'm concerned that it may be."Conservatives say he ought to be. On Wednesday, James C. Dobson, the founder of Focus on the Family, used his nationwide radio show, which reaches seven million listeners, to deliver an anti-Specter message. In it, Tom Minnery, an official of Focus on the Family, deemed Mr. Specter "an unacceptable candidate."The White House, offering only lukewarm support, says the matter is best left up to the Senate, where the Judiciary Committee will hold great sway over Mr. Specter's fate. One influential conservative Republican on the panel, Senator John Cornyn of Texas, said Wednesday that Mr. Specter had asked for a committee meeting. "I do think it's going to require some clarification and some common understanding of his position before we can lay this matter to rest," Mr. Cornyn said.But other committee Republicans are mostly mum. They include Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who was nominated for a federal judgeship in 1985 -- only to find himself opposed by Mr. Specter.After 24 years in the Senate, and a lifetime of artfully straddling the divide between left and right, Mr. Specter, a one-time Democrat who switched parties nearly 40 years ago, is adept at working his way out of tight spots.During President Bill Clinton's impeachment trial, he invoked Scottish law so that he could vote "not proven" -- thus avoiding a pronouncement of guilt or innocence. His harsh treatment of Professor Hill in 1991 helped make 1992 the so-called Year of the Woman in politics, and it nearly cost him his Senate seat."He's a survivor," said Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, a close Senate friend. "He knows how to fight."Most recently, Mr. Specter survived a primary challenge from Representative Patrick J. Toomey, but only after Mr. Bush came to his rescue. Judgeships were an issue. So conservatives were irked when, at his post-victory news conference, Mr. Specter said the Senate would be unlikely to approve "judges who would change the right of a woman to choose."Mr. Viguerie said the remark was evidence that Mr. Specter's independent streak simply went too far. "There's an old saying that an honest politician that, once having been bought, stays bought," he said. "And Specter, no matter what you do for him, it's like he never talked to you, like he never had any kind of arrangement, nothing."Even Judge Bork, who backed Mr. Toomey in the primary, has weighed in. "I think he is generally a bit shifty," he said of Mr. Specter.But what some view as shifty, others view as having backbone.Tom Korologos, a former Washington lobbyist who shepherded Judge Bork through the nomination process and is now ambassador to Belgium, said, "If you wanted somebody that was as tenacious as anybody could be, probably one of the smartest guys in the Senate, you always went to Specter."Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat and member of the Judiciary Committee, said Mr. Specter "makes it respectable for every moderate to vote for whomever the judge is he's supporting."The son of Jewish immigrants who wound up in Russell, Kan. (also the hometown of former Senator Bob Dole), Mr. Specter has known hard times. When he was 5, he and his father, a peddler, sold cantaloupes door-to-door in Wichita. In Russell during World War II, his father opened a junkyard. The family later moved to Philadelphia.His parents were Democrats, and so was he, until he tried to run for Philadelphia district attorney in 1965. The local Democratic chairman, he said, told him they didn't want "a young Tom Dewey as D.A." -- a reference to Mr. Dewey's career as a racket-buster. So Mr. Specter ran on the Republican ticket as a Democrat. He switched his registration after he won.His career has run the gamut, from assistant counsel to the commission that investigated the death of President John F. Kennedy (Mr. Specter takes credit as the author of the single-bullet theory) to a brief bid for the presidency in 1995. ("I withdrew because I ran out of money," he explained.) In the Senate, Mr. Specter has been an ardent advocate of biomedical research, including embryonic stem cell studies.But his heart, he said, is in the Judiciary Committee."I am essentially a lawyer," Mr. Specter said. "I have been a student of the Constitution since I was in college, even before law school, going back to high school debating days."Some have theorized that Mr. Specter wants the chairmanship so that the Thomas confirmation will not stand as his judicial legacy. But he insists that is not the case. "I've gone back and looked at every frame of the videos of Professor Hill," Mr. Specter said, "and I did not ask her one unprofessional question."Others wonder why Mr. Specter remains a Republican. His predicament exposes the growing fissures within the party, particularly within the Senate. There, Mr. Specter is one of five moderates -- the others are Olympia J. Snowe, Susan Collins, Lincoln Chaffee and John McCain -- whose influence could shrink now that the Republican majority has increased to 55. "My voice and the voice of McCain and Snowe and Collins are very important in the Republican caucus," Mr. Specter said.Yet at a moment when he hoped to bask in the triumphal glow of his election to a fifth term, Mr. Specter is now scrambling to portray himself as more of a team player. He is also counting on Republicans to follow their own rules; chairmanships are supposed to be awarded on the basis of seniority, and after Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, who is Finance Committee chairman and does not want the judiciary job, Mr. Specter is the most senior member.The current chairman, Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, is stepping down as a result of term limits. The panel must now pick a successor, to be approved by the full caucus.A formal vote is expected in January, when the Senate reorganizes, but lawmakers could decide as early as next week.Conservatives are digging into Mr. Specter's past. The Christian Defense Coalition, an advocacy group in Washington, is circulating a 1995 letter, written during Mr. Specter's brief bid for the presidency, in which he referred to religious conservatives as "radical extremists." The group is also planning a protest on Tuesday.Mr. Specter, ever the lawyer, is working hard to defend himself. In an opinion article published Wednesday in The Wall Street Journal, he noted, yet again, that he had supported every one of Mr. Bush's judicial nominees. He cited his "17 floor statements to protest Democratic filibusters."In interviews, the senator is acting conciliatory, a trait that some say is not in his nature. "I think it's very important not to be presumptuous," he said, when asked if he was confident. Yet he bristled when asked if there was anything in his long Senate career he would do differently."I've voted 9,000 times," he said, sounding a bit exasperated. "There are some votes I would do over, but I'm not going to get involved in identifying them."Then, the senator's voice softened, and he took a more diplomatic tack: "I try to be thoughtful. I work hard. I exercise my best judgment and then I move on. I don't look over my shoulder with regrets."Correction:  November 20, 2004, Saturday  An article and a picture caption on Nov. 11 about efforts by conservative Republicans to prevent Senator Arlen Specter from becoming chairman of the Judiciary Committee referred incompletely to his vote on the impeachment of President Bill Clinton, a move that some called typical of his ability to work his way out of tight spots. While he indeed invoked Scottish law so he could vote "not proven," he also added, "Therefore not guilty." (His vote was recorded in The Congressional Record as "not guilty.")