http://www.nytimes.com/2000/03/18/us/gun-makers-see-betrayal-in-decision-by-smith-wesson.html
Gun Makers See Betrayal in Decision by Smith & Wesson - The New York Times
VIOLENCE POLICY CENTER,SMITH & WESSON CORP,RAND  KRISTEN,PUBLIC OPINION,SUITS AND LITIGATION,GUN CONTROL,FIREARMS,LIABILITY FOR PRODUCTS
March 18, 2000
7976
Smith & Wesson's decision to adopt gun safety measures in order to settle lawsuits brought by state and federal agencies has set off criticism within the gun industry and a debate among handgun control advocates.To many other gun manufacturers, the decision by the nation's largest gun maker was seen as a betrayal that would only alienate customers and could make Smith & Wesson an industry outcast.Gun control advocates were mixed in their views. Some said the agreement, which ends litigation against the company brought by the federal government and 15 cities, was an important first step toward ending gun violence. Others said the agreement was filled with loopholes that Smith & Wesson, a subsidiary of Tomkins P.L.C. of London, could easily exploit.Jeff Reh, general counsel at Beretta U.S.A. Corporation, said: ''I think that a fair number of Smith & Wesson customers will no longer want to purchase their products because of this agreement, and they will lose market share. A lot of gun owners will see this agreement as a betrayal of their Second Amendment rights and a capitulation to the Clinton administration gun control agenda.''Beretta U.S.A., like most American gun makers, is owned by a foreign company. Beretta is a unit of Fabbrica D'Armi Pietro Beretta in Riviera, Italy.Many in the industry, as well as some of the cities that brought suit against Smith & Wesson and that were not part of the agreement, were taken by surprise.Lawsuits have been brought against a number of gun manufacturers by 28 cities and counties to hold them responsible for the damage done by their products and to improve gun safety. Discussions between the two sides to resolve the lawsuits have been under way since late last year.Among those sharply critical of the settlement was the National Shooting Sports Foundation, the gun industry trade group. In a statement, the foundation said: ''The decision by foreign-owned handgun manufacturer Smith & Wesson to forge an agreement with the most anti-gun administration in our nation's history has violated a trust with their customers and with the entire firearms industry.''The foundation said Smith & Wesson had taken ''initiatives that have been discussed in confidential industry talks and run off and cut their own deal.''Robert T. Delfay, chief executive of the foundation, said he believed that no other gun manufacturer would follow Smith & Wesson's lead.''Smart gun companies have said that making a deal with a half dozen cities won't save my hide one bit,'' Mr. Delfay said. ''And it could even exacerbate the situation. So that is why I don't believe you will see other companies signing on or striking other independent deals.''He added that even if gun makers like Smith & Wesson settled some lawsuits, ''hundreds more could come down the road.''''That's why the industry is interested in a unified national solution,'' he said, ''not a piecemeal solution, like this is.''Gun control advocates had mixed views on the agreement's impact. Stephen P. Teret, director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Gun Policy and Research, said that ''for the first time the gun industry has admitted it has the capacity to do much better in the design and distribution of guns.''But Mr. Teret said it was unclear whether other manufacturers would follow. ''Some manufacturers will be scrambling to get in on the deal,'' he said. ''Others, because of the macho culture of the industry, will try to tough it out and they will suffer severe punishment.''Kristen Rand, director of federal policy at the Violence Policy Center, a gun control advocacy group, predicted that Smith & Wesson would suffer for this agreement.''There will be a firestorm in the industry in which every other manufacturer will treat Smith & Wesson as a pariah,'' Ms. Rand said. ''In the gun culture, Clinton equals Satan and they will see that Smith has just made a deal with Satan.''Other gun control advocates were less harsh. Garen Wintemute, director of the Violence Prevention Center at the University of California at Davis, said the agreement had important provisions. Among them are provisions that prevent Smith & Wesson from releasing guns for sale before background checks on potential buyers are completed, requirements for additional training for Smith & Wesson employees and new records to be made available to law-enforcement agencies.''This falls short of what needs to be done to adequately regulate the industry,'' Mr. Wintemute said, ''but it's a good first step.''