https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/25/us/baltimore-mayor-demands-answers-in-death-of-freddie-gray.html
Baltimore Police Admit Delay in Calling Ambulance for Freddie Gray - The New York Times
Baltimore (Md),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Rawlings-Blake  Stephanie C
April 24, 2015
4620
BALTIMORE —  The police commissioner in Baltimore said Friday that Freddie Gray, the unarmed black man who died Sunday after suffering a spinal cord injury while in police custody, should have received medical attention much sooner than he did.The commissioner, Anthony W. Batts, said during a news conference that officers should have called for an ambulance when Mr. Gray, 25, was first arrested, not about 50 minutes later when he was at the police station.“We know that police employees failed to get him medical attention in a timely manner,” Mr. Batts said.Mr. Batts also acknowledged that the officers had violated department procedure by not putting a seatbelt on Mr. Gray while he was being transported.“We know he was not buckled in the transportation wagon as he should have been,” Mr. Batts said. “No excuses for that. Period.”Mr. Gray was arrested on April 12 after being chased and tackled by officers. In cellphone videos taken by witnesses, he can be heard asking for assistance while on the ground and screaming while being dragged to the van. Six officers have been suspended in the case.“Over the course of the last 12 days, we have undertaken a massive investigation,” deploying a team of at least 30, Mr. Batts said.The official in charge of the investigation, Deputy Commissioner Kevin Davis, said investigators were working to piece together all of the events on the day of the arrest, including what happened in the van while Mr. Gray was being taken to the police station.Gaps remain in the timeline involving three stops made by the van, Mr. Davis said, in particular the last one, when Mr. Gray had to be picked up off the floor of the van and put in a seat.At the first two stops, Mr. Gray appeared to be able to move and talk, Mr. Batts said, but at the third, he could do neither. But it still remains unclear, Mr. Batts said, exactly when Mr. Gray was injured.Investigators expected to submit their preliminary findings to the state’s attorney of Baltimore next Friday.At an earlier news conference on Friday, Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake and other leaders urged the community to have patience and to allow the investigation to be completed.“In order to have justice and not just seek justice, the investigation needs to follow procedures,” Ms. Rawlings-Blake said. “We have to be able to follow up on leads, and they have to be as thorough as possible.”After a week of protests in Baltimore, a large rally is expected Saturday outside City Hall, and Baltimore officials urged protesters to remain peaceful.“We know that people are coming in from outside of Baltimore,” Ms. Rawlings-Blake said. “If you’re going to come here, come here to help us, not to hurt us.”The president of the Baltimore branch of the N.A.A.C.P., Tessa Hill-Aston, cautioned outsiders further. “We do not need people coming in bullying our community,” she said.