http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/01/us/severe-flooding-in-south-and-midwest-as-storm-system-tapers-off.html
Rescuers Turn to Boat as Storm Rocks Florida - The New York Times
Rescues,Boats and Boating,Floods,Florida,Tornadoes,Deaths (Fatalities),Southern States (US),Midwestern States (US),Weather
April 30, 2014
4222
PENSACOLA, Fla. —  His city stunned and saturated by floodwaters, Craig Hindsman, a pastor at the Marcus Pointe Baptist Church here, suddenly became an amateur rescuer on Wednesday.With an office at the church as a makeshift command center, Mr. Hindsman and two other pastors set out in a pair of trucks to escort people to safety. But the waters kept rising, the latest salvo of severe weather throughout the South and Midwest that killed at least 38 people across eight states this week.“We got about four blocks away from the church, and the water was way too deep, above our chests,” Mr. Hindsman recounted on Wednesday. They turned back and got a boat, ultimately rescuing at least 14 families in an operation that included pulling residents from balconies and rooftops, even among homes where electricity was flowing.“I was mainly worried about touching a live wire and getting electrocuted,” said Mr. Hindsman, whose team rescued a mother and her two children, as well as a 90-year-old woman. “But when times get tough, you help your neighbor.”The overwhelming rains that propelled the church leaders into action struck the Florida Panhandle and parts of Alabama on Tuesday night and into Wednesday, with some areas recording nearly two feet of precipitation. The deluge surprised the authorities, who, with many roads impassable and floodwaters rising, were also forced to stage rescues.“We would send a team out on a mission for one person, and they would come back with 10 people,” said Mitchell Sims, the emergency management director in Baldwin County, Ala., where the first rescues began around 10 p.m. Tuesday and continued until midmorning on Wednesday.Florida officials said they rescued hundreds of people in the state, where one woman died after her vehicle became submerged in water in Escambia County.The dousing assault came after days of severe weather elsewhere in the South. Violent tornadoes leveled small towns, including Louisville, Miss., where the National Weather Service said a storm packing winds of up to 185 miles per hour left stretches of the city decimated.Along with Florida, officials in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Iowa, Mississippi, Oklahoma and Tennessee have reported fatalities from the week’s storms.Although forecasters and emergency officials in the South had braced for another round of severe weather on Tuesday and Wednesday, few people predicted the onslaught along the coast.“In my mind, the expectation would have been for severe thunderstorms and potential tornado concerns, not the deluge of rain that we’ve received,” said Bill Pearson, a spokesman for Escambia County. “I don’t think that was really in the forecast in any way, shape or form.”But what did happen was unusual, and people spent Wednesday comparing the conditions an unnamed spring storm wrought to a summertime hurricane.In Alabama, the Fish River crested at 23.18 feet, slightly higher than the record set during Hurricane Danny in July 1997. The river reaches flood stage at 11 feet.The rain fell quickly: Government meteorologists said a weather station recorded almost 5.7 inches in an hour at Pensacola’s airport, which forecasters said was a rate seen about once every 200 years.“It’s unbelievable,” said Tony Riha, a barber who has lived in Pensacola for more than 60 years. “Water is an incredible force of nature. I’ve never had this much damage. I’ve never seen anything like it.”Officials were still trying to determine the extent of the destruction, but Mr. Pearson said the Escambia County authorities anticipated an extensive recovery process.“We definitely have roads that are impassable and will take a significant amount of time and cost to repair,” said Mr. Pearson, who said that engineers hoped to begin their assessments on Thursday.