http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/us/contrasting-portraits-emerge-of-jaylen-ray-fryberg-shooter-at-washington-school.html
Tangled Portrait of a Student Emerges in Washington Shooting - The New York Times
School Shootings,Fryberg  Jaylen Ray,Marysville (Wash),Murders and Attempted Murders,Tulalip Indian Reservation (Wash),Marysville-Pilchuck High School (Marysville  Wash)
Oct. 25, 2014
7868
MARYSVILLE, Wash. — If the bullet-scarred American psyche has an archetype for a school gunman, it looks very little like Jaylen Ray Fryberg. He was not a loner or a known misanthrope — far from it. He was a football player with a million-dollar smile, popular enough to be elected homecoming prince of his freshman class at Marysville-Pilchuck High School.Just a week ago, he presided over homecoming festivities in a red shirt with black bow tie, suspenders and Converse sneakers. His close friends were there, too, the girls in frothy dresses built for twirling and the guys with boutonnieres and that residual, aching youthfulness that plagues freshman boys.When Jaylen pulled out a handgun in the school cafeteria on Friday, according to witnesses, he did not randomly target fellow students, nor did he point it toward authority figures. Instead, he fired at those very friends, killing one student and seriously wounding four others before killing himself.Family members identified two of the wounded victims as Nate Hatch, 14, and Andrew Fryberg, 15, and said they were Jaylen’s cousins. They were being treated at Harborview Medical Center in Seattle. Officials at Providence Regional Medical Center Everett on Saturday identified two 14-year-old girls — Shaylee Chuckulnaskit and Gia Soriano — who were being treated there for gunshot wounds. The girls and Andrew Fryberg remained in critical condition, while Nate Hatch was in serious condition.Neither officials nor relatives had publicly identified the female classmate who was killed.The students and teachers in this community, near Seattle, had known they were no more immune to violence than Columbine or Sandy Hook; they had even practiced lockdown drills. But they never could have guessed who the perpetrator would be.“This wasn’t the typical trench coat, introvert-type person, no,” said Rick Iverson, a former teacher and wrestling coach at Marysville-Pilchuck. “This was an outgoing person that everyone in the school loved.”At a tearful church vigil here on Friday night, in a sanctuary packed with people wearing the red and white school colors of the Marysville-Pilchuck Tomahawks, some people talked about how wrenching and torturous high school itself can be — with its relationships and breakups, insults and grudges.Judy Davis, the mother of a freshman girl who had known Jaylen since grade school, summed up the sentiments of many people at the vigil.“I don’t know what went wrong,” she said. “He was just a good kid. He was everybody’s friend.”Ms. Davis, who wore school red down to her shoes, said she had heard that Jaylen had broken up with his girlfriend recently. But that still left a hole in the explanation of things as far as she was concerned, since the wounded students, she said, included his cousin and a longtime friend.“It just doesn’t fit,” Ms. Davis said.Jaylen, 14, whose Facebook friends — there were more than 2,000 — called him Jay, came from a prominent family on the Tulalip Indian Reservation, where several generations of Frybergs serve in positions as high as the board of directors. Jaylen was proud of his heritage, posting photos of himself in tribal dress, singing canoe songs and powwow songs, even, according to one news report, honoring his grandmother by presenting her with a slain deer.Josh Iukes, 14, also a tribal member, said he had known Jaylen since preschool, and said Jaylen loved to play football, wrestle and hunt.“There were guns around the house,” Josh said. “They were mostly rifles. He would go hunting with his dad most of the time. They were pretty close. He and his dad had a really good relationship, and his brother and his mom all did, too.”Jaylen’s brother Julian, 13, is in eighth grade, Josh said.The gun used during the shooting, however, was a pistol, said Josh, who was in the cafeteria at the time. “I have no idea where he got the pistol,” he said. “It didn’t even look like an American pistol. It was really small.” (The police have said they recovered a .40-caliber pistol, the suspected weapon used in the rampage, from the scene.)In one Facebook post over the winter, Jaylen wrote: “The thing is, is I don’t always just go out an shoot something. It’s not my favorite part about hunting. My favorite part about it is about just being in the woods. Just me my dad an my brother. An even if I’m sitting in the passenger seat sleeping it doesn’t matter. I like to be in the woods an that’s it.”Jaylen, as described by Josh, was a boy with a bold comic bent, someone who would shout during class to make people laugh. Even though he was a good student, he would sometimes call out, “I’m too stupid for this.” Josh said that Jaylen had dated a girl from another school, but that they had recently broken up.This month, Jaylen got into a fight at football practice, punching a student and breaking his nose over a racial slur against Native Americans, Josh said.That day, ShyAnn Wolf, 16, a junior, was in a sports medicine class. “The kid that got his nose broken came in with a bloody nose — it was gushing blood,” she said. “He told our sports med teacher that Jaylen just came up and grabbed him and started punching.”ShyAnn, whose boyfriend is a football player, later also heard that a racist joke had started the fight, and said Jaylen had been briefly suspended from the football team.“God damn jay he deserved it but we need you bro!” Nate, a childhood friend and one of the cousins injured in the shooting, wrote in a Twitter post on Oct. 14.It was unclear whether the fight and the shooting were related, but ShyAnn said racial tension was rare at Marysville-Pilchuck High.“We are, honestly, we’re like a little mini-community there. We are all very tightknit,” she said. “Our principal from last year, they were thinking of relocating him, and we all went crazy. We all came together and tried to keep him there.”Jaylen, she said, fit right in: “He was just so full of life and energy. He was happy.”A few days before the shooting, Josh said, Jaylen’s demeanor changed markedly, but he refused to talk about it. In math class, Josh noticed that Jaylen was listening to headphones instead of doing schoolwork, as he normally would, and asked what was wrong.“He said, ‘It doesn’t concern you,' ” Josh recalled.Jaylen’s social media posts were rife with juvenile profanity, anguish, frank sexuality and even pornographic images. They also showed him boating and hunting, wrestling and goofing off with friends. But a few days before the shooting, his posts grew edgy and cryptic.“It breaks me. ... It actually does. ... I know it seems like I’m sweating it off. ... But I’m not. ... And I never will be able to. ...,” he wrote on Oct. 21. “I should have listened ... you were right. ... The whole time you were right.”On Thursday, he wrote his final Twitter post: “It won’t last. ...It’ll never last.”