https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/10/us/politics/trumps-company-settles-lawsuit-with-a-second-celebrity-chef.html
Trump’s Company Settles Lawsuit With a Second Celebrity Chef - The New York Times
Trump Organization,Zakarian  Geoffrey,Andres  Jose (1969- ),Suits and Litigation (Civil)
April 10, 2017
572
The Trump Organization announced on Monday, for the second time in four days, that it had settled a lawsuit with a celebrity chef who had backed out of plans to build a restaurant in its luxury hotel in Washington.The chefs — Geoffrey Zakarian, whose settlement was announced Monday, and José Andrés, whose announcement came Friday — had both abandoned plans to set up shop in the Trump International Hotel, in Washington’s Old Post Office building, shortly after President Trump began his campaign in 2015. In response, Mr. Trump sued both.In backing off his plans to open a restaurant in the hotel, Mr. Zakarian, who noted that more than half his team was Hispanic, said in a written statement that Mr. Trump’s comments about some Mexican immigrants’ being rapists and drug dealers “do not in any way align with my personal core values.” Mr. Andrés had said earlier that Mr. Trump’s comments made “it impossible for my company and I to move forward.”Mr. Andrés, who was born in Spain, became an American citizen in 2013. Mr. Zakarian, who was born in the United States, has Armenian and Polish ancestry.The two settlement announcements were made in joint statements among the parties and included no details of the conditions.“After an intense, two-year legal battle, we are pleased we were able to amicably resolve our differences and wish Geoffrey continued success,” Donald Trump Jr., one of two trustees with broad legal authority over President Trump’s assets, said in the Monday statement.Mr. Zakarian “also acknowledged his satisfaction with the resolution,” according to the statement. Both he and Donald Trump Jr. plugged their own projects.The New York real estate developer Louis Ceruzzi, who had backed Mr. Zakarian’s restaurant, said he was glad “to put this matter behind us.”In the Friday statement, Mr. Andrés said he was “excited” about the prospect of working with the Trump Organization on programs to benefit the community.“I am pleased that we were able to resolve our differences and move forward cooperatively, as friends,” he said.