http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/15/us/15cnd-victims.html
Profiles of the Victims - The New York Times
Murders and Attempted Murders,Northern Illinois University
Feb. 15, 2008
7970
The following six died as a result of the shooting at Northern Illinois University, as identified by the DeKalb County Coroner and the university:Daniel Parmenter, 20, from Westchester, Ill. Sophomore, played football in high school, lived at Phi Kappa Alpha fraternity house. Robert Greer, 57, his stepfather, said he heard news of the shooting while driving home. His first thought was that “there are thousands of students at N.I.U., and the likelihood that anything had happened to him was probably small.” But a phone call from his wife’s brother told him that Daniel was among those shot. Mr. Greer, a religion professor at Judson University, immediately called his wife, Linda, a nurse at a local hospital. “She already knew,” Mr. Greer said. “She was shaken, of course. She had just talked to Daniel at noon. He had called to wish her a happy Valentine’s Day.” He learned that Daniel was sitting in the front row of the lecture hall with his girlfriend when the shooting began. She was critically wounded.Catalina Garcia, 20, from Cicero, Ill. She was studying to be a teacher and loved working with children, her older sister was quoted as saying by The Chicago Sun-Times. She was the youngest of four children and had just turned 20 on Jan. 15. Her father, Jacinto Garcia, said he had not heard about the shootings when he walked in the door of their home on Thursday and found his daughter and wife crying. They could not reach Catalina on her cell phone and were worried. “She was adored by our family because she wanted to become somebody in life — that’s what she was going to school,” her father said on Spanish-language radio station WOJO-FM on Friday morning.Ryanne Mace, 19, from Centersville, Ill. Name pronounced “Ryan”, psychology major. “She was a terrific kid that never got bad grades, never did anything wrong,” her father, Eric Mace, told The Chicago Sun-Times. Of his only child he said “On her worst day she was better than most people are on their best days.” Unable to reach anyone by telephone, he and wife drove to Kishwaukee Hospital to learn she had been shot. She had updated her MySpace.com page earlier in the day. It says “Happy Valentine’s Day Everybody!” Underneath that headline, she left a note that reads, “Saying you love someone is not enough, it’s how you treat them that shows your true feelings.”Julianna Gehant, 32, from Mendota, Ill. A dean’s list student for the last two years, she impressed Betsy Smith, who works with 400 students as academic adviser for elementary education. “She lit up a room,” Ms. Smith was quoted as saying by the Rockford Register Star. “She was thrilled to finally be doing what she wanted to do, she was very nice, kind and mature, and very smart. Ms. Gehant’s mother, Debra Gehant of Mendota, said another daughter, Jennifer, called her Thursday afternoon to tell her she had heard about a shooting at N.I.U. The family tried to reach Julianna, as did university officials, but she didn’t answer her cell phone. About 10 p.m., the police called and asked for a description of Julianna, who had served 12 years in the Army Corps of Engineers as a carpenter, whose job included building schools overseas and included service in Bosnia. “I worried about her being in Bosnia,” her mother said in a telephone interview today with the Register Star. “I didn’t worry about her sitting in a classroom.”Gayle Dubowski, 20, from Carol Stream, Ill. Sophomore. “She was just an amazing kid,” said Dave Pocta, youth and family minister Chicago Church of Christ in Elmhurst, Ill. He said he had watched her grow up and worked with her last summer when she was a counselor for high school students at the church’s camp. Mr. Pocta said the church community is very tightly knit and they knew very quickly that something was wrong. “We knew she hadn’t called home, and no one could contact her within an hour of the shooting, Mr. Pocta said. He said Ms. Dubowski was airlifted to a hospital in Rockford, Ill., but that she died en route. “Her parents are in shock.” he said. “We’re all in shock.”The gunman, who killed himself before police arrived, Steve P. Kazmierczak, 27, of Champaign, Ill.