https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/fashion/angela-dimayuga-mission-chinese.html
Angela Dimayuga: Chef Behind the Wok at Mission Chinese - The New York Times
Chinese Food (Cuisine),Restaurants,Fashion and Apparel,Mission Chinese Food (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Dimayuga  Angela (Chef)
July 6, 2017
8886
Age 31Hometown San Jose, Calif.Now Lives In a “big floor-through brownstone flat” in Bedford Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, which she shares with a roommate.Claim to Fame Ms. Dimayuga is the executive chef of Mission Chinese Food New York, the cool temple of Sichuan cuisine on the Lower East Side known for its ferocious, tongue-numbing fare. “We’ve created our own language with wok-fired food,” she said. Ms. Dimayuga was named one of the best new chefs of 2015 by Grub Street and earned a James Beard nomination last year. Her taste-making influence extends outside the kitchen. She helped design the restaurant’s retro interior and art installations, and oversees its streetwear merchandise.Big Break At 22, she was a cook at Vinegar Hill House in Brooklyn, alongside such foodie notables as Jean Adamson of Freemans Restaurant and Chris Parachini of Roberta’s. “I didn’t really tell anyone how young I was at the time,” she said. “But slowly my reputation was growing in an insider way, and a lot of options ended up on the table.” The most enticing offer came in 2012 with a cold call from Danny Bowien, the founder of Mission Chinese. “We had an instant connection, even though I had never even had Sichuan peppercorns before meeting him,” she said.Latest Project In May, Ms. Dimayuga catered the annual gala for Creative Time, a nonprofit public arts organization that honored Humberto Leon and Carol Lim of Opening Ceremony. “I’ve been to Humberto’s house many times where his mom has cooked amazing dinners for us, so it always feels organic coming up with crazy ideas together,” she said. To create the gala’s globe-spanning menu, which included a salt-encrusted fish and mango chow, Ms. Dimayuga teamed up with the League of Kitchens, a group that offers intimate culinary classes taught by immigrant cooks in their own homes.Next Thing An art-food collaboration between Ms. Dimayuga and her friend, the conceptual artist Anicka Yi, will run in the September issue of A Magazine Curated By.Fire Starter In April, Ms. Dimayuga caused a minor political stir when a writer for IvankaTrump.com reached out to her to do a profile. Ms. Dimayuga posted her fiery reply on Instagram, saying that “as a queer person of color and daughter of immigrant parents” she could not support “a brand and a president that slyly disparages female empowerment.” The exchange was picked up by Elle, HuffPost and others. Five days after her post went viral, Ivanka Trump’s Instagram account began following her. “I thought, uh-oh, I probably have an F.B.I. profile now,” she said.