https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/design/cool-heat-an-art-outlaw-who-still-simmers.html
Cool Heat: An Art Outlaw Who Still Simmers - The New York Times
Art,Whitney Museum of American Art,Oiticica  Helio,Brazil
July 13, 2017
3050
What can art do for you? Brighten your wall. Return your investment. Snag you a pass to a V.I.P. lounge. That’s about it in the art fair age. And if those are your criteria of aesthetic value, I can’t think what you’d make of “Hélio Oiticica: To Organize Delirium” at the Whitney Museum of American Art, a survey of scrappy, ephemeral work so high on politics, drugs and crazy love as to seem to be from some other planet, which it is: Planet 1960s/’70s, as occupied by one sometimes-transplanted Brazilian artist for 42 brief years.Hélio Oiticica (pronounced Oy-ti-SEEK-a) was born in Rio de Janeiro in 1937 into a family of scholarly leftists. His grandfather, a philologist, published an anarchist newspaper; his father was a photographer and a scientist focused on butterflies. Oiticica inherited their broadband curiosity. He was a live-wire gay kid: a talker, a reader, a looker, a dancer. He entered art school at 16 and quickly became the baby member of the Neo-Concretists, one of Brazil’s leading avant-garde groups.His art, like theirs, was abstract: A 1955 Oiticica painting — a bright checkerboard of mango-yellow and red — opens the show. But the thinking behind their work and his was, in its way, practical. Color and form, purposefully orchestrated, could change the way people feel, think and behave, and thus change the world. Oiticica later disavowed his early pictures as standard, derivative modernism, and he wasn’t wrong. But he held on to their originating idea: Art is potent to the degree it merges with life.By the 1960s, he began to physically demonstrate this merging. He took paintings off the wall and suspended them in the middle of a room. He hammered painted panels into boxlike containers – he called them “Bólides” (“Fireballs”) — that could be picked up and handled. He built free-standing booths called “Penetrables” that could be entered, like walk-in paintings. The point was that in all cases the viewer — the term he preferred was “participator” — physically interacted with the art, and by doing so moved art into life.When you move into life, you move into politics. In 1964, a military coup brought a right-wing junta to power in Brazil. Oiticica fiercely opposed it, though his politics didn’t fall along conventional left-right lines. His hatred of the government was absolute. But so was his rejection of dominant left-wing rhetoric that advocated a new cultural nationalism, a return to a mythical, precolonial “real” Brazil. Oiticica positioned himself outside both camps, in outsiderness itself.Being gay was probably a motivator. It put him outside whether he wanted to be or not. It fine-tuned his social-justice radar. He began spending time in Rio’s hillside slums, or favelas, home to a population of working poor that the government wanted to expel. There he steeped himself in Afro-Brazilian samba culture, learning its dances and music, which inspired his radically interactive series of works called “Parangolés.”The Parangolé is a dance costume. Made of cheap, bright enveloping fabrics, painted with taunting slogans and portraits of hero-martyrs, it revealed its full identity as a combination cape, tent and banner only when seen on a moving body. It was a literally activist art form; videos of some being danced are among the show’s highlights. In 1965, when Oiticica was in a show at the Museum of Modern Art in Rio, he brought a troupe of Parangolé-draped performers to the opening and was refused entry. The performance went on anyway, outside the museum, which is where, he often said, he wanted his art to be.By the mid-60s, Oiticica’s art and career were on a roll. In 1967, at the same museum, he produced his best-known piece, “Tropicália.” Reconstructed at the Whitney, it’s an artificial garden with banana plants, live parrots, two favela-style huts and a pebble path winding through sand. What might be taken as a homage to Brazilian exoticism is the opposite. The plants are in plastic pots; the staticky noise of a television leaks out from a hut; the words: “A pureza é um mito” — “Purity is a myth” – are scrawled on a wall of a second hut.In general, the visual arts had low visibility in Brazil, but the name of Oiticica’s show, “Tropicália,” soon went viral. The popular musician Caetano Veloso borrowed it as a song title. His tune, widely interpreted as an anti-authoritarian anthem, climbed the charts and spawned a new countercultural movement, Tropicalismo. In 1969, Mr. Veloso was arrested as a dissident, and then fled to London.Oiticica was already there, overseeing a retrospective at the Whitechapel Gallery. A year later, he was in New York, where he had work in the much noticed “Information” show at the Museum of Modern Art, and planned to build an installation in Central Park. After a quick return to Brazil revealed worsening repression, he decided to make New York his home, at least for the short-term. He stayed for seven years.The Whitney edition of the current retrospective, which appeared earlier at the Art Institute of Chicago and the Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, puts particular emphasis on Oiticica’s New York sojourn. Partly, I suspect, this is to justify a show that significantly challenges the Whitney’s founding definition of “American art.” But it’s also because Oiticica’s New York years have been little studied. They’re a blank, even to most historians. The Whitney curators, Donna De Salvo and Elisabeth Sussman, have tried to fill in that blank.The story they tell isn’t an easy one, but it’s rich. Oiticica arrived in the city with high expectations. After his MoMA success, he got lots of welcoming hugs. The Central Park project felt exciting. (A maquette is in the show.) Gradually, the momentum slowed. The hugs soon grew fewer. The city, he learned, forgets, ignores. That was O.K. The mainstream art world, everywhere, left him cold. As in Rio, so in New York he kept to the fringes, exploring the city’s gay life, visiting the favelas of the South Bronx, enmeshing himself, through his use and sale of cocaine, in the local drug culture.Time passed. The Central Park project, envisioned as a big adult playground, a theater for creative leisure, never happened. In New York, Oiticica exchanged object-making for filmmaking. The Whitney projects several short films, or fragments, on gallery walls, but they’re interesting mostly as 1970s atmosphere. Focus — Oiticica’s focus – is a problem. It’s hard to locate from the work on view what he was finding important, politically and aesthetically, and why. Some of his period enthusiasms — Mick Jagger as revolutionary hero — just feel naïve. Anyone who knew his earlier work knew he could think better than that. And he was thinking better, and feeling deeper, as he watched from afar the political horror show that Brazil had become.A couple of reconstructed installations have impact largely because they’re prescient of art by others to come. The homoerotic slide show “Neyrótika” prefigures Nan Goldin’s “Ballad of Sexual Dependency.” And “CC5 Hendrix-War,” its images splashing across the ceiling and walls of a room hung with hammocks, anticipates Pipilotti Rist.But where the political thinking comes in is in his writing, which is the most gripping work he did in New York — daily, voluminously as scripts, letters, poems, lists. Dozens of manuscript pages are here; they’re displayed only in facsimile and hard to read, but they simmer with a wired free-associative energy that soaks into the films and gives them some purpose. Just as his father had once cataloged butterflies species, Oiticica catalogs, and fancifully names, varieties of cocaine. (The Brazilian-American artist Arto Lindsay recites the list, with a musical lilt, in recordings made for the show.)But by 1978, the New York days were over. Weary, broke and harassed by immigration authorities, Oiticica returned to Rio de Janeiro. The show’s final piece, “PN27 Penetrable, Rijanviera,” is an abstract portrait of the “River of January” city. You enter the modest, cabanalike structure barefoot, walk though shallow currents of gently eddying water and exit — bathed, baptized — onto a beach of soft sand.The piece dates from 1979, the year before Oiticica died of a stroke. And it provides a return-to-strength punctuation for a show that, over all, feels sketchy and unfinished. Partly this is because it records an unfinished career, but also because much of that career has been physically lost. In 2009, hundreds, maybe thousands of Oiticica works were destroyed in a storage fire in Rio. Some items were rescued and restored; others have been reproduced as copies. The show has examples of both. The copies can be experienced interactively as the artist intended; the archival pieces are treated with hands-off museum reverence of a kind he claimed to deplore.Did he really deplore it? After all, he preserved quite a bit of work. But he was a person of contradictions: a hedonist with a needle-sharp ethical eye; a marginalist protected by safety nets of class and race. “Purity is a myth” applied to him as well as to his art, and he knew it, and the show knows it, which is why it’s moving, the way Oiticica’s art is moving. Mostly that art is not beautiful; when he made it, it was worth next to nothing; by the end of his life it had gotten him almost nowhere. But it’s alive in a way almost no art feels now.