https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/us/politics/students-are-the-newest-us-weapon-against-terrorist-recruitment.html
Students Are the Newest U.S. Weapon Against Terrorist Recruitment - The New York Times
Homeland Security Department,Terrorism,Colleges and Universities,Social Media,Youth
July 18, 2017
63
WASHINGTON — The Department of Homeland Security is enlisting American college students in its efforts to stop the radicalization and recruitment of young people, mostly immigrants, by foreign terrorist groups.Under a program called Peer to Peer: Challenging Extremism, students at dozens of universities are given a budget of up to $2,000 each semester to develop social media campaigns and other tools to counter the online recruiting efforts of terrorist groups like the Islamic State.George Selim, director of the Office for Community Partnerships at the Department of Homeland Security, said about 50 to 75 universities voluntarily participated in the program each year. Students enter a competition judged by Homeland Security and other national security officials, and the winning school is given $5,000.On Tuesday, the department awarded students at the University of Maryland first place in the competition for developing a project that helps friends and neighbors recognize signs of radicalization in young people. It is built around a video game and a social media campaign.“Who better to push back against the prejudice, bigotry and hate online than students?” said Tony Sgro, the president of EdVenture Partners, the company that created the program.Countering violent extremism online has become a focus of the United States government in recent years as groups like the Islamic State and Nigeria’s Boko Haram have successfully used the internet to market themselves and gain recruits. Dozens of young people from the United States have joined groups like the Islamic State.But the government has long struggled to counter the groups’ use of social media.So officials at Homeland Security and other federal agencies have turned to the very people whom terrorist groups are trying to attract: young people.“The program addresses two fundamental things,” Mr. Selim said. “It brings real-world national security problems to the classroom, and it gives young people a chance to have their voices heard.”Although most of the program seems to focus on countering foreign terrorist groups, Mr. Selim said students were also encouraged to develop campaigns to counter the violent messaging of domestic hate groups. The University of Maryland project targets white supremacist groups as well as gangs like MS-13.Government programs to counter violent extremism have been criticized by some civil liberties groups, which say that ideology is not a clear predictor of terrorism. Some Islamic organizations worry that the programs are a way for intelligence and law enforcement agencies to gather information that can be used to arrest Muslims.