https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/nyregion/new-york-today-a-busy-time-to-move.html
New York Today: A Busy Time to Move - The New York Times
New York City
July 18, 2017
2388
Good morning on this sunny Tuesday.This is the Year of the Renter.And the July-to-August stretch is high season for apartment hunting in our city.(Cue combination of excitement and headache.)To help current residents and newcomers navigate the search, we asked licensed real estate agents about housing trends in the city.Over the past few years, residents have been leaving Manhattan for more attractive rent and space options in Brooklyn and Queens, according to Stan Broekhoven of Keller Williams.But that is changing. “People are looking to move back to the city because prices have gone down a little and people are tired of the commute,” he said, referring to the transit shutdown of the L train, the problems at Pennsylvania Station and the delays on the subway. “When transportation becomes unreliable, people look again at moving closer to work.”So, is July a good time to look for an apartment in the city?Not really, according to Kobi Lahav, a managing director with Mdrn. Residential.“July and August is a terrible time to move because everybody wants to be in before Sept. 1,” he said. “So the prices are higher, the broker fees are higher — even the movers are charging more money.”Still, one upside to moving in July is that there’s more to choose from, Mr. Lahav added, “but if you want to get a deal, move after the crazy rush.”Yet we’ve heard July and August are still the most popular months  to move?It’s a chicken-egg situation, Mr. Lahav said.“Although it’s the worst time to move, it’s also ironically the busiest time of the year,” he said. “A lot of people don’t have a choice; they need to move before Sept. 1.”Even so, the climate is better for renters in 2017 than in previous years, Mr. Broekhoven said.“Numbers tell us that rent is still just as high as last year, but landlords are more likely to negotiate and there are more incentives being given,” he said.Where are young professionals moving?“They tend to go where it’s more affordable,” Mr. Broekhoven said: Harlem, Hamilton Heights and Washington Heights in Manhattan, Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn, and Astoria in Queens. (He noted that the Lower East Side was also a contender, but that prices there were rising.)“People who team up with three or four roommates can end up in the city, but it’s a different way of living,” he added. “People that are fresh out of college or young that want to live on their own tend to go outside Manhattan.”Where are prices falling?Williamsburg, thanks in part to the L train shutdown, Mr. Broekhoven said.“Prices are dropping there, and you can get a better deal,” he said. The shutdown is “still almost two years away, but people are thinking ahead.”Where are prices not coming down?TriBeCa and SoHo, “still pretty much the most expensive neighborhoods in Manhattan,” Mr. Broekhoven said.And what’s the next up-and-coming neighborhood?That’s difficult to predict because there are so many influencing factors, but wherever it may be, “there needs to be transportation,” Mr. Broekhoven said. “Transportation, safety and affordability are the big ones.”Happy hunting.Here’s what else is happening:It should be clear for the morning commute, but watch out for showers later.The afternoon will be warm with a high near 86, and there’s a small chance of rain and thunderstorms after 2 p.m., so bring an umbrella.This evening should be lovely, cooling down to the low 70s.• Four people have been arrested in the killings of four young Latino men on Long Island in April. [New York Times]• Mayor Bill de Blasio’s probable Republican opponent, Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, has raised more money that counts toward the city’s six-to-one matching program. [New York Times]• A Manhattan jury acquitted a man who pushed a passenger to his death on a subway track. [New York Times]• A lawyer representing a man convicted in a gang assault in Brooklyn said her client was a “scapegoat.” [New York Times]• American Airlines will honor a 91-year-old mechanic today for his 75 years of service. [New York Times]• Mr. de Blasio said he welcomed new proposals to restrict horse-drawn carriages in New York City, providing that the City Council was on board. [Daily News]• Hundreds of tenants at a Brooklyn Jewish Hospital complex have been guaranteed rent-stabilized leases for the next 30 years. [DNAinfo]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “To the Man in the Hard Hat on Eighth Avenue”• Scoreboard: Twins are too much for Yankees, 4-2; Cardinals fly over Mets, 6-3.• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Tuesday Briefing.• Mr. de Blasio and the Queens borough president, Melinda Katz, host a fair at Borough Hall, where Queens residents may share concerns with top city commissioners. 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. [Register here]• Find your balance after work at an outdoor yoga class in Randalls Island Park. Bring your own mat. 6:30 p.m. [Free]• Are there vacation destinations on other planets? The authors of the “Vacation Guide to the Solar System” tell all at the American Museum of Natural History. 7 p.m. [$15]• The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra performs Bach’s Brandenburg concertos at the Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park. 7:30 p.m. [Free]• Mets host Cardinals, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Twins, 8:08 p.m. (ESPN). • Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Aug. 15.• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.With another clammy day ahead — and a week that’s only getting stickier — it might be a delightful time to go for a dip.The Parks Department has more than 30 outdoor public pools across the city.For those of you who don’t know how to swim or are simply looking to brush up your breaststroke, the city has begun its annual free swimming lessons. Its Learn to Swim program caters to all age groups and offers sessions in July and August.The next set of classes at city pools begins on Friday, and registration for the subsequent August session will close on July 31. See the schedule and learn how to sign up here.Mr. Cuomo has announced that the Learn to Swim program is also being offered at two dozen parks around the state, including Roberto Clemente State Park in the Bronx and Riverbank State Park in Manhattan. See the schedule and learn how to sign up here.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.