https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/nytnow/online-campaign-questions-official-account-of-sandra-bland-death.html
F.B.I. Investigating Police Accounts of Black Woman’s Death in Custody - The New York Times
Bland  Sandra (1987-2015),Encinia  Brian T (1985- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Social Media,Waller County (Tex)
July 16, 2015
4599
Days after a black woman from suburban Chicago was found dead in a Texas jail cell, her friends and family are contesting police statements that she killed herself.The woman, Sandra Bland, 28, was arrested last Friday in Waller County by an officer with the Texas Department of Public Safety on a charge of assaulting a public servant. She had been pulled over for failing to signal a lane change.A statement from the Waller County sheriff’s office said that the cause of Ms. Bland’s death appeared to be self-inflicted asphyxiation. An autopsy on Tuesday classified her death as suicide by hanging, according to The Chicago Tribune.In a statement released Thursday afternoon, the Texas Department of Public Safety said that the Texas Rangers and the Federal Bureau of Investigation were jointly investigating the cause of Ms. Bland’s death.Friends, family and supporters of Ms. Bland are not satisfied with the autopsy results, and are calling for federal authorities to look into her death. Since Tuesday, more than 31,000 people have tweeted using the hashtag #SandraBland, according to Topsy, a social media measurement tool. An online petition calling for the Justice Department to take over the investigation has been started.Ms. Bland’s death comes during a time of intense scrutiny of how police departments treat black people, especially those in their custody. Three months ago, social media users helped bring widespread attention to the death of Freddie Gray, an unarmed 25-year-old African-American in Baltimore who died from injuries sustained while being transported in a police van.Many of the people who dispute the account of Ms. Bland’s death say that she was a vocal civil rights advocate. In April, she posted a video to Facebook in which she discussed police brutality.“Black lives matter,” Ms. Bland says to the camera. “They matter.”“In the news that we’ve seen as of late, you could stand there, surrender to the cops, and still be killed,” she continues.A video of the arrest recorded by a bystander has surfaced online, showing Ms. Bland on the ground with a police officer standing above her. In the video, Ms. Bland complains that her head had been slammed into the ground, and another police officer tells the person who is recording that he should leave the scene.Officials said Ms. Bland refused a medical review after the encounter, and was then booked into the Waller County jail.A statement from the Waller County Sheriff’s office said that authorities tried to perform CPR on Ms. Bland after she was found not breathing in a cell Monday morning, and that the state authorities were immediately asked to begin investigating her death.Discussing the investigation on Wednesday, Elton Mathis, the Waller County district attorney, acknowledged skepticism around the circumstances of Ms. Bland’s death and said that the state’s Texas Rangers had been asked to investigate.“I understand there’s some disbelief among some friends and family that she would do this to herself,” Mr. Mathis said. “That’s why it’s very important that the Texas Rangers be allowed to conduct a thorough investigation.”