http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/16/world/middleeast/syria-western-intelligence-cooperation.html
Flow of Westerners to Syria Prompts Security Concerns - The New York Times
Syria,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Espionage and Intelligence Services,Al Qaeda,National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces,Assad  Bashar al-
Jan. 15, 2014
9446
FRANKFURT —  A week before international peace talks on Syria are to begin in Switzerland, Western leaders and intelligence officials are reacting with alarm to what they say are the rising numbers of young people leaving Europe and the United States to wage jihad against President Bashar al-Assad.The public comments, which coincided with an international donors conference on Wednesday for victims of Syria’s war, have highlighted the issue Western nations face. Concerns over the continuance of what they call Mr. Assad’s dictatorial rule must be weighed against the threat that the rebellion, which the West supports, is creating a new generation of jihadists.Across Europe, intelligence officials, police officers, social workers and teachers have reported an increased push in recent months by Islamist radicals to recruit young Europeans to fight on the Syrian battlefield. Most are men, but some women have also been drawn to Syria with the prospect of helping establish an Islamic state, according to German officials and experts monitoring the trend.American and European intelligence officials estimate that 1,200 young people have left to join Syria’s rebel groups, some of which have ties to Al Qaeda. On Tuesday, President François Hollande of France, in a news conference, said that French intelligence had counted 700 French citizens and foreigners who had headed to Syria from his country. “We must prevent them,” he said.The same day, Germany’s interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, speaking after meeting with the heads of German intelligence and the police, ranked international terrorism as his No. 1 problem. The main concern, he said, is the flow of young people to the Syrian battlefield, which he called “a great danger,” particularly if they return home trained in the use of weapons and explosives.Mr. de Maizière said that 240 people left Germany for Syria last year. Intelligence officials and experts say most of those who head for the battlefield are young men from immigrant families, often with a Muslim background and usually unsuccessful at school and in life.There have been indications over the past week that Western intelligence officials are pooling knowledge about the trend of Westerners traveling to Syria, which is often accomplished via the long border with Turkey. The issue has been raised in several countries, and Mr. de Maizière spoke on Tuesday after what he said were talks with his French counterpart.In the United States, senior intelligence and counterterrorism officials told The New York Times in an article published last week that at least 70 Americans have either traveled to Syria, or tried to, since the conflict began there nearly three years ago. The officials also expressed concern that those going to Syria are radicalized to mount attacks after their return home.Increasingly, European and American officials are taking steps to counter the trend, although the extent of that effort remains unclear.On Wednesday, the BBC reported that a Syrian official, Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad, said that several Western intelligence services had visited Damascus for discussions. The BBC broadcast his comments after The Wall Street Journal reported that French, Spanish and German spy services had made contact with Mr. Assad’s government.Mr. Mekdad declined to specify which countries had made such contact, but he asserted that representatives of many countries had visited Damascus.There was no immediate confirmation from French, Spanish or German officials of such activity.A British Foreign Office official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said he believed that the Syrian Information Ministry was promoting the report for reasons of its own.“We are not in contact with the Assad regime,” the official said. Referring to the coming peace conference, he added, “We believe they’re getting jumpy about Geneva II and they are trying to destabilize the opposition by suggesting that the British government is involved with the regime in order to bolster support for it.”In Germany, the state of Hesse, where Frankfurt is, has been one of the main sources of jihadist recruitment for Syria. Officials in Hesse say 23 youths headed there in recent months, including nine students. One 16-year-old from Frankfurt was reported to have been killed in Syria’s embattled northern city of Aleppo last month.German authorities detained a 20-year-old man last month at the Frankfurt airport who was returning from Syria, but so far they have not brought charges.Boris Rhein, interior minister of Hesse until a government reshuffle this week, has increasingly sounded the alarm about Islamist radicals in recent months. In an opinion article written for the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in November, he called their religious extremism “the greatest security policy challenge” of the 21st century.Mr. Rhein, who will remain in the Hesse government but as minister of science and arts, has drawn attention in particular to German-language videos on the Internet aimed at turning disaffected young men into radicals and recruiting them for the battle in Syria.“It starts harmlessly with an offer of a free copy of the Quran,” he wrote in November. “The propagandists engage the young people in conversation and just show them some simple paths in life. But the real aim is indoctrination with extreme Islamic thought.”