http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/18/us/politics/obama-supreme-court-senate.html
Merrick Garland Visits Capitol as G.O.P. Digs In Against Vote - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Garland  Merrick B,Presidential Election of 2016,Republican Party,Democratic Party,Senate,Senate Committee on the Judiciary,Appointments and Executive Changes,McConnell  Mitch,United States Politics and Government
March 17, 2016
5149
WASHINGTON — Senate Democrats enthusiastically embraced Judge Merrick B. Garland on Thursday in his first visit to the Capitol as a Supreme Court nominee, but Republican leaders, brushing aside stirrings of defections in their ranks, vowed again that they would not hold hearings or a confirmation vote this year even if a Democrat wins the White House in November.It was a strange day even for an often-fractious Capitol. Democrats moved forward with the traditional opening pageantry for a Supreme Court nominee, including staged photo opportunities and two largely ceremonial meetings. At the same time, the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, sought to dismiss the fight over the court vacancy as an irreconcilable difference that should be set aside, like some routine piece of failed legislation, as the Senate moved on to other business.Tensions boiled over early after Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, and others suggested that Republicans might take up Judge Garland’s nomination in the lame duck session — should Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders win the White House — and outraged Judiciary Committee Democrats called Republicans duplicitous.Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, noted that Republican leaders had repeatedly said they wanted to let voters in November decide the balance of the Supreme Court with their ballots in the presidential election. But now, Mr. Franken said, Republicans suddenly seemed prepared to deny voters that say in order to prevent Mr. Obama’s successor from potentially choosing a more liberal judge.“I used to make a living identifying absurdity and I am hearing a lot of it today,” said Mr. Franken, who entered politics after a career writing and occasionally performing on “Saturday Night Live.”For his part, Judge Garland, in a dark suit and a green tie for St. Patrick’s Day, smiled tightly for photographers in the offices of the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, and Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee. Keeping with custom, Judge Garland made no statements as he moved around the Capitol complex with a retinue of White House aides.By the end of the day, Republican leaders made clear they were sticking to their original position and flatly ruled out any action on the nomination during the lame duck session.Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican and a member of the Judiciary Committee, said on Thursday that he expected Democrats to keep repeating their demands for a confirmation vote, but he urged them to desist.“It’s frankly a waste of time,” Mr. Cornyn said at the Judiciary Committee’s business meeting. “The decision has been made that we are going to wait for the voters to choose the next president and allow that president to make the nomination at which time that nomination, whether it’s a Democrat or a Republican will be processed. But not before then.”Even Mr. Hatch had retreated. “If it’s Hillary, it’s Hillary,” he told reporters with resignation at the Capitol, acknowledging that party leaders had decided Mr. Obama’s nominee would not be confirmed under any circumstance.Adding to the day’s theatrics, Senate Democrats crossed the street and stood outside the Supreme Court building for a news conference where they reiterated the “Do your job!” refrain that has become their battle cry in recent weeks.The unorthodox news conference highlighted the extent to which the battle over Judge Garland’s nomination — unlike past confirmation fights such as those involving Justice Clarence Thomas or Judge Robert Bork — will play out not in televised committee hearings or debate on the Senate floor, but in the court of public opinion.And with senators leaving town Thursday night for a two-week Easter recess, Senate Democrats and the White House were clearly hoping that Republicans would start hearing from voters in their home states.“Why can’t the Republicans do what they’re supposed to do, do their jobs?” Mr. Reid said at a news conference after meeting with Judge Garland in his office, which is not far from Mr. McConnell’s office. “Why are they afraid to meet with him? Why are they afraid to hold hearings? Are they afraid the American people will watch these hearings and demand they do something more than they are demanding now?”Judge Garland is widely viewed as a moderate jurist. He received robust praise from a number of Republicans, including Mr. Hatch, when he was confirmed in 1997 for his current seat on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.Conservative groups, however, have unleashed a furious opposition to Judge Garland, raising questions about his views on Second Amendment gun rights.And Mr. McConnell has seemed as immovable as the Corinthian columns lining the front of the Supreme Court building. On Wednesday, shortly after Mr. Obama announced the nomination, Mr. McConnell telephoned Judge Garland to say there was no point in them meeting face to face.In a speech on the Senate floor on Thursday morning, Mr. McConnell repeated his position and said it was time to move on to other business.“When it comes to filling the current Supreme Court vacancy, which could fundamentally alter the direction of the court for a generation, Republicans and Democrats simply disagree,” he said. “We simply disagree. Republicans think the people deserve a voice in this critical decision. The president does not. So we disagree in this instance and as a result, we logically act as a check and balance.”At the Judiciary Committee business meeting, senators traded recriminations and Mr. Franken expressed disbelief at the Republicans’ position.“Let’s at least be honest while we are talking about this stuff,” Mr. Franken told Mr. Hatch, who had raised the idea of taking up Judge Garland’s nomination during the lame duck session.Mr. Franken continued: “You can’t say ‘I want the people to decide; wait for the next president. Oh, wait a minute, if we lose the election, then we’ll vote for this guy.”Addressing Mr. Hatch directly, Mr. Franken said, “Will you at least admit to me that is contradictory?”Mr. Hatch replied, “If I was in your shoes, I would be saying, ‘Well that’s wonderful, at least we are going to vote for this nominee one way or the other.’ ”Mr. Franken was not mollified. “No, it’s double-talk. Don’t you see that as double-talk?”Mr. Leahy, at a news conference after his meeting with Mr. Garland, cited average time frames of past Supreme Court vacancies and said the entire confirmation process could be completed by the end of May.“If we followed our normal routine, we could easily have the hearings, the debate, the background and the vote by Memorial Day,” he said, adding that Republicans should cancel some recesses if they think more work days are needed.Mr. Reid, after his own meeting with Judge Garland, said he had not offered any special advice. “I just told him to be himself,” Mr. Reid said.