http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/democratic-national-convention.html
Democratic Convention Day 1 Takeaways: Michelle Obama Steals the Show - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Democratic National Convention,Democratic National Committee,Democratic Party,United States Politics and Government,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,Schultz  Debbie Wasserman,Philadelphia (Pa)
July 25, 2016
7524
PHILADELPHIA — The Democratic National Convention began with the ouster of the party’s chairwoman, protests in the streets, disruptions on the convention floor and a torrential thunderstorm. Facing the prospect of chaos, an array of party leaders — including Michelle Obama, and Senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren — moved to heal the breach in the party, seemingly with some success. Our takeaways:It’s Hillary Clinton’s convention, and it was Mr. Sanders’s big night. But the unquestioned star of the program on Monday was Mrs. Obama, who used her prime-time speech to describe an optimistic, confident view of American social progress, and to embrace Mrs. Clinton as the natural heir to the Obama presidency.She praised Mrs. Clinton as a big-hearted public servant and as a political survivor, and rebuked Donald J. Trump as a bully without mentioning his name. Most important, Mrs. Obama wrapped her speech in a sunny narrative about what the country has accomplished during her husband’s presidency, celebrating the image of a black family in the White House and casting Mrs. Clinton’s election as a similar milestone.“Don’t let anyone ever tell you that this country isn’t great,” Mrs. Obama said. “This, right now, is the greatest country on earth.”It was a strikingly positive speech in a bitter election season, and a vivid rendition of the political worldview that lifted the Obamas to the top of the party in the first place. The powerful response Mrs. Obama drew from the crowd showed just how formidable she is likely to be on the campaign trail.Mrs. Clinton needed a bear hug from liberal Democrats on Monday night to have any chance of easing tensions with supporters of Mr. Sanders, who entered the convention in a state of rage over the Democratic National Committee’s meddling role in the 2016 primaries.And a bear hug is what Mrs. Clinton got, most crucially from Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren. In a speech that celebrated his own victories at length, Mr. Sanders also gave Mrs. Clinton his full-throated backing. “Hillary Clinton,” he said, “must become the next president of the United States.”Ms. Warren delivered a string of sharp attacks on Mr. Trump, while praising Mrs. Clinton’s liberal agenda and urging Democrats to “work our hearts out to make Hillary Clinton the next president.” Representative Keith Ellison, Democrat of Minnesota, reminisced about Sanders rallies in his state, and said it was time to join forces with Mrs. Clinton.Still, those testimonials are unlikely to placate the most agitated demonstrators in the streets of Philadelphia. The question now is how many of Mr. Sanders’s supporters are equally implacable.At first, the program appeared headed for disaster, as pro-Sanders activists shouted angrily at even liberal Democrats like Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland and Senator Jeff Merkley of Oregon. The party barely averted an evening of unsightly clashes. By the start of the prime-time hours the rowdy heckling had largely abated — but not entirely.Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, the Senate’s only black Democrat, was interrupted by chants of “Black lives matter.” Some attendees taunted Ms. Warren, too, calling out, “We trusted you!” — a reproach for supporting Mrs. Clinton.It’s not clear how big a chunk of Mr. Sanders’s coalition these disruptive voices represent. But their willingness to keep jeering at the party’s top leaders promises to keep cramping the proceedings as the week goes on.The unifying theme at the Republican convention last week was fierce opposition to Mrs. Clinton. Her name was a rallying cry starting on the first night, as a jumbled collection of speakers railed against familiar offenses: her use of a private email server, her handling of the Benghazi, Libya, attack and more.Mr. Trump has not yet taken such a central place in the Democratic convention. He was the target of attacks from a number of speakers, especially Ms. Warren, but anti-Trump riffs from other speakers were not surefire crowd pleasers, and the mere utterance of his name did not seem to electrify the audience.That may change as the week progresses, and the focus of the convention shifts from achieving party unity to winning the general election. But on Monday, Mr. Trump was often relegated to his least favorite place: the background.