http://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/25/nyregion/front-row-keni-valenti-is-casting-off.html
Front Row; Keni Valenti Is Casting Off - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,VALENTI  KENI,APPAREL
May 25, 2004
7709
Don't bother asking for the Vivienne Westwood ''Sex'' shirt Keni Valenti personally stole from Sid Vicious a quarter century ago. It's long gone, sold to a happy customer for $3,800. The truth is, hardly anyone who ever visited Mr. Valenti's fabled showroom on West 30th Street was likely to have come away unsatisfied.Long before it became de rigueur to call used clothes ''vintage,'' Mr. Valenti was stocking the stuff, at all levels, and in bulk: Yves Saint Laurent couture dresses, Thierry Mugler jackets, Christian Dior ''New Look'' frocks from the 1940's, as well as some of the raunchier 1980's rags popular with the current subteenage supermodel set.Mr. Valenti's story would seem to be one of those that could only happen in fashion. A school dropout at 9, a semiprofessional teenage shoplifter, a one-time bartender at Studio 54, a former Hare Krishna follower and someone who once told an interviewer he had coasted through an entire decade fueled ''by cocaine, cocaine, cocaine, cocaine and more cocaine,'' Mr. Valenti eventually settled down (he has been sober for years) and realized that his manic energy, sharp eye and gift for finding the hidden value in castoffs could be parlayed into a business.Thus it was that his by-appointment-only showroom became a pilgrimage site for the fashion stylists who are the names behind the names. Ask Katie Grand (Prada), Arianne Phillips (Madonna), Patti Wilson (DSquared), Alex White (Prada before Katie Grand), Tina Laakkonen (Peter Som; Cacharel) or Camilla Nickerson (Narciso Rodriguez) where designer ''inspiration'' comes from and, likely as not, they will direct you to Mr. Valenti's fur-district showroom, called Keni Valenti Retro-Couture.Now, with his lease at an end, Mr. Valenti plans to open his Aladdin's cave to a more general public. For six days, June 14 through 20, he will be selling some of the 20,000 dresses and 10,000 accessories he has accumulated (and sometimes stored in plastic Hefty bags) from an eighth-floor studio at 247 West 30th Street. Plans are in formation for Mr. Valenti's next episode.   GUY TREBAY