https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/arts/television/bachelorette-rachel-eric-final-four.html
A Rare Conversation About Class Brings ‘The Bachelorette’ Into the Real World - The New York Times
Television,ABC Inc,Lindsay  Rachel L,The Bachelorette (TV Program),Poverty
July 11, 2017
334
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is underway on ABC, and The New York Times is still here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives are following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey while saying farewell to two men the audience could barely tell apart. Can we steal you for a sec?CARYN GANZ “The Bachelor” franchise started out as a fable of upward mobility — a man of stature known for his wealth was up for grabs, and a cast of women fought to claim a place at the end of a “fairy tale” as a bride.Over the years, the show moved away from casting a rich person as the object of affection (early Bachelors included business heirs, financial whizzes and semifamous actors, all of whom were understood to be affluent), and instead chose a protagonist from the previous season’s “The Bachelor” or “The Bachelorette” who had proved himself or herself to have the charisma and the ability to hold the audience’s attention. While this has resulted in a succession of white romantic leads (something NPR’s Linda Holmes has written about and that we noted in our Bachelorette Bible), it also caused a flattening of the show’s class politics. The emphasis shifted from the wealth of the Bachelor or Bachelorette to the lavishness of the dates the show sent them on, which disproportionately feature international travel and helicopter rides.Over the last few seasons, class has been made less of an issue on the show than ever — from the playful way hopefuls’ careers have been described (the memorable, “aspiring dolphin trainer”) to the relatively folksy way people from outside big cities have been portrayed. (Like Raven from the most recent season of “The Bachelor,” who operated a “fashion boutique” in a town of fewer than 3,000 people.)All of this made Eric’s candid talk with Rachel on the final group date of the season all the more stunning on this week’s episode. While she seemed shocked by his disclosure that at age 29 he has never brought a woman home to his family before, his far more surprising admission was that he grew up in Baltimore facing the kinds of issues that are not typically discussed on “The Bachelorette,” where conversations about class — and, until this season, race — have gone unspoken.“It’s a very challenging city,” he told Rachel, adding that it was easy “to sell a drug or commit a crime or just do anything of that nature because it was just normal.” He revealed “all the people in my family were in the streets, dealing drugs, committing crime.”He spoke about an uncle in prison, having friends in housing projects who didn’t have clothes for school, watching family members get high, witnessing abusive relationships and friends killed in the streets. The things he didn’t see, he said, were his mom and dad together, or a healthy relationship on which to model his own.If you were hoping for Rachel to turn to the camera during her subsequent testimonial to discuss intersectionality (reminder: Eric is the last black man left in the competition), I can assure you that this did not happen. But it was a rare moment when actual reality crept into this reality show, and it was an interesting counterpoint to a class-centric scene during Rachel’s earlier date with Bryan, when she took him to a Breitling store in Switzerland and announced that she was buying him an expensive watch. (He tried on one with a black band and said, “I like black,” to which she replied, “Do you?” and the pair chuckled.) “We’re going to get these; I’m getting this for you,” she said as he swooned. “I got you. I got this.”JOE COSCARELLI Eric’s brief detour into the pain and complication of the real world — one of the most engrossing conversations between Rachel and a suitor all season — lasted only about a minute. That tells you a lot about this show. The fact that it was never made explicit, or even really alluded to, that Eric was the final remaining black contestant on the first season of “The Bachelor” or “The Bachelorette” to feature a black lead might tell you even more.The racial makeup of the cast as we entered this final stretch couldn’t help but hang over the final three-on-one date, after Dean, Bryan and Peter had already received the roses that entitled them to bring Rachel on a hometown visit. Yet any conflicted feelings the characters may have felt about the role of identity in the contest remained stuffed uncomfortably under the surface.Sure, Eric’s heavy Baltimore biography, coded as it may have been in the edit that aired, could be setting up some raw real-talk when they’re face-to-face with his family. But the show left so much juicy subtext between the lines that to hope it’s sufficiently unpacked next week feels borderline foolish.Instead, we got what loyal watchers have come to expect from this part of a season: a bloated game show. Whats-his-face and whats-his-face — Eric’s challengers for the last rose of the night — had barely registered for weeks (apparently their names are Matt and Adam), but we were forced for two final hours to pretend as if they had a shot at marrying Rachel.The desperation ratcheted up when Adam came right out with the line, “Do you see yourself still falling in love with me?” (If you have to ask …) But that’s the setup here, in which the chances of obvious favorites are played down (see: Peter’s equivocating) while dead-end dudes are kept around for filler fake-drama. True character development is typically bypassed in favor of superficial clashes, but the feints at something more — the dangling of Eric’s depth, for instance — are what keep us coming back.