https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/opinion/the-biggest-threat-to-job-growth.html
The Biggest Threat to Job Growth - The New York Times
Labor and Jobs,Unemployment,Trump  Donald J
April 7, 2017
8728
Job growth slowed abruptly in March. Only 98,000 jobs were created, compared with over 200,000 in January and in February.The slowdown, however, is no cause for worry — yet. Even with relatively weak growth in March, job creation has averaged 178,000 a month over the past three months, about even with the 182,000 average over the past year, indicating a steady job market.There were also signs of improving conditions last month. The unemployment rate fell, from 4.7 percent in February to 4.5 percent, as did the underemployment rate, which fell from 9.2 percent in February to 8.9 percent. Those improvements suggest that the economy is still en route to full employment — and that policy makers, including President Trump, have a nice tailwind.Unfortunately, they’re unlikely to take advantage of it. Mr. Trump’s deregulatory push — the only part of his agenda that has gotten off the ground — is likely to boost corporate profits while imposing costs on workers in the form of reductions in pay, safety and health. The president’s proposed budget would most likely harm employment by shrinking much of the government sector, which is an important employer in its own right and helps sustain the economy through federal spending. His proposed high-end tax cuts, if enacted, would probably worsen the federal budget deficit without improving the economy, because putting more money in the pockets of people who already have more than they can spend does little to spur growth. His promise to spend more on infrastructure, if kept, could do some good, because it would create jobs in the near term and support future growth through improvements to roads, bridges and the like. But as yet, the president has no real infrastructure plan, let alone the political support or financial resources to turn a plan into reality.Federal Reserve policy makers, for their part, have indicated their intention to raise interest rates gradually this year to keep inflation at bay as the economy continues to recover. But they would do well to err on the side of caution. Unemployment is falling, but history indicates that it could fall further still before sparking wage increases and higher prices. In fact, recent wage growth — even in the face of falling unemployment — has generally only kept up with inflation, rather than outpacing it in the way that leads to an overheating economy.Here’s the sliver of hope: Mr. Trump’s wrongheaded ideas do not appear headed to fruition anytime soon. The Fed may yet curb its eagerness to raise rates and, in any event, could reverse rate increases if they proved untimely. Left to its own devices, the economy might simply forge ahead on its path toward full employment. In the current political moment, doing no harm would be an achievement.