http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/15/us/destruction-mounts-as-floodwaters-engulf-louisiana.html
Destruction Mounts as Floodwaters Engulf Louisiana  - The New York Times
Mississippi,Louisiana,Floods
March 14, 2016
4253
PEARL RIVER, La. —  “I think what we’re seeing right now is what we’re going to get,” J. J. Jennings, the police chief of this small and currently waterlogged city near the Mississippi border, said with nervous optimism.What he was seeing at that moment on Monday was a group of neighbors using pumps and sandbags to keep an ever-rising creek out of Ed Martensson’s house, which was so hemmed in by water that a 12-year-old boy was fishing in the driveway.After days of extraordinary rainfall — some places recorded more than 20 inches in less than 72 hours, the National Weather Service said — the rising waters that ruined homes from Mooringsport to Merryville are now swelling the rivers, bayous and lakes of southern Louisiana.“They’ve already got a lot of water down there, much like we have, and now we’re sending more water down there,” said Matt Hemingway, a Weather Service meteorologist in Shreveport, in northern Louisiana. “The entire state has been impacted with this, and we’ll certainly continue to see the fallout for the next few weeks, for sure, if not longer.”Gov. John Bel Edwards has declared a statewide emergency, and President Obama said on Sunday that there were major disasters in seven parishes. Mr. Obama could soon extend federal assistance elsewhere in Louisiana, where thousands of people have evacuated and the authorities have reported at least four deaths.State officials said more than 6,100 structures had been damaged, and that the toll was expected to increase.On Monday, fears mounted that more damage was to come, particularly along Louisiana’s western edge, where floodwaters from the Sabine River caused wide destruction.“From the northern portion all the way to the southern portion of my parish, I’ve got major flooding going,” said Glen Mears, the emergency preparedness director in Beauregard Parish in southwestern Louisiana, where a helicopter delivered supplies. “This has never been seen before by anyone here.”Just south, the Calcasieu Parish authorities went door to door to urge people to leave their homes, but they had only limited success.“The great news is it’s not heavily, heavily populated,” said Sheriff Tony Mancuso, who said parts of his parish were under a dusk-to-dawn curfew. “But the bad news is the population that’s there, you know, they’re entrenched there, they love their homes, and they don’t want to leave.”Here in St. Tammany Parish, in the southeastern part of the state, some subdivisions became large lakes, including the well-appointed development of Tallow Creek. Residents paddled their children to safety on Saturday, and some spent the night sitting on roofs watching rescuers scan the water with spotlights. On Monday, rugs and garbage bags were piled along the streets for trash pickup, and in front of the Faherty house towels covered with drying toys were laid out.“My son put a stick in the ground and said, ‘Let’s watch it,’ ” said Tom Faherty, 60, who was walking through his son’s house, now carpet-less, largely unfurnished and shorn of a foot and a half of ruined sheet rock near the floor. “At about 11 o’clock he said, ‘This isn’t stopping.’ ”During his State of the State address on Monday, Mr. Edwards said there was flooding “literally in every corner of our state” and that officials were “working around the clock to get assistance to those who need it.”“I will tell you that I’ve had opportunities over the last several days to see Louisianans taking care of one another as the neighbors that they are called to be, not in the way that we might think of neighbors on a daily basis, but as Jesus taught us with the Parable of the Good Samaritan,” Mr. Edwards said.The Louisiana National Guard said that its soldiers had rescued more than 4,600 people and pets.In Mississippi, where a state of emergency was in effect and the National Guard was activated, the state’s emergency management agency said at least 185 homes were destroyed, and hundreds more were damaged.“We’re doing better than we thought it might have been, but still dealing with a lot of flooding,” Gov. Phil Bryant said on Monday. He said that there had not yet been enough destruction in Mississippi to seek a disaster declaration from Mr. Obama, but that the authorities were prepared for flooding and that the state might ultimately request federal aid.“We are ready to do the best we can, and then it will be a matter of going in and assessing the damage,” Mr. Bryant said, adding, “We think — we hope — the worst is over.”Although Louisiana and Mississippi faced the gravest threats on Monday, federal officials also issued flood warnings in more than a half-dozen other states. Local officials across the South closed schools, opened shelters, imposed curfews and declared roads impassable. Power failures were scattered.The trouble in Louisiana came less than a year after floodwaters battered some of the state’s northern parishes, where the Red River swelled because of downpours elsewhere.“This go-round, we had the heavy rain right over north Louisiana, and it impacted just about the entire region,” said Mr. Hemingway of the Weather Service. “As we continued to pile up the rainfall last week, we couldn’t absorb anymore, and that’s why we experienced so much of the urban flooding. And a lot of that is making its way into the rivers.”In and around Pearl River, residents prepared for a day of rising waters, blowing up air boats and fueling outboard motors. The houses are generally raised, but many said it was hard to know exactly how high the water would get — and where — because so much had changed since the worst flood in memory, in 1983. Since then, lots have been developed, wetlands have been drained and hurricanes have cleared out debris that blocked waterways.“We don’t know what it’s going to do,” said Lora Cutrer, an alderwoman in Pearl River. While she was keeping up with the rising river, her other concern was the local wildlife that might show up on residential streets.“We don’t need kids out there playing with alligators, thank you very much,” Ms. Cutrer said.