http://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/24/business/24TELE.html
AT&T; Is Planning To Split Up Again - The New York Times
AT&T CORP,TELEVISION,CELLULAR TELEPHONES,FINANCES,TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Oct. 24, 2000
9813
The board of AT&T, the nation's largest communications company, approved a plan late yesterday to split up the company in what would be AT&T's most significant overhaul since the court-supervised breakup of the company's Bell System in 1984.Under the plan approved yesterday, people close to the company said, AT&T intends to spin off the company's cable television business and wireless units as separate companies over the next 12 to 24 months.The company also plans to create a new stock to track AT&T's consumer long-distance division, which would operate as a separate retail unit. The remaining core of AT&T would control most of the company's network and oversee the unit that serves business customers.Executives of the company declined to comment, but people close to the company said the decision would probably be announced tomorrow.By now AT&T is familiar with spinoffs. Besides the 1984 breakup, which created seven Bell local phone companies while leaving AT&T with the long-distance business, the company voluntarily broke itself up again in 1996.In that move, AT&T shed its troubled NCR computer business and spun off its equipment unit as Lucent Technologies. Coincidently, Lucent announced yesterday that it had fired its chairman, Richard A. McGinn.As a corporate pater familias, AT&T has been more virile than any company in the nation's history, with the possible exception of the original Standard Oil. Over the last two decades alone, AT&T has spun off units that themselves now have a combined market value of at least $450 billion, rivaling that of the General Electric Company.So now may be the right time to ask: what is AT&T's legacy to its children? What do AT&T's offspring take from their parent and how does it affect their ability to thrive on their own?In many ways, AT&T endows its offspring with the benefits of wealth, a good upbringing and the right connections. But at times, a sense of regal entitlement can create a corporate culture that is slow to recognize its own shortcomings and respond to market changes.Make no mistake; Lucent's recent stumbles notwithstanding, the children tend to thrive. The valuation numbers speak for themselves. With the exception of WorldCom and the Sprint Corporation, all of the nation's top-tier communications services players have roots at AT&T.Of course, top-tier largely means the Bell companies, which have now consolidated into four: BellSouth, Qwest, SBC Communications and Verizon.It is true that much of the telecommunications sector is in the dumps these days; the stocks of many long-distance carriers, wireless providers and new local phone companies are languishing as investors worry that too many companies are chasing too few customers. But the incumbent local phone companies are generally riding high above the carnage, and that speaks to the most visible thing that AT&T gives its children: capital and customers.In the case of the Bells, that meant wires into the lion's share of the nation's homes and businesses; those wires are what keep the Bells out of the morass that much of the  sector has fallen into.In the case of Lucent, the AT&T legacy meant unparalleled research capacity in Bell Labs and credible  relationships with big customers -- including the Bell companies.In keeping with this family tradition, an AT&T cable spinoff would set out as the nation's biggest cable carrier. And the new wireless company would be among the biggest in the nation.''What the spinoffs take is a direct relationship with the customer,'' said Scott Cleland, chief executive of the Precursor Group, a communications research firm in Washington. ''The Bells got the copper wire into 80 percent of America's homes and Lucent, the equipment supplier, took relationships to almost every telephone company in the United States and many around the world.''AT&T's spinoffs also rarely have to look hard to find good executives, Mr. McGinn's travails notwithstanding. AT&T has lost more top-flight executives than many big corporations have ever had -- in part because a top lieutenant at AT&T strikes many other companies as commanding-officer material. All of the remaining Bells have chairmen -- or a chairman-in-waiting, in the case of Verizon -- who originally worked at AT&T.That does not mean, of course, that such management depth necessarily lasts. It is a sign of the weakness of Lucent's bench that that company has brought back Henry B. Schacht as its new chairman; Mr. Schacht ceded that job to Mr. McGinn two years ago. And yet, were John D. Zeglis to stay at the wireless unit and Daniel E. Somers at the cable business, AT&T would have two capable executives already in place to run those businesses.''AT&T hires, attracts and tries to develop very good people, and I think they have a very good focus on customers,'' said Alex J. Mandl, the former AT&T president who is now chairman of Teligent Inc., a new local communications carrier.But all of the resources, customers and talent that AT&T bestows sometimes come with a price: a sclerotic internal structure and a mentality that can prevent the spinoffs from realizing their full potential.''You can argue whether or not the sort of competitive aspects of personalities have been honed as aggressively at AT&T as they might be in Microsoft or Cisco or a company like that,'' Mr. Mandl said.No one in the communications business would question the competitive fire of, say, Edward E. Whitacre Jr., chairman of SBC, and Joseph P. Nacchio, chairman of Qwest, two former AT&T executives who now run Bell companies. But communications experts would also tend to agree that AT&T's spinoffs often take some baggage with them.Lucent provides a good example. The immediate problem that led to Mr. McGinn's ouster was that the company missed a critical product cycle in a critical sector, optical transmission gear. The deeper problem was that Mr. McGinn did not move fast enough to change some of the tendencies that his company inherited from AT&T's Bell Labs.Traditionally, Bell Labs had focused on primary research rather than product development and in some ways, that trend continued after Lucent became independent. Lucent may have had the technology to stay on top of the optical networking market but too much of that technology has stayed in a laboratory rather than moving into the market.Ultimately, however, AT&T's main legacy may be a regal notion that is passed down within the company from one generation of leader to the next, the concept that the company can and should be all things to all people.In AT&T's 1907 annual report, Theodore N. Vail, the company's president, wrote: ''To the public, this 'Bell System' furnishes facilities, in its 'universality' of service and connection, of infinite value to the business world, a service which could not be furnished by dissociated companies. The strength of the Bell System lies in this 'universality.' ''AT&T has shed its aversion to ''dissociated companies,'' as demonstrated by its voluntary spinoffs. But the notion of universality is one that still lingers deep in the company's ethos. In important ways, it drove C. Michael Armstrong, the current chairman, to make AT&T the nation's biggest cable operator, seeking to make cable lines the replacement for the links to millions of homes that the company lost in the 1984 breakup.In the end, Mr. Vail's Bell System was undone by antitrust pressure from the Justice Department. In the end, Mr. Armstrong's vision may be undone by pressure from financial markets.Always, though, the concept of universality -- to be the first choice for communications across the nation -- has persisted at AT&T. And as always, how the company and its progeny cope with that legacy will determine their fate.