http://www.nytimes.com/1996/12/27/opinion/a-wing-and-a-myth.html
A Wing And a Myth - The New York Times
EARHART  AMELIA,AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES,MISSING PERSONS
Dec. 27, 1996
826
A piece of metal found a few years ago on an island in the Pacific might be old enough to have come from Amelia Earhart's plane. That is what experts at the Alcoa Technical Center who examined the scrap have just determined, prompting people to wonder again about the fate of the aviator. Was she spying on the Japanese? Did she land on a desert island? Did she, her navigator and her Lockheed Electra go down in the Pacific?The news also raises the question of why Earhart's legend remains so compelling. When people ask me why we're still interested in her, I'm tempted to say: ''Because she was the most famous woman pilot of her time, a visionary, a person of courage, intelligence and style who flew around the world and disappeared. Isn't that enough?''But maybe it isn't. What makes a myth has more to do with fantasy than with fact, and maybe what makes Earhart such a mythical creature is that she reflects so many of our fantasies. She was romantic and pragmatic, masculine and feminine. She had a passion for life and a suicidal streak. She wanted to fly because she thought that women should do things men had done, and not done. She also wanted to fly for the fun of it.When she vanished off the coast of New Guinea in 1937, at the age of 39, she seemed to embody the American dream of freedom. She also captured the nightmare of failure.Perhaps the greatest contradiction of Earhart's life is that in trying to circumnavigate the globe, she ended up in another world. There's something magical, outrageous and deeply strange about a person who disappears. A person who disappears is neither dead nor alive. What does it mean to be neither dead nor alive? It means you can be dead and alive.Earhart is both. We can know that she's dead and feel as if she's alive. It's uncanny, and it makes her an exceptionally vivid carrier of our dreams. She's like an angel, or a star. Her layers of contradiction -- tomboy and glamour girl, the great heroine who failed -- give her persona an electric, dramatic tension. Eternally in flight, she's almost too perfect a symbol of our imagination.In mythologizing her we've created a character who seems incapable of a simple fate. What if we do find out what actually happened to her? What if someone comes up with incontrovertible evidence that she was a spy, that she landed on an island, that she fell into the sea? Maybe it would take some of the shine off her image, turn her back into a plain old heroine.I'm not sure we'd even believe the real story, whatever it is. We're always looking for the meaning of things, the answer, as if we'd know what to do with it once we found it. But we'll never stop dreaming about Amelia Earhart. She's in the air.