https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/sports/basketball/brooklyn-nets-los-angeles-lakers-brook-lopez-dangelo-russell.html
Nets Said to Be Trading Brook Lopez to Lakers for D’Angelo Russell - The New York Times
Basketball,Trades (Sports),Brooklyn Nets,Los Angeles Lakers,Lopez  Brook,Russell  D'Angelo (1996- ),Mozgov  Timofey
June 20, 2017
3613
The Brook Lopez era is over in Brooklyn.The Nets agreed on Tuesday to trade Lopez, their longtime center, and the 27th pick in Thursday night’s N.B.A. draft to the Los Angeles Lakers for D’Angelo Russell and Timofey Mozgov, according to a league official briefed on the deal.On the surface, the trade appears to be mutually beneficial. For the Nets, the addition of Russell, a 21-year-old point guard, fits into their plans for a slow rebuild. And the Lakers shed pricey contracts that may ease an eventual pursuit of All-Stars.In addition to ridding themselves of Mozgov’s contract, which will last three more years and cost $48 million, the Lakers acquired Lopez’s expiring deal, which would cost Los Angeles $22.6 million for next season.Once that deal expires next summer, the Lakers should be positioned to make lucrative offers to members of the next free-agent class, like Paul George, who grew up in the Los Angeles area and is believed to have interest in joining the team.George has one season left on his contract with the Indiana Pacers, who have been entertaining trade proposals for him in recent days. LeBron James, who has a home in Los Angeles, and Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook also will be eligible to become free agents next summer.The deal between the Nets and the Lakers was first reported by The Vertical.Russell, the second overall pick in the 2015 draft, averaged 15.6 points and 4.8 assists a game while shooting 40.5 percent from the floor last season. He is talented — he scored 40 points in a narrow loss to James’s Cleveland Cavaliers in March — but has not always exhibited the best judgment. During his rookie season, he alienated himself from his teammates with a prank-gone-wrong on Nick Young, whom Russell filmed while he admitted to cheating on his then-fiancée. The video made it onto the internet, and Russell publicly apologized.Russell should have more time to learn and grow with the Nets, who can afford to be patient with him.Mozgov, a 30-year-old center, has career averages of 7 points and 5 rebounds a game. After playing for the Cavaliers during their championship run in 2016, Mozgov cashed in as a free agent last summer, signing a lucrative deal with the Lakers. But he failed to have much impact in Los Angeles, and the team’s new front office — led by Magic Johnson and the former agent Rob Pelinka — was eager to move on. By packaging him with Russell, the Lakers found a willing trade partner.Lopez, 29, was a mainstay with the Nets, having spent his entire nine-year N.B.A. career with the franchise dating to its final seasons in New Jersey. During that time, he lost most of two seasons to injuries and was the subject of frequent trade rumors. But he stuck around amid the franchise’s upheaval and dysfunction, and last season averaged 20.5 points and 5.4 rebounds. He also became the Nets’ career scoring leader last season — one of the few highlights for the team, which lumbered to a league-worst 20-62 record under its first-year coach, Kenny Atkinson.After years of ill-advised deals and bad contracts, the Nets are seeking stability — and they are doing it by banking on the future.