https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/politics/environmental-groups-focus-on-change-by-strengthening-their-political-operations.html
Environmental Groups Focus on Change by Strengthening Their Political Operations - The New York Times
Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Global Warming,Environment,Sierra Club,National Republican Congressional Committee,Peabody Energy Corporation,Natural Resources Defense Council,Environmental Protection Agency,Obama  Barack,Political Action Committees,United States
May 31, 2014
1240
ST. LOUIS — When the police arrested seven students at Washington University in St. Louis recently after a crowd of protesters sought to crash a board of trustees meeting, leaders of the environmental movement were thrilled.The students were demanding the resignation of one of the board’s members: Gregory H. Boyce, the chairman of Peabody Energy Corporation, the nation’s largest coal company and one of the most ardent corporate opponents of efforts to address global warming. They also represented the face of a new activism that the nation’s largest environmental groups are encouraging to revive a climate-change movement that seemed stalled not so long ago.Like their student confederates, the so-called big green groups are mounting their own climate-change campaign this spring, and it looks nothing like the failed efforts of the recent past.What was a scattering of lawyers, lobbyists and policy analysts with the same goal but no agenda has become a united front, leaders of the groups say. Major organizations like the Sierra Club and the Natural Resources Defense Council have strengthened their political operations and grass-roots networks, and they have raised and spent more money than ever before.Members whose activism had been limited mostly to paying their annual dues have been marshaled by the groups for a number of efforts, like demonstrating in Washington, dogging members of Congress on home leave and blitzing the Environmental Protection Agency with emails and letters.“The national environmental groups said, ‘We need to do more in-your-face activism,' ” said Gene Karpinski, the president of the League of Conservation Voters. “You can’t just lobby members of Congress with a poll that says people support you.”Most striking, perhaps, the groups intend to make global warming an issue in some of this fall’s hardest-fought political campaigns — a calculation that conservatives who say climate change poses no threat have overplayed their hand.An example of the retooled strategy will debut Monday, when the Obama administration will issue a draft regulation sharply limiting emissions of global-warming gases from existing coal-burning power plants. Anticipating furious opposition from congressional Republicans and coal-state Democrats, environmental groups plan to rally support for the regulation using a campaign created by the Climate Action Coalition — a coordinating body with its own staff and consultants, formed by 10 leading environmental groups and linked to 60 more.Created in 2009 during a failed lobbying effort for climate-change legislation, the coalition was “renovated from bottom to top” after the 2010 midterm elections to bolster it for continuing climate-change battles, said Wesley Warren, head of the Policy Advocacy Center at the Natural Resources Defense Council. Most recently the coalition oversaw a campaign, completed in May, that spurred four million people to send comments to the Environmental Protection Agency supporting a proposal to limit emissions from new coal-burning power plants.The new campaign, which will reprise the comment drive, will be backed by millions in advertising on cable television and online.“What we’ve learned is that you have to build out the political infrastructure to support these kinds of actions at every level,” Mr. Warren said.If big green claims to have retaken the offense in the climate-change wars, opponents say they welcome the fight.“The issue most people are most concerned about is jobs, and the policies they are proposing limit job growth and potentially destroy existing jobs,” said Daniel Scarpinato, a spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, the House Republicans’ campaign arm. “It’s out of touch with where the American people are.”A spokeswoman for Senator James M. Inhofe, an Oklahoma Republican who calls climate change a hoax, described the groups’ campaign as hypocritical, saying the environmentalists accuse their foes of being financed by oil-industry contributions while liberal allies pour tens of millions of dollars into their effort.And John Christy, a scientist and climate-change skeptic at the University of Alabama in Huntsville who was a lead author of a 2001 report for the authoritative Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, called the big green groups ideologues. “It’s a strategy that doesn’t require any scientific defensibility,” he said, but “the real data will eventually win.”Those are precisely the arguments that the major environmental organizations aim to refute, said Michael Brune, the executive director of the Sierra Club.“We’re in a fight to change how our civilization is powered — that’s the crux of the climate-change issue,” he said. “The coal and oil and gas companies are fighting the environmental movement very actively, punching with both fists, and to combat that, the environmental movement needs to be strong.”Which it was not. Such changes were a recognition that the very groups whose grass-roots and political activism spawned the environmental movement in the 1960s and 1970s had let those strengths atrophy by the time the climate-change battles of the last decade began.During those years, the groups’ strategy was rooted in Washington lobbying, and their effort to rally public support was driven mostly by scientists’ complaints of an invisible, slow-moving and seemingly distant threat. The approach made the environmental movement an easy target for the energy industry and its ideological allies, which cast doubt on the reliability of climate science and turned global warming into a political wedge issue.Comprehensive climate-change legislation that had been the overriding goal of the environmental movement died in the Senate in 2010 without reaching a vote. That November, an angry electorate replaced many of the legislation’s supporters in Congress with deeply conservative Republicans who opposed climate legislation.Thoroughly drubbed by their foes, big green leaders decided to bury their climate-change strategy, but not before conducting a collective autopsy.“After we quickly got through the hand-wringing and finger-pointing,” said Mr. Karpinski, “we spent a lot of time saying, ‘O.K., what do we need to do to be more powerful?' ”Much of the reinvigorated activism stems from strategic decisions made after the electoral defeats of 2010. A rejuvenated Climate Action Campaign moved its focus to promoting the federal government’s authority to rein in carbon emissions. The Natural Resources Defense Council, long focused on lawsuits and policy papers, set up an advocacy center that, among other projects, organized Latino climate activism; the group currently runs Latino voter-registration programs with the League of Conservation Voters in 12 states.By 2011, Mr. Brune’s Sierra Club had created an Internet team to extend the group’s reach. Experimenting with everything from website typefaces to the “sign” button on email petitions, the group sharply increased donations to Sierra campaigns and, since September, recruited 100,000 volunteers.Last August, the League of Conservation Voters tested the greens’ election strategy, running commercials in the home states of legislators who question a threat from global warming. Polls indicated that favorable ratings of the legislators dropped once voters knew of their views, said David Willett, the league’s chief spokesman.“It’s not just people’s position on climate change, but what your denials say about you as a person,” Mr. Willett said. “It paints you as an extremist and puts you in a category of people that people think of as the fringe — birthers and that sort of thing.”The 2014 election will show whether the same messages that resonate with environmental loyalists also strike a chord with other voters. This time, the big-green strategy is not to make climate change an electoral litmus test — few voters do that — but to make it a test of character.In Florida, where a rising sea level is becoming a concern, the Natural Resources Defense Council is dispatching local environmentalists to Gov. Rick Scott’s public appearances to ask that he explain his plan to address climate change. Mr. Scott’s videotaped responses — the first was “Goodbye” — are sent to the state’s news media and to activist groups.In Michigan, where concern is rising over the impact of climate change on the Great Lakes, the Democratic candidate for the Senate, Representative Gary Peters, is challenging his Republican opponent, Terri Lynn Land, to say whether she believes human activity causes global warming.In St. Louis, the student protesters say the leader of a company that disputes a threat from global warming has no place at an institution where scientists have underscored the seriousness of the problem and administrators have set a goal of reducing its carbon footprint. The university says Mr. Boyce of Peabody Energy is staying on its board — and the students say they will keep protesting until that changes.Julia Ho, one of the protesters, said, “I think it’s pretty fair to say that this issue isn’t going away.”