https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/07/world/australia/sam-dastyari-china-senator-donation.html
Chinese Company’s Payment to Lawmaker Sets Off Furor in Australia - The New York Times
Dastyari  Sam (1983- ),Campaign Finance,Australia,Labor Party (Australia),Legislatures and Parliaments,China
Sept. 6, 2016
9082
SYDNEY, Australia — An Australian senator who accepted a donation from a Chinese company and used it to cover travel expenses has provoked charges in the country that foreign donors are buying political influence.Over the last week, the senator, Sam Dastyari of the opposition Labor Party, has faced intense pressure over the payment, which amounted to about $1,270.Mr. Dastyari told Parliament last week that the Top Education Institute, a private Chinese company, made the payment, which he later said he had used to pay some travel bills. He publicly declared the funds on a disclosure register for politicians, and his acceptance of them was not illegal.At a news conference on Tuesday, he apologized for accepting the payment, saying that he had only ever “acted in the national interest and the public interest.”But Mr. Dastyari’s opaque declaration in Parliament on Aug. 31 — it was just 66 words and came only after pressure from his political opponents — added fuel to concerns that he might have deviated from Australia’s bipartisan, hard-line policy against China’s activities in the South China Sea. That led to a fiery debate over the influence of foreigners in Australia’s politics.“Ministers have been sacked for less,” the leader of the Greens party, Richard Di Natale, said Tuesday on ABC radio. “Let’s recognize that big-money politics is corrupting the decisions that are made in the Australian Parliament.”Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce has called on the Labor Party leader, Bill Shorten, to dismiss Mr. Dastyari. Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, speaking on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hangzhou, China, said that the senator was undermining Australia’s foreign policy.Political opponents of Mr. Dastyari pointed out that as he was campaigning for the national elections that took place on July 2, the Chinese news media in Australia reported that he was supportive of Beijing’s activities in the South China Sea, a claim he denied.“Bill Shorten is standing up for Sam Dastyari’s right to take cash from a company associated with a foreign government,” Mr. Turnbull said, “and then express a view on foreign policy that undermines the Australian government’s foreign policy.”China has built artificial islands and military installations in the Spratly archipelago, not far from Scarborough Shoal, about 140 miles from the Philippines. A tribunal at The Hague ruled against China in July, rebuking it for violating international laws on fishing, endangering vessels from the Philippines and failing to protect the shoal’s marine environment.Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, urged China to abide by the ruling, and Mr. Turnbull told President Xi Jinping of China after the Group of 20 meeting that Australia expected all parties to comply with the law and not act in a way that exacerbated tensions in the region.China is Australia’s largest trading partner and owns significant infrastructure assets in the country, including a 99-year lease over a port in Darwin in the Northern Territory. But relations between the two countries have increasingly been marked by discord. Last month, Australia’s treasurer, Scott Morrison, rejected a bid from a Chinese company to buy just over half of Ausgrid, which distributes power in the most populous state, New South Wales. Mr. Morrison cited national security concerns.During questioning of Mr. Dastyari in the Senate, Stephen Conroy of the Labor Party demanded to know why Ms. Bishop’s party, the Western Australian branch of the Liberal Party, had received about $457,000 from a Chinese company that does not do business in Western Australia, Ms. Bishop’s home state. He added that the payment had “hopelessly compromised” her.A list published by the Australian Electoral Commission shows that for the year ending on June 30, 2015, the most recent period for which data was available, Hong Kong Kingson Investments, of East Kowloon, donated $152,000 to the Liberal Party’s Western Australian branch.These donations were not illegal, although donations to any political party greater than $10,000 must be declared on the commission’s public register. But the declarations can be made months after the funds change hands, sometimes well after national elections.Mr. Dastyari told Parliament that “on reflection, I should have paid that amount myself.”He added, “I take full responsibility, and I have donated that amount to charity.”At the news conference on Tuesday, he said he supported the policy on China and the South China Sea shared by the government and the Labor Party.Mr. Shorten, the Labor leader, and Mr. Di Natale of the Greens have said they want an end to foreign political donations. On Tuesday, a lawmaker from Mr. Turnbull’s party also called for change.“It’s wrong for substantial amounts of money from foreign entities and nondemocratic governments to flow into Australian body politic,” the Liberal senator from South Australia, Cory Bernardi, told ABC radio.“Donations should only be made to political parties by those that are registered on the Australian electoral roll, they should be capped at a finite amount, and they should only be made by individuals,” he said.