https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/13/nyregion/with-future-of-stop-and-frisk-tactic-within-their-grasp-few-candidates-have-a-plan.html
After Decision, Mayoral Candidates Offer Many Opinions but Few Concrete Plans - The New York Times
Search and Seizure,Elections  Mayors,Police Department (NYC),Liu  John C,Catsimatidis  John A,Thompson  William C Jr,Quinn  Christine C,Bloomberg  Michael R,de Blasio  Bill,Lhota  Joseph J,New York City,Police,Racial Profiling
Aug. 12, 2013
1425
Many of the candidates for mayor of New York have called the city’s use of stop-and-frisk policing unconstitutional, unwarranted and unfair to black and Hispanic communities.But few of them have offered details on how they would reshape a signature policy of the Bloomberg administration — a critical decision that will define the next mayor’s approach to public safety at a time when homicide rates are near historic lows.The stop-and-frisk issue re-emerged on the campaign trail on Monday after a federal judge said the city’s use of the tactic had violated the constitutional rights of black and Hispanic young men.Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, in furious terms, pledged to appeal the ruling. But the legal battle will most likely persist beyond the end of the year, when Mr. Bloomberg’s tenure ends, leaving his successor with a crucial choice.Four Democrats vying to succeed Mr. Bloomberg pledged on Monday to overhaul the stop-and-frisk tactic and end the city’s appeal of the decision if elected: Bill de Blasio, the public advocate; John C. Liu, the city comptroller; Christine C. Quinn, the City Council speaker; and William C. Thompson Jr., a former city comptroller.Several Republicans, including John A. Catsimatidis, a billionaire grocer, and Joseph J. Lhota, a former Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman, stood by Mr. Bloomberg’s efforts and pledged to defend the practice.At a news conference on Monday, Mr. Bloomberg expressed some concern about the future of a tool that he has often credited with reducing crime in the city. Asked if the stop-and-frisk policy would continue after his time as mayor, he said: “Boy, I hope so, because I wouldn’t want to be responsible for a lot of people dying.”While many of the Democratic candidates have said they would work to decrease the frequency of stops, they have not said exactly how they would overhaul the stop-and-frisk practice.The exception is Mr. Liu, who has called for banning the tactic entirely.Ms. Quinn and Mr. de Blasio have argued for the appointment of an inspector general to oversee the Police Department. (Mr. Bloomberg vetoed a City Council bill to that effect last month; lawmakers will vote later this month on whether to override his veto.)Ms. Quinn said that in her administration, the number of people stopped under the policy — which totaled 4.4 million between 2004 and mid-2012 — would “go down dramatically.” She said that she would like to keep in place Mr. Bloomberg’s police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, a staunch defender of the stop-and-frisk policy, but that he would have to follow her orders.Mr. de Blasio, who has called for a community policing model, criticized the stop-and-frisk practice, blaming Ms. Quinn and Mr. Bloomberg for its wide use.“It has only served to drive police and community further apart,” he said at a news conference in Times Square. He said that the City Council should pass a bill to open state courts to claims of racial profiling — in addition to the inspector-general bill — and that he would appoint a new police commissioner.Mr. Thompson has drawn distinctions with his Democratic rivals by refusing to support the Council bills. He has said he would work to change the culture of the Police Department from within, by improving training. In a major speech last month, he denounced the policies of the Police Department, drawing comparisons to the case of Trayvon Martin in Florida.Several of the Republican candidates embraced Mr. Bloomberg’s use of the tactic. Mr. Lhota rejected the judge’s call for installing an independent lawyer to monitor the stop-and-frisk practice. “The last thing we need is another layer of outside bureaucracy dictating our policing,” he said in a statement.Mr. Catsimatidis called the stop-and-frisk policy an “example of proactive police work that gets guns off our streets.”The stop-and-frisk issue is tricky for the mayoral candidates, given the drop in crime during Mr. Bloomberg’s tenure. The next mayor will face pressure to maintain crime at low levels, and any change in policy might come under criticism if crime rates fluctuate.“The first time that there is an uptick in crime, The New York Post will have a headline about police reform bringing the city back to the bad old days,” said Alex S. Vitale, an associate professor of sociology at Brooklyn College who studies policing. “Negotiating that risk is going to be the biggest challenge.”