https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/realestate/compare-homes-in-bethel-park-pennsylvania-santa-fe-new-mexico-and-st-louis-missouri.html
$500,000 Homes in Pennsylvania, New Mexico and Missouri - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Pittsburgh (Pa),Santa Fe (NM),St Louis (Mo)
July 19, 2017
2840
WHAT A house built in 1840 with four bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $549,900SIZE About 3,500 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT About $157SETTING This three-story house is in a suburb about 10 miles south of central Pittsburgh. The 2,013-acre South Park is nearby, with trails, a golf course, athletic facilities, a nature center and a wave pool. There are many shopping options close by as well, including the South Hills Village and Galleria malls less than five miles away.INDOORS This historic landmark, known as the Peter Boyer House, retains much of its early charm, including chestnut floors, a central cherry staircase, and two wood-burning and four decorative fireplaces. From the porch, an entrance door with sidelights and transom window opens into a large foyer. The house is set into a hillside, and a door directly ahead provides access to a basement laundry room and storage space. To one side is a formal dining room with built-in cabinetry, currently used as a family room; to the other side is a large renovated eat-in kitchen with marble counters, a farmhouse sink and Viking appliances.The second floor has four large rooms that could all be used as bedrooms; one is currently used as a sitting room and another as an office and bar (with a door leading to a large patio above the attached two-car garage). There are two porches on this level — one on the front of the house, the other at the side. The master bedroom is connected to a carpeted sitting room with built-in bookcases. All share a bathroom that has been renovated with subway tile, a black-and-white hex tile floor and a marble vanity. There is a half-bathroom between two of the rooms. Two additional bedrooms are on the third floor, under sloped ceilings.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 1.75-acre landscaped lot with a large lawn, gardens, stone walls, a fire pit area, a spring and a shed for storage.TAXES $7,570 a yearCONTACT Krissy Rackley, RE/MAX, 412-833-0900; remax.com•WHAT A 2009 compound including a house with two bedrooms and a bathroom, a guesthouse with a bedroom and a bathroom, and a garage with a studioHOW MUCH $469,750SIZE 1,760 square feet totalPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $267SETTING This house sits on a mesa in a sparsely populated area with long views of the Sangre de Christo and Jemez mountains, including Cerro Pedernal, a favorite of Georgia O’Keeffe. The small city of Española is about 20 miles south, and Santa Fe is around 20 miles farther.INDOORS The buildings on this property were designed with ease of maintenance and passive solar heating in mind. The main house has a stucco-and-glass exterior topped by a metal roof with a large overhang in front, which allows sunlight inside in the winter (where it heats a concrete floor equipped with a radiant heating system) but provides shade in the summer. The front of the house has an open living, dining and kitchen area centered on a cinder block wood-burning fireplace between floor-to-ceiling windows. Toward the back of the house there are two bedrooms, one currently used as a media room; they share a bathroom with a tiled walk-in shower.The 160-square-foot guesthouse contains a bedroom and a connected bathroom, which the owners rent through Airbnb and VRBO. The detached two-car garage is clad in corrugated metal and has a large glass door; it connects to a 375-square-foot studio with its own entrance and sliding glass doors.OUTDOOR SPACE The buildings are clustered together and connected by concrete pavers set in a pebbled surface, on a 16.9-acre lot with pinyon and juniper trees, yucca plants and flowering cactuses. There are corrugated metal fences, multiple patios and grilling stations for the main house and guesthouse.TAXES $3,230 a yearCONTACT Ann McDaniel, Abiquiu Realty, 505-685-4646; abiquiuland.com•WHAT An 1895 house with three bedrooms and three and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $465,000SIZE 3,790 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $123SETTING This house is in the Compton Heights neighborhood, a historic district with an eclectic collection of old homes. It is a few blocks from Compton Hill Reservoir Park, home to a distinctive tower with an observation deck built in 1898 that is occasionally open to visitors, including during full moons. Numerous restaurants are within about a mile; the house is also near Interstate 44.INDOORS This brick house retains much of its original charm, with distinctive moldings, doors and mantels around its five fireplaces. The front door opens into an entrance hall the size of a small family room. The ceilings are 12 feet high, and the floors are parquet. The living room is to one side of the entry. Antique doors with stained-glass panels lead to a hallway with the staircase and a dining room beyond. The renovated kitchen at the back of the house has a tiled floor, butcher-block counters, stainless-steel appliances and exposed brick walls.The master bedroom is on the second floor and connects to a renovated bathroom with a clawfoot soaking tub and a free-standing shower. The owner has turned the attic into a third-floor suite with a carpeted bedroom and sitting room, and a bathroom with a corner bathtub and shower.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.141-acre lot with a landscaped backyard and a large two-level deck that holds a swimming pool. There is a small lawn and a pebbled area for parking, which doubles as a fire pit space.TAXES $2,449 a yearCONTACT Anna Garcia, Garcia Properties, 314-973-3319; gpstl.com