https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/arts/music/beyonce-twins-photo.html
Beyoncé Releases First Photo of Her Twins - The New York Times
Knowles  Beyonce,Pregnancy and Childbirth,Jay-Z,Social Media
July 14, 2017
7363
One month after the internet exploded over rumors that Beyoncé had given birth to twins, she finally made it official in the same way she broke the news of her pregnancy: on her own terms, with an Instagram post early on Friday morning.The image shows Beyoncé, 35, holding her two babies — a boy and a girl — in front of an elaborate flower arrangement by the sea, and is captioned, “Sir Carter and Rumi 1 month today.” It had received more than 6.6 million likes on Instagram by 10 a.m. on Friday.A representative for Beyoncé said that the photographer Mason Poole took the picture of her with the twins. The image is similar in aesthetic to the one Beyoncé posted in February to announce her pregnancy, in which she was surrounded by roses, draped in sheer material and cradling her belly. The pregnancy photo shoot was done by the artist and photographer Awol Erizku, who called that project “a collaboration,” adding, “Beyoncé didn’t say, ‘Hey, this is what I want; do this.’”Reports of the twins’ birth started circulating in June from media outlets, including People and Entertainment Tonight, which cited anonymous sources. Baby fever ensued on social media. Beyoncé’s husband, the rapper Jay-Z, referred to their birth on his new  album, “4:44,” which he released on June 30. Still, Beyoncé stayed silent.In the end, she has done something uncommon in a world of 24-hour celebrity news. She has managed to keep tight control over the release of information about her pregnancy and delivery, revealing it on her own timeline and on her own terms. It’s in keeping with how this pop star has conducted all of her business over the last few years. As The New York Times noted in 2015, Beyoncé is seen but not heard: She rarely grants interviews, and when she does, she often answers queries by email. (In January she was the one asking the questions, speaking with her sister, Solange, for Interview magazine.)Beyoncé has also chosen when and how to make major announcements about her music, revealing “Lemonade” via an hourlong HBO special last year, and releasing “Beyoncé” as a surprise in 2013. She informed the world of her first pregnancy by rubbing her belly and grinning at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards. The couple’s daughter Blue Ivy Carter is now 5 and recently made a guest appearance on Jay-Z’s “4:44.”Throughout her pregnancy with the twins, Beyoncé used Instagram to document her style, turning out photos that were artistic, glamorous and skillfully staged. She performed at the Grammys while pregnant in February, but had to cancel her headlining sets at Coachella in April.Her pregnancy announcement in February remains the most-liked photo on Instagram ever, with more than 11 million likes to date. The caption for that image reads: “We would like to share our love and happiness. We have been blessed two times over. We are incredibly grateful that our family will be growing by two, and we thank you for your well wishes. — The Carters.”