http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/04/world/americas/hurricane-matthew-haiti-jamaica-cuba.html
Haiti Braces for Catastrophe as Hurricane Matthew Makes Landfall - The New York Times
vis-multimedia
Oct. 3, 2016
6270
Haiti braced for a possible catastrophe on Tuesday as Hurricane Matthew, a dangerous Category 4 storm, made landfall, delivering winds of up to 145 miles an hour and rainfall that could exceed three feet in some areas.The storm made landfall around 7 a.m. near the town of Les Anglais, in western Haiti. The eye of the storm was expected to move near eastern Cuba later on Tuesday and to deliver torrential rains and powerful gusts there. The storm is expected to retain its intensity until at least Wednesday night.“Haiti is in deep, deep trouble tonight,” Dennis Feltgen, a meteorologist and spokesman for the National Hurricane Center in Miami, said on Monday evening. “The potential for Haiti is what I would describe as catastrophic.”Heavy rains and damaging winds were expected across a number of island nations, including Jamaica and Turks and Caicos. “Life-threatening flash floods and mudslides are likely from this rainfall in southern and northwestern Haiti, the southwestern Dominican Republic, and eastern Cuba,” the hurricane center warned.As the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere, Haiti is still recovering from a devastating earthquake in 2010, and it has limited resources to respond to another large-scale natural disaster.The hurricane is striking at a particularly difficult time for Haiti. The nation was planning long-delayed elections for this weekend. If large stretches of the country are inundated with water and are devoid of power, and if roads and other critical infrastructure are severely damaged, the likelihood of electing a new president will be low.More immediately, the storm surge, or water pressing in toward the island, was expected to be seven to 10 feet, a huge amount for even a developed nation with the resources to combat such a storm. In Haiti, there is no protective sea wall to help blunt the encroaching tide.Operation Blessing International, a charity that operates in Haiti, warned on Monday that an outbreak of cholera could quickly follow intense flooding.“Based on the rainfall predictions and how slow this storm is moving, we fear that Matthew will bring a tsunami of cholera cases unseen since post-earthquake days,” the group said in a statement.As the water rolls off Haiti’s mountains, which have been broadly stripped of their trees, landslides are highly likely. While these conditions exist in much of the country, the south, has another disadvantage. Many resident there are subsistence farmers. Flooding will probably destroy even that.“This hurricane is hitting the worst possible place,” said Conor Shapiro, the president of the St. Boniface Haiti Foundation, which runs the largest hospital in southern Haiti.In the south, heavy rains and winds had already arrived on Monday, prompting the evacuation of people across the region.“My biggest concern is food supplies and basics to assist the people I have evacuated,” said Ronald Delice, the head of civil protection in the southeast of Haiti. He said his teams had relocated 800 people in 40 shelters.In other areas, residents were resistant to leaving, fearful of abandoning belongings and their homes, in part because of robberies. Low-lying areas of the capital, often the more poverty-stricken, are especially vulnerable.On Monday afternoon, NASA posted video from the International Space Station showing the storm from 250 miles above.International aid groups are preparing to send people and begin assessing the damage. Many of the groups, recalling the chaos and waste that followed efforts to assist Haiti after the 2010 earthquake, are hoping for an improved response this time.“The 2010 response was regarded as a huge disaster, really just a disaster upon a disaster,” said Chris Skopec, who is with the humanitarian aid group International Medical Corps. “A lot of the systems in place have been built on the lessons learned from those mistakes.”The challenge, in large part, is one of coordination, a job that by most accounts should fall to the central government. At the best of times, the Haitian government struggles. But now, it is worse: There is no elected president, meaning there is a significant absence in the center of the central government.The hurricane is expected to remain dangerous through the next five days, according to the National Hurricane Center. It forecast “very dangerous” beach and boating conditions along much of the East Coast of the United States throughout this week and weekend.The governors of Florida and North Carolina declared emergencies, and officials worried that the storm could shift rapidly westward, potentially leaving little time for evacuations.“Although Matthew is not projected at this time to directly impact Florida, that could quickly change,” Gov. Rick Scott said in Hialeah, near Miami. He said state officials were especially concerned about the Interstate 95 corridor.