https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/world/americas/venezuela-police-protests.html
Police and Protesters in Venezuela Share Common Grievances - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Venezuela,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Maduro  Nicolas
May 17, 2017
282
CARACAS, Venezuela — In scenes across Venezuela, the security forces emerge as villains in dark uniforms. A young demonstrator approaches the military with outstretched arms, witnesses said, only to be shot dead moments later.In one video, a National Guard armored vehicle runs over protesters. In another, a man shrouded in tear gas falls into convulsions before soldiers toss him on the back of a motorcycle.But behind their shields and batons, many police officers are enduring the same economic turmoil — and share many of the same grievances — as the protesters they are battling, testing their loyalties to the government they have been sent to defend.“We are citizens, too, and we are not exempt from this crisis affecting us,” said a 46-year-old member of the National Police deployed during demonstrations here in the capital, Caracas.Just like countless other Venezuelans, she said, before going to work she takes one last look at a refrigerator with barely enough to feed her son. She then travels from her government housing complex into the center of the capital as the crowds began to gather, only too aware of why they are so angry.“I once went to the supermarket and there were five brands of milk, and I could buy everything I wanted — whatever you wanted, whatever you could,” she said. “But now, you go there and there is nothing.”The police officer, like others interviewed in this article, spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals from the government, including being dismissed from a job that pays less than $1.75 a day. As the battle for Venezuela’s future is fought on its streets, she says she is caught between a government she no longer believes in and a protest movement that has labeled her the enemy.“If you speak bad of Maduro, you will be jailed,” she warned, referring to the President Nicolás Maduro.Unable to reach the presidential palace, which has been cordoned off, many Venezuelans have vented their outrage at the police officers containing them in streets, throwing homemade bombs and feces at the security services. At least one officer and a National Guardsman have been killed, the authorities say.The scenes of repression from the police and military have been stark as well. As protesters demand food and new elections, stone-faced police officers have dragged them across the pavement or chased them into a dirty canal with the sting of tear gas. More than 40 people have died in the clashes in recent weeks.Yet there are moments when the two sides have seemed closer. On the side of a building one night, as shots were heard in the capital and people in high-rises banged on pots and pans to protest the president, someone projected a message on a wall directed at the National Guard. “Guardsmen,” it said, “are you not hungry?”The pain has been growing in Venezuela for more than two years as it reels from its worst economic crisis in generations. Hundreds of thousands have taken to the streets to demand the ouster of Mr. Maduro, and clashes between protesters and the state have continued for weeks.The United States raised the crisis at the United Nations Security Council on Wednesday, despite Venezuela’s objection that it was an internal matter. Ambassador Nikki R. Haley of the United States said that if left unaddressed, Venezuela’s crisis would escalate into a “world problem,” as had the crises that afflicted countries like Syria and South Sudan.The United States took no sides in Venezuela, Ms. Haley insisted, but she called on Mr. Maduro to “show respect for the Venezuelan people” and their constitutional rights. “Suddenly, you’re arresting protesters, we’re seeing deaths happen, we’re seeing political prisoners,” she said. “That’s not the way to respect your people.”Students left their classes on a recent day at the Central University of Venezuela, pushing into the lines of security forces as they tried to make their way to the Ministry of the Interior. There was tear gas and the sounds of rubber bullets being fired.“You bastards, you disgrace; you’re going to pay,” a woman yelled at police officers as she passed by in a truck.A 26-year-old officer stood at the sidelines, not much older than the students. It was not the insults that bothered him most that day; it was not his daily pay, which hardly bought a hamburger, or the fact that the constant protests had forced him to sleep in a police station that had run out of water.What he feared most was returning home, he said. Crime was so rampant that gangs in his working-class town had taken to picking off police officers when they returned, he said, including a member of his unit, who was stabbed to death last year in front of his family. Before the killing, he said, the gang ordered the victim to put on his uniform.“For the gangs, killing us is a prize,” the officer said. “The government does nothing.”As he spoke, news came that a student leader had died in the coastal state of Anzoategui. A hush descended over the officers and they began to retreat to another part of the campus.“I think they will topple this government and end this mess,” the young officer said before he headed away.Others hope for a different end. “There has to be a deal, the country has to be reunited again,” a police commander said.With 23 years on the force, he remembers the past protests that looked so much like the ones today: the demonstrations in 2014 that left 40 dead, the strike in 2002 that ended in a brief coup against Hugo Chávez, then the president.So little seemed to change after each wave, he said. Would there be a new government this time?He thought for a moment. “Governments come and go, but the police always remains,” he said.On a recent Saturday in Caracas, another day of protests had closed the streets. This time, thousands of women had gathered, many holding flags and pictures of sons and loved ones they had lost in the unrest.It was a difficult scene for the 46-year-old police officer, who was catching her breath after managing a cordon to keep the women from advancing. The protesters seemed too much like her, she said. Their struggles were her struggles; their tears were becoming hers, too.At one point, she recalled, a policewoman scolded another officer: “You’re weak, don’t cry.”“But I say, no one is a stone, because my eyes have gotten watery, too, now,” she said. She paused, and added, “But one can’t speak like this on the job.”But when her job ends in the evening, the officer changes out of her uniform, and she feels as vulnerable as any Venezuelan.One night, as she headed home with her husband, a police commander, they reached an unlit stretch of road. Before long, two men were stalking them in the darkness. “Don’t scream,” were the assailant’s words, the officer remembered. “I thought, ‘My God, they will kill us.’”But they had only a razor. Her husband had a gun. The men ran away.“It’s not worth it,” she said. “I’m tired of this, and so is my husband.”