https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/18/nyregion/sag-harbor-fire-destroys-theater.html
In Sag Harbor, a Beloved Cultural Oasis Is Lost - The New York Times
Sag Harbor Cinema (Sag Harbor  NY),Sag Harbor (NY),Movies,Fires and Firefighters,Theaters (Buildings)
Dec. 18, 2016
8865
The program scheduled at the Sag Harbor Cinema over the weekend was typically offbeat: It included a French film about a philosophy professor facing a midlife crisis and a documentary about a Dutch immigrant who turned an old plow horse into a show jumping champion.But the theater — beloved for its single large screen, the breadth of its programming and its red neon sign with the village name — was destroyed in a fire that ripped along Main Street on Friday, leaving residents dealing with the loss of a cultural oasis that had become a symbol of the area.“For anyone entering Sag Harbor, the sign had significance and was remarkable,” said April Gornik, vice president of the Sag Harbor Partnership, a group that works to preserve the character of the town, on Long Island’s East End. “But for anyone that was living here, we understood that it was a possibility of seeing the most fantastic films in the world at a remarkably preserved venue.”She added: “Everyone’s in tremendous sadness over it. No one has driven by the cinema where it had stood and not felt just a tremendous pain and pang of remorse.”The fire broke out in a building in the Main Street shopping district early Friday and, driven by the wind, spread to several other buildings, including the movie theater. A popular coffee shop and several stores were badly damaged, and several apartments were destroyed, although there were no injuries, according to Mayor Sandra Schroeder.Volunteer firefighters from several towns spent hours battling the blaze in freezing temperatures that turned the water from their hoses to ice. The cause is still under investigation.The theater is owned by Gerald Mallow, a real estate developer, who bought it in the 1970s. A film enthusiast, Mr. Mallow had changed little about the theater since, resisting the trend of dividing larger theaters to install multiple screens. The theater has one large screen, and he frequently programmed several movies a day — each one showing once.For Sunday, the program would have included the documentary about the immigrant and the horse, “Harry & Snowman,” at 3 p.m., the French film, “Things to Come,” at 5 p.m., and the hit independent film “Moonlight,” at 7 p.m.Reached by telephone, Mr. Mallow said: “I’m not ready to talk to you now. Sorry.”“He’s in terrible shock,” said Robby Stein, the deputy mayor of Sag Harbor, who said he spoke to Mr. Mallow after the fire. “This has been a life work for him.”Mr. Stein added, “It was like being punched in the head.”Mr. Mallow has periodically talked about selling the theater, and a group of residents, including Mr. Stein and Ms. Gornik, hoped to raise money to buy the building and preserve it as a movie house. Mr. Stein said that it was unclear now what would happen.The building became a movie theater in the 1920s, but before that it was a venue for vaudeville and other types of entertainment. The neon sign, with its curved letters echoing the curved top of the white facade, was replaced several years ago with a replica of the original.The building’s facade had to be demolished because it was weakened by the fire, Ms. Schroeder said. The sign, however, was rescued. The main part of the theater, where the screen and seats were, is intact, although the extent of the damage is not clear, Ms. Schroeder said.“Gerry captured the kind of essence of the independent theater which has died all around us,” Mr. Stein said. “It also was kind of a place where it was idiosyncratic in every way. Everyone has stories about being there in the middle of winter with five people, and yet the movies would go on.”Sag Harbor was a hub of the whaling industry in the 18th century. It has also been a home to writers, including John Steinbeck and E. L. Doctorow. For years, it was a sleepy town sidelined from a wave of luxury that washed over other parts of the South Fork, although, in recent years, it has become more upscale.Still, Ms. Gornik said it retained enough of its old character to be considered “the un-Hampton.”“The fact that we had the coolest movie theater just seemed to go with that, and it was just of a piece with a community that’s really vibrant: artists, writers, poets, movie people,” she said.While the building and its sign were widely loved, there appeared to be a divide among newer and older residents in their attitudes toward the theater and its offerings.Newer residents like Ms. Gornik, an artist, and Mr. Stein, a psychoanalyst, raved about the unusual movies they had seen there. People born in the town, such as Ms. Schroeder or Lisa Field, the president of the Sag Harbor Chamber of Commerce, talked with nostalgia about seeing movies or cartoons there as children, but said it had been years since they had been inside.The fire also affected other businesses.“It’s literally smack in the center of Main Street, right in the heart of the village,” said Ms. Field, who owns Sag Harbor Variety, a five-and-10 store on Main Street. The fire damaged the building next to hers but was extinguished before it reached her store, she said, and she was open for business on Sunday.“Sag Harbor, its residents are resilient,” Ms. Field said. “The talk around town is we’re going to rebuild. We’ll pull together. We’ll come back.”