https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/opinion/for-train-kids-the-second-avenue-is-a-dream-come-true.html
For ‘Train Kids,’ the Second Avenue Subway Is a Dream Come True - The New York Times
Second Avenue Subway (NYC),Autism,Children and Childhood,New York City
Jan. 9, 2017
8737
I had never asked my six-year-old son about his dreams before, and he had never brought it up. But last Monday, his book of choice at bedtime, “Steam Train, Dream Train,” gave me an opening.“Dreams are the things you think about when you are sleeping,” I explained. “What do you dream about?”“Trains!” he answered. His voice was so confident, and his answer so fitting, that I was sure he understood me.As it happened, a train dream came true for New Yorkers last week. With great fanfare, the city unveiled a new stretch of the subway along 2nd Avenue, a project that took almost a century to bring into being. Most city dwellers can tell you that the congestion on the subways along Manhattan’s east side is severe, and the new train extension is expected to bring long-overdue relief.A spanking-new city subway line is also a big deal for “train kids” like mine. New York is a place where kids memorize the subway maps and see the world through a subway lens. And for many children affected by autism, like my son, the trains take on a mythic status, becoming a joy and a fixation. Trains may appeal to people on the autism spectrum because of the rapid visual stimulation they offer and the reliability and predictability of their routes and schedule; the toy versions also have spinning wheels that children with autism often love.As soon as I could fit it in our schedule, we went to visit, meandering across Central Park last Wednesday and catching the 96th Street bus to 2nd Avenue. As we descended the escalator to the new station, we were both excited. For my son, the chance to take a leisurely ride and check out escalators, elevators and trains brought pure bliss. He was laughing with delight.My thoughts drifted more toward awe. Had the city really done it? I had heard about this long-planned subway project after I moved to New York 18 years ago. Now here it was, finally real, a little pocket of hope to start off 2017.A boy with autism, literally jumping with joy in a train station, can stand out in the crowd. A woman next to us smiled at my son’s over-the-top antics. I explained that this was a fun excursion to see the new line and not our typical commute. She was a happy rider too, but for prosaic reasons — her trip to her office at 96th Street and 2nd Avenue was now much shorter.We joined some tourists taking pictures of the art installed at the stations. It was better than a museum because I didn’t have to worry about my son touching the displays. Should I have been worried about germs and dirt? Probably, but at least he was running his fingers along the newest, cleanest subway mosaics in the city.At 72nd Street, he reached out in wonder at the image of a man dropping his suitcase full of papers, and another of a man and girl holding balloons, both designed by the artist Vik Muniz. He and I stood next to the larger-than-life self-portrait of Chuck Close at 86th Street, examining the intricate mosaic tiles that create his beard. And I think he fell in love with Mr. Close’s captivating portrait of the artist Sienna Shields.I wouldn’t be a New Yorker if I didn’t have some complaints. Too frequently I experience delays “due to train traffic” or “signal trouble” on my treks around town. I wish the M.T.A. would make more improvements and spend its money more carefully. But the new subway line is glorious. Yes, it will probably raise rents. Yes, it took forever. But it is here. For the “train kid” in all of us, it’s great to see.