http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/01/us/politics/rand-paul-takes-on-eye-roll-caucus-to-oppose-data-gathering-in-patriot-act.html
Rand Paul Takes On ‘Eye Roll’ Caucus to Oppose Data Gathering in Patriot Act - The New York Times
Paul  Rand,USA PATRIOT Act,Surveillance of Citizens by Government,United States Politics and Government,National Security Agency,Presidential Election of 2016,Senate
May 31, 2015
702
WASHINGTON — With his presidential campaign flagging, Senator Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican known for a strong libertarian bent and a penchant for dramatics, understood on Sunday that he had to make good on his “Stand With Rand” sloganeering.He needed to block a vote on the Senate floor to extend the vast surveillance authority the government has used since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. It was a task he performed with relish, and he succeeded, at least temporarily.The week leading up to the clash on the Senate floor was not good for Mr. Paul. The Republican establishment seemingly rose as one in umbrage after he faulted Republican hawks for the birth of the radical Islamic State, or ISIS. C-Span cameras caught one of those hawks, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, rolling his eyes mockingly on the Senate floor as Mr. Paul denounced the post-9/11 national security state.A Quinnipiac University poll released last week showed Mr. Paul leading a second tier of Republican candidates. He trailed five early front-runners — including long shots like former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and the retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson — by a narrow margin.So it came as no surprise when Mr. Paul took to the floor on Sunday evening to fulfill his promise to use his power as a single senator to try to ensure that the section of the Patriot Act used by the National Security Agency to vacuum up reams of telephone data would expire at midnight.“The people who argue that the world will end and we will be overrun by jihadists are trying to use fear,” Mr. Paul warned. “Little by little, we’ve allowed our freedom to slip away.”Mr. Paul’s stand was a lonely one. His tactics were publicly shunned by some of his Republican colleagues, and he did not attend a Republican strategy session before a critical vote to move forward on a replacement surveillance bill passed by the House.For much of the rare Sunday session of the Senate, he stood apart from other senators, dressed in khakis, a blue blazer and Nubuck shoes, clustered with two like-minded House Republicans, Justin Amash of Michigan and Thomas Massie of Kentucky.After Mr. Paul objected to a request by Mitch McConnell, the other Kentucky senator and the majority leader, to extend two relatively uncontroversial surveillance authorizations for two weeks, Mr. McConnell criticized his opponents’ “campaign of demagoguery and disinformation.” Mr. Paul sat impassively in the corner of the chamber.In truth, Mr. Paul’s stand only delayed passage of the USA Freedom Act, which would curtail the government’s dragnet authority, however insufficiently from Mr. Paul’s perspective. A single senator’s objection can stretch out the parliamentary hurdles faced by legislation but, with enough time, cannot derail it.Still, Sunday was Mr. Paul’s moment. The public gallery was filled with supporters in bright red “Stand With Rand” T-shirts.“He is definitely the lead messenger in this movement,” Mr. Massie said admiringly. “Senator Paul has elevated this issue nationally.”For more than a week, the senator’s official business and campaign imperatives have aligned seamlessly. When he gave a 10-and-a-half-hour talkathon on the Senate floor Wednesday to delay consideration of a Patriot Act extension, his campaign’s emails and Twitter feed urged supporters to post pictures of themselves in front of screens showing the senator’s performance on C-Span. All the while, the campaign hawked T-shirts and bumper stickers.America’s Liberty PAC, the political action committee backing Mr. Paul’s White House ambitions, produced an Internet video framing the showdown on the Senate floor as a monster truck rally. “The brawl for liberty, this Sunday, Sunday, Sunday,” the narrator bellowed.The Paul campaign broke an explicit Senate rule with its own video, which presented extensive footage of Mr. Paul speaking from the Senate floor, a forbidden political use, especially for a fund-raising appeal.“There has been a little too much political grandstanding and crusading for ideological causes that have skewed the debate on this issue,” John O. Brennan, the director of the C.I.A., said Sunday on the CBS News program “Face the Nation.”Mr. Paul’s protest of the surveillance program has no doubt solidified his position with the libertarian wing of his party that stood with his father, Ron Paul, during his own presidential campaign in 2012. The libertarians are a demanding lot, even when their position runs contrary to the rest of the Republican Party and the nation as a whole. They believe in as little government as possible, one that provides for defense and not much else.Mr. Paul seems to have decided that he is not taking these supporters for granted.“There is a group of us who represents a new generation of Republicans who care a lot about civil liberties and want to grow the Republican Party, and he has been extremely influential on us,” said Mr. Amash, who is, if anything, less compromising than Mr. Paul.But the one-man stand was a big gamble. Mr. Paul has spent more than a year cozying up to Mr. McConnell, trying to bolster his bona fides with the party establishment. A series of speeches on foreign policy appeared to have been aimed at defusing concern that a Paul presidency would undercut American support for Israel. Mr. Paul seemed to be mending fences with the national security wing, led by Senator John McCain of Arizona, who once called him a “whacko bird.”Now, it appears that those overtures might have been for naught.Mr. McCain and Mr. Paul traded barbs all night on the Senate floor Sunday. Shortly after the Senate went into session, Senator Dan Coats, Republican of Indiana, was lamenting the perils facing the country without surveillance, and Mr. Paul tried to break in. Mr. McCain angrily interjected: “I want regular order. The senator from Kentucky needs to learn the rules of the Senate.”That altercation was a continuation of a battle that ran all week. On Wednesday, Mr. Paul said on the MSNBC show “Morning Joe” that “ISIS exists and grew stronger because of the hawks in our party, who gave arms indiscriminately, and most of those arms were snatched up by ISIS.” That brought denunciations from all corners of the Republican Party, including from Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, a rival for the presidential nomination, and the conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer.Mr. Graham’s eye roll was a bit of comic relief, but it prompted Mr. Paul to open fire on his critics, especially Mr. McCain.“If I’m going to slug it out Sunday with the spy state apologists, I’m going to need all the help and support I can get,” he wrote to supporters on Wednesday. “Unfortunately, it seems the president, the senior senator from Arizona and other members of the ‘eye roll’ caucus who can’t stand any mention of the Bill of Rights are all operating out of the same playbook.”