http://www.nytimes.com/1996/08/28/garden/eating-well.html
Eating Well - The New York Times
FRESH FIELDS,WHOLE FOODS MARKET,MACKEY  JOHN,ORGANIC FOOD,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,SUPERMARKETS,FOOD
Aug. 28, 1996
8948
FROM hippie to hip capitalist in 18 years.John Mackey, chief executive of Whole Foods Market, is buying up his competitors left and right. Peace, love and whole grains, combined with tough business practices, have turned his natural-foods supermarket chain into a force with which conventional supermarkets must now reckon.With the acquisition of Fresh Fields, a Maryland-based natural-foods chain of 22 stores, to be completed on Friday, Mr. Mackey's empire, which began with a 2,000-square-foot store in 1978, will consist of 70 stores in 16 states.The company's nearest rival, Wild Oats of Boulder, Colo., has 32 stores. Whole Foods Market, with headquarters in Austin, Tex., has also gobbled up Mrs. Gooch's in California and Bread and Circus of Massachusetts, among others. Combined sales this year, the company estimates, will be $850 million, and they are expected to reach $1 billion next year.Compared with conventional supermarket chains, Whole Foods is a pygmy. But because of the aggressive growth of natural-foods supermarkets in general, and of Whole Foods in particular, with more than 20 percent a year for the last two years, conventional chains are taking defensive measures. Some have responded by increasing their stock of natural and organic foods.Safeway at the Marina in San Francisco stocks dozens of items similar to those sold by natural-foods supermarkets, and experts predict that within 10 years it will be difficult to tell a Whole Foods from a Safeway. Others chains have opened their own natural-foods supermarkets: Wild by Nature in East Setauket, L.I., is owned by King Kullen, a Long Island-based supermarket chain with 45 conventional stores. Star Markets in Boston is also experimenting with natural and gourmet foods.As Whole Foods expands, it has been changing. Natural and organic are no longer enough. Quality is the buzzword. ''We want to be a store for serious cooks and not just vegetarians,'' Mr. Mackey said. ''We get excited about food as pleasure and not just health. For a long time, natural foods were dominated by puritans, and we are moving out of that, increasing the gourmet part of the business.''So in addition to competing with other natural-foods stores and conventional supermarkets, Whole Foods is taking on upscale markets as well. In pursuit of the gourmet market, it is competing with Dean & DeLuca in New York, Sutton Place Gourmet in Washington and Gelson's in Los Angeles.''Whole Foods is going after the bohemian customer and the gourmet customer,'' said Mark Hanratty, a retail-food analyst for Paine Webber in New York. ''There is some overlap. High service, high quality, seem to be the best way to grow in this business, which makes it a little difficult for mainstream grocers to do.''Whole Food markets offer some combination of services most conventional supermarkets do not have: large selections of European-style breads and prepared foods made on the premises; cafes that serve breakfast, lunch and dinner; meat, fish, cheese and bread departments with service counters. Many of the packaged products are of high quality, though the company is still so new in the upscale market that it does not always know, for example, who sells the best coffee or where to buy the finest tomatoes in season.Like conventional supermarkets, however, it is expanding its line of house-brand products, which are very good.Industry observers credit a sense of mission, as well as financial acumen for the publicly held company's success.''The principle ingredient we look for is whether the management of a company truly has a passion for what it is doing,'' said Matthew Patsky, an analyst at Adams, Harkness & Hill, an investment bank in Boston, comparing John Mackey to Sam Walton, who founded Wal-Mart. ''Whole Foods is passionate about providing better-for-you foods and beverages as well as making a good return for investors. In addition John Mackey's father was a successful accountant in Austin, so his son had a relationship with the venture-capital business. There was more financial muscle than usual.''Idealism, after all, can go only so far. ''You can have all the idealism in the world, and if you don't do business well, your business won't be a success,'' Mr. Mackey said. ''My father was my mentor. He was my equivalent of an M.B.A. and kept me from making a lot of mistakes.''Mr. Mackey, who is 43, still does not wear a shirt and tie, except, he said, ''when we are visiting bankers.'' His usual dress is Birkenstocks or sandals and shorts. He dropped in and out of the University of Texas six times, went to work for a natural-foods store in Austin, where he became interested in the connection between food and health, and fell in love with retailing.When his first natural-foods store merged with another in 1980, the new entity was renamed Whole Foods Market. It had 11,000 square feet. The Whole Foods Market that opened last month in San Francisco has 60,000 square feet.''Whole Foods is a mission-driven business,'' Mr. Mackey said. ''We have other goals besides making money. We believe in natural and organic food, in sustainable agriculture and eating healthier and better. The philosophy of the business involves stockholders, team members, the community and the environment. I think it helps our competitive success. If you are going to tap into deeper motivational energies, you need more than money.''Whole Foods differentiates itself from conventional chains in many ways. ''We give a minimum of 5 percent of profits to community organizations,'' Mr. Mackey said. ''We pay our employees up to 20 hours a year to work in the community; we give them 20 percent discount on anything in the store.'' And employees at the level of department heads and above are offered stock options.Like all natural-foods chains, Whole Foods has production standards that differentiate it from conventional markets: no artificial colors, no irradiated food, no bleached flours. In the Whole Foods march from a sawdust-on-the-floor, food-in-garbage-cans ambiance to Dean and DeLuca-style opulence, some critics think it has sold out. Its standards are not so strict as those of Mrs. Gooch's and Bread and Circus, two of the chains Whole Foods acquired.But Peter Roy, the president of Whole Foods and a onetime long-hair vegetarian, whose health-food store in New Orleans was purchased by Whole Foods in 1988, says Whole Foods has always been different in some ways from the chains it acquired. It has, for instance, always sold coffee and alcohol, including wines with sufiltes, as well as white flour and white sugar. ''You keep yourself in a penalty box without white flour and white sugar,'' he said, ''and as much as possible we sell primarily chemical-free foods.''Fresh Fields was selling what it called crossover foods -- they did not meet its standards but made one-stop shopping possible -- like Snackwells, the nonfat cookies that were once so popular that people hoarded them. But Whole Foods will eliminate foods like Snackwells, because they contain artificial colors and flavors. ''We've got to draw the line somewhere to define our niche,'' Mr. Roy said.Yet, the company carries many dairy products that may contain milk from cows injected with bovine growth hormone. Haagen-Dazs ice cream is one such company, and Whole Foods sells it because customers demand it, Mr. Roy said. Unlike the store's shelf labeling of produce as conventional or organic, Whole Foods does not provide shelf labels for dairy products free of added bovine growth hormone.Margaret Wittenberg, head of the company's quality-review team, says it has done the best it can to determine what products are free of bovine growth hormone, and it provides customers with a list of the companies. The list was not in evidence in two stores visited.Mr. Mackey said he planned to explore the company's position on bovine growth hormone. ''I don't know of any reason we shouldn't be investigating this,'' he added.Chris Kilham of Lincoln, Mass., a consultant in the natural-foods industry, has noticed the change in Bread and Circus standards. ''I was disappointed to see an end display of Domino's sugar,'' he said. ''They just aren't as interested in the same tight standards. I don't fault them because they sell more organic and natural foods than anyone else, and having white flour and sugar makes it easier to compete with upscale stores and supermarkets.''All of the stores owned by Whole Foods Market will carry that name within the next 18 months. Within seven to nine years Mr. Mackey expects to have 150 stores, with sales of $3 billion.