https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/dining/pork-chops-with-tamarind-and-ginger-recipe.html
Fattier Pork Is Better Pork - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Pork Chops,Pork
June 16, 2017
6086
As the availability of good, fat-marbled pork has risen, so has my adoration of that stalwart favorite, the bone-in pork chop.Things used to be different.For years, pigs were put on a diet, then served up lean and mean, without much internal fat to lubricate and flavor their brawny flesh. (Remember “the other white meat” ad campaign?) The result was often chewy, bland and dry. Not nearly as good as bacon and therefore, in my mind, not worth eating.You can still certainly find lean pork chops, and if you like them, feel free to use them in this recipe. But the more succulent, dark pink meat of thick-cut chops, most likely raised on small farms, is probably in the supermarket refrigerator case right alongside the skinnier chops. Look for a creamy layer of fat surrounding the meat and bone — this is a sign of something good.For the cook, the fat serves several purposes: It insulates the meat, keeping it juicier for longer, giving you a larger margin of error when it comes to cooking. Even if you overshoot your target temperature, the fat protects the flesh, keeping it moist.Fat also adds flavor, meaning you don’t need to do too much to your chops beyond adding a generous sprinkle of salt and pepper to make them taste fantastic.This said, marinating the chops can make them even better. Here, I smear them with a paste of turmeric, tamarind, cumin, chile, garlic, ginger and a touch of fish sauce. It’s not a flavor combination that’s authentic to any one place, but the sour, pungent and salty notes all go together beautifully.A brief stint of high-heat searing followed by a jaunt to the oven allows the edges of the chops to caramelize and the center to cook a little more slowly. If you are grilling instead of roasting, a combination of direct heat and indirect heat yields similar results.I like my pork chops cooked between medium-rare and medium, with meat that’s distinctly pink and juicy. I aim for an internal temperature of 135 degrees and let the meat rest for a few minutes, allowing the temperature to rise and the juices to reabsorb. Then I carve it off the bone and serve it in slices.With all the aromatics in the marinade, these chops don’t need a sauce, though a spoonful or two of the drippings makes them glisten and intensifies their already wonderfully rich flavor: the taste of good, fatty pork.Recipe: Pork Chops With Tamarind and GingerAnd to Drink ...The spicy, sour flavors of this dish are often tricky to pair with wine, but with good pork chops, they will simply accent the dominant savory richness of the meat. Among whites, you could opt for a riesling, either a dry German or Austrian bottle, or a lightly sweet kabinett. The herbal, peppery flavors of grüner veltliner would workwell, as would a grassy, mineral sauvignon blanc as long as it is not oaky or tropical-fruity. You could try a pinot blanc or a sylvaner from Alsace. If you prefer a red, I would look for something fresh, lightly fruity, with perhaps a touch of bitterness and no oak, like an inexpensive cabernet franc from the Loire Valley, a cru Beaujolais or maybe a dolcetto or barbera from northwestern Italy. ERIC ASIMOVFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.