http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/17/nyregion/new-york-protesters-to-meet-with-mayor-bill-de-blasio.html
New York Protesters to Meet With Bill de Blasio - The New York Times
Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Justice League NYC,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,New York City,de Blasio  Bill,Garner  Eric,Attacks on Police,Police Department (NYC),Skolnik  Michael
Dec. 16, 2014
7147
Mayor Bill de Blasio will meet this week with some organizers of the recent New York protests, City Hall announced on Tuesday. The police, meanwhile, are aggressively investigating the assault of two lieutenants during a protest last weekend and are asking for the public’s help to identify several suspects.Mr. de Blasio will meet at City Hall on Friday with members of Justice League NYC, one of the groups that has staged the protests, said Marti Adams, a spokeswoman for the mayor.“At that meeting, the mayor will hear firsthand the concerns of this group, and will detail the substantive policy changes that he and the police commissioner have already put in place to bring police and community closer together, all while keeping crime low,” Ms. Adams said in a statement. “He will also reiterate his calls for protests to be nonviolent and respectful.”About a dozen organizers from Justice League NYC and other groups will attend the meeting, said Michael Skolnik, a Justice League board member and a political director for Russell Simmons, the hip-hop entrepreneur and social activist.The meeting comes after protesters staged a demonstration at City Hall and later descended on Gracie Mansion to demand a sit-down with the mayor.The group, a task force of criminal justice reform advocates, artists, convicted felons and others, has staged daily protests since Dec. 3, when a grand jury declined to bring criminal charges against a white police officer in the death of Eric Garner, a black Staten Island man. The group is pushing officials to meet a list of demands that includes firing the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, and ending the “broken windows” policing strategy, which targets petty crimes.Justice League NYC met last week with Eric T. Schneiderman, the state attorney general, and is seeking a session with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.On Tuesday, the police released photos of seven suspects sought in connection with the assault of the two lieutenants during the protest on the Brooklyn Bridge on Saturday night. They also asked for help in identifying nine witnesses who could provide information for the investigation.A $12,000 reward was offered for information in the case by Crime Stoppers and Citizens Outraged at Police Being Shot, the police said.Mr. Skolnik said Justice League NYC was “100 percent denouncing any violence” and noted that the group issued a news release on Sunday that said it “condemns any and all forms of violence, including an incident that allegedly occurred on Brooklyn Bridge.”On Sunday, the police arrested Eric Linsker, an adjunct professor at the City University of New York, on felony charges in the assaults. The police said Mr. Linsker tried to throw a trash bin over the side of a pedestrian walkway, and protesters punched and kicked the officers when they tried to stop him. Both officers had cuts and bruises, and one officer had a broken nose, the police said.Carmen Perez, co-founder of Justice League NYC, said in a statement on Tuesday that a meeting with the mayor was essential. (The meeting had originally been scheduled for Wednesday, but was moved to Friday.)“It’s important for our mayor to hear the voice of the people — the people who voted for him, came out to canvass for him, those of us who work in this field and who are impacted by these policies,” Ms. Perez said.Mr. de Blasio, who was arrested in a demonstration against a hospital closing last year before he took office as mayor, finds himself the agitator turned arbitrator as he tries to balance protesters’ demands with police morale. He has spoken frequently in public about how he and his wife advised their son, who is biracial, to interact with the police. But he also has condemned violence by a small group of protesters, calling their actions “unacceptable” and urging peaceful demonstrations.