https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/t-magazine/entertainment/audrey-tautou-photographs-self-portraits-superfacial.html
Audrey Tautou’s Very Private Self-Portraiture - The New York Times
Photography,Tautou  Audrey
June 20, 2017
2920
Audrey Tautou received a camera as a gift for her first communion. As a child, she says, she was inspired by the primatologist Dian Fossey, and imagined herself photographing wild animals in the jungle. “The camera was, for me, more an expression of my desire for adventures,” she says. “It was not a photographer who made me want to become a photographer.”Fame lay ahead for Tautou, but of a different kind. In 2001, “Amélie” brought her global recognition — for which she was entirely unprepared. She turned back to photography as a way to regain perspective, she says, and started to capture journalists after they interviewed her on the promo circuit. “I needed to do it,” she says. “Maybe because of what happened to me with this huge celebrity suddenly — it was a way for me to take a bit of distance from the storm.”In July, the annual Rencontres d’Arles photography festival will show Tautou’s photographic work for the first time. The precisely cataloged and annotated portraits of journalists will sit alongside three other bodies of work by the actress: All are forms of self-portraiture. Counterbalancing her pictures of the journalists responsible for creating her public image are small, spontaneous snapshots Tautou takes of her own reflection. “I always have a camera with me,” she says.There are formal, fantastical self-portraits too. For these, Tautou constructs sets, props and costumes, arranges the lighting and performs as both photographer and model, choosing her camera and format. “I adapt myself to the location, which is always some intimate place — a place that I owned or at my parents’ house,” she says. “Once I take the photos, I don’t retouch and I don’t change the framing at all. I don’t cheat on anything.” Finding it impossible to set up the shots without seeing herself in the frame, Tautou explains that she has “made a double, which is exactly my size,” and that sits in position for her until the critical moment.The final set of photographs sees Tautou return to her childhood interest in wildlife photography in an unexpected way. While working on her composed self-portraits she trained two surveillance cameras on herself. Using an infrared trigger system — “like the box you put in the forest for a tiger,” she says — the cameras capture sequences of photographs when they sense movement. “I thought I could create something like an extreme ‘making of,’” Tautou explains. The result is hundreds of pictures, which, pieced together, resemble stilted moving-image footage from the pre-cinema age.In this show, Tautou hopes to offer a glimpse into her life as a photographer — an unseen side of her identity that has evolved over the last 15 years, in parallel with her performing career. “For me it was a necessity to deliver myself from this work,” she explains. “I’ve been keeping it to myself for so much time, even those around me don’t know this work.” As for how it will be received on so public and high-minded a platform as Arles, she shrugs. “I’m very used to present things to the audience, so I know that as soon as you give something, it doesn’t belong to you any more.”