https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/dining/hot-dog-guide.html
Want to Choose the Best Hot Dogs? Learn What the Labels Mean - The New York Times
Hot Dogs and Frankfurters,Cooking and Cookbooks,Labeling and Labels (Product),Beef,Sausages
June 27, 2017
6133
For our official Food department hot dog tasting, we tested only 10 of the dozens of brands available. And some brands offer as many as eight different recipes.So how should you choose your hot dogs? It depends.Do you prefer premium, bun length, all natural, old-fashioned, uncured and skinless? Or perhaps classic, grass fed, smoked, signature, organic and Angus?Some of these terms are important; some are meaningless; a few are nonsensical. We’ve explained what some of them mean below.Always read the label, and as a general rule, buy those with as few ingredients as possible. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, a hot dog can be made of any kind of meat or poultry. Mechanically separated meats and fillers like nonfat milk powder are also allowed. But don’t be put off by the end of the list, where it might say “Less than 2 percent of …” followed by nebulous ingredients like “seasonings.” This is how the garlic, spices and other flavors are listed. Trace amounts of sweeteners and sometimes colorants (like cherry or beet powder) are also to be expected.CURED AND UNCURED Virtually all sausages, except for fresh ones that require cooking like Italian sausage or fresh chorizo, are cured, since “cured” simply means preserved, whether it’s with salt, smoke, brine or other methods.The U.S.D.A., however, defines “cured” meats as only those that are preserved with synthetic nitrites — salt-based preservatives that prevent spoilage and browning. (Think of the bright reds and pinks of corned beef, bologna and Canadian bacon.) Producers that use no nitrites, or only the naturally occurring ones in vegetables like celery, must label their products “uncured.” This includes most organic and all-natural brands. It does not indicate a difference in taste.SKINLESS, NATURAL CASING AND COLLAGEN CASING All hot dogs are made and precooked in casings, or skins. Casings are made either from collagen that is naturally present in the intestines of an animal, or from processed collagen that’s extracted from other animal parts.Hot dogs may be labeled “skinless,” which means that the casing has been removed after cooking. Those with the casings left on may be labeled “natural casing” or “collagen casing.” Traditionally, sausages destined to be boiled, like frankfurters, were kept in the casing to produce the juicy snap that some associate with a good hot dog. But if you’re grilling or griddling your hot dogs, keep in mind that the casings can become tough — especially the artificial ones.ORGANIC, GRASS FED AND ALL NATURAL These refer mainly to the beef used to make the hot dog. (Though the garlic and spices may also be organic, the main ingredient in any self-respecting hot dog is meat.) There are clear explanations of what these terms mean in regard to beef on many websites and via the U.S.D.A.ANGUS This breed of cattle is supposed to produce especially marbled beef. But “Certified Angus” is a brand of beef, not an official designation, and does not necessarily make better or different hot dogs than other types of beef.KOSHER These hot dogs, made under rabbinical supervision, can’t contain pork.OLD-FASHIONED, PREMIUM, SIGNATURE AND CLASSIC These are marketing, not meaningful, terms.