https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/world/europe/a-soccer-hero-dips-a-toe-into-britains-roiling-politics.html
Gary Lineker, Soccer Hero, Dips a Toe Into Post-Brexit British Politics - The New York Times
Great Britain,Soccer,Lineker  Gary (1960- ),Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Discrimination,Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Match of the Day (TV Program)
Jan. 27, 2017
887
LONDON — A group of child refugees had just landed in Britain and the country’s right-wing tabloids were in a fury, warning of foreigners cheating their way into the country by lying about their age. Amid the cacophony, a challenge arose on Twitter from an unexpected source.“The treatment by some towards these young refugees is hideously racist and utterly heartless. What’s happening to our country?”The tweet came not from a human rights advocate or from a liberal lawmaker but from Gary Lineker, one of the finest strikers in English soccer history and the veteran host of “Match of the Day,” a weekly roundup on the BBC of highlights from the Premier League that is the nation’s most popular sports show.It has turned Mr. Lineker, a onetime working-class boy from Leicester, into an unlikely spokesman for the much-maligned “liberal elite.” That amorphous catchall phrase has come to describe those in Britain who are uncomfortable with the anti-immigration and anti-European rhetoric that has become mainstream in Britain since last year’s vote to leave the European Union.Mr. Lineker has gone where not even the opposition Labour Party goes these days for fear of being branded out of touch.The Sun newspaper, incensed about being called racist for demanding dental X-rays to determine the age of the child refugees, ran a front-page article accusing Mr. Lineker of “peddling” a lie and demanded that the taxpayer-funded BBC fire him. His Twitter feed, followed by about 5.6 million and still mostly about soccer, has been inundated with vitriol and occasionally more polite demands that he “stick to football.” (“Stick to politics,” his fans retort on his behalf.)Mr. Lineker, who is not easily fazed — he claims not to have been nervous even when taking penalty kicks for England in the 1990 World Cup — shrugs off the furor. A twice-divorced father of four sons, he is no stranger to unwanted attention from the tabloids.If anything, he says, the latest criticism has made him more determined to speak his mind. “Being a sportsman I’m quite competitive, so I wasn’t just going to back down,” he said one recent afternoon in Barnes, the leafy West London neighborhood where he lives.Silver-haired and boyish-looking at 56, Mr. Lineker is something of a national treasure in Britain. With 48 international goals to his name, the former England captain scored more goals in World Cup finals than any other English player before or since. In the 1986 World Cup, he scored six times and won the Golden Boot for top scorer, the only English player to win the award.During his 16-year career, he was never given a yellow or red card and once was awarded a trophy for fair play by FIFA. So entrenched is his nice-guy image that advertisements for Walkers, a potato chip company based in Mr. Lineker’s hometown, Leicester, in central England, have played on it in commercials for years, featuring variations of a “Nasty Gary” who steals chips from children and never shares.Normally appearing on Match of the Day in sharp Italian suits, Mr. Lineker presented the show one week last September in underpants — making good on a promise a year earlier to strip if Leicester City won the Premier League. “The thing is, I knew categorically that there was zero chance of Leicester winning. Zero,” he said. Like the vote to leave the European Union and Donald J. Trump’s election, he said, “it was just impossible.”If his first transformation was unusual — ex-soccer players sometimes become commentators and analysts, but few become anchors who write their own copy and dominate broadcasting as much as they once dominated the soccer pitch — Mr. Lineker’s outspoken forays into the minefield of post-Brexit politics are in some ways even more striking.A Europhile who learned Spanish so well while playing for Barcelona for three years that he says he used to dream in the language, Mr. Lineker urged Britain publicly to stay in the European Union before the referendum last June and condemned the vote after.“The E.U. has its weaknesses, but it’s been pretty good for us and it’s been pretty good for Europe and it’s kept peace,” he said.In November, he called Nigel Farage, the former leader of the U.K. Independence Party and one of the main supporters of the withdrawal from Europe, a “racist” for describing President Obama as a “creature.”Lately, he has also taken on Mr. Trump. After Mr. Trump said last month that burning the American flag should be a crime punishable by a loss of citizenship, Mr. Lineker tweeted: “It’s soooo cold, I could burn a flag.”As for his tweet about refugees, that was “humanitarian” rather than political, he said.It was bold language for someone whose audience cuts across class, ethnicity, age and educational background and, if anything, is somewhat skewed to the working-class sector that lists immigration as its primary concern and that voted strongly to leave the European Union.Leicestershire, the central English county where Mr. Lineker grew up, backed the exit from Europe. For all he knows, his own father did. “I don’t like to ask because I’m too scared of the answer,” he said.Mr. Lineker, who is now worth an estimated $15 million, comes from solid working-class stock himself. The descendant of three generations of market-stall owners, he did not finish the equivalent of high school. (His final report card read: “Must devote less of his time to sport if he wants to be a success.”) Even after the local soccer club recruited him, he continued to help out at the family stall in the early years of his professional career.“People are fed up with the way things are,” he said. “There is a lot of bitterness out there, a lot of anger about a lack of jobs and concerns for the next generation.”“I understand all of that; I’ve grown up with that,” he said. “But all of a sudden we’re blaming all the ills of the country on refugees and foreigners. It’s just wrong.”Listening to Mr. Lineker, soccer becomes almost a parable for what has gone right and what has gone wrong in Britain over the last 30 years.When he played professionally in the 1980s, racism was unrestrained. He says he remembers bananas being thrown at black players. Abusive chants in the stadium were commonplace. Once, Mr. Lineker recalled, he got on a plane with John Barnes, a black player on his team, and an England supporter shouted: “You shouldn’t be allowed to wear an England shirt.”“We’ve come a million miles since then,” Mr. Lineker said. “But what you don’t want to see now is to turn back the other way.”For him the globalization of teams has done huge amounts to increase not just standards but also tolerance in the sport.“As footballers you just grow up with people from different backgrounds and different colors of skin,” he said. “When you sit in a dressing room and you’ve got 15 teammates with you, you don’t look around and think ‘He’s got black skin. He’s Asian.’ You think ‘He’s a great player. He’s a good player. He needs to work.’ ”If soccer has in some ways showcased growing tolerance in society, it has also mirrored the spectacular rise in income inequality that has developed in recent decades.Mr. Lineker’s grandfather played soccer in the army and received offers from a couple of soccer clubs but opted to work selling fruit and vegetables, which seemed a more economically stable option at the time. Mr. Lineker himself did well financially, but he was still in a generation of top-level players who needed to look for another job after retirement. Today’s superstars, like Cristiano Ronaldo or Lionel Messi, earn in a week “what I earned in a year,” Mr. Lineker said.“There is a kind of parallel there” with what is happening in society at large, he said.The mention of those top players gets Mr. Lineker visibly excited. “We’re blessed to live in the era of both, to have two absolute greats at the same time,” he said. “Whereas Ronaldo is prolific, he’s an astonishing athlete, he is a wonderfully brilliant footballer, Messi brings joy. He’s beautiful to watch. He will always edge it for me.”In politics, he says, people lack that choice.“That’s the biggest problem at the moment,” he said. “I don’t think there is an opposition at the moment, not in this country.”