http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/04/sports/tennis/2011-french-open-its-nadal-federer-in-the-final.html
2011 French Open: It’s Nadal-Federer in the Final - The New York Times
French Open (Tennis),Federer  Roger,Nadal  Rafael,Djokovic  Novak,Tennis,Murray  Andy (1987- )
June 3, 2011
9404
PARIS — It was a January night in Melbourne, Australia. Roger Federer had just been beaten in three tight sets by Novak Djokovic, and suggestions of decline were filling the room.“Let’s talk again in six months,” Federer said.On a June night in Paris, Federer, 29, spoke with his racket, ripping ground strokes and, above all, serves under pressure. He absorbed Djokovic’s heavy baseline blows and stared down his chest-thumping sense of destiny in the French Open semifinals.Djokovic had good reason to believe in his chances Friday. He had won 43 straight matches, including all 41 he had played this year. He had beaten Federer three times and Rafael Nadal four times, twice on red clay. And now Djokovic — after leaving his family as a teenager and traveling the world in search of an unlikely goal — was one victory from assuring himself of becoming No. 1 for the first time.But Federer, in one of his most stirring performances, slammed the brakes on all that momentum, winning this high-velocity semifinal, 7-6 (5), 6-3, 3-6, 7-6 (5), and wagging his right index finger as he walked to the net with roars of approval ringing in his ears from the crowd that had chanted “Ro-ger” for much of the match.Federer, winner of a men’s record 16 Grand Slam singles titles, including the 2009 French Open, had played the unusual role of spoiler to perfection. And instead of watching a new-age final between Djokovic and Nadal on Sunday, the fans in Paris will now see the latest installment of the classic Federer-Nadal rivalry.“It always seems to me that Rafa needs to be in the French Open final to make it special, and I got the match I guess I was hoping,” Federer said. “After beating Novak, it’s in a way a gift that I get the chance, and I’m looking forward to it.”Nadal, who beat Andy Murray, 6-4, 7-5, 6-4, in Friday’s first semifinal, has not given Federer much reason for optimism in Paris. With his high-bouncing forehand causing big trouble for Federer’s one-handed backhand, Nadal, a five-time champion, has won all four of their French Open matches and humiliated him in their last encounter at Roland Garros, winning the 2008 final, 6-1, 6-3, 6-0.But Federer, long No. 1 but now No. 3, is moving and striking the ball with particular conviction at the moment, and he needed his finest match of the season to defeat Djokovic.He needed to fight through consistent adversity to grab the first set in a tie breaker, needed to avoid an emotional letdown in the second and then, with Djokovic willing himself to a higher plane, needed to find a way to break him when he served for the fourth set at 5-4 in the gloaming.There would not have been sufficient light to play a fifth set, but Federer solved that problem, too, in the tie breaker: hitting an ace and a powerful service winner to get to 6-3 and then coming up with another ace at 6-5 to seal the victory in four sets on Court Philippe Chatrier.“He served great, that was the biggest thing,” said Paul Annacone, Federer’s co-coach. “And he did a good job varying the pace, which is hard to do because when you do that you have to run. And he knew that that was going to happen. But Novak is very good if you play one-dimensional tennis, and Roger was very, very intent on trying to vary it a bit. And he did it well enough to put himself in a position to win and then served well at the big times and reminded me a little bit of a guy from California that I used to work with.”That would be Pete Sampras, who ranks second behind Federer on the men’s list of career Grand Slam singles titles with 14 and also foiled a few younger men’s plans in his later years.“It was best five months of my life, my tennis career,” Djokovic said. “I cannot complain. It was definitely an incredible period. It had to end somewhere. I knew it was coming. Unfortunately, it came in the bad moment. It was a big match today. But look, you know, it’s sport. I will keep on working hard.”“I congratulate him for a great performance, “ Djokovic said of Federer. “He really played well.”Djokovic had not experienced defeat since Federer beat him at the Masters Cup in London last November. Since then he had won the Davis Cup final in Serbia in December, the Australian Open and seven consecutive tournaments over all. But he had never played a match for himself with quite this much at stake, and he played it in unusual circumstances after receiving a walkover in his quarterfinal from the injured Italian Fabio Fognini and being forced to take an unplanned four-day break from competition.Though he hit high notes Friday, above all with his crosscourt forehand, he was not at as relentlessly consistent as he had been earlier this season on clay: making 41 unforced errors compared with 40 winners.“I don’t think it was a disadvantage,” Djokovic said of his enforced break.Among those he practiced with during the layoff was John McEnroe, who set the Open-era record for the best start to a season in 1984 by winning his first 42 matches. “Records are made to be broken,” McEnroe said Friday afternoon. “I hope he breaks it. Actually, I hope he ties it.”But because of Federer’s inspired performance, McEnroe remains alone in the record books. Federer’s victory also preserved his friendly archrival Nadal’s No. 1 status for the time being, which Federer said was appropriate considering that Friday was Nadal’s 25th birthday.“Perhaps it’s a nice present for him that I beat Novak today,” Federer said.But Federer can still give Djokovic a present Sunday: The only way Nadal can preserve his No. 1 ranking next week is by winning this tournament. He certainly knows how. His is 44-1 at Roland Garros, and if he wins again, he will tie Bjorn Borg’s modern men’s record of six singles titles there, and Borg may be in the stands to watch on Sunday.“I don’t think about that,” Nadal said, adding, “It’s much more important to win Roland Garros than equal Bjorn.”Nadal has not been at his most dominant this year, requiring five sets to defeat John Isner of the United States of the first round and publicly fretting over his level of play in the middle rounds. But though he is still struggling to hold serve more often than usual on clay, he saved 15 of 18 break points against Murray.Nadal sprinted around backhands to whip forehand winners, gobbled up territory and gradually — very gradually — gained the upper hand in a baseline slugfest that required 3 hours 17 minutes even though Murray did not win a set.“He’s an unbelievable player, you know,” Murray said. “He’s one of the best players ever. He’s for sure the best clay-court player ever, and all those things add up to it being a very difficult match when you play against him here.”Federer needs no such reminder. No matter how loudly he spoke against Djokovic in the twilight, the conversation in Paris is not quite over.