https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/17/arts/television/jimmy-fallon-trump-press-conference.html
Jimmy Fallon (as Trump) Meets the Press - The New York Times
Corden  James (1978- ),Fallon  Jimmy,Kimmel  Jimmy,Field  Sally,Netanyahu  Benjamin,Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Trump  Donald J,Winfrey  Oprah,Colbert  Stephen,Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Glass Menagerie (Movie),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
Feb. 17, 2017
3767
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the funniest jokes and videos and the sharpest monologues and parodies from the comedy shows. We’ve got your back: You need sleep, after all, and something to smile about, while we’re getting paid to watch late night, which is insane.Do you like this feature? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.President Trump’s 77-minute solo news conference, his first since his inauguration, was fodder for an array of jokes and skits Thursday night. Jimmy Fallon opened “The Tonight Show” with a spoof. Here are some choice quotes:Drawing inspiration from Genghis Khan and other “ferocious despots,” Stephen Colbert donned a “big furry hat,” one of his favorite props, then declared: “I really feel like giving a press conference.” He proceeded to issue some “proclamations”:Mr. Colbert went after the president’s news conference more directly in his opening monologue. “It was a robust one hour and 17 minutes long,” he said. “That is beefy. So beefy, you could eat it with a fork, but you’re gonna want to use a spoon — to get every drop of the crazy.”Jimmy Kimmel didn’t go for a Trump-related skit, but he fit in more than his share of zingers about the president’s news conference.Referring to the recent announcement that scientists had discovered a distant planet with earthlike qualities, Mr. Kimmel quipped: “This might not be the best time to make contact with aliens. They say, ‘Take us to your leader’ — what do we do at that time? ‘Our leader’s a little busy on Twitter right now. How about we take you to Oprah? She’s nice, you’ll like her.’”The actress Sally Field, who was on “The Late Show” to talk about her role in “The Glass Menagerie” on Broadway, took a moment to offer her thanks to Mr. Colbert for his work. Inevitably, the conversation circled to Mr. Trump.The hosts took aim at Mr. Trump’s response to April Ryan, a black reporter, during his news conference. When she asked him whether he would seek input from the Congressional Black Caucus on his plans to address urban crime, he asked whether its members were friends of hers and suggested that she set up the meeting for him.That’s all we’ve got for you this week. We at the Times Late-Night Comedy Committee sincerely hope you’ve been enjoying these rundowns. Don’t hesitate to send us any feedback. Have a great weekend, and we’ll see you back here next week.