https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/dining/what-to-cook-right-now.html
What to Cook Right Now - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Recipes
July 10, 2017
6073
Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.Good morning. Jennifer Steinhauer has a smart, funny and very helpful article in The Times this week that concerns a great many of us here in the world of Cooking: “How to Feed Your Summer Crowd Without Going Crazy.” It’s filled with great advice from a working mom in a big, blended family, and following at least some of it will help even those of us who feed “only” three or four or five people each night.Read her tips, then pull out your slow cooker and make her new recipe for butter chicken. We’ll get through this season together.Of course, if you’re flying solo or close to it, Cooking has plenty to offer as well. Nigella Lawson’s recipe for chicken soup for one is deeply satisfying. So is Mark Bittman’s recipe for steak Diane for two.Some think a bowl of instant ramen to be a depressing thing to eat. Not if you dress it up fancy, as the Los Angeles chef Roy Choi advises. His recipe for perfect instant ramen is a solo diner’s rare treat. Or you could make a radish sandwich with butter and salt, and if the bread’s as good as the radishes and butter, you’ll be in heaven in about five minutes flat.You could make poached eggs with mint and yogurt. Or a single fillet of fish, pan-roasted in butter with herbs. Or tuna salad, with capers, olives and lemon.Or you could just order in a burrito and eat it on the couch while you watch “Snowfall” on FX. That can be a very good night, so long as it’s not every night.Larger crowds might take that slow-cooker tip of Jennifer’s and apply it to a pork butt, for my recipe for vaguely Vietnamese pork tacos, or Mark Bittman’s recipe for braised pork with red wine. If you’ve got a pressure cooker, you could make Melissa Clark’s recipe for pork with citrus and mint, or the one she ginned up for spicy pork shoulder.Have you hopped on the cold-brew coffee bandwagon yet? It’s ridiculously easy to make, as our recipe lays out plainly, and once you’ve tasted the result you won’t get off it until the end of the summer at least. Make that tonight as well, whether you’re feeding a dozen or just yourself. You’ll thank me in the morning, sure.Many thousands more recipes to cook tonight and in coming days are available on Cooking. Go take a look at them. If you take out a subscription to Cooking (and I hope you will subscribe, in part because it’s good and in part because I like working on it and would like to continue), you’ll be able to save the recipes you like to your recipe box. You’ll be able to organize them, and rate them and leave notes on them, for yourself and for others. And we’ll be there to help if anything goes sideways. Just reach out to us at cookingcare@nytimes.com.Now, take a look at this crazy Japanese Twitter account I got hipped to by the kids at Saveur. It’s filled with short videos of cats dressed in fruit hats ringing bells for food. Pavlov’s absurdities.Consider toasting up Jonny Miles’s new recipe for a Lake Erie Monster sandwich: batter-fried walleye with cheese and a jalapeño-spiked tartar sauce.“Game of Thrones” is back on HBO on Sunday. The obsessive fans at our Watching site have started a G.O.T. newsletter to help you get ready and to guide you through the season. Please sign up.Then make like the police chief in Burlington, Vt., and read something smart in the London Review of Books.And remember that it was on this day in 1973 that the Bahamas gained full independence within the Commonwealth of Nations. Listen to Biosis Now sing about that, really loud. It is one of the great summer cooking jams, and I hope you’ll put it in heavy rotation: “Independent Bahamas.”