https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/world/europe/will-london-fall-britain-brexit-readers-reaction.html
Will London Fall? How Dare You! - The New York Times
London (England),Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Social Media,European Union,New York Times,Sun  The (British Newspaper),Times of London,Lyall  Sarah
April 13, 2017
9780
Will London fall?It is a question as evocative as it is provocative.It was also the headline in The New York Times at the top of Tuesday’s front page essay about London that generated a spirited trans-Atlantic discussion. The essay by Sarah Lyall, with striking visuals by Sergey Ponomarev, is the first in a series of articles examining how Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, known as Brexit, could affect London.Ms. Lyall looked closely at the British capital: a teeming multicultural metropolis of 8.7 million people, with a Muslim mayor, where some native Britons no longer feel at home. London is a center of international culture and commerce whose resilience and openness became a symbol of postwar European unity. It’s expected that in two years it will no longer be a part of that European experiment.In Britain, and around the world, the response to the article was swift, if hardly unanimous. Readers, commentators in the British news media, members of Parliament and people across social media weighed in and continued to do so on Thursday.No matter how rapidly the media landscape is changing, headlines still matter. “Will London Fall?” clearly struck a nerve; some people reacted to the headline more than the article. Some viewed it as unduly inflammatory or sensationalistic. #WillLondonFall became a trending topic on British Twitter. Some thought it provoked unwanted memories of the much-maligned disaster movie, “London Has Fallen.” Others thought it was fine. Passionate responses poured in from a city that has survived fire, plague and the Blitz, among them:Not everyone was so high-minded. To some people on Twitter, London had already succumbed to immigration, globalization and more. Venom seeped through some Twitter feeds, reminiscent of the anger that surfaced during the vote, to the annoyance of some others.Some readers complained that an American newspaper (if one with a sizable newsroom in London and bureaus around the globe) should not turn its eyes to London and Britain’s planned exit from the union when foreigners could make similar prognostications about the fate of the United States in the wake of a similarly surprising voting result: the election of Donald J. Trump.Some British conservatives and segments of the British news media interpreted the article as a frontal assault by New York itself on the British capital, which might be a surprise to the City of New York.From The Sun on Thursday:So went the headline to an Op-Ed by Gerard Lyons, a British economist and writer, in which he defended Brexit as good for London and for Britain. To help illustrate the piece, The Sun embedded a small photo of Queen Elizabeth II with the following:Ouch, zinger. Jackson Heights and Flushing, rise up.From The Evening Standard on Wednesday:From The Sun on Tuesday:The article also stirred a discussion on social media about British humor, whether the article had misread a sketch written by the British satirist Patrick Kidd and whether Americans were humor-challenged, anyway. Ms. Lyall, who lived in London for 15 years, used a Facebook chat about the story to explain why she wrote what she did.In the spirit of good zingers, though, here was one from Mr. Kidd, who later exchanged friendly notes with Ms. Lyall on Twitter.Beneath all the noise, many readers saw the article as a powerful and melancholy essay for a London that for decades has been a place of opportunity for all Europeans.