https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/13/us/politics/scott-walker-approves-public-funding-of-basketball-arena.html
Scott Walker Approves Public Funding of Basketball Arena - The New York Times
Wisconsin,Walker  Scott K,Presidential Election of 2016,Stadiums and Arenas,Basketball,Budgets and Budgeting,Republican Party,Milwaukee Bucks
Aug. 12, 2015
7379
Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin approved $250 million in public financing for a new arena for the Milwaukee Bucks basketball team on Wednesday, a deal exposing him to charges of corporate welfare as he seeks the Republican nomination as a fiscal conservative.Mr. Walker praised the deal, passed with bipartisan support in the Legislature, as a sound investment that will return $3 in state taxes for every $1 invested.The owners of the National Basketball Association team, who include hedge fund managers in New York and a top fund-raiser for Mr. Walker’s presidential campaign, had threatened to leave the state without public funding for a new stadium.The issue scrambled the usual political alliances in Wisconsin. Milwaukee-area Democrats lined up with the Republican governor, while some conservatives who normally support Mr. Walker objected to what they called “crony capitalism” — taxpayer support of a sports team owned by billionaire financiers.“From the beginning we have questioned the role of the state, county and city in this plan,” said Nick Novak, a spokesman for the MacIver Institute, a conservative research group in Wisconsin.The Cato Institute, a libertarian group in Washington, has also denounced the public financing of the arena.The Bucks owners said a new arena, needed to attract fans, would cost $500 million. Former Senator Herb Kohl of Wisconsin, a Democrat who was the team’s previous owner, agreed to contribute $100 million. The new owners, led by Wesley Edens and Marc Lasry, who run hedge funds in New York, will pay $150 million. Taxpayers will kick in $250 million.Some Republicans objected to Mr. Walker’s embrace of a deal that would benefit Mr. Lasry, who is a major fund-raiser for Hillary Rodham Clinton, and who once employed Chelsea Clinton at his firm, Avenue Capital.A minority owner of the team, Jon Hammes, is a longtime supporter of Mr. Walker’s and now serves as a finance chairman for his presidential bid. A company registered to one of his family members donated $150,000 in May to a “super PAC” supporting Mr. Walker.The governor argued that the public-private arena deal would prevent the loss of the $6.5 million in state taxes paid each year by Bucks players and personnel.“We have protected our hard-working taxpayers against the major loss in tax revenue that was inevitable had we failed to reach an agreement,” Mr. Walker said in a statement Wednesday.The arena deal may follow Mr. Walker onto the campaign trail in early voting states, where he is running, in part, on his record of defeating public employee unions in a fight to balance the state budget in 2011.This year, Mr. Walker also won a series of skirmishes with members of his own party in the Legislature as he cut $250 million from the University of Wisconsin and increased state debt to build roads and bridges rather than raise taxes.Highlighting the political sensitivity of the issue, Republican leaders in the Legislature severed the arena deal from the state budget to attract Democratic support this summer.“Only Republicans voting for the arena is not good for us, both politically and the optics,” State Senator Scott L. Fitzgerald, the Republican majority leader, said in an interview in June.Craig Robinson, editor in chief of The Iowa Republican, said the “issue that could be problematic for Walker is the overall amount of money the state of Wisconsin borrows for roads, bridges and now sporting arenas.”