https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/05/nyregion/pier-55-park-chelsea-barry-diller-douglas-durst.html
Clash of Titans? Opponents of Pier 55 Have Secret Backer, Media Mogul Says - The New York Times
Pier 55 (Manhattan  NY),Hudson River Park (Manhattan  NY),City Club of New York,Durst Organization,Diller  Barry,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Hudson River Park Trust,Durst  Douglas,Parks and Other Recreation Areas,Manhattan (NYC)
Sept. 4, 2016
7680
In their quest to build a huge new cultural pier on the West Side of Manhattan, the Hudson River Park Trust and Barry Diller, the media mogul who is paying for it, have faced one seemingly intractable opponent: the City Club of New York, a little-known civic group founded in 1892 that was all but dead a few years ago. But it has gone back to court repeatedly in the last year to stop the project.The sides are due back in court on Tuesday, when the State Supreme Court’s Appellate Division will hear arguments on whether to dismiss objections to the project or impose an injunction barring further work on it.But Mr. Diller now says there is a hidden hand at work in all of this, one nursing a grudge and possessing deep pockets. If true, this legal battle could actually be something much bigger — a proxy war between two titans of industry.“The backer of all this,” Mr. Diller said in a recent interview, “is one Douglas Durst.”Mr. Durst, the real estate tycoon whose family owns a dozen Manhattan skyscrapers and who was an active supporter of the nonprofit Friends of Hudson River Park, the fund-raising partner of the trust, when it formed in 1999, might seem an unlikely antagonist. He served as chairman of the group and donated $1 million to it.He declined last week to say whether he is financing the lawsuits against the project, known formally as Pier 55 and informally as Diller Island. But in a terse statement, he said, “I do not like the process or the project and I am in favor of the litigation.”City Club’s lawyer, Richard D. Emery, argues that the trust failed to conduct a proper environmental review. The club has also said that the trust should have sought other potential developers, rather than simply handing such a valuable site over to Mr. Diller.David Paget, a lawyer representing the trust in the Pier 55 lawsuits, said his clients went well beyond what was required in the group’s environmental review, its solicitation of public input and its publication of public comments and responses.Hudson River Park, which runs for four miles along the West Side of Manhattan, is supposed to be a self-sustaining public-private partnership. It is run by the trust, whose board is appointed by the governor and the mayor. Commercial ventures within its boundaries, such as the sports complex Chelsea Piers, are supposed to generate funds for the maintenance of the park. But the park itself remains unfinished and has long been starved for money.In 2011, Madelyn Wils, formerly an executive at the New York City Economic Development Corporation, was appointed chief executive of the trust, working with Diana L. Taylor, the group’s chairwoman. They took control of Friends of Hudson River Park, directing the group to focus on wealthy donors, not advocacy. Mr. Durst and a half dozen other board members were pushed out.Though Mr. Durst publicly said then that he had agreed “to step down for the benefit of the park,” making way for others who could donate or solicit more money, he seethed in an unpublished interview at what he saw as the highhandedness of the trust’s leadership.In 2012, he cast doubt on the trust’s plans to save another of the park’s crumbling piers, Pier 40 in the West Village, by building housing in the park, and suggested a commercial development instead.Around the same time, Ms. Taylor secretly approached Mr. Diller for help in rebuilding the decaying Pier 54, at 13th Street, which was slowly falling into the Hudson River.Mr. Diller, the chairman of IAC/InterActiveCorp, and his wife, the fashion designer Diane von Furstenberg, were the single biggest donors to another public-private partnership in the neighborhood, the High Line elevated park. Mr. Diller also built his distinctive white-glass headquarters at 18th Street and 11th Avenue, opposite Chelsea Piers.Mr. Diller eventually suggested that Pier 54 be replaced with an entirely new, 2.4-acre pier shaped like a parallelogram, with three performance venues amid trees.The idea was that Mr. Diller would cover most of the cost and create a nonprofit to oversee theatrical, musical and other performances. He enlisted help from Scott Rudin, the film and theater producer, and George C. Wolfe, the former head of the Public Theater. He promised to run the park and pay the operating expenses for 20 years. The cost has now swelled to more than $200 million from its original $130 million.The proposal went public in November 2014. It gained support from many quarters, but some groups questioned the secretive planning, private control of public spaces and the impact on the environment.“Somebody’s got to pay for it,” Ms. Taylor said at the time. “We don’t have the money.”Over the last year, the trust approved a lease with a nonprofit group established by Mr. Diller and his family foundation. The city and the state approved the project, as did the Army Corps of Engineers and the state’s Department of Environmental Conservation.City Club filed its first lawsuit last year in State Supreme Court. The suit was dismissed last April, but Mr. Emery went to the Appellate Division for an expedited appeal and a temporary halt to construction, which was granted. The court did allow the trust to install nine of 550 piles for the pier before the appeal could be heard this month.Mr. Emery, when asked whether Mr. Durst was involved, said that all decisions about the case had been made by his client, City Club. A spokesman for the club said its president, Michael Gruen, could not be reached for comment.Those looking for connections might note that another party to the suit is Tom Fox, also a longtime member of the Friends group’s board who was pushed out in 2011. Mr. Fox was a co-owner with Mr. Durst of New York Water Taxi, a ferry company now run by Mr. Durst’s daughter Helena. Mr. Fox could not be reached for comment.And Mr. Emery represented Mr. Durst and the Durst Organization in connection with the HBO documentary “The Jinx,” about Mr. Durst’s estranged brother, Robert, who is in federal prison awaiting trial on murder charges.Then there is City Club itself, which has actions in three courts against Mr. Diller’s project. That is an enormously expensive undertaking for an organization that suspended activities in 2003 for lack of money, only to be revived a few years ago by Mr. Gruen and other civic advocates.Mr. Diller was convinced enough of Mr. Durst’s involvement that this spring he called Mr. Durst in an attempt to gain his support. They held two meetings. On May 2, Mr. Durst went to the IAC building. A week later, they met in Mr. Durst’s Midtown office.Mr. Durst declined to divulge any details, saying they were supposed to be “off-the-record, one-on-one meetings.” But Mr. Diller said that at the first meeting, Mr. Durst did not raise any objections to the project itself, but described his unhappiness with Ms. Taylor and Ms. Wils.At the second meeting, Mr. Diller recalled, Mr. Durst told him, “I don’t like your process,” saying that there should have been a full environmental review of the project and an auction offering the pier project to competing developers, which were points raised by City Club in its legal actions.In the end, according to Mr. Diller, Mr. Durst told him, “You have my sympathy.”“I turned around and walked out,” Mr. Diller said.In the latest court filings, City Club contends that Mr. Diller has total control over the park and the nonprofit that would run Pier 55, and holds any potential rights to rebroadcast performances at Pier 55. Those could be lucrative rights that could be assigned to Mr. Diller’s media company, the legal papers say.“So when Taylor Swift plays Diller Island, the audio, the video and all other ancillary rights are (un)fair game for IAC distribution and exploitation,” Mr. Emery wrote in court papers filed on Aug. 19.Mr. Diller scoffed at the notion and said the lawsuits are multiple “garbage balls thrown at us.” He, Mr. Rudin and Mr. Wolfe have no interest in Pier 55 being a stop on anyone’s tour, he said. He added that most of the venues are too small for big acts like Ms. Swift. One stage, Mr. Diller said, could accommodate about 300 people, while the amphitheater might seat up to 750 people. The main area, or piazza, would fit about 3,000, he said, “but we’ll use that very sparingly.”“Pier 55 will never own any copyrights,” Mr. Diller said. “If profits ever accrue to a production, they go back into the pier. Not me, not my family, Scott Rudin or George Wolfe will profit from this. We’re all in a nonprofit enterprise, full stop.”He said he remained undaunted.“It’s what you expect when you put a good New York foot forward,” he said.