http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/08/sports/tennis/08tennis.html
John McEnroe Puts Oomph Behind Alternative Tennis Academy - The New York Times
Tennis,United States Tennis Assn,McEnroe  John,McEnroe  Patrick
May 7, 2010
3293
When John McEnroe considers the future of tennis, he imagines the height of his past. He can see a 21st-century version of himself, challenging the orthodoxy, combating the world, emerging from a laboratory that is named after him.He can envision an academy of his creation as a means of promoting less predictable tactics, along with a return to youth sports sanity, while acknowledging how that might sound like a contradiction when taking into account his behavioral reputation.“I don’t think you have to give up everything, play six hours a day, to be successful,” McEnroe said. “When I was 12, 13, I was playing soccer and basketball and whatever I did to keep myself sane — some people may argue that point — and from not walking away from the game because I had outlets.”The next figurative ball for McEnroe to strike in his 51-year-old life of playing the angles is scheduled for Thursday, when he plans to announce the September start of the John McEnroe Tennis Academy at the 20-court Sportime facility on Randalls Island. McEnroe intends to model the enterprise on the Port Washington, N.Y., club he grew up in — having the gifted and daring play a few sessions a week while attending school independently, living a life.He hopes to widen the search for the next great player from New York to less traditional tennis-playing  communities like East Harlem and the Bronx, perhaps with the help of corporate scholarships. But he won’t object if his cultural alternative to the generic Florida tennis factory appeals to the families of prodigies from Seattle to Serbia.“People feel, put the kids in the middle of nowhere, isolate them, so all they can do is live and breathe tennis,” he said. “Me, I went to Florida with Harry Hopman, at 15 or 16, for one day and said, ‘I’ve got to get out of here.’ Never would I have made it if I had to do that. It would have been a form of torture. I mean, some people will say, There’s too much going on in New York. But I feel that with the natural energy here, you can feed off that.”McEnroe is collaborating with Claude Okin, the managing partner of Sportime New York, which operates clubs in 13 locations. Before hiring a coaching staff, it tabbed McEnroe’s brother, Mark, a corporate lawyer, to manage the Randalls Island operation.“We’ve made it a McEnroe family affair,” Okin said.Not entirely. The youngest McEnroe brother, Patrick, is the general manager for the United States Tennis Association’s elite player development program, and this is where the story becomes the kind of compelling psycho-drama long associated with the tennis-playing McEnroes of New York.According to John, he had long badgered the association to create a program with him at its National Tennis Center. He figured it a logical extension of his legacy: he was a ball boy at the United States Open when it was played in Forest Hills, then a four-time champion and in recent years its network voice.Alternately encouraged and stonewalled, he became hopeful when Patrick was hired to fix a clogged developmental pipeline in the flagging search for the next great Americans.“He gave me this, ‘Well, we don’t have a lot of money, so we’ve got to start with two courts and a couple of hours,’ ” John said. “I said, ‘Are you kidding?’ How much does the U.S.T.A. make from the Open? You’re going to sit there and tell me they don’t have the money to spend on a program if they want to?“I mean, how many tens of millions — hundreds of millions — have they put out on other programs? What has that gotten them? If this had been a complete and dismal failure, it would have been just like 100 other things.”Ultimately, John reasoned, his brother had to answer to “people who are like politicians, so rather than pressure him — ‘How come you’re not helping your bro out?’ — I decided, he’s my little brother, I love him, and I decided to go somewhere else.”For his part, Patrick McEnroe said John’s vision of the academy did not quite mesh with the U.S.T.A. mission. “As I told John, I’d love to have him associated with the program,” Patrick said. “But he always felt that he wanted something that was his. It was hard to make the argument that you’re going to have a U.S.T.A. program named after a player — any player.”Asked if his brother’s academy would be a direct competitor to the national association, Patrick McEnroe said: “It’s a totally different situation, in a sense that the kids who come to our programs don’t pay a dime. The others have different models, a business model. In John’s situation, he’d like to get some kids who can be great players, but he’ll have to straddle that line between development and making money.”Patrick McEnroe had to tread lightly as he navigated a familial and no doubt familiar minefield. As the superstar of the McEnroe clan, John has always had a quixotic side, reserving the right to alter his life flow as fluidly as he could change the pace of a point.For that reason, it is possible that the U.S.T.A. has been wary of him since he lobbied for the Davis Cup captaincy in the late 1990s, only to quit after one year on the job — replaced by Patrick, who has remained in the role.Asked why he was making what he called a long-term commitment to the academy, John pointed to a guitar propped against the wall of his new Sportime office.“Would I like to be Keith Richards?” he said. “Yeah, I would, but that’s not going to happen. At times you get riddled with career angst, the love-hate thing, and I’ve been lucky enough to at least try and do some other things, have other interests. But eventually it comes back full circle. I’m a tennis player, that’s what my life has been.”He had, in fact, just returned from a weekend in Boston, energized by Champions Tour victories over Bjorn Borg, Jim Courier, who is 39, and by nearly beating Mark Philippoussis, 33. McEnroe sliced, diced, served and volleyed like it was 1978.“I’m considered a dinosaur, to some degree,” he said.He is counting on the notion that young people tend to think dinosaurs are cool.