https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/23/world/asia/united-nations-security-council-examines-north-koreas-human-rights.html
United Nations Security Council Examines North Korea’s Human Rights - The New York Times
North Korea,United Nations,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Sony Pictures Entertainment,Cyberwarfare,Computers and the Internet,Nuclear Weapons
Dec. 22, 2014
9166
UNITED NATIONS —  The United Nations Security Council for the first time turned its attention to human rights in North Korea on Monday, as Pyongyang and Washington traded accusations over a hacking attack against a Hollywood studio, and North Korea’s already limited connection to the Internet went down completely.North Korea chose not to speak at the Council briefing, which focused largely on a United Nations inquiry that had found widespread and systematic human rights abuses, including forced starvation, enslavement and rape. Instead, in a letter to the world body, North Korea described the Council briefing as the product of a “hostile policy pursued by the United States.” It went on to threaten the resumption of nuclear tests.China, which is North Korea’s principal ally on the 15-member Council, sought to prevent the briefing, arguing that the Council had no business looking into one country’s human rights record. It lost that bid.The Australian ambassador, Gary Quinlan, rebutted that claim by citing the hacking attack against the studio, Sony Pictures, which he said showed North Korea’s ability to “destabilize other countries and international commerce.” He was referring to a break-in of the computers at Sony in retaliation for its satirical film “The Interview,” about a fictitious plot to assassinate the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un.The Obama administration has blamed North Korea for the Sony attack and promised to respond. North Korea has denied involvement and made new threats against the United States should the White House retaliate. On Monday, just before the Council meeting began, came reports that North Korea’s Internet had gone dark.The Monday briefing was an outcome of a landmark report by a United Nations Commission of Inquiry chronicling widespread and systematic abuses, including infanticide, executions and torture in North Korean prison camps.The report was based on interviews with North Korean exiles, whom the North Koreans described in a letter to the United Nations as “human scum.” The report recommended that the Security Council refer North Korea to the International Criminal Court for possible prosecution of Mr. Kim and others.Several Council members on Monday suggested support for the idea, including the United States, which has not itself signed the treaty that created the court.Any such referral is highly unlikely, given China’s veto power. Still, North Korea’s newly established presence on the Council’s agenda means that it can come up for discussion repeatedly.The Commission of Inquiry report caused a flurry of diplomatic attention on North Korea. Secretary of State John Kerry convened a meeting on North Korean rights abuses on the sidelines of the General Assembly last September. The chief of the Commission of Inquiry sparred with a North Korean diplomat at a public meeting here last October. And last week, the United Nations General Assembly urged the Security Council to take up the situation in North Korea, including a referral of the country to the International Criminal Court.The United Nations assistant secretary general, Ivan Simonovic, said of the report: “Rarely has such an extensive charge-sheet of international crimes been brought to this Council’s attention.”At the meeting, China’s representative, Liu Jieyi, urged the Council to focus on ridding the Korean Peninsula of nuclear weapons instead. The United States ambassador, Samantha Power, seemed to suggest that human rights were not worth trading for a nuclear deal. “That is a false choice,” she said.China objected to the meeting, which led to an unusual procedural vote — the first in eight years — on whether the meeting should be held. Only Russia agreed with China; Chad and Nigeria abstained; the other 11 members, including the United States, voted in favor.Rights activists who have long pressed for North Korean accountability said the meeting itself was an important advance.“Today, the Security Council signaled that Pyongyang’s decades-long regime of massive cruelty against its own people must end,” said Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch. “By placing North Korea’s appalling human rights record on its agenda, the Council can now at any point take the next step of referring these crimes against humanity to the I.C.C.”