https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/12/fashion/mens-style/john-derian-east-village-bedroom-home-design.html
A Tour of John Derian’s East Village Bedroom - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Derian  John,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),East Village (Manhattan  NY),John Derian Company
Aug. 9, 2016
3805
Name John DerianAge 53Occupation Designer, owner, John Derian CompanyLocation Lower ManhattanFavorite Room The bedroom of his East Village rental, a former artist’s studio (and before that a sewing factory) with a view onto a private garden and cemetery. As with Mr. Derian’s home goods shops in the city (also in the East Village), his apartment feels antique and Old World.What do you love about your bedroom? The scale is amazing and feels luxurious. The high ceilings and the big shape of the room. The fireplace — not that it works — and nice moldings. I’m supercrazy about the shutters. Every time I open and close them I think of “A Christmas Carol” and Scrooge opening the shutters to yell down to the boy, “What day is today?”The walls have a wonderful aged look. That’s nicotine. The woman who lived here for decades was a chain smoker, so there’s this amazing patina, because it’s dust and dirt and nicotine everywhere. It’s all kind of a mistake.What’s the secret to living with antiques in an old space and making it look elegant rather than crusty? The scale and the size of the room help. If it was a small, dingy room, I’m not sure it would work. What’s nice about this is I didn’t do fake walls. Sometimes when you try too hard, it doesn’t happen. But this just happened. The woman who lived here was an artist, and she took care of the garden in the middle of the block, and I would see her every day. One day, she said: “Hey, Derian. I have some antiques you might like.” She invited me up here to look at them. The windows were surrounded by ivy, with this green, filtered light. It was one of those moments where I was like, ‘I never want to wish for this, because I would feel bad.’ So I put it out of my brain. She eventually went to a nursing home. I took it over.Certain elements of your décor, like the bust on the fireplace mantel, give the impression that we’re in an Italian villa. That I got in Paris. It’s a terra cotta bust, probably used in a museum or a school for drawing. I stayed in Rome at the Villa Medici, an art institute, before I lived here. The rooms were big, with high ceilings. There’s something about this room, too, that’s Italianesque.Anything you’re hunting for to finish the look? I do want a four-poster bed with a curtain, so I can really live it. But my boyfriend doesn’t really want that.