https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/10/sports/its-time-for-the-nfl-to-welcome-a-gay-player.html
It’s Time for the N.F.L. to Welcome a Gay Player - The New York Times
Sam  Michael,Homosexuality,Football,National Football League,Football (College),Athletics and Sports,Missouri,University of Missouri,Sam  Michael (1990- )
Feb. 9, 2014
3621
It’s time.Enough of the slow-moving, inch-by-inch steps toward making gay athletes a public part of the fabric of professional sports, as they should be. No more stone-by-stone dismantling of a wall of discrimination by players who announce they are gay only after they have retired from competing in the big leagues.There is no better moment than now to plow ahead and topple that wall with a bulldozer, and what a relief that Michael Sam, an all-American defensive end from Missouri, is in the driver’s seat, bravely heading full speed ahead.Same-sex marriage laws have been passed in many states, with more to come. Gay rights have been a major issue at the Olympics in Russia, where the government last summer passed a law that prohibits the transmission of “gay propaganda” to children, prompting many groups and some athletes to speak out.Even Pope Francis has, in his own way, recently expressed support for gays, shocking conservatives when he said, “Who am I to judge?” He said people “should not be marginalized” because of their sexual orientation and “must be integrated into society.”Now, change is about to come to the N.F.L., the behemoth of the American sports landscape. It was inevitable, but the league now finds itself in a difficult, and potentially awkward, predicament.Its identity has been built on machismo and violence. It is a league rich with alpha males bursting with muscles who unapologetically smash into one another, to the delight of millions of fans.Initially, it may be hard for many viewers, and some football players, to see Sam, who announced publicly Sunday that he was gay, as another hard-nosed tough guy on his team’s defense. But I suspect he will change their perceptions, if a team gives him a chance.Some fans will love him, some will hate him. Some may reserve judgment until they see him rip the heads off his opponents, just as any other defensive player would do.Like so many other minorities, Sam will have to work harder to prove his worth. Fans will probably judge him more harshly, and he will have to perform better than other rookies to prove he belongs in the N.F.L.He will also have to survive his own locker room. And in the N.F.L., that may be his biggest obstacle. It is a place where bullying is a part of the culture, and because of Miami Dolphins offensive lineman Richie Incognito, the public has seen glimpses of that culture’s dysfunction.When Incognito used racial slurs to refer to his teammate Jonathan Martin, and when he left a voice message for Martin saying, “I’ll kill you” — that was just “Richie being Richie.” Martin said he felt so attacked that he left the league, and Sam is likely to endure far more attention than Martin ever did.Even more disturbing than Incognito’s actions were his teammates’ inaction. By doing nothing to stop any bullying, they encouraged it.So, we may not be able to trust Sam’s N.F.L. teammates to protect him as well as his Missouri teammates apparently did. He may have to brace himself for a rough road ahead.The former Minnesota Vikings punter Chris Kluwe says homophobia exists in the league. He is convinced that the Vikings released him because he had taken a strong stand for same-sex marriage. He also claimed that the special-teams coach, Mike Priefer, had made antigay comments to players, including, “We should round up all the gays, send them to an island and then nuke it until it glows.”If what Kluwe says is true, Sam surely wouldn’t be a good fit with the Vikings. But he should have hope. Other coaches in the league, including ones from years past, like Vince Lombardi, have shown themselves to be more progressive.If Sam had played for Lombardi, he would probably have had a clear, safe chance to shine. Lombardi had a gay brother and preached equal treatment of his players in his locker rooms. He made the rules and punished the dissenters — and that was all his teams needed to fall into line. He showed what could be done to affect locker room culture if coaches just took the lead.Teams could also rally around Sam, as the Washington Redskins did in the 1960s and ’70s with the All-Pro tight end Jerry Smith, who was long rumored to be gay. His teammates never made an issue of it — probably because he could play. After Smith died of AIDS in 1986, it was reported that several of his teammates were pallbearers because they felt like family off the field as well as on it.Roger Goodell, the league commissioner, will bear some responsibility for making sure that Sam is treated respectfully. How Goodell handles the Incognito case will signal his appetite for changing the league’s culture.There is no question that Goodell will be watching Sam closely and will be monitoring his treatment in the locker room — if only because he knows the world will be watching, too.But first, of course, Sam must be drafted.It’s time to move forward. The teams and the league are on the clock.