https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/19/nyregion/a-surprise-gift-from-martin-shkreli-who-became-a-hated-ceo.html
Martin Shkreli’s Arrest Fuels Debate Over $1 Million Donation - The New York Times
Shkreli  Martin (1983- ),Hunter College High School,Upper East Side (Manhattan  NY),Philanthropy,Turing Pharmaceuticals AG,Securities and Commodities Violations,Frauds and Swindling,New York City
Dec. 18, 2015
3258
When Hunter College High School announced in March that it had received a $1 million donation — the largest ever in its century-long history— from a member of the Class of 2001, many graduates were stunned to learn who the young donor was: Martin Shkreli, a multimillionaire pharmaceuticals executive.Martin Shkreli? The awkward and impatient kid who had cut class and seemed almost allergic to working hard? The aspiring emo and punk musician who had ultimately been kicked out for poor grades and poor attendance?“I never really thought about him as a ‘Most Likely To’ type of person,” said Geoff Gresh, a classmate of Mr. Shkreli’s, who is now a freelance video editor.In retrospect, Mr. Gresh’s initial impression may have been correct, according to federal officials, who on Thursday charged Mr. Shkreli, 32, with securities fraud in connection with his hedge fund, MSMB Capital.If the charges against Mr. Shkreli are true, his flunking out of Hunter, the prestigious Upper East Side school known for its Ivy League-bound students, was just the first in a series of failures that he would try to overcome with money, his own or other people’s.Though he eventually graduated from another city high school, it was Hunter that seemed to have a hold on him. Classmates describe him as always offering to pay for nights out during their college years, giving the impression that he wanted badly to prove that he had made good. Then came his donation to Hunter. And then on Monday, in the days before his arrest, he drew more attention to his Hunter connection by chatting online with a female Hunter student during a live stream on YouTube.The interaction transfixed the student body, many of whom abandoned their homework to watch the video, drawn by a torrent of messages on social media.Casey Liu, 14, a freshman, said Friday she had found out about the event after a couple of her friends sent her snippets of it on Snapchat. Like much of the school, she and her friends have been talking about it since.“They don’t like Martin, first of all,” she said. “They thought his live stream was a joke.”She also said she thought the school should give back his donation. “He just seems like not a nice person,” she said.Even before his arrest, when Mr. Shkreli was merely seen as a bad-boy pharmaceutical executive, some Hunter alumni felt the same way. These alumni were appalled by his aggressive strategy, as the chief executive of Turing Pharmaceuticals (a post from which he resigned Friday) of snapping up companies that produce inexpensive, little-used drugs, then marking up the prices, one by more than 5,000 percent.The debate has intensified since his arrest, in Facebook chat groups and within the school itself, even though Mr. Shkreli pleaded not guilty and has said, through a spokesman, that he is confident he will be exonerated.At the time Mr. Shkreli announced his $1 million gift, he cited his Hunter experience as laying the foundation for his success in the business world. In particular, he thanked a math teacher, Linda Aboody, telling The Daily News that she was “just a wonderful teacher — her logic class was unbelievably helpful.”Ms. Aboody, who still teaches at Hunter, said that she remembered teaching Mr. Shkreli in an eighth-grade math class. One part of the course, she recalled, was devoted to logic, and the importance of organizational skills.She said that Mr. Shkreli, while bright, often did not put in the effort needed to maximize his potential.“I do feel that he had a heart, and I had a soft spot for him,” she said. “I think he really loved math and science and loved learning about it, but did not want to do the grit work. I’d have to prod him, ‘I know you can do it. You have the ability.’ ”By 10th grade, however, classmates say that Mr. Shkreli would skip class frequently. Sometimes, Mr. Shkreli, recognizable by his rail-thin frame and predilection for white T-shirts and jeans, would hang out in the hallway, playing chess or cards. Other times, he would play basketball outside with his best friend at the time, Franky Guttman.In an interview on Friday, Mr. Guttman, who now lives in Los Angeles, said that he and Mr. Shkreli had bonded over their fondness for music, and because both were uninterested in the fast track to law and medicine and academia that obsessed so many of their classmates.“In order to really succeed there, you had to put in an amazing amount of effort and I think we both decided it wasn’t worth the effort because we wanted to do other things,” he said.The two were part of a band. Mr. Shkreli wrote the music and Mr. Guttman wrote the lyrics for sardonic songs with titles like “L. Ron Hubbard” and “I Like Eggs.” Their sound reminded classmates of the Pixies.After Mr. Shkreli’s grades tumbled, he went to City-As-School High School, an alternative public school where students did internships for credit. He worked for TheStreet.com, the financial news website founded by James. J. Cramer, among other jobs, several classmates recalled, before later working for Cramer Berkowitz, & Co., the hedge fund in which Mr. Cramer was a partner.“He would come back to Hunter frequently in a suit and in a briefcase, hanging out in the hallways and sort of showing off,” said one classmate who, like most people interviewed, spoke on condition of anonymity to avoid getting entangled in any investigation.Another classmate said that, after high school, most of Mr. Shkreli’s Hunter friends drifted away as he became more involved in finance.“We would come home from college and go out, and Martin seemed to be very interested in paying for everything, in order to show that he could,” one classmate said. “He changed during this time into someone they didn’t recognize as the same guy they had been friends with before.”Mr. Shkreli apparently became interested in donating to Hunter College High School when he heard, about 10 years ago, that the school was trying to raise money, said Matthew Blumenfeld, a Hunter alumnus and nonprofit consultant who acted as a liaison to secure Mr. Shkreli’s gift.“He wasn’t on Hunter’s radar screen at all,” Mr. Blumenfeld said. “But I think he really wanted to help the school and I think he wanted to make a splash with a major contribution.”The funds came in about a year or so ago, Mr. Blumenfeld said, and are now in the hands of the high school’s foundation. The money has been split into two funds, one that can be spent at the direction of the principal, alumni and foundation, and the other that is part of the endowment.At the time, Hunter officials hailed the gift, with the alumni association’s   website declaring ”Martin Shkreli, from the Class of 2001, donates $1,000,000 to HCHS!”When asked this week whether Hunter was considering returning the money, a press officer declined to comment. Two members of the alumni association did not respond to emails.Several classmates say that when they heard about Mr. Shkreli’s gift, they could not help but wonder whether it was meant as a sly act of one-upmanship.“I thought it was weird since he hadn’t graduated,” one classmate said. “It seemed almost like a ‘take that’ move.”