https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/28/nyregion/paul-massey-new-york-mayors-race.html
Paul Massey Unexpectedly Drops Out of New York City Mayor’s Race - The New York Times
Elections  Mayors,New York City,Massey  Paul J Jr
June 28, 2017
7736
Paul J. Massey Jr., a millionaire real estate sales executive, unexpectedly ended his Republican campaign to challenge Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York on Wednesday, citing the cost of running against an incumbent as the reason for halting his bid.Despite rivaling Mr. de Blasio in fund-raising, Mr. Massey, a first-time candidate for public office, struggled to gain support among voters in polls during nearly a year on the trail. His withdrawal all but cleared the way for Nicole Malliotakis, an assemblywoman who represents parts of Staten Island and Brooklyn, to win the Republican nomination.Mr. Massey ended his campaign with a statement hours after appearing with Ms. Malliotakis at a breakfast debate, in which he drew harsh scrutiny for claiming that the city’s low crime statistics had been “fudged.” But in an interview on Wednesday after announcing his withdrawal, Mr. Massey said he had decided in recent days to leave the race and had told some on his staff on Tuesday.“I hadn’t caught fire; I thought I would at some point,” said Mr. Massey, who spent lavishly to build a team of experienced Republican consultants but struggled to settle into the role of political candidate. “In marketing something, you got to have excitement around it. And, you know, it wasn’t there.”His decision to drop out thrust Ms. Malliotakis into the role of Republican front-runner after little more than two months of campaigning and offered an opening for outsider candidates like Roque De La Fuente, a San Diego developer who recently moved to New York City to run for mayor as a Republican.The independent candidate Bo Dietl, a former detective and private investigator, remains barred from running as a Republican.Ms. Malliotakis said in a statement, “I will now be able to focus all my energies on defeating Bill de Blasio in the November election.” She called Mr. Massey a “gentleman” and castigated the mayor for not addressing reporters’ questions on Tuesday about a subway derailment.“He may attempt to run and hide from the press,” she said of Mr. de Blasio, “but he won’t be able to run from me.”Republican Party leaders moved to embrace Ms. Malliotakis as their candidate. “She is the new face: young, Hispanic, Greek,” said Adele Malpass, the chairwoman of the Manhattan Republican Party. “I always thought that a primary was the kiss of death. And now we don’t have one.”Mr. Massey’s decision to drop out also opened up the ballot line for the Independence Party, which had endorsed Mr. Massey.Mr. de Blasio’s campaign immediately pivoted to attacking Ms. Malliotakis and sought to connect her to President Trump, who is unpopular in New York City.“Today, Nicole Malliotakis echoed Trump’s harsh position on deportations and admitted voting for Trump,” Rick Fromberg, Mr. de Blasio’s campaign manager, said in a statement referring to her comments during the morning’s debate, hosted by Crain’s New York Business.Mr. Massey, during that event, did not hint at his impending departure from the race and even offered a slogan for his campaign: “New York, Proud Again.”Later, in his campaign office, occupying the fifth floor of a small office building on East 21st Street in Manhattan, Mr. Massey cited the “brutal reality” that polling numbers and “headwinds fund-raising” made his success unlikely. On another side of the office, roughly 30 staff members mingled, newly unburdened and unemployed.Mr. Massey, who relocated to New York City from Westchester County before beginning his campaign, raised $3 million from contributors through the middle of May and lent his campaign another $2.7 million. But his fund-raising prowess was equaled by his ability to spend the money at a rapid clip on a bevy of expensive consultants.He had a little over $600,000 in the bank at the end of the latest campaign reporting period, and his fund-raising showed signs of slowing. A prominent national Republican fund-raiser stopped her work for his campaign in recent weeks. Mr. Massey has already paid himself back for $1.1 million in loans, bringing the total spending for his campaign, through the latest filing in late May, to $5.1 million.The next filing is set to be released next month.“I thought I would have won,” he said, adding of Mr. de Blasio, “There’s a chord of discontent about this guy that’s thick.”A public poll conducted by Quinnipiac University in February showed Mr. Massey losing to the mayor by 34 points. By May, his numbers had worsened. (Ms. Malliotakis polled similarly against Mr. de Blasio.)In the interview, Mr. Massey disputed the idea that high-priced consultants had taken advantage of a new political candidate. “No one takes me for a ride,” he said. “No one took me for a ride.”In any event, the road to City Hall was always going to be tough for a little-known Republican facing a Democratic incumbent — with Democratic voters outnumbering Republicans about 6 to 1 — and it remains so for Ms. Malliotakis.Mr. Massey said he had not yet decided whether to support her. “I’m going to sleep on it,” he said.In the campaign headquarters, a wall of “Paul Massey for Mayor” signs and other campaign writing could be seen on the fifth floor from a crowded elevator.“Who is Paul Massey?” a young man holding a laptop asked as the elevator doors closed.“He’s running for mayor,” a young woman replied.When told that he had just dropped out, they were taken aback.“Tough day on 5,” the man said.