http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/09/sports/tennis/federer-beats-murray-and-britain-to-win-wimbledon.html
Federer Beats Murray, and Britain - The New York Times
Federer  Roger,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Tennis,Records and Achievements,Sampras  Pete,Renshaw  William,Murray  Andy (1987- )
July 8, 2012
9414
WIMBLEDON, England — As the rain gave way, if only briefly, to sunshine and the Wimbledon men’s final approached, lovers, friends and families took turns posing in front of the Fred Perry statue that is on display outside Centre Court.Perry’s statue has been a photo opportunity for years at the All England Club, but this was the day when Perry, the last British man to win the singles title here in 1936, could finally get company in earnest: the day when Andy Murray was about to play the final against Roger Federer.A Murray victory Sunday would have been quite something — a national moment, a thunderous start to London’s Olympic summer. But nobody in tennis today does history as well as Federer, and though Murray played brilliantly, even bravely, at times in this high-quality outdoor-indoor final, Federer was the one who ended up falling to the grass with milestones to savor.Federer’s 4-6, 7-5, 6-3, 6-4 victory gave him a seventh Wimbledon singles title, which ties the men’s record shared by William Renshaw, a Briton who played in the 19th century, and Pete Sampras, an American who won his last title here in 2000.Sunday’s victory also guaranteed that Federer, who will turn 31 next month, would return to No. 1 on Monday and soon break another Sampras record for total weeks atop the rankings.This was also Federer’s 17th Grand Slam singles title, padding his lead in the career men’s standings. But this victory, though not the most significant or emotional of his career (the only tears on court this time were Murray’s), was particularly reaffirming because it was his first major title in more than two years at an age when tennis superstars are usually past their primes.“I mean there was so much on the line, so I didn’t try to think of the world No. 1 ranking or the 7th or the 17th,” Federer said. “So I think that’s going to actually, for a change, take much longer to sort of understand, what I was able to achieve today. Yeah, it was crazy how it all happened under the circumstances. Yeah, I played terrific.”Federer last won a major title at the 2010 Australian Open. Though he has continued to pile up titles on the regular circuit in best-of-three-set events, Federer has been eclipsed at the Grand Slam events in the last two years by rivals Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal.But Wimbledon, the oldest of the Grand Slam events and the only one played on grass, remains beautifully suited to Federer’s Swiss army knife of a skill set: his speed and innate grace, his first-strike instincts, his medley of options off his single-handed backhand, his ability to improvise off a bad bounce or a mid-rally twist, and perhaps his traditionalism, too.A former junior hothead who has become a self-contained champion, he enjoys the decorum. the dress code and the sense that Centre Court is as much a theater as a stadium. Though he was upset in the quarterfinals here the past two years, he has met with much more triumph than disaster on the court where that phrase from Rudyard Kipling’s poem “If” is posted above the players’ entrance.“His fuel tank is amazing to me,” said Paul Annacone, his co-coach who also coached Sampras when he won his seventh Wimbledon. “Roger loves his sport. He loves to play, and he loves to travel. This is his life, so hopefully he’ll just keep building.”Federer won his first title here in 2003 and then reeled off four more before Nadal stopped him in the gloaming in the epic 2008 final that is rightly considered one of tennis’s finest matches. Federer won again in 2009, and this victory means he will tie Sampras’s record for 286 total weeks at No. 1 next week and pass him the following week.“As we know, the world No. 1, you don’t get those gifted; I was up two sets to love in the quarters here last year and two sets to love up at the U.S. Open,” Federer said, referring to his loss to Djokovic in the 2011 United States Open semifinals.“So many chances if you like,” Federer said. “Maybe I got nervous, maybe the other guys were just too good you know. I never stopped believing, and I started playing more even though I have a family. I don’t know. It all worked out. I got great momentum, got great confidence and it all came together. It’s just a magical moment for me.”Sunday’s final started outdoors but was stopped because of rain at 1-1 in the third set after 2 hours 2 minutes of play with Federer serving at 40-0. The decision was quickly made to close the retractable roof over Centre Court, and when Federer and Murray resumed play 40 minutes later, they were indoors — a first for a Wimbledon singles final.Before the rain break, the level of play was, at times, phenomenal, with extended rallies and a surplus of forced errors as Murray, one of the fastest and most consistent men in the game, served big and pushed out of his traditional comfort zone by going for more pace on his ground strokes. All the while he forced Federer to hit extra shots and even extra overheads from what would usually be winning positions.But Murray, as good as he was early, could not grab a two-set lead as Federer twice fought off break points on his serve in the second set and then broke Murray at 4-5 with two master strokes in attack against the wind. The first was a lunging forehand drop volley at 30-30 that surprised Murray, who scrambled forward and knocked a lob long. The second was a backhand drop volley winner at 30-40 to finish off a huge rally and the set.“It’s clear that was the key to the match,” Federer said. “I knew that if I stayed aggressive I was going to have my chances, even if he defends incredibly well.”After the rain break, Federer, long the most successful indoor player in the world, shifted to a higher gear without wind, sun or other distractions. His forehand, in particular, was more penetrating, and the match finally turned for good with Murray serving at 2-3 in the third set.Federer required 10 deuces and 6 break points to finish off the break, as Murray lost a 40-love lead and ended up on the grass on three different occasions: twice from slipping near the net and once from diving to his right deep behind the baseline.“When the roof closed, he played unbelievable tennis,” Murray said.Tennis fans worldwide will surely miss Federer and his flowing game when he retires, but Murray will surely miss him rather less. Murray, a 25-year-old Scot, has lost to Federer in three Grand Slam singles finals: the 2008 United States Open, the 2010 Australian Open and now Wimbledon. He has lost his first four major finals. The only other man in the Open era to lose his first four major finals is Ivan Lendl, who finished with eight major titles and has been coaching Murray since December.“He gave it all obviously; I thought that was apparent,” Lendl said of Murray. “Roger played very well in important moments and served very well, second serves as well. I thought it was a good show for everybody.”But it lacked Britain’s happy ending, and it was perfectly understandable that Murray struggled to control his emotions as he addressed the Centre Court crowd. Even if he had become the first British man to reach the final since Henry Austin, known as Bunny, in 1938, losing was a hammer’s blow.“Getting closer,” Murray said through the tears, with his mother, Judy, and girlfriend, Kim Sears, crying in the players box along with numerous fans in other parts of the stadium.“I’d like to congratulate Roger,” Murray said after recovering his composure. “He’s not bad for a 30-year-old. He played a great tournament. I thought he had some struggles early on with his back and showed what fight he still has left in him.”Though Murray was unquestionably the crowd favorite, the atmosphere in Centre Court was not quite a wall of pro-Murray sound. There were two shouts of “I love you, Roger” in the second game alone.Even with Murray trying to end a 76-year British drought, Federer still had big support. But the prevailing sentiment in the end on Centre Court was not joy for Federer but sympathy for Murray, a great talent whose tennis dreams, unlike Federer’s, have not yet been realized.“I really do believe deep down in me he will win Grand Slams, not just one,” Federer said. “I really do believe and hope for him that he’s going to win one soon.”