https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/karl-lagerfeld-interview.html
The Maddening and Brilliant Karl Lagerfeld - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Lagerfeld  Karl
Oct. 12, 2015
3838
THE HISTORY OF FASHION is the history of longing. Nobody is born stylish. Everybody wants to be a little memorable, and some would like to be somebody else, or more like the self we see in the better part of our minds. It’s about one hundred years since fashion took its place alongside literature, painting and music as a way to look for the social essence of one’s era. Proust saw it happening, and, in ‘‘In Search of Lost Time,’’ Madame de Guermantes’s dresses are ‘‘not a casual decoration alterable at will, but a given, poetical reality like that of the weather, or the light peculiar to a certain hour of the day.’’ I tried to recall the passage as I waited for Karl Lagerfeld in his Paris apartment off the Boulevard St. Germain. It was just after 1 p.m., though there is something timeless about the room where he likes to take his lunch. It has blinds and something of an Art Deco ambiance in shades of gray, angular, with spotless glass and candle-scented air, a Jeff Koons sculpture erupting on the table, next to a beautiful drawing for the poster of the 1924 film ‘‘L’Inhumaine.’’The room is all about the books, lying horizontally on towering shelves that go to the ceiling. Euripides’s ‘‘Electra.’’ Samuel Beckett’s letters. ‘‘A Companion to Arthurian Literature.’’ The poems of Cavafy. ‘‘Alice Faye: A Life Beyond the Silver Screen.’’ ‘‘My problem is I have no experience,’’ said Lagerfeld, who came into the room, shook my hand and dove, at my first mention of the name ‘‘Proust,’’ into the most florid and energetic conversation. ‘‘Because I don’t believe in experience.’’‘‘You have no past?’’‘‘Not as far as I remember. For other people, maybe. But personally I make no effort to remember. I like the language in Proust, but not the context. I could say something mean. It’s all — you know — the son of the concierge looking at society people. There was this woman who survived from that group. The wife of a banker, Madame Porgès. They had a huge hôtel particulier in front of the Plaza Athénée hotel, where LVMH is now. She died a hundred years after everyone else. She was not very chic, and people said, ‘She was the last person who could remember a world she was never part of.’ Some couture designer — to be kind I will not say his name — once said to me he liked Proust because Françoise Sagan coached him in the best passages.’’I believe he is talking about Yves Saint Laurent. He paused. ‘‘There was a moment when designers draped in ermine would be reading Proust, or pretending to.’’And so we began. Karl Lagerfeld loves only the present. He loves work and does eight collections a year for Chanel, as well as his work for Fendi and other companies. In conversational terms, he takes to the track like a prize racehorse, not only groomed, but leaping the fences and taking the corners with brio. Unlike most people in fashion, he actually likes questions, gaining on you one moment, falling back the next, but never resting on his laurels. I don’t know if I’ve ever met anyone more fully native to their own conception of wonder. That’s to say: He lives out his own legend in every way he can think of, with every instinct he has, and in a world of stolid conventions, he has the courage to perpetuate a vision of something wonderful. He also has the intelligence not to take himself terribly seriously, laughing easily, sending up his own iconic status, and — God save us — actually thinking about the world he makes money from, instead of just feasting on its vanities. Lagerfeld is a man on top of his own greatest invention: himself. And believe it or not he has the talent and the good taste, after all these years, to continue finding the world mysterious, and to give himself wholeheartedly to its discovery. There’s nothing that doesn’t interest Lagerfeld, except perhaps death.‘‘What does survival mean to you?’’ I asked.‘‘Well, I’m a battlefield sort of person.’’‘‘You like the fight?’’‘‘Yes,’’ he said. ‘‘But not with intimates.’’Nor does he take inventory of his past: ‘‘One day it will be over and I don’t care. As my mother used to say, ‘There is one God for everybody and all the religions are shops.’ ’’ His mother read constantly, he said. ‘‘I remember her being on the couch reading and telling other people what to do. ... I spent my childhood in the country and started reading even before going to school. There was nothing else in my life but sketching and reading.’’As he picked at his lunch and sipped Diet Coke, I wondered if the only old-fashioned thing about Lagerfeld was his way of speaking. It is fabulous, both inward and outward at the same time, the actions of a man searching his thoughts and pouring out his learning. It’s not everyone who sees thoughts as action, but he does. Let me show you how he trips from one thing to the next. When I asked him about the 19th century, he only said, ‘‘We are spoiled. We have dry cleaners. They did not.’’ Then he talked about the Scottish philosopher David Hume. (‘‘I just found a book by him in a box of books that came to me from my parents.’’) Then quickly we moved to the case of the German novelist Günter Grass. At this point I saw how entertainingly Lagerfeld will give vent to his opinions. I told him I once did a public talk with Grass at the New York Public Library. Grass had just published a memoir that revealed his time spent as a young member of the Waffen-SS. ‘‘He left it too late,’’ Lagerfeld said without hesitation. ‘‘You can’t give moral lessons all your life and have that in your past. He was the most boring, lesson-giving writer, and everything was lost in fake political thoughts. Willy Brandt was clever enough not to give him a post. And — even worse — the sketching!’’ At this Lagerfeld let out a giant roar of disapproval. ‘‘Horrible! Like a mediocre German art student of the 1950s!’’ He went into a piece of gossip and quoted his friend, the late style journalist Ingrid Sischy (‘‘a genius’’) and then told me that before he knew that fashion could be a job he wanted to be a cartoonist.He hates it when people talk to him about their illnesses. (‘‘I’m not a doctor!’’) And he thinks psychoanalysis is the enemy of creativity. ‘‘Analysis?’’ he said. ‘‘What for? To get back to normality? I don’t want to be normal.’’‘‘Maybe that’s why you like silent movies,’’ I said. ‘‘Because you don’t like the talking cure.’’‘‘Yes, the discovery of silent movies,’’ he said, ‘‘was much more important to me than discovering the talkies. To me they are images. Like illustrations. I remember when I was at school I saw the ‘The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari.’ I could not sleep for three weeks because I thought the strange marionette played by Conrad Veidt would come onto my balcony and then kill me the same way. I have stills from the making of the movie and the only surviving German poster of the opening. I bought it for a fortune.’’Since 1954, when he won a prize from the International Wool Secretariat (judged by a panel that included Pierre Balmain and Hubert de Givenchy), Lagerfeld has been a master of his own choices. He never went to school for fashion, though early on he designed for the couture house Jean Patou. But it was not in couture that he made his name, rather as an irreplaceable styliste, a king of ready-to-wear long before it was the mainstay of the big fashion houses. He cultivated his mind and made his own prestige, becoming a personality in Paris fashion when he worked for Chloé. He was a lightning rod of 1970s sensibility, imbuing his designs with an essential sparkle and a Pop Art accessibility. The ultimate cultural magpie, Lagerfeld grew in fame, and has remained in orbit, as a freelance personality with a strong conception of himself that exists beyond the labels he represents. After 60 years of achievement, he appears more like a grand film director than a designer. He never sought to own the studio. He just wanted to imbue his work with unmistakable good form. And that is what he does. He has a director’s eye for detail, for story and allure, which makes him stand out, at the age of 82, as our premier idea of what a brilliant fashion designer can be.‘‘Which directors do you love?’’‘‘I love Erich von Stroheim’s movies. My favorite is ‘Foolish Wives.’ ’’‘‘Actresses?’’‘‘I came to know Marlene Dietrich when she was an old lady,’’ Lagerfeld said. ‘‘I introduced her to Helmut Newton. He told me he used to masturbate to her photographs.’’ He wanted to say more about silent films. ‘‘I was once talking to Paul Morrissey, who made the films with Andy Warhol. He said he loved silent film. But he knew nothing about the European ones, the Italian, the Swedish ones, the Danish ones. I have a Google brain.’’‘‘You were in a film of Warhol’s, weren’t you? ‘L’Amour.’ ’’‘‘Oh, yes,’’ he said. ‘‘It was the most childish moviemaking ever.’’‘‘But we were talking about actresses. You’ve always cared about them.’’‘‘I had better do, the business I’m in.’’Lagerfeld loves women but he has never fetishized them or sought muses. He’s an intellectual designer and tends to admire women not so much for their shape or how they look so much as for their way of being. They don’t always last in his affections, but he prefers human beings who let their imaginations run away with them — Inès de la Fressange, Amanda Harlech — and he allies strength to intelligence in a way that has made him sensitive to women who refuse stereotypes.I asked him what was his ideal of the perfect woman today. He didn’t hesitate. ‘‘Julianne Moore,’’ he said.‘‘Why?’’‘‘I don’t know. I just think she’s great. Her whole life; the way she is in life. And Jessica Chastain — she’s great, too. Of the younger generation, I love Kristen Stewart. She is gifted. She looks tough but in fact she’s the nicest person in the world.’’You can see from the way he talks about his mother that Lagerfeld is no stranger to strong women, and he still has them around him.‘‘Feminism matters to you?’’‘‘I was taught it as a child, not to overestimate the importance of men,’’ he said. ‘‘My mother was interested in the history of feminism. And in my childhood I heard about Hedwig Dohm, a German-Jewish feminist who was a writer in Berlin. The rights of women in Germany in the 1870s were limited to the Three Ks — Küche, Kirche and Kinder — the kitchen, the church and the children. Her granddaughter Katia later married Thomas Mann. Nobody remembers. People remember the English suffragettes but the first to care about women’s rights was Hedwig Dohm.’’Lagerfeld spoke much more about Germany than I had expected. He said goodbye to it a long time ago, but something remains. His father, Otto, was managing director of an American-owned German milk-products company, Glücksklee, from which the family became considerably affluent. The north German, Hanseatic world of Bad Bramstedt, where Karl grew up, appears to lie a million miles away from who and what he is now, but, for all its remoteness, the Germany of his past is not invisible, and I sense that the values of that world still detain him. One might argue that his working life is a fabulous refusal of the past, but even a refusal is an acknowledgment, and one can have a deep connection to things that disgust one. In any event, his creativity is now a principality of its own, and he leases it to Chanel.A butler in a white jacket served us lunch. It was mainly exquisite slithers of smoked fish with asparagus and julienned carrots. ‘‘This food is like a health farm, no?’’ he said.‘‘Yes,’’ I replied. ‘‘I’ve lost a stone just sitting here.’’ He laughed easily, and the butler came with a fresh carafe of Diet Coke. His conversational style is rapid, as if he worries he might lose his opportunity to say what he has to say.‘‘You know St. Mary’s Church in Lübeck?’’ I asked.‘‘Absolutely,’’ he replied. ‘‘My father had one of his factories less than five miles from Lübeck.’’ His eyes lit up as we began to speak of the Old World.‘‘In 1942, when that church was attacked by Allied bombers,’’ I said, ‘‘the bells in the belfry — which were several hundred years old — half melted and fell to the floor. They are embedded there to this day. The church was rebuilt around them. And those were the bells that Thomas Mann heard every morning of his childhood.’’‘‘Yes, this is the past.’’ Lagerfeld said. ‘‘But the past embellished by our minds. This is different. History is not interesting — what is interesting is the anecdote.’’Lagerfeld was 49 when he became head designer at Chanel. It seemed perfect, and many of the designers who came after — Tom Ford, Riccardo Tisci — had much to learn from him about how to revivify an old brand. His empire grew until it began to look, as it does today, an unmistakable part of the world, and his secret, according to him, was to keep working harder than anybody else and to scent newness while renovating tradition. ‘‘Fashion is also an attempt to make certain invisible aspects of the reality of the moment visible,’’ he wrote in the catalog that accompanied Chanel’s landmark 2005 show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Neither a smoker, a drinker or a druggie, he has called himself a ‘‘fashion machine,’’ someone who produces designs in order to keep moving forward.There is something complete about the Lagerfeld look. The stiff white collar, the fingerless gloves, the dark jacket and pants, the rings, the dark glasses and the ponytail. When I was with him, his face was an even mask of light foundation and his hair was powdered. He has fleshy lips, Oscar Wilde lips, and a sparkle in the eye that one only sees with his permission, when he dips his glasses to let you see that a joke has made its way through to the smart interior. Lagerfeld is a little cosmology of luxury. He doesn’t much care for the things around him, except the books, but he cares for himself. He wants to present the best of all possible worlds and impose his own philosophy of improvement. ‘‘The American poet Wallace Stevens once wrote that ‘money is a kind of poetry.’ Do you agree?’’‘‘Yes and no,’’ he said. ‘‘What do you think?’’‘‘I’m not sure.’’ He stared for a moment into a large sculpture beside us, an unknown piece that had been hidden behind a wall in the Marais for 200 years.‘‘Let me tell you something,’’ he began. ‘‘The great art collections were made from very little money. Nowadays, rich people wait for things to become expensive before they buy them. And why? Because they may not be flattered to have something in their house that they bought for little money, even if it is great. But you know, I had Warhols and Basquiats and I gave them away because I thought they would not last.’’Modesty — like jealousy — is a dish best served cold. But there is something warm in Lagerfeld’s insistence that he only wants to do better. I looked up and saw a book about the American artist Whistler and remembered an opinion someone had of him: ‘‘His problem is he behaves as if he had no talent.’’ Lagerfeld is the exact opposite. He has the natural self-doubt of the truly gifted, and the charm to render his doubt as a point of style. So, naturally, I found myself reassuring him, and asking him the kinds of questions he might wish to be asked.‘‘Your profile is recognized everywhere,’’ I said. ‘‘Does that feel strange to you?’’‘‘But in everyday life I don’t think about my profile.’’‘‘I think about mine all the time.’’‘‘But you have a good profile.’’‘‘Not so much.’’‘‘My mother used to say to me, ‘Your nose is like a potato. And I think I should order curtains for the nostrils!’ She would also say, ‘You look like me, but not as good.’ ’’ As for work, he said, ‘‘I always have the feeling I could do better. I always feel I am behind a glass wall that I cannot break to get through to what I want.’’‘‘Self-satisfaction is a kind of death,’’ I suggested.‘‘Yes. I am satisfied with a lot of things but not with myself.’’‘‘Your father was a good businessman.’’‘‘Yes, but he was from another planet,’’ Lagerfeld said. ‘‘He was so far away that it was out of the question to ask him anything. I knew that his mother was very mean. They were strange people, you know. They were Protestants who had become Catholic, and those are the worst.’’‘‘How come?’’‘‘They are hysterical and they overact.’’Many of the world’s great conversationalists live alone. Noël Coward lived alone. So did Jonathan Swift and Simone de Beauvoir. And Oscar Wilde spent more time in hotel rooms than he did at home in Tite Street. Lagerfeld sees his work as an engine of self-propulsion, and he is never lonely, he says, because he is just too busy, plus there’s his beautiful cat, Choupette. You can be in love with your work. He prefers to avoid the word ‘‘love.’’ But for some people, it is work that delivers the great moments of discovery and escape. We were ranging across the subjects in that beautiful, old-fashioned way of his when a moment’s silence opened up.‘‘Are you happy?’’ I asked.‘‘You are never happy in the moment when you ask yourself that question,’’ he said. ‘‘So I don’t ask myself the question, which means I must be happy. I’ve been lucky. I didn’t finish school. I learned nothing. It is all improvisation. And yet I am not doing badly. Happiness is not something life owes you.’’SOME CITIES ARE LIGHT in your mind but dark in reality, and Seoul looks bad in the rain. It was spring but the Han River was blue in the wrong way, like a stressed vein, and the sky was unsmiling the day I arrived. People were driving as if imminent disaster was just part of the ordinary atmosphere in South Korea. You might wonder how such a place happened to fall so hard for luxury, but it makes sense if you believe that beautiful things cheer you up. There are little bits of architecture to remind you that Seoul does have a culture of its own, but mainly, these days, there are labeled, shimmering towers (K-Biz, Simpac) and Kentucky Fried Chicken. A lady held up the perfect pink umbrella as I passed and a man was leaning against the window of Domino’s Pizza, wearing the kind of leather jacket that boys used to spend their whole childhood waiting to buy.I went to the third floor of the Shilla hotel and found Lagerfeld sitting behind a desk at the end of a function room, the Diet Coke already poured and sitting beside a pot of sharpened pencils, a Diptyque candle creating a little halo of pomander in Karl’s corner. A model was standing in front of him wearing a long layered black dress covered in white embroidered flowers. ‘‘You’ll notice the waist is higher,’’ he said, and then he shrugged, as if the whole thing was merely a personal enthusiasm. ‘‘Have a sweet,’’ he said, proffering a plate of disgusting morsels that tasted of nothing. Then he was off again: looking, assessing, opining and being brilliant at what he does. Lagerfeld had flown to Seoul for Chanel’s cruise show and he was checking the accessories, basically, but doing so with an almost hilarious degree of flair and exactitude, rather in the manner of Herbert von Karajan conducting the violin section during a rehearsal of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony.‘‘Virginie,’’ he said in French, ‘‘are you persuaded that these Bermuda pants work, the black with the indigo?’’ He suggested they try a white camellia brooch further up. He said no to several possible handbags. He said yes to a belt. He hesitated, asking the model to walk and then he asked that some black gloves be added. ‘‘It is higher than an empire waistline, in the Korean style,’’ he added. ‘‘This is a thing from history.’’ He had an idea that the models’ eyebrows should sometimes be doubled, like two eyebrows, and in others they were hardly drawn in at all. ‘‘It’s just an idea I had,’’ Lagerfeld said. ‘‘I don’t ask myself why.’’ He told me that all the buttons and all the embroidery on the dresses were done by artisanal firms owned by Chanel. ‘‘Make some movement with the dress as you walk,’’ he said to a young model. ‘‘We want to see the layers of the dress as you move.’’ He turned and drew our attention to the use of hair pieces. ‘‘I wanted the hair to be like a hat,’’ he said. Again, he addressed the models. ‘‘I want the hands in the pockets, yes? Like that. Yes. Beyond cool.’’Lagerfeld was in his element — styling. He gets as much pleasure nowadays from taking all the photographs for his campaigns and from running a publishing imprint, always styling, always choosing, always thinking the fresher thing, capturing the image. He doesn’t have to make money and he doesn’t have to please anyone, except himself. One suspects this may be the biggest task of all. And that it has never been possible for Lagerfeld to say, ‘‘I don’t care.’’ Everything he does is a product of his need to put something in place that didn’t quite exist before, and that is carefulness as fuel, carefulness as existential necessity: He cares, therefore he is. I don’t believe anything about Karl Lagerfeld is accidental, and even his suppressions are part of his game. In any case, it works. Chanel has annual sales to the tune of $5 billion.It was all camera shutters clicking on the third floor of the Shilla. Lagerfeld looked up at Michel Gaubert, the sound stylist. ‘‘Let’s hear the music that goes with this,’’ he said. Within seconds it filled the room, ‘‘What I Mean’’ by A.G. Cook, a heavy-bass, synth-dependent track that sounds, someone said, with its little voices on a loop, like two chipmunks orgasming. Karl tapped his hand on the desk and turned. ‘‘You could not say this was a very beautiful city, could you?’’ He shook his head. ‘‘Very gray, but there is an energy. For a long time I wanted to come to Korea, but I need a professional reason. I am not a tourist.’’ He stood up to greet more of the kind of people he spends his public life with: Françoise-Marie Santucci of French Elle, Godfrey Deeny of Le Figaro, Christiane Arp of German Vogue. His smile grew, though, and he emitted a little purr of delight, when his friend the model Brad Kroenig came into the room. Kroenig came with his son Hudson, who is Lagerfeld’s godson. The designer spent a minute in natural affection before turning back to the group at the table. Looking down, he quickly sketched what the venue would look like for the show. ‘‘It’s an art installation,’’ he said, looking briefly up and then down again, ‘‘and afterward, for the party, there will be 6,000 camellias.’’That night, inside the Dongdaemun Design Plaza — a giant silver pebble designed by Zaha Hadid in the market neighborhood of Yeji-dong (‘‘a neighborhood for learning politeness’’) — the city’s fashionistas were out in force to toast all things Chanel, or all things Lagerfeld, since for them the two names are synonymous. These people were logocentric, dressed top to toe in Chanel and nothing but Chanel, and the giddiness at the show could only derive from the presence of the icon and superstar who had made it possible. The audience peered from their colored stools (it was indeed an installation, like being at the center of a molecule cluster) and they couldn’t cheer enough and they believed fame was a kind of breathable ether. When Kristen Stewart entered the room a general but quite tangible levitation occurred, and the ladies in their Chanel togs threw off all decorum and jumped on their seats to take pictures. At the end of the show, Lagerfeld took to the runway and seemed like a vivid piece of defiance, still working and already thinking at that very moment of his next collection.‘‘I DON’T WANT to see all those old dresses,’’ Lagerfeld said, back in Paris, when I asked about a retrospective of his work organized by Amanda Harlech in Bonn. ‘‘I didn’t go. I’m more interested in the ones I’m trying to design now. I am not like all those art directors now, who have 20 people sketching. I do it all myself. There’s an old German dictum — ‘no credit on the past.’ And with those words I can manage.’’‘‘How important is daydreaming?’’‘‘If you don’t daydream your life is a nightmare,’’ he said. Those women in Seoul were like the girls I grew up with. They just wanted a lipstick that could make them feel they might belong in a bigger town. ‘‘Luxury is something very few people have,’’ Karl said. ‘‘And to buy a handbag is to have a dream of getting nearer. That’s our culture and tons of people — me included — make a lot of money from it.’’ When I press him to think more about what it is people actually want, he stepped back. He is wary of intellectualizing something that seems so obvious and yet so mysterious to him. He knows so much, but there are perhaps some things that he simply doesn’t care to know, for fear of them evaporating. ‘‘I’m actually very superficial,’’ he said. ‘‘And I work on that. I became, as you say, an icon — and this removed me from reality. I don’t go on the streets any more.’’‘‘There are people, let’s say young people, who have never been to Paris. But they might look at you and see freedom.’’‘‘That is the biggest compliment in the world.’’‘‘These people don’t buy handbags, they buy belief.’’‘‘Exactly,’’ he said. ‘‘I don’t do marketing. I don’t know what it means. At Chanel, I don’t make those meetings. I work, but, you know, the minute you love your job, it is no longer work.’’We didn’t talk about health or weight issues or old rivals, because he’s said so much about them before and now his silences seem more eloquent. Out of the blue, he wanted to talk about friendship and I stared into the blissful vacuum of his Jeff Koons as he delivered himself of a salvo on the question of loyalty. ‘‘Sometimes I have left people by the side of the road when they can no longer walk,’’ he said. ‘‘I am sorry but the fight goes on. I don’t want to hear about the good old days. I don’t want to hear about health problems. I loved my mother and my father was from another planet. My sisters and my cousins, I don’t even know them. Most of them are dead, I don’t know. But I know that I need other people. ... I take care of myself because broken cars are not that comfortable. I once went to a fortune-teller and she told me my life would start once it had stopped for the others. And I live with that idea.’’I think he misses the great ones who are dead. And I think he loves his friends. But he knows enough to know that he gains no energy from sentiment. ‘‘When you wake up in the morning,’’ I asked, ‘‘do you see with the eyes of your boyhood?’’‘‘I am short-sighted. I choose not to put on the glasses of reality.’’When I asked what younger designers he liked, he chose only one. ‘‘Sarah Burton of Alexander McQueen,’’ he said. ‘‘She’s great. I love what she does now. He [McQueen] had an obsession with death and phantasm that I don’t share, but I love what she does. I just photographed a dress of hers that I thought was so beautiful. And I just had the print made to send to her. She’s divine. He was unpleasant and poorly groomed but I’m more at ease with what she does. Very poetic and very beautiful.’’‘‘Is hatred useful in creative life?’’‘‘When things are too positive and too sweet, it is very bad,’’ he said. ‘‘Too peaceful is very dangerous. You fall asleep. You need to take care of your enemies. Your friends you don’t need to worry about.’’As I stood to leave, he showed me some pictures on his phone. They were all of Choupette, the wonderful white cat with the sapphire eyes. ‘‘I am not the most important person in my house,’’ he said. ‘‘I think Choupette made me a better person — less selfish. I don’t want her to work but she had an offer from the Japanese and it was a massive success. In one trashy French paper they asked the reader, ‘Are you shocked that a cat can make so much money?’ Eighty-two percent were shocked, so I sent the editor a letter saying I was sorry to find that 82 percent of their readers were envious people. What can I say? She is the Garbo of cats.’’At the after-show party at the Dongdaemun Plaza in Seoul, there was a spontaneous, giant round of applause when Lagerfeld entered the room, making his way to a tree of camellias adjacent to the dance floor. At that point, I saw a Korean girl raise a glass of champagne and point it in Lagerfeld’s direction. ‘‘I’m going to die!’’ she said in English.‘‘And Karl Lagerfeld never will,’’ said her friend. He stood in his bower like the king of style and blew kisses to the people all around, while here and there, dislodged by the applause and the pounding of the music, white petals fell to the dance floor.