http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/us/charleston-shooting-dylann-roof-troubled-past.html
Dylann Roof’s Past Reveals Trouble at Home and School - The New York Times
Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church (Charleston  SC),Council of Conservative Citizens,Roof  Dylann Storm,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides
July 16, 2015
7865
COLUMBIA, S.C. — The young man accused of the terrible crime was a bug-eyed boy with a bowl haircut who came from a broken home and attended at least seven schools in nine years. Many afternoons, he would sit silently on the curb in front of his roomy yard and, when he tired of it, move to a different curb. He helped neighbors with their yard work, but they still found him strange.Dylann Storm Roof, the 21-year-old white man charged with killing nine black parishioners in a storied Charleston, S.C., church last month, attended solidly middle-class, racially integrated schools, grew up with black friends and came from a respected family, his grandfather a well-known local lawyer. But court records suggest that his divorced parents struggled with finances when he was a teenager, with his mother being evicted from her home in 2009 and his father’s once-successful business renovating historic homes falling into debt and closing a few years later.By the time he was in high school, Mr. Roof was struggling with his classes, attending the ninth grade twice before dropping out. He floated in and out of jobs, took drugs and drank, had run-ins with the police, began reading white supremacist websites and, in the months before the massacre, boasted of wanting to start a race war, friends and investigators say.But nothing in the records, and nothing in his friends’ memories, offer a clear explanation to the question haunting South Carolina and the nation: How did the silent young man with no record of violence in his past come to be accused of killing nine people who had gathered to pray?“When he opened up, you could tell something was wrong at home. He wasn’t at peace,” said Taliaferro Robinson-Heyward, who attended middle school with Mr. Roof. “It wasn’t like he was a mean person, but you could tell he had a darkness to his life.”In his first court appearance since a dramatic hearing last month where relatives of the shooting victims said they forgave him, Mr. Roof sat impassively as his lawyer waived bail in state court on Thursday. Judge J.C. Nicholson of the Ninth Judicial Circuit Court set a trial date of July 11, 2016, on the charges: nine counts of murder and three counts of attempted murder. Mr. Roof, who could face the death penalty if convicted, has not entered a plea. His public defender, D. Ashley Pennington, also told Judge Nicholson he believed that Mr. Roof was competent to stand trial.Judge Nicholson also continued until Wednesday an order blocking the release of any documents, photographs or recordings in the case, saying he will let it expire then unless parties in the case request an extension.Mr. Roof was born in 1994 to Amelia and Franklin B. Roof, a construction contractor who liked to ride Harleys. The birth came three years after his parents had divorced. But their reconciliation did not last: When Dylann Roof was 5, his father, known as Benn, remarried.School records suggest that Mr. Roof often moved back and forth between Lexington, a rural mostly white community, where his mother lived, and Columbia, about 20 minutes away, where his father owned houses.The Lexington School District, where Mr. Roof attended fourth, eighth and ninth grades, described him as a “very transient student.”In Columbia, he was in class with black students and the children of professors who worked at the nearby University of South Carolina.“I remember him as somewhat shy, and that he never penetrated into the ‘in’ crowd,” said Ted Wachter, the retired principal of Rosewood Elementary School, where Mr. Roof attended fifth grade.Mr. Robinson-Heyward, who is black, said he saw little evidence of bigotry in the young Dylann. “To me, in the seventh grade, he saw black just as he saw white, you know,” said Mr. Robinson-Heyward, 20, who works in a funeral parlor and helped prepare for burial the bodies of two of the shooting victims.Another childhood friend, Caleb Brown, recalled a class assignment that required students to go home and ask about their heritage.With a child’s inquisitiveness, Mr. Roof asked his mixed-race friend, who had darker skin and curly hair, about his background and learned that Mr. Brown’s father was black.“That didn’t change his behavior toward me,” Mr. Brown said in an interview.The boys became friends at the behest of their mothers, having sleepovers, skateboarding and playing Nascar racing video games. Mr. Brown recalled Mr. Roof’s mother being welcoming and tolerant of all of races.“He wasn’t the most popular kid, but he wasn’t upset about that,” Mr. Brown said.When he was in middle school, Mr. Roof’s mother told her friends that her son was beginning to founder in school. “‘I don’t know what’s wrong with him,’” a friend, Kimberly Konzny, recalled her saying. “She said it was boring to him.”Several of Mr. Roof’s friends said he often complained that his father put him to work landscaping. Even in his youth, Mr. Roof began to exhibit a greater interest in smoking grass than cutting it. At 13, his mother caught him spending $50 he had earned landscaping on marijuana, Ms. Konzny said.“‘You ain’t going to see him for a while; he’s grounded,’” Ms. Konzny recalled his mother saying.In an interview with The Daily News, Mr. Roof’s former stepmother, Paige Mann, said she raised him while his father traveled up to four days a week. She described her stepson as “a loner and quiet and very smart — too smart.”“He was locked in his room looking up bad stuff on the computer,” she said. “Something on the computer drew him in — this is Internet evil.”In her 2009 divorce filing from Mr. Roof, Ms. Mann described a comfortable life, including a car that cost $700 a month, a 3,000-square-foot, custom-built home in Earlewood and four other properties, including two homes in the Florida Keys.The couple at one point moved to the Keys, but the school district there said Mr. Roof was never enrolled, and neighbors did not remember much about him except that he was scrawny for his age.The move destroyed the marriage, Ms. Mann said in the divorce records, and the couple returned to South Carolina separately in late 2008. The Keys house was later lost to foreclosure as the elder Mr. Roof’s construction business collapsed and he defaulted on a business loan, court records show.Ms. Mann claimed that she left because her husband had been abusive, and offered photographs to prove it. Benn Roof hired a private detective to document her liaisons with another man.That family turmoil took place at about the time Mr. Roof was entering ninth grade in Lexington. School records show he repeated the grade, completing the last three months of his second stint of ninth grade back in Columbia, in 2010. After that, neither district has any record of his attendance.His childhood friends say they lost touch with Mr. Roof after high school and were reacquainted only this year, when he joined Facebook. He reached out to Ms. Konzny’s sons, friends from his childhood in Lexington.In May this year, Mr. Roof spent several nights a week sleeping on Ms. Konzny’s sofa and watching movies. He was the only one in the group who had a car and some spending money, so he drove the friends places and often showed up at their trailer home with bottles of Taaka vodka.“He was a lot more quiet,” Ms. Konzny’s son, Joseph C. Meek Jr., 20, said. “He was, like, emotionless.”Mr. Meek’s younger brother, Jacob, said Mr. Roof recently watched a documentary about the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and praised the assassinated civil rights leader, but was bothered by the Trayvon Martin case in Florida. “He doesn’t use the N-word,” said Jacob, 15. “He says ‘African-American.’”But Joseph Meek admitted that he knew his friend harbored racist views and talked of doing “something big.” But Mr. Meek did not try to alert the authorities.Jacob Meek remembered how Mr. Roof would call his father, pretending to be at work when he had actually quit his landscaping job weeks earlier. Mr. Roof’s relatives declined to comment or did not respond to several messages left at their homes. John Delgado, a lawyer representing the family, said, “They are still grieving and at loss to explain this horrific incident.”This year, Mr. Roof had at least three encounters with the local police. In February, he attracted attention at a shopping mall when, dressed in black, he asked store employees about how many people were working and what time they would be leaving. A police officer searched him and found Suboxone, a prescription drug used to treat opiate addiction, and he was charged with a misdemeanor. A few weeks later, a police officer questioned him for loitering at a park and found semi-automatic rifle parts in his car trunk, but he was not charged. In April, Mr. Roof was arrested at the same shopping mall, where he had been barred for a year, and was convicted of trespassing, a misdemeanor.It was also in April that Mr. Roof went into a gun store in West Columbia and bought a .45-caliber handgun with money his father had given him for his 21st birthday. Last week, the F.B.I. said Mr. Roof should have been barred from making the purchase because he had admitted to possessing drugs, but a breakdown in the background-check process allowed the sale to go through. The police said the gun he purchased was used in the church killings.The arrest was particularly surprising to people familiar with Mr. Roof’s grandparents, Joe and Lucy, who are known for taking walks in their tree-lined Columbia neighborhood and greeting neighbors they run into along the way.Tameika Isaac Devine, a Columbia city councilwoman who lives on the grandparents’ street, rang their doorbell three days after the massacre.“Lucy was visibly upset. She kept saying, ‘We’re so sorry, we are so sorry,’ ” said Ms. Devine, who is African-American. “They said they were going to stay prayed up and ask the Lord to help them through this. From what I know of them, their grief was sincere.”Todd Rutherford, a state legislator who represents the grandparents’ district, noted that in Columbia, the mayor is black and African-American Democrats make up the majority of the City Council and the school board. And while some whites fled integration, the Roofs stayed put, he added.“Roof’s father and grandfather both live in neighborhoods where they are surrounded by African-Americans,” Mr. Rutherford said. “Dylann Roof can be racist if he wanted to, but he would have had to have done it in his house.”Benn Roof liked hosting parties and often invited his black and Hispanic employees, one former neighbor said.Several former neighbors, none of whom wished to have their names used because they did not want to be associated with the case, said the same thing: The Roofs were as normal as normal could be.Yet a website that Mr. Roof created included photographs of him with patches from white-ruled African governments on his clothes and others of him waving the Confederate battle flag. He sported the number “88” on his clothes, which appeared to be a reference to the white supremacist code for “Heil Hitler.”On that website, investigators say, he posted a 2,500-word essay that complained bitterly about black crime, citing incidents described on the website of the Council of Conservative Citizens, a white supremacist group.He also praised segregation, saying, “Integration has done nothing but bring Whites down to the level of brute animals.”“A lot of people feel children learn that, they are taught intolerance and discrimination,” Ms. Devine said. “I don’t feel that is something Joe Roof would have taught or tolerated. Someone had to teach him that. So where?”