https://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/19/magazine/19FOB-Medium-t.html
Granting Anonymity - The New York Times
Wikileaks,Computers and the Internet,Classified Information and State Secrets,Tor Project,Privacy
Dec. 17, 2010
9579
Transparency is secretive business. WikiLeaks, the swashbuckling new-media organization whose motto is “We open governments,” relies on a technology of extreme reticence called Tor Hidden Services — a part of the Tor Project, a nonprofit organization dedicated not to light and clarity but to shadows and opacity, to the increasingly difficult art of keeping secrets online.A deliberately byzantine system of virtual tunnels that conceal the origins and destinations of data, and thus the identity of clients, Tor has been around since 2001, when programmers from M.I.T. and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory introduced it at a California security conference. In the past year, supported by grants from the U.S. government and other funders, the Tor Project has prolifically expanded its networks. The software has been downloaded more than 36 million times this year, and thousands of nameless volunteers — many of them Tor clients — now help to relay mind-bogglingly diverse Tor data in nearly every country on earth.Peaceniks and human rights groups use Tor, as do journalists, private citizens and the military, and the heterogeneity and farflungness of its users — together with its elegant source code — keep it unbreachable. When a communication arrives from Tor, you can never know where or whom it’s from. Tor is by design not a media project or a human rights one or (anymore) a military one.Jacob Appelbaum, a developer for Tor who travels the world explaining Tor to human rights and social-justice activists, tells me that users periodically complain about the politics and motivations of other (self-identified) users. What they don’t grasp is that if Tor were cohesive — physically or ideologically — its members could be identified. As Appelbaum explained, “If it’s only the military using the Tor network” — say — “it’s not anonymous.”A Tor transmission these days might start in Addis Ababa, hop to Dallas, then to Stockholm and finally Johannesburg. (There are some 2,000 Tor relay nodes at any one time across the globe.) The only thing the Johannesburg recipient can discover is that the data came from Tor, and Tor has successfully identified itself with no person or group, only with ideological incoherence. For the person trying to get a message out through Tor, this means he communicates exactly as much as he chooses and no more. With Tor, you “only reveal the information that you type,” Appelbaum says. “As opposed to all the other information that comes along when you use your computer.”So why can’t a Tor transmission merely be intercepted sometime in its swerving and illogical flight path? This is the innovation of Tor’s code. A complete chain of nodes is never fully readable at a single relay point. Not only is the communication fully encrypted during transit, but its traffic pattern also is more than unknown; practically speaking, it’s unknowable. This central insight of Tor is brilliantly tautological: What can’t be known can’t be found out — even by interested parties with state-of-the-art or brutal interrogation and intelligence-gathering techniques. As Appelbaum put it: “Even though the government has a monopoly on violence, violence cannot solve math problems.”Appelbaum, who is a developer for Tor and a research scientist at the University of Washington, had some cause for these sinister ruminations about governments while we spoke. Hours earlier, Julian Assange, the brazen founder of WikiLeaks, was arrested in London on Swedish sex-crime charges. Appelbaum himself, who is 27, was detained for several hours last summer by federal agents at Newark Liberty Airport, where he was questioned about his connection to WikiLeaks and Assange as well as his convictions about the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.Appelbaum said he didn’t discuss those topics with the agents in Newark, and we agreed to avoid them also. Instead he spoke volubly, on a temporary Web-based phone line, about Tor and privacy. Appelbaum, whose work as a Tor evangelist requires him to persuade large numbers of people to trust Tor, calls traditional journalism a system of “privacy by policy” — where the policy is set ad hoc by the journalist and the source. (“This is off the record; the story should run on Monday; you must let me use this if you expect the Monday story to run,” etc.) Tor, by contrast, offers what Appelbaum calls “privacy by design” — a kind of privacy that is built into the code, which is available, like Tor software, free, so users can inspect it. You couldn’t violate Tor’s privacy if you wanted to.The Tor Project is now building a Linux-based system, distributed on CD, to make Internet connections entirely anonymous by providing a portable, secure operating system that can be temporarily grafted onto another computer (even in a cafe). Soon users will also be able to take a router provided by Tor and plug it into their home networks. I’m almost considering becoming a Tor relay myself so I can, however briefly and blindly, inhabit these crazy Internet tunnels for myself.I asked Appelbaum about Tor’s shortcomings, expecting public relations and bravado. His frankness surprised me again. “We have 2,000 Tor relays,” he said. “We need 10,000 or 50,000 Tor relays.”The relays give the network its power: more nodes mean less traceability. As city dwellers have long known, there is anonymity in numbers, and anonymity in diversity. If someone contacts you from New York City, pop. 8.4 million, you can’t tell as much about him as you can about someone contacting you from Quantico, Va., pop. 4,516.Efforts to liken Tor to other processes can quickly turn inadequate and surreal. When I told Appelbaum that I was stumped by the common comparison of Tor technology (networks) to onions (spheres), he gamely asked me to imagine onions tossed like footballs around blind corners and peeled anew by each catcher, who alone knows how to peel that layer of skin. Whoa.And there was more. We also discussed telescoping drinking straws. I was drawn to this concept but, without knowing computer code, I could hardly even paraphrase it, much less apply it.It seemed to frustrate Appelbaum, who has a vivid and compassionate way of talking for a programmer, that Tor seems forbidding. Because he’s trying to spread the network, especially to the disenfranchised populations he thinks need it most, he wants Tor to be simple to use, as hard as it may be to comprehend.Appelbaum, whose exhibitionistic Twitter feed is studded with impassioned support for WikiLeaks and Julian Assange even as he worries about being arrested for the connection, is keenly aware of the paradoxes of transparency-secrecy and simplicity-complexity. In conversation, he vacillates between high anxiety and extreme gentleness — but he never loses sight of his devotion to privacy.“It’s so ironic that I’d be such a public WikiLeaks supporter,” Appelbaum told me. “Because I work for anonymity. I believe quite clearly that people have a right to personal privacy. I wear pants because it’s no one else’s business what I look like under my pants. The same way I want curtains on my windows, I want curtains on my e-mail.”Points of Entry: This Week’s RecommendationsOPAQUEGetting tired or scared of the open Web? Want to be a clandestine Tor client or a secret Tor relay, or both? It’s as easy as downloading software. The Tor Project — at torproject.org — makes the ups and downs of anonymity very clear and shows you the furtive, freaky way.TRANSPARENTAs of this writing, WikiLeaks — which has been denied services by Amazon, Visa, MasterCard and PayPal — is available at wikileaks.ch. You can read leaked documents and reports, contribute to the organization and, if you’ve got documents, avail yourself of the Tor-secured electronic drop box. That could change anytime.TRANSLUCENT2600: The Hacker Quarterly, is now available for the Kindle and the Nook. Keep up with the secrecy and encryption buffs. For more information: 2600.com.