http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/01/us/samuel-duboses-death-in-cincinnati-points-to-off-campus-power-of-college-police.html
Samuel DuBose’s Death in Cincinnati Points to Off-Campus Power of College Police - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Tensing  Ray (1989- ),Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Police,Blacks,Cincinnati (Ohio),University of Cincinnati
July 31, 2015
4642
CINCINNATI — Six years ago, with crime creeping upward in the tree-lined, if slightly downtrodden, neighborhoods encircling the University of Cincinnati campus, the city and the university quietly signed an agreement giving the 72-member campus police force authority to patrol nearby residential streets.The goal was “increased visibility,” university officials say, and the roughly 10,000 students who live in apartments and rowhouses off campus noticed a difference. Campus officers walked them home late at night or gave them rides. “I feel like crime has gotten pushed out,” said one senior, Jen Steiner, 21.But the fatal shooting of an unarmed black motorist, Samuel DuBose, by a white campus police officer who now faces murder charges, is forcing officials to reconsider a policy in which the Cincinnati Police Department empowered a less racially diverse — and, critics say, inadequately trained — force to patrol an area far more complex than its campus home base.The Hamilton County prosecutor has called for the campus force to be disbanded; the university has suspended neighborhood patrols and is initiating a “top to bottom” review. Mayor John Cranley said he was concerned about the racial makeup and training of the campus force, and in an interview Friday, Chief Jeffrey Blackwell of the Cincinnati police called for the agreement, signed by one of his predecessors, to be scrapped.“If we’re going to have one, it needs to be written in such a manner that is very restrictive in what it allows U.C. police to do inside the confines of a large city,” Chief Blackwell said, adding, “I don’t believe their officers have the skill set to police Cincinnati with the same philosophy of fairness and cultural competency that my officers display.”Cincinnati has learned tough lessons since 2001, when it erupted into riots over of the use of deadly force by the police against blacks. The next year, the city entered into a federal consent decree that, many here say, spawned a new era in policing, including improvements in training and a shift to less aggressive tactics that leaders call “problem solving.” But the decree, known as the “collaborative agreement,” did not cover the campus force.“This is an island of throwback policing in the middle of a city that actually does policing correctly,” said Al Gerhardstein, a civil rights lawyer who brought the class-action case that led to the consent decree. “That’s what makes all of us ache.”University officials counter that they are already retraining officers on matters like racial profiling, and that their officers work closely with their city counterparts. Professor Robin Engel, who directs the university’s Institute of Crime Science and advises both city and campus officers, says the university is also developing an “early warning system” to flag officers who might pose problems.“High visibility was always our goal to reduce crime,” she said, “but it’s possible that some officers took that further than we may have originally intended.”The University of Cincinnati is not the only urban campus with an armed police force; the Justice Department reports that 92 percent of public institutions and 38 percent of private campuses have police officers, as opposed to security guards. Nearly all officers carry guns, and about nine in 10 have arrest and patrol jurisdiction off campus.And as universities buy up properties and expand into surrounding neighborhoods, formal agreements like the one between Cincinnati and the university are “coming into vogue,” said William Taylor, president of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators.But Chief Taylor, now head of the department at San Jacinto College in Pasadena, Tex., said policies varied on whether campus officers can conduct traffic stops like the one that led to Mr. DuBose’s death. Typically, he said, such stops involve “hazardous situations,” not “technical violations,” like the missing license plate that prompted Officer Ray Tensing to pull over Mr. DuBose.In Cincinnati, the DuBose shooting is creating tensions precisely because the city’s own police force has taken aggressive steps, under federal supervision, to improve training and racial diversity. The Cincinnati police say their officers undergo 1,040 hours of police academy training; the university says its officers spend 616 hours in the academy, plus 80 hours of new-officer training once hired. While minorities make up one-third of the 1,017-member Cincinnati Police Department, there are just four African-Americans and one Asian-American on the 72-member campus force.While that is not out of proportion for a campus that is just 8 percent black, the city is 45 percent black. Michele Ralston, a spokeswoman for the university police, said officials “recognize that we need to diversify.”Although the consent decree expired in 2008, an advisory group meets regularly with the city to monitor continued adherence to what it calls “the collaborative.” Some group members, including Judge Susan Dlott of United States District Court, who oversaw the consent decree, say they were alarmed to learn, after Mr. DuBose’s death, that the university had a formal agreement to patrol beyond campus borders.“We were furious, because we knew that the U.C. police have not had any of the training that the Cincinnati Police have,” Judge Dlott said.A spokesman for the university, Lonnie Soury, says it has “one of the most highly trained university police forces in the country,” and notes that its officers wear body cameras, which provided critical evidence that cast doubt on Officer Tensing’s claim that he was being dragged by Mr. DuBose’s car. Mr. Soury says the university is already “retraining our officers in bias, racial profiling, reporting sexual assault, use of force and what we call procedural justice — stop and frisk.”But the force has had troubles in recent years. One chief resigned in 2013 amid complaints of low morale, and a new chief, Jason Goodrich, was not appointed until nine months ago, creating what Professor Engel, the police adviser, concedes was a “gap in leadership at a critical time.”The university has fired Mr. Tensing, who has pleaded not guilty and filed a grievance in an attempt to get his job back. When the university hired Mr. Tensing, he had experience in a suburban department, but he had also dropped out of the Ohio State Highway Patrol’s training academy after one day.A highway patrol spokesman, Sgt. Vincent Shirey, said applicants were put through a physically and mentally demanding boot camp environment the first day. “Basically, he couldn’t adapt,” Sergeant Shirey said.Two officers who witnessed the shooting are on paid leave pending an internal investigation. On Friday, the Hamilton County prosecutor said that both had been truthful during the investigation and would not be indicted.Mr. DuBose is the third black man to die after encounters with the university police since 2010; Kelly Brinson, a 45-year-old psychiatric patient, and Everette Howard, an 18-year-old student, died in 2010 and 2011 after campus police officers fired Taser stun guns at them, according to lawsuits filed by their families.The university settled the Brinson suit for $638,000 and the Howard suit for $2 million, and has since barred its officers from using Tasers, saying the stun guns would be reintroduced after officers were adequately trained in how to use them.The university, though, says it has no intention of disbanding the force. It says crime has dropped drastically in the city area it patrols. In 2009, the year the agreement with the city was signed, there were 491 violent crimes, including homicide, rape, robbery and assault, in that area; last year, there were 227, according to a campus crime report released in May. Most victims were nonstudents.In the nearby neighborhoods, along streets dotted with bars and auto repair shops, students and residents expressed support for the campus officers. “Students want to keep them,” Ms. Steiner said, a sentiment echoed by William Flege, a contractor.Mr. Flege, 45, who lives not far away in an eclectic neighborhood known as Northside, says the area east of campus is known as “pill hill,” for its proximity to local hospitals.“I won’t characterize it as a bad neighborhood,” he said, “but there’s a good reason U.C. police have been scurrying around.”But Iris Roley, a project manager for Black United Front, an advocacy group involved in the suit that led to the consent decree, and a cousin of Mr. Brinson, the psychiatric patient who died, said the campus police would have to change. “Cincinnati is used to working and rolling its sleeves up and getting things done,” she said. “They can disband right now, or we can go in and reform them, the same way we reformed Cincinnati police.”