https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/25/us/greg-gianforte-facts.html
Who Is Greg Gianforte? - The New York Times
Elections  Governors,Gianforte  Greg (1961- ),Assaults,Montana,Politics and Government
May 25, 2017
8554
Greg Gianforte, a wealthy former software executive who was charged with assaulting a reporter on Wednesday, won a special election on Thursday for Montana’s seat in the House of Representatives. Mr. Gianforte, a Republican, had been the front-runner against the Democratic candidate, Rob Quist, but his campaign was plunged into crisis by his confrontation with the journalist.Mr. Gianforte, 56, who has never held public office, amassed a personal fortune as a technology entrepreneur: He founded a software company, RightNow Technologies, that he later sold to Oracle for about $1.5 billion. He has put his business background at the center of his campaign, promising to use his private-sector sensibilities to help create jobs.Mr. Gianforte ran for governor of Montana in 2016, unsuccessfully challenging the incumbent, Steve Bullock, a Democrat. Mr. Bullock defeated Mr. Gianforte by about four percentage points, even as Donald J. Trump carried the state over Hillary Clinton by 20 percentage points.Many of the attacks Democrats used against Mr. Gianforte last year lingered in the House race, forcing national Republicans to spend millions to bolster his campaign. And Mr. Gianforte made new, unforced errors, in one instance announcing his support for the American Health Care Act in a phone call with Washington lobbyists before stating a public position in Montana.Mr. Gianforte entered the week as a clear favorite over Mr. Quist, a country music singer. Then Ben Jacobs of The Guardian asked him about the American Health Care Act. According to an audio recording and the accounts of witnesses, Mr. Jacobs asked Mr. Gianforte for his reaction to a Congressional Budget Office report showing that the bill would cause some 23 million people to lose health insurance coverage, and Mr. Gianforte erupted.He was accused of assaulting Mr. Jacobs and given a court date in June. Several Republican leaders, including the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, called on Mr. Gianforte to apologize.Mr. Gianforte has had politically charged legal encounters before. During the governor’s race, Democrats criticized him for having sued a state agency over a land easement next to his property; land-use issues are highly contentious in Montana politics, and the suit played into the Democrats’ characterization of Mr. Gianforte as a cold tycoon. This month, The Missoulian also reported that Mr. Gianforte had illegally killed an elk in 2000. Mr. Gianforte’s spokesman said he had self-reported the killing, describing it as a mistake.Mr. Gianforte, who is originally from New Jersey, has supported creationism and was attacked during the governor’s race for seeming to question evolution. He has been a major benefactor of the Glendive Dinosaur and Fossil Museum, which explains the age of the dinosaurs in biblical terms.Three of Montana’s major newspapers — The Missoulian, The Billings Gazette and The Independent Record — withdrew their endorsements of Mr. Gianforte after the assault charge. But the prospects that the altercation would tip the race were complicated by Montana’s early-voting tradition: Over half of the estimated ballots had been returned by Wednesday.