https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/11/fashion/saks-fifth-avenue-downtown-brookfield-place.html
Where Masters and Mistresses of the Universe Can Have It All - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Shopping and Retail,Saks Fifth Avenue,Brookfield Place (Manhattan  NY)
April 11, 2017
4132
Not long ago, a shiny, glass-and-metal shopping mall appeared in Lower Manhattan, the kind of thing Manhattan natives (your stopgap Critical Shopper included) longed for in their foolish youths when suburban friends would floss and brag. It is called Brookfield Place, and behind its streak-free panes wait Diane von Furstenberg and J. Crew, Burberry and Bottega Veneta, a Lululemon and a designer gym to wear it in.These are difficult days for the brick-and-mortar retail business, which is fighting against the forces of ease, convenience and Amazon.com, so the arrival of a megamall seems like a strange eruption. But Brookfield, a stone’s throw from the 9/11 Memorial, is closer still to the gleaming office towers that house American Express, Merrill Lynch and Goldman Sachs, some of which are accessible from its well-appointed elevator banks. What the good old mall meant to gum-popping high schoolers, this one aims to mean to blue-chip M.B.A.s with budgets to burn. Want to meet at the food court for curly fries at the nerve center of American capitalism?Touching down here is Saks Fifth Avenue, a New York landmark now untethered from its iconic address and off to explore a new New York. It arrived like an 86,000-square-foot emissary from one of the city’s stateliest dowagers. Of course, “downtown” is as much a state of mind as an address. Even stocked with designer labels picked for maximum cool (edgy entrants like Vetements, whose fully unstructured Carhartt work-apron dress will run you $1,210), Saks, with its manicured gleam and full floor of private salons, feels less downtown than Uptown South.That’s not to say it is without the zing of surprise.“Where would you wear these?” wondered Hannah, the girlfriend I enlisted to vet the Saks women’s assortment with me. She had in her hands a pair of Miu Miu slides, upholstered in a faux fuzz the color of Cookie Monster and topped with imitation pearls ($950). They were never meant for the touch of the subway platform.But they would be perfect for a spin around Saks, which resembles a clean, well-lighted spacecraft, with rack after rack of clothes in the round. The shoe salon radiates concentrically outward from an enormous bubbled chandelier, and the designer fashion section orbits around a central bank of escalators and a kicky display that changes monthly. (It is currently given over to the exuberant designs of Rosie Assoulin, a riot of deck chairs on a packing-peanut “beach.” Summer share!) The point of this Saks is bounty: the way the racks groan with clothes, one leading seamlessly, and slightly disorientingly, to the next.The masters of the universe who work upstairs (and whose families are penthoused nearby) are used to having it all, and Saks seems determined to offer it all to them. It is organized by designer, and the gang’s all here: the rowdy Americans (Marc Jacobs, Alexander Wang, Proenza Schouler), the elegant Europeans (Chloé, Akris), the flouncy, convention-flouting avant-garde (Comme des Garçons, Sacai, Simone Rocha). There are spaces for more moderately priced “contemporary” clothes, denim, handbags and beauty products, but because of the mostly open layout, everything runs together, even in defiance of logic.A Baja East tie-dyed T-shirt featuring the “Minions” characters (“very Venice boardwalk,” Hannah said) hangs a few feet from dressy office garb by Akris’s Punto line. (The same issue prevails on a smaller scale at the Saks men’s store across the mall, where racks of outgoing pieces by Thom Browne, Lanvin and Off-White segue into Saks’s more conservative private label, for maximum sartorial whiplash.)A focused trip through Saks — the kind you might make on a lunch-break search mission — can yield treasures. Hannah found clunky-heeled shoes by Dries Van Noten that stopped her short, bright separates from A.L.C. and Alice + Olivia, and an asymmetrical tie-front dress in a lipstick red by Proenza Schouler ($1,850) that she loved. “This is the sort of thing that makes me wish I was invited to luncheons,” she said, giving it a spin in front of a dressing room mirror as a hopeful clerk looked on.But in the absence of a tighter edit, overabundance can lead to exhaustion. Trendy pieces — the patch-studded jean jacket, the men’s-wear-style shirt — appear with slight variations (and at different prices) across brands. Variety can be a virtue, but this recurrence makes much of the offering feel like a mountain of merchandise in search of a stern curator, special items adrift in mere swag. “Some of it feels like stuff for the Kardashians to put into their closets and never look at again,” Hannah said.A full-throttle Saks expedition could legitimately require a vacation afterward. Here, too, of course, the store is ready to help. An exclusive selection of sweatshirts ($95) and hoodies ($115) by the New York label Knowlita teases a certain tribe’s favorite escapes: “St. Barth or Nowhere”; “The Cape or Nowhere”; and, perhaps hopefully, “Saks or Nowhere.”