https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/arts/design/jim-henson-muppets-puppeteer-museum-of-moving-image.html
The Muppets and Their Maker Take Queens - The New York Times
Puppets,Art,Television,Museum of the Moving Image,Henson  Jim,The Jim Henson Exhibition (Exhibit),Sesame Street (TV Program),The Muppet Show (TV Program)
July 19, 2017
3053
It’s time to play the music! It’s time to light the lights! Four years after the family of Jim Henson donated much of his puppeteer archive to the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens — a move announced by then-mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who planted a smooch on Miss Piggy — the work goes on permanent display this weekend, googly eyes and all. The project ran several years behind schedule, as the museum expanded its gallery space (with the help of city funding) and restored the hand-held creatures (with the help of a crowdfunding campaign that blew past financing goals). Now, at last, the fur is all in place.“The Jim Henson Exhibition” includes nearly four-dozen puppets, plus hundreds of sketches, videos and props from “Sesame Street” and “The Muppet Show,” early commercials, misfired experiments and cult films of the 1980s. Another substantial chunk of Henson’s archive is at the new Center for Puppetry Arts in Atlanta, which Henson supported during his lifetime, though the Museum of the Moving Image has a home-court advantage: Henson’s workshop is nearby in Long Island City, while Sesame Street itself lies around the block at Kaufman Astoria Studios. In this initial period you’ll need to get a timed ticket to meet the Muppets, which seems sensible given the show’s narrow, winding galleries; you’ll want to reserve your family’s spots now.Children will no doubt thrill to see Big Bird and Kermit, but this exhibition — like many of Henson’s shows — is principally for adults, concerned with the craft of puppetry and the expansion of broadcast media as much as with lovable frogs and monsters. Henson, born in Greenville, Miss., in 1936, had an early gift for landscape drawing, but he cottoned on quickly to the potentials of a new medium — and to the branding opportunities that the medium would allow. In 1950 he convinced his parents to buy an early TV set, and before he was out of his teens Henson had created “Sam and Friends,” a puppet show that ran in five-minute segments on a local Washington station.With Jane Nebel, later his wife and muse, Henson performed what were essentially early music videos: lip-synced renditions of “That Old Black Magic” or “I’ve Grown Accustomed to Your Face,” interwoven with wacky words from our sponsor. Sam, a human puppet, had a rigid face more appropriate for puppet theater. But another, floppier puppet who made his debut in 1955 — named Kermit, who was not yet a frog but a lizardlike creature made from an old coat belonging to Jim’s mother — could produce animated facial expressions that made him perfect for the close-up shots of a TV camera. In one of the few interactive sections of this show, you can don a puppet on your right hand and try to make it lip-sync one of these early variety performances in front of a camera. (I scored pretty low on hand-eye coordination; my clip looked like a Muppet hostage video.)Henson was a young man in a young medium, and both “Sesame Street” and “The Muppet Show” would later bear the patent legacy of early television — above all the variety show, with its swift succession of skits and songs. His puppets were ideal guests for variety hosts in those early years; one of them, Rowlf the Dog, appeared on “The Jimmy Dean Show” between 1963 and 1966. At the same time, Henson was producing rapid-fire, often mischievous commercials. Eight-second spots for supermarket coffee featured Wilkins, a smiley cylinder, and Wontkins, a grumpy cone who got bopped on the head or set on fire. Instant chow mein was hawked by a red and pink dragon, one of Henson’s earliest full-body characters, who looks like a carnivalesque prototype for Big Bird.Henson was a voice actor as much as a puppeteer, and with “Sesame Street,” whose first episode aired in 1969, you can fully see the brilliance of Henson’s comic timing — and the more frenetic gifts of Frank Oz, the Laurel to Henson’s Hardy. They pulled off some of the great double acts, whether as strait-laced Bert and wisecracking Ernie, or as antic Grover and flummoxed Kermit, now officially a frog. (Henson’s successor as Kermit, the puppeteer Steve Whitmire, was fired this month, after 27 years, in a dispute with Disney, which bought the Muppetsin 2004.)Later Mr. Oz would voice a new character, Miss Piggy, who grew from a one-off character on late-night TV to the star of “The Muppet Show,” the music-hall-style show that Henson produced in Britain in 1976 after American executives passed. Miss Piggy is here in a bridal gown, and the other full-scale puppets include Big Bird, Cookie Monster, Elmo, Prairie Dawn, the Swedish chef and several stars of “Fraggle Rock.” There is a prototype of the “Anything Muppet,” the fat blue bit player of “Sesame Street” whom visitors can affix with any number of eyes, noses, wigs and mustaches. You also get to know my all-time heroes Statler and Waldorf, the professional haters in the “Muppet Show” balcony who remind us that even we critics can deliver a punch line. (“Do you believe in life after death?” “Every time I leave this theater!”)Henson initially demurred when he was asked to join what became “Sesame Street,” and he was always wary of seeing puppetry as only children’s entertainment. A fascinating gallery at the Museum of the Moving Image is devoted to Henson’s experimental work of the 1960s, which included live-action shorts, peace-and-love documentaries, and designs for a psychedelic nightclub that would have featured kaleidoscopic projections. His two films from the 1980s, “The Dark Crystal” and “Labyrinth,” skew darker and more fatalistic. But though the puppets his studio designed could inspire awe in cinematic settings, as a performer and writer Henson always did best with the intimacy and rapidity of television.He died young, succumbing at 53 to a bacterial infection. In the years since his death in 1990 his studio, known as the Creature Shop, has produced increasingly sophisticated animatronic characters, notably for the television show “Dinosaurs” (1991-1994), as well as digital characters for the children’s show “Sid the Science Kid.” But there is something about the simplicity of the Muppets — low-tech dummies in a young broadcast medium — that brought out a new kind of virtuosity from Henson and his team, who threw so much into their performances that whole generations became their intimate friends.