https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/05/us/republican-presidential-candidates-fight-to-make-cnn-fox-debate-cut.html
As Republican Debates Near, Candidates Vie to Make Cut   - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),CNN,Fox News Channel,Republican Party,Christie  Christopher J,Fiorina  Carleton S,Jindal  Bobby,Perry  Rick,Walker  Scott K,Santorum  Rick,Rubio  Marco
June 4, 2015
7659
Carly Fiorina is on the clock, a nine-week clock to be exact. That is when the first Republican debate of the 2016 election will happen. And if she does not get her poll numbers up, she will not make the cut.“I need your help to get on that debate stage,” Ms. Fiorina, the former Hewlett-Packard chief executive, wrote in an urgent plea to supporters the other day. “I need to grow my team of supporters.”Rick Santorum, the former senator and two-time presidential candidate, also might find himself excluded. “If you’re a United States senator, if you’re a governor, if you’re a woman who ran a Fortune 500 company,” he vented to reporters recently, “then you should have a right to be on stage.”The announcements by Fox News and CNN that they will limit the first two major debates to candidates who rank in the top 10 in national polls has given the Republican Party a “Hunger Games”-type feel. Facing the possibility of being excluded from the first nationally televised face-offs of the 2016 election — and deprived of the priceless media attention the events can generate — some of the lesser-known candidates are under tremendous pressure to raise their visibility.They are imploring supporters to give more money. They are increasing their national television presence. And they are not waiting for the spotlight to find them.Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who barely cracks the top 10 in many polls, has spoken to Fox News at length twice in recent weeks, stressing conservative positions. Ms. Fiorina invited reporters and cameras last week to follow her to the same hotel in Columbia, S.C., where Hillary Rodham Clinton was speaking. She then stood outside and taunted Mrs. Clinton, landing copious headlines.For Republicans in states like Iowa and New Hampshire that hold the first primaries and caucuses, the trend is troubling. They fear candidates are too focused on getting on television to enhance their poll standing, when they should be out meeting voters in town halls and greasy spoons. Making matters worse, they say, is that the networks are using only national polls to determine who makes the top 10 — not state-based polls — so a candidate who builds momentum in Iowa could still be left off the stage.There are already signs that the early-state rituals are being neglected, with a number of candidates waving off traditions like the Iowa straw poll in August. Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida have said they have no plans to participate, and representatives of Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin last week declined to send anyone to an informational meeting on the poll.Making the cut for the first debates is now “on everybody’s mind,” said Steve DeMaura, executive director of Carly for America, the “super PAC” working for Ms. Fiorina. “If you’re currently at 5 percent or below, you have to know that everybody is trying to get in,” he said.Some Republicans said the traditional role of taking the measure of candidates has effectively been outsourced to the networks.“The centralization of the presidential primary process is very concerning, especially when you have the very real prospect of network executives, not actual voters in an early primary or caucus states, winnowing the field,” said Matt Strawn, a former chairman of the Iowa Republican Party. “The strength of early states like Iowa and New Hampshire,” he added, “is the fact that a candidate, no matter their station or title in politics, is expected to look voters in the eye.”Those at risk of being left out could include politicians who in another election year would be competitive.There are Lindsey Graham, a popular senator from South Carolina; two former governors of big states, Rick Perry of Texas and George E. Pataki of New York; and three sitting governors: Mr. Christie, Mr. Jindal and John R. Kasich of Ohio. In Mr. Kasich’s case, exclusion would come with an added indignity: The first debate will take place in his own state.In an interview, Mr. Kasich acknowledged the pressure to appear on television. But he insisted that was not where his focus would be. “When it comes to retail politics, that’s where the action is,” he said. “They want to see you in Iowa, in New Hampshire and in South Carolina.”The scramble shows the degree to which the Republican Party is still struggling to exert control over the debate process after the last election cycle, in which a series of debates — 20 in all — seemed to exasperate party leaders and, occasionally, candidates too. The Republican National Committee has sanctioned only nine debates this time, with the possibility for three more. But there are 15 declared or likely candidates, and each will be looking for ways to stand out in such a crowded pack.Then there is the gnawing question of what to do with Donald Trump. Mr. Trump ranks high in national polls because of his name recognition. Many Republicans worry that the inclusion of Mr. Trump, who few believe will follow through with an authentic presidential campaign, will squeeze out someone like Mr. Kasich or Mr. Jindal.Despite the frustrations of state officials and back-of-the-pack candidates, the party and the networks say there is no easy way to avoid leaving some people out.“Nobody knows how to do this. Nobody,” said Newt Gingrich, the former speaker of the House who saw his campaign for president in 2012 take off after he delivered two aggressive debate performances in South Carolina.Chief among the concerns among the campaigns is the networks’ methodology for selecting the top 10. Early polls have shown the contenders bunched together, with the differences in their ranking still statistically insignificant.Mr. Santorum’s top political adviser, John Brabender, likened the criteria set by Fox News and CNN to pulling numbers out of a hat. And Mr. Pataki’s spokesman, David Catalfamo, said the criteria would have barred “Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and probably Abraham Lincoln” from the stage.Network executives, who said they could find no precedent for a televised debate including more than 10 people, believe they have been as fair as possible under unusual circumstances. And they point out that they have long used national polls to narrow who gets on the debate stage. CNN has set up a two-tiered debate for Sept. 16, with the lower-polling candidates participating in a segment that will air before the main event. Fox said it would offer airtime on the same day of its Aug. 6 debate to candidates who do not clear the top 10.But these secondary debates — likely to be taken as consolation prizes for being denied a seat at the adults’ table — may not mollify everyone. And that has raised questions about what candidates might do to get a piece of the spotlight.“People got to do what they’ve got to do to draw attention,” said Armstrong Williams, a friend and adviser to Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon who is a Republican candidate, adding: “I can see them just totally disrupting the rules and the process.”Mr. Gingrich offered one possibility. “So you don’t want me to be on the stage? Fine. So I’m going to be the guy who comments about dumb answers online,” he said. “You could imagine the social media around the debate being bigger than the actual debate.”