https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/insider/car-camping-at-the-tour-de-france.html
Car Camping at the Tour de France - The New York Times
Camps and Camping,Tour de France (Bicycle Race),New York Times,France
July 19, 2017
9368
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into life at The New York Times.One night a few weeks ago, I sent a text message to Pete Kiehart, a freelance photographer based in Paris, with an unconventional idea for how we might approach a story we’d been planning for the Tour de France. Since Pete and I hadn’t actually met yet, I wasn’t sure how he’d react.“Maybe we should think about camping out?” I wrote to him.Six minutes later, Pete typed back a four-word response: “Sounds good to me.”And so began the reporting process for our piece this week on the largely unseen ritual of watching the Tour from one of its iconic mountainside locales — one that would ultimately involve me sleeping for two nights in the woods in the passenger seat of a white Ford Kuga.As anybody who’s seen the race on television knows, the mountains draw some of the event’s most hard-core fans. They dress up. They run alongside the riders. Sometimes they reach out and touch them.What can be less obvious to viewers on television is how these fans actually end up on those remote mountain roads before the Tour passes through. Space along these roads can be scarce, and local authorities often block access to the mountains a day or two ahead of the race. Many people, therefore, arrive several days early to camp.That’s what Pete and I set out to experience.In planning the piece, I’d singled out Stage 9 of the Tour, which would take the riders on a punishing series of climbs between Nantua and Chambery on Sunday, July 9. Mont du Chat would be the last of the ascents, and we headed there, hoping to see a crowd.On Thursday afternoon, Pete and I arrived in Chambéry, where we had booked a couple of hotel rooms for the weekend. (At this point, we weren’t fully committed to our plan to sleep outdoors.) After dropping our bags off, we got straight back into my rental car and drove to the mountaintop.It was still 72 hours before the riders were scheduled to arrive, but the area was already bustling with activity; camper vehicles and tents were scattered up and down the winding road.It was perfect. We went back to the hotel and canceled our reservations for the rest of the weekend.On Friday morning, we got up early and made two quick stops: to Decathlon, a French sporting goods store, where we bought a tent, a sleeping bag, a rain poncho and some other camping supplies; and then to Carrefour, a supermarket, where we gathered a haphazardly considered assortment of food and, more important, wine, which we’d heard would endear us to our potential neighbors on the mountain.For the next three days and two nights, we hiked up and down the mountain road, listening to stories from a charming assortment of people: fans who had been camping like this for decades, mountainside newbies, young locals, retirees from afar, die-hard cycling fans, people who’d never seen the race before.Some boozed morning to night. Some were content to sit and stare out into the road. Some arrived in mammoth R.V.s equipped with satellite dishes. Some pitched small tents on slivers of sloped grass.The wine turned out to be unnecessary as an icebreaker. As a whole, the people we encountered were welcoming and happy to stand and chat, sharing camping advice and food.Pete, the more outdoorsy of the two of us, slept in the tent. Through a flap, he could watch the sun rise over the crystalline Lac du Bourget.I slept in the passenger seat of white Ford, which was parked nearby and held all of our luggage and gear in the back. These weren’t the best nights of rest I’ve ever had.But it was worth it. We watched our little mountain society go to bed at night — or in the case of some, stay up and party — and we saw it come to life again early in the morning.Amid the relative quiet of the mountain, the sounds stuck with me more than the sights: the snoring of a shirtless Frenchman napping on a roadside blanket; the happy singing of the Danes who camped next to us; shouts of “Vai Italia!” from the Italians watching an early stage on an iPad.When the road was closed on Saturday, the energy on the mountain cranked up several notches, and we were happy to be up there inside the barriers.The three days built to an exciting, frenzied climax — and then, with little fanfare or ceremony, all the people picked up their things and left.So Pete and I did the same. By that point, we were both sunburned and in need of shower.