https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/us/politics/trump-nominates-randal-quarles-to-oversee-wall-street-banks.html
Trump Nominates Randal K. Quarles to Oversee Wall Street Banks - The New York Times
Federal Reserve System,Quarles  Randal K,Appointments and Executive Changes,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,Banking and Financial Institutions,Trump  Donald J
July 10, 2017
1605
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday named Randal K. Quarles, a former Treasury Department official, to serve as the Federal Reserve’s top watchdog overseeing Wall Street and to play a leading role in the administration’s plans to reduce financial regulation.Mr. Quarles would be the first person to serve in the role of vice chairman for supervision, which Congress created after the financial crisis to sharpen the Fed’s focus on regulatory issues. As a member of the Fed’s board of governors, he would also have a vote on monetary policy.The position requires Senate confirmation, but Republicans, who hold a majority, can confirm Mr. Quarles without support from Democrats, should that be necessary.Mr. Quarles, 59, would be a counterweight to the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, who has led the Fed’s postcrisis stimulus campaign and its efforts to strengthen financial regulation.Mr. Quarles has criticized some of those policies, including the focus on constraining the largest banks. He is regarded as more sympathetic than Ms. Yellen to the industry’s view that regulation is restricting lending and impeding economic growth.In a 2016 opinion article in The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Quarles warned against “arbitrarily taking an ax to big banks and irreparably damaging the economy.”Mr. Quarles has also publicly criticized the Fed’s efforts to stimulate the economy, and will probably push for the central bank to end those efforts more quickly.He has endorsed a Republican proposal to constrain monetary policy by requiring the Fed to publicly describe a mathematical formula for determining the level of interest rates.In a 2015 interview, Mr. Quarles described the Fed’s opposition to such a rule, and its reliance on subjective decision-making, as a “crazy way to run a railroad.”Mr. Quarles, 59, was a lawyer for the financial industry before joining the Treasury Department under President George W. Bush in 2002, first as assistant secretary for international affairs and then as under secretary for domestic finance. After leaving the Bush administration in 2006, he became a partner at the Carlyle Group. In 2014, he helped to found the Cynosure Group, a private equity firm based in Salt Lake City.His wife’s great-uncle is Marriner S. Eccles, the Fed’s chairman from 1934 to 1948 and the namesake of the Fed’s marble headquarters on the National Mall in Washington.There are two other vacancies on the Fed’s board. The Trump administration plans to nominate the conservative economist Marvin Goodfriend to one of those seats. It is seeking someone with community banking experience for the other seat.Mr. Trump must also decide whether to nominate Ms. Yellen for a second term as chairwoman. Her four-year term in that role ends in February, although she could choose to remain on the board if she is not renominated as chairwoman.