https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/07/world/asia/fact-check-trump-china-trade.html
Trump Recycles Overstated Campaign Claims About China and Trade - The New York Times
Fact Check,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,China,International Trade and World Market,Labor and Jobs,Factories and Manufacturing,Renminbi (Currency),Customs (Tariff),United States International Relations
April 7, 2017
5257
WASHINGTON — Even days before he was scheduled to meet with President Xi Jinping of China, President Trump had yet to abandon his exaggerated election rhetoric on China and trade.Mr. Trump “is still in the raucous campaign mode,” said James Zimmerman, former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China. “Raising issues such as currency manipulation and the size of the trade deficit may play well to the underinformed base, but not to those that understand the issues.”Here’s an assessment of claims Mr. Trump has made about China and trade since his inauguration.This is exaggerated. The United States imported about $463 billion in goods from China in 2016, but it also exported about $116 billion worth.That’s an overall goods deficit of about $347 billion in 2016, in addition to a services surplus of about $37 billion, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, for an overall deficit of $310 billion.For context, the difference in the actual goods deficit and what Mr. Trump claimed — $157 billion — is larger than the entire economy of Hungary.This is misleading. Mr. Trump’s claim would have been more accurate a few years ago. China did keep its currency, the renminbi, artificially cheap at one point, but now faces the opposite problem.As China’s economic growth slowed, so did the flow of capital into the country — and the value of its currency dropped. In recent years, China has taken to selling dollars to keep its currency from depreciating more.Under current United States law, the Treasury Department will specifically monitor a country’s currency if it meets three criteria: a large trade surplus, a material current account surplus (meaning the country is a net lender) and “persistent one-sided intervention in the foreign exchange market.” As of October 2016, China met the first two criteria, but not the third.This needs context. Like Mr. Trump’s criticism of currency manipulation, this talking point about China’s impact on jobs is outdated. While Mr. Trump does broaden his claim to “other countries,” he also ignores a huge driver in the shift in the labor market: automation in the United States.Independent studies have found that Chinese imports have cost the United States jobs; one analysis pinned the number to at least two million from 1999 to 2011. But rising wages and costs mean that China is currently facing more competition from other Asian countries and may be losing jobs to them.Productivity gains have also displaced jobs and according to other research are a much bigger factor than trade with China. A study from Ball State University found that out of about 5.6 million manufacturing jobs lost from 2000 to 2010, 13.4 percent of those losses were due to trade and 87.8 percent because of technological advances.True, but … Mr. Trump has repeated this statistic at rallies before and after his election. While his figure is accurate, there’s debate around the implied causal link.Census Bureau data does show that the number of manufacturing establishments decreased by more than 70,000 from 2001 to 2014. But economists disagree on how much of this is because of China’s entry, with some pointing again to automation as a driver.The manufacturing decline in the United States is also in line with changes in Western Europe and Japan, the Congressional Research Service pointed out in a January report. The report also notes that the United States “appears to have outperformed many other wealthy countries in the growth of manufacturing value added in recent years.”This is exaggerated. Mr. Trump spoke of import taxes China levied on the United States in a March 2016 interview with The Times, but overstated the scope of these duties.The United States does charge an average tariff of 3.5 percent. That’s lower than China’s average tariff of 9.9 percent, but on par with rates in other developed countries like Australia, Japan, Canada and the European Union.Some 160 countries, including China, also charge a steep value-added tax on domestic and foreign products alike. But these costs are largely shouldered by consumers.Both China and the United States have placed blanket bans on certain imports (for example, bald eagles in the United States), but none that target only each other, according to the W.T.O’s database on import restrictions, though China does limit imports on American-made movies and other media and genetically modified agricultural products.“But over all, since China joined W.T.O. in 2001, more and more American goods and services are allowed into the country without significant restrictions,” Mr. Zimmerman said.