http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/13/world/asia/hong-kong-legislative-council.html
At Hong Kong Swearing-In, Some Lawmakers Pepper Their Oath With Jabs - The New York Times
Hong Kong,China,Legislatures and Parliaments,Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong,Youngspiration (Hong Kong Political Party),Law Kwun-chung  Nathan,Leung Kwok-hung,Wong  Joshua (1996- ),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots
Oct. 12, 2016
6623
HONG KONG — The streets of Hong Kong have been the site of numerous protests over the years against the Chinese government’s policies toward the semiautonomous territory, whether over national security legislation or election procedures. On Wednesday, the protests moved into Hong Kong’s legislature, as newly elected lawmakers gathered to take the oath of office. The acts of defiance directed at Beijing, with some people calling for outright independence for Hong Kong, seemed to augur an especially stormy legislative term.One new legislator, Sixtus Leung, known as Baggio, took his oath with a banner draped across his shoulders that read “Hong Kong is not China.” And instead of swearing allegiance to the “Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China,” he pledged allegiance to a “Hong Kong nation.” Mr. Leung, 30, a founder of the political group Youngspiration who advocates independence for the former British colony, then read the official text of the oath, as required by law. Except that he replaced the word “China” with the derogatory “Shina.”His ally from Youngspiration, Yau Wai-ching, 25, slipped what sounded like a profanity into the phrase “People’s Republic of China” when she recited her oath.The two were among several young political activists elected to the Legislative Council last month in the first major election after the pro-democracy protests of 2014 that became known as the Umbrella Movement. As the Chinese government refused to yield to the demand for greater public participation in the election of Hong Kong’s leader, the chief executive, the protests gave rise to new political forces demanding greater autonomy, if not independence, from the Chinese mainland.The defiance by the pair at the ceremony was a direct jab to the Chinese government, whose top representative in Hong Kong had warned of “calamity” if advocates of independence were permitted to take seats in the legislature.Theatrical protests that others staged on Wednesday spoke to the grievances that have remained unresolved since the protests in 2014 and presaged more clashes to come in and outside the legislative chamber.“I would never serve a regime that murders its own people,” said Nathan Law, a student leader of the 2014 protests. He then read the official oath in full, while giving the second character of each “China,” in Cantonese, a sharply rising intonation. Mr. Law, 23, who founded the Demosisto party with his fellow Umbrella Movement leader Joshua Wong and ran on a platform that called for self-determination for Hong Kong, is the youngest person ever to serve in the legislature.Shiu Ka-chun, a university lecturer and participant in the 2014 protests, after taking his oath as a legislator representing the social welfare sector, declared, “We’re back.”Lau Siu-lai, an instructor who taught at mobile democracy classrooms during the Umbrella Movement, read the oath in extreme slow motion. The statement of no more than 80 words in English took her about 10 minutes to read.Leung Kwok-hung, a longtime democracy advocate widely known as Long Hair, unfurled a yellow umbrella — the symbol of the 2014 protests — as he spoke.The Council’s clerk refused to swear in three of the body’s 70 legislators — Mr. Leung and Ms. Yau of Youngspiration and a third pro-democracy legislator, Edward Yiu, because of their deviations from the text and the banner display. They are expected to be able to take the oath again next week, as in the case of a legislator who coughed his way through the ceremony at the beginning of the last term, in 2012.Not all innovations on oath-taking were directed at the Chinese government.One legislator, Ann Chiang of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong Kong, a pro-Beijing party, took the unusual step of reciting the oath in Mandarin, the official language of the Chinese mainland rather than the Cantonese that is standard in Hong Kong.The oath, in English, reads: