https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/26/us/politics/debbie-wasserman-schultz-dnc.html
Debbie Wasserman Schultz Is Met With Jeers at Pre-Convention Breakfast - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Schultz  Debbie Wasserman,Democratic National Convention,Democratic National Committee,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard
July 25, 2016
2311
PHILADELPHIA — It keeps getting worse for Debbie Wasserman Schultz.The outgoing chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, who announced her resignation on Sunday amid the revelation of committee emails suggesting an institutional preference for Hillary Clinton over Bernie Sanders, showed up on Monday morning to address a breakfast meeting of Florida delegates.With her speaking slots and officiating duties all but scrapped during the convention — it was announced later that she would not “gavel in” Monday’s opening — it was to be one of the embattled Florida congresswoman’s few public appearances.And it was a disaster.Protesters, wearing Sanders T-shirts and buttons, stood and held signs that read “E-MAILS” and “We Don’t Want Cheaters In Our Party Anyway” and “NO!” and “Division” and “Thanks for the ‘Help’ Debbie.” They booed, loudly, and screamed “fair elections” as Ms. Wasserman Schultz took the lectern and said: “It is so wonderful to be able to be here with my home state. All right everybody now, settle down. Everybody settle down, please.”Her supporters, in Debbie Wasserman Schultz T-shirts, tried to drown out the protesters by chanting “Debbie, Debbie, Debbie.” They couldn’t.Ms. Wasserman Schultz sought to inject a more somber note into the room by expressing condolences for the victims of a deadly shooting in Fort Myers, Fla., on Sunday night. The Sanders supporters weren’t having it. She made the case for gun control. But it was hard to hear her.She tried to make light of the protest by saying, “I can see there’s a little bit of interest in my being here, and I can appreciate that interest,” but the booing continued unabated.It didn’t help when she said that the interest was a testament to Florida’s importance as a battleground state and “we’ll make sure that Hillary Clinton is elected president of the United States.”As television cameras encircled the protesters, and Florida officials on the dais exchanged stunned looks, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, once considered a potential leader in the party, had a pained look on her face.“I thank President Obama for the honor of serving as chair of the Democratic National Committee,” she said, adding, with a note of defiance, that Mrs. Clinton had asked her for her help.“I will serve as a surrogate throughout this campaign,” she said.Looking out at the crowd, she raised her voice and insisted, to some cheers, that “we know that the voices in this room that are standing up, and being disruptive, we know that’s not the Florida that we know. The Florida that we know is united.”She concluded her remarks and was hurried out of the room in a huddle of staff members to boos, cries of “shame” and chants of “na na na na, hey hey hey, goodbye.”After she left, the room settled down.“I thought it was absolutely disgraceful,” said Elaine Geller, a delegate in a Wasserman Schultz shirt. “They were screaming and ranting and raving.”Kyle Breazeale, 20, a Sanders supporter who attends Florida State University, said, “We’re very upset that it’s now been proven that her, along with other officials at the D.N.C., worked to undermine Senator Sanders’s campaign.”He added that Ms. Wasserman Schultz “has no place in the government and no place in our party,” saying that “we’re disgusted” that Mrs. Clinton praised her and appointed her to a position in her campaign.Another Sanders supporter, Dan O’Neal, who wore “Bernie” buttons, said: “I’m a member of the Arizona delegation. I just heard the noise so we walked in as we were going to our workshop, I am appalled by what Debbie has done. Not surprised but appalled. I think she, her actions and the actions of the D.N.C., I guess with complicity of the Hillary campaign, now is putting our party in jeopardy and giving Trump more ammunition.”He added, “Thank God for WikiLeaks, the truth comes out.”As some delegates wondered whether their congresswoman was a glutton for punishment — “Why is she here?” — others came to her defense.Joanne Goodwin, a supporter of Ms. Wasserman Schultz from Florida’s Broward County, said: “They should respect her and the office that she holds. I’m disappointed and hurt” by the protests.She added, “She is certainly getting a raw deal.”Well before Ms. Wasserman Schultz arrived, her loyalists were already playing defense. Wearing the “Team Wasserman Schultz” shirts, the supporters sat together around tables in the carpeted conference room at the Philadelphia Marriott and made their case to fellow delegates, to reporters and really anybody who would listen that the D.N.C. chairwoman, who has for years been privately criticized by the White House and throughout Washington, was a force for good.Bina Frank, a delegate from Weston, Fla., said that the congresswoman was her neighbor and friend. “I’ve been in private places and tried to ask her about Bernie. And all she would say is that the party had two amazing candidates. Not once did she say ‘Support Hillary.’ People are unfair. It’s a shame what the Bernie people are doing. Debbie takes the blame for everybody.”Barbara Sharief, a former mayor and current commissioner from Broward County, said Ms. Wasserman Schultz was “getting a bad rap” and that people in Florida knew that because they knew her.But there were already clear signs that the congresswoman’s appearance would not go smoothly.“We’re attempting party unity — it has not been, in my view, very successful,” said Allan Nichols, a delegate from Miami Shores, Fla., who wore a “Sanders for President” button on his shirt. He said he still thought his candidate had a shot and so was incensed by Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s presumptive support of Mrs. Clinton from her perch at the officially neutral D.N.C.“There are repercussions,” he said.Ms. Wasserman Schultz had been expected to pound the gavel to open Monday’s convention, then possibly hand the duties over to Donna Brazile, the longtime Democratic political adviser and TV pundit.“I have decided that in the interest of making sure that we can start the Democratic convention on a high note that I am not going to gavel in the convention,” Ms. Wasserman Schultz told The Sun Sentinel, a South Florida newspaper.Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake of Baltimore pounded the gavel to open the convention instead.