https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/fashion/emmy-red-carpet-fashion-2016.html
Red Carpet Review: Tuxes Are Easy. It’s the Emmy Gowns That Demand Effort. - The New York Times
Celebrities,Fashion and Apparel,Emmy Awards,Ferrera  America,Women and Girls
Sept. 18, 2016
3791
[ Our full report on the 2016 Emmy Awards | the list of Emmy winners | red carpet looks | our critic’s review of the show ]On the night of TV’s biggest awards, the men have it easy and the women have it tough. The male nominees, navigating the red carpet and the pit of interview opportunities that await them there, mostly look unbothered or bored, in black (and, occasionally, navy) tuxes hauled out for an evening. The actresses, on the other hand, do the heavy lifting, at least where fashion is concerned.Kristen Bell, a presenter for the evening, looked radiant in a floral, crystal-embroidered gown by the Lebanese couturier Zuhair Murad. “I wanted to do something more whimsical than I’ve done before,” Ms. Bell said, and whimsical it was — except when she had to scoop up its enormous skirt in huge armfuls and make her way up and down for interviews.Where the red carpet is concerned, whimsy takes grit. Each elevated stopping-point along the path, where on-camera interviewers wait to flatter and schmooze, represented a new opportunity to negotiate entrance and egress in an outfit best suited for standing and posing. On the stairwells leading to the interviews, sisterhood was on display. “I won’t let you go,” Constance Zimmer, a nominee for “UnREAL,” promised Regina King, who was nominated and won for “American Crime,” as they did the delicate dance to trade places.The gowns selected by actresses and their stylists for shows like these — gowns then mercilessly scrutinized by postshow panels and armchair critics at home on Twitter — tend to fall into two categories: Ball-gown big (Ms. Bell and Ms. King) or second-skin slinky (Emilia Clarke and Sophie Turner of “Game of Thrones”; Heidi Klum of “America’s Got Talent” and “Project Runway”).Apart from that, every imaginable combination of clothes, shoes and jewels came down the carpet, each actress carefully ticking off her brands and thanks, an acceptance speech before any actual acceptance speech. (Ms. Turner was wearing a sheer Valentino gown, Forevermark diamonds and Christian Louboutin shoes, she said, “I’ve got to name all of them, or they won’t lend to me again.”)They arrived in gold (Claire Danes, in Schiaparelli Couture), silver and every color under the sun, including the color of the sun: It was an unexpectedly strong night for electric shades of yellow, chosen by Ellie Kemper (in Jenny Packham), Angela Bassett (in Christian Siriano) and Taraji P. Henson (in Vera Wang Collection). “I’m feeling very princesslike,” Ms. Kemper, a first-time nominee for “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt,” told the cameras as she made her way to the ceremony.But then, the Emmys have a way of making princesses, even if only for an evening, whether she is an actress accustomed to the flashbulbs (the six-time nominee Sarah Paulson, nominated twice this year, including for her Emmy-winning role as Marcia Clark in “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story”) or a lawyer long since fled from the spotlight, dipping onto the award-show circuit for one night only (Ms. Clark herself, Ms. Paulson’s date for the show). Ms. Paulson looked wonderful in a sequin-dangling, emerald-green Prada gown that would have cowed a more timid soul; Ms. Clark was her match, in a low-cut, beaded gown and diamonds.The Emmys may not be famous for surprise — Jeffrey Tambor and Ms. King each won acting trophies for the second year in a row, and Julia Louis-Dreyfus won for best actress in a comedy for the fifth year running — but the clothes occasionally can be. For the best-dressed of the evening, risk led to reward, whether in color, in cut or in daring reveal. Cutouts turned out to be one of the evening’s biggest trends, and slicing a panel out of a dress paid dividends. It worked for the nominees Tracee Ellis Ross, in white Ralph Lauren Collection; for Tatiana Maslany, in fire-engine red Alexander Wang, the rebel prince of New York fashion; and even for the very pregnant Kerry Washington, in a custom gown by Brandon Maxwell.They can’t all be Emmy winners, of course, but for those who boldly went where few would follow, they’ll have a victory lap on the best-dressed lists. Giuliana Rancic, E! TV’s on-air adulator in chief, pressed her subjects with a request sure to be repeated throughout the night, from the ceremony through the after-parties: “Before I let you go, can we do a little selfie?”