https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/31/us/police-shootings-trial-jury.html
In Police Shootings, Finding Jurors Who Will Say ‘Not Guilty’ - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Decisions and Verdicts,Jury System,Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Tensing  Ray (1989- ),Yanez  Jeronimo (1988- ),Castile  Philando (1983-2016),Boyd  James M (1976-2014),Perez  Dominique W (1981- ),Sandy  Keith P (1975- )
May 31, 2017
329
When two Albuquerque police officers went on trial for murder last fall after the fatal shooting of a mentally ill homeless man, things did not look good for them. Police videos appeared to show the man turning away before officers fired. Their release had been preceded by a long history of police violence and followed by six days of protests. But defense lawyers thought they still had a chance — if they could get the right jury.“A jury was going to make that decision,” said Sam Bregman, who defended one of the officers. “And picking that jury was the single most important aspect of the entire trial.”Modern jury selection is a dark art practiced by a cottage industry of consultants who promise to sort antagonists from sympathizers using mock trials, questionnaires, exhaustive reviews of social media profiles and even photographs of prospective jurors’ homes.The scrutiny is likely to be no less intense as jury selection begins this week in two highly publicized police shootings. One, the death of an unarmed black man during a traffic stop in Cincinnati, has already resulted in one hung jury. The other, in which a man’s girlfriend live-streamed the moments after he was fatally wounded in a St. Paul suburb, also during a traffic stop, goes to trial for the first time.Choosing a jury has become more difficult as law enforcement violence has become a national issue and the recent profusion of videos of shootings has made prosecutions of officers more common and jurors less inclined to give them the benefit of the doubt.Prosecutors are looking for jurors who are usually more suspicious of law enforcement — liberals, minorities and people with arrest records — while the defense prefers conservatives, whites and the well-off, who tend to be more trusting of police officers. But those assumptions are not foolproof.A series of incidents in which videos appeared to contradict police accounts has eroded juries’ trust. “A lot of people look at cops and say, ‘Well, you probably did it because I’ve seen it over and over again on television,’” said Thomas P. Baggott, a 71-year-old clinical psychologist in Tucson who almost exclusively assists law enforcement defendants in lawsuits.That has given the jury selection process in police shooting trials an unusual twist: Discovering whether a potential juror has seen a video of the shooting is crucial. “Many people who want to be on a jury will deny they have seen the video,” Mr. Baggott said. “We have to get them to confess to us.”For prosecutors, it remains excruciatingly difficult to win a conviction against a police officer — juries must vote unanimously, so it takes only one holdout to derail a guilty verdict.Mr. Baggott, who spent 25 years as a Pennsylvania state trooper, was on one side of the jury selection face-off in Albuquerque.That battle offers a primer for what is likely to occur in the two forthcoming trials. In one, Ray Tensing, who was a University of Cincinnati campus police officer when he fatally shot Samuel DuBose, 43, during a traffic stop, faces charges of murder and voluntary manslaughter. In his first trial, four jurors opposed conviction on either charge.Mr. Tensing is white, while Mr. DuBose was black. Last week, the judge ruled that a Confederate flag T-shirt that Mr. Tensing wore on the day of the shooting could not be admitted as evidence.In the other case, Officer Jeronimo Yanez, who is Latino, will stand trial for manslaughter after he fatally shot Philando Castile, 32, during a traffic stop. According to prosecutors, Mr. Castile, who was licensed to carry a gun, told the officer that he had a firearm moments before he was shot. Mr. Castile, who was black, was in the car with his girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds, and her young daughter.Her Facebook video  of the aftermath has been widely seen, but audio and video from the squad car has not been released publicly and is expected to be shown at the trial.Video, however, can be far from convincing. In Albuquerque, video of the 2014 shooting of the homeless man, James Boyd, 38, and the hourslong standoff that preceded it had spread through the city, leaving virtually everyone with an opinion about what had happened — and lowering public esteem for the police in general. The case, Albuquerque’s first indictment of police officers in a shooting in at least three decades, riveted the city.Mr. Baggott offered free jury consultation to the two officers, Dominique Perez and Keith Sandy, after they were indicted on a charge of murder.On the opposing side was another firm, National Jury Project, which was hired by the special prosector assigned to the case, Randi McGinn, to advise on jury selection and other issues.The two sides had a pool of 1,450 potential jurors, of whom only basics like names and addresses were known. Focusing on the first few hundred on the list, the two sides set about searching the names online and checking Facebook profiles. Mr. Baggott even checked the profiles of their friends: A juror who may not reveal much online, he said, “usually adopts the views and attitudes of people they’re friends with.”George V. Laughrun II, a lawyer from Charlotte, N.C., who defended a white police officer in a 2015 manslaughter trial for the shooting of an unarmed black man, recalled one potential juror in particular. “She had answered every question perfectly,” he said.But on Facebook, she expressed strong views against the defendant, enabling Mr. Laughrun to get her disqualified.Prosecutors in Albuquerque added a sheaf of questions to a 14-page questionnaire, which included what causes potential jurors had contributed to (law enforcement, the homeless and the National Rifle Association were among the choices) and whether they had ever felt threatened by someone with mental illness.Mr. Baggott, the defense consultant, took a different tack, dispatching workers to photograph the first 250 jurors’ homes and automobiles.“I can tell a heck of a lot more about lifestyle and where a juror is going to come down by looking at your house,” Mr. Baggott said. “One guy has a white picket fence, a pickup and car in the driveway, a couple of kids’ toys on the porch. Everything’s orderly, the lawn’s mowed. This is going to be a person who pays attention to detail, a person who’s reasonable and is hard-working.”A ramshackle house and beat-up car suggest a less stable and dependable juror, he said. Vehicles offer a bonus: bumper stickers with political and religious messages that shed light on a jurors’ leanings.Both sides tried to sift out the handful of candidates that might particularly help or hinder their case. Ms. McGinn looked for potential opponents who were also leaders — people in management, or who answered questions confidently or forcefully.“If you have a question about that person, that person is more dangerous to you than a follower, because they’ll lead the jury in the other direction,” she said.The defense focused on finding “sleepers” — candidates who hid their true views of the case in a bid to win a seat on the jury — through artful questioning during the selection process. Among those who passed muster, defense lawyers flagged people in jobs that dealt with facts, like engineers who based decisions on calculations, or accountants. “They believed in order,” Luis Robles, who represented one of the officers, said in an interview. “Even if they’re not leaders, they’d fight for us if they agreed with us.”The jury, six men and six women, was seated in September, heard 12 days of testimony and deliberated for two days. By mid-October, they were a hung jury: nine favored acquittal, including all six women. Three favored conviction, including the accountant.The judge declared a mistrial. Officials elected not to seek a new trial.Ms. McGinn said she was disappointed, but unsurprised. “We recognized the impossibility of our task,” she said. “It’s a huge thing to find 12 people who will convict a police officer. This was the first prosecution here. I expected a 15-minute acquittal.”Mr. Robles, on the other hand, was disappointed because there was no acquittal — and because the net they used to catch hostile jurors wasn’t fine enough. “Soon as the verdict is read, the accountant goes downstairs and holds an impromptu news conference,” he said. “I think, ‘That’s not like an accountant.’”Seeking to determine what went wrong, the lawyers asked investigators to perform some additional spadework. They found that while he held a job at an accounting firm, he also wrote online, under a pen name, about social justice and other issues.“We missed it,” Mr. Robles said. “Shame on us.”