http://www.nytimes.com/2003/07/02/world/security-laws-target-of-huge-hong-kong-protest.html
Security Laws Target of Huge Hong Kong Protest - The New York Times
HONG KONG,GREAT BRITAIN,CHINA,ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH,EUROPEAN UNION,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,PROTESTANT CHURCHES,SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS,CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY,LAW AND LEGISLATION,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
July 2, 2003
6656
Pouring through this city's tropical parks and its canyons of glittering skyscrapers, an immense crowd marched here today to protest government plans to impose stringent internal-security laws.Many here describe the proposed laws as the real handover of Hong Kong to Chinese rule. Parts of the pending security legislation are less draconian than British colonial regulations still on the books for offenses like sedition. But the colonial rules have seldom been enforced since the late 1960's, including since Britain handed over Hong Kong to China six years ago today.The demonstrators, many carrying umbrellas for shade on a sunny and unusually hot day, wore mostly black as a sign of mourning for what they portrayed as Hong Kong's coming loss of civil liberties.Hong Kong's Basic Law, a mini constitution drafted by Britain and China prior to the transfer of power, called for Hong Kong to retain its own political and economic system for 50 years.But the Basic Law also required Hong Kong to enact new security legislation. Following complaints last summer from Beijing that the legislation had not been enacted, the Hong Kong administration drafted laws setting long jail terms for sedition, secession or treason.But, as was clear today, the political reaction to the perceived imposition of Chinese restrictions on freedoms long enjoyed in Hong Kong has been been vigorous.So many people showed up for the protest that marchers filled the nearly three-mile route, and throngs waited hours at Victoria Park for their chance to join the procession.The police said that attendance at the demonstration peaked at 350,000 three hours into the seven-hour march, but acknowledged that some may have left before then or arrived later. The Civil Human Rights Front, which organized the march, estimated total participation at more than 500,000. Hong Kong has 6.8 million people.It was the largest demonstration here since the 1989 march to protest the killing of students in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, and the largest protest ever directed against the Hong Kong government itself. The demonstration today also appeared to be the largest anywhere on Chinese soil since Tiananmen Square.The most controversial new provision being put forth here allows the government to ban any organization in Hong Kong if it has links to an organization banned elsewhere in China for national security reasons.The White House, Britain and the European Union have all criticized the proposed security legislation in the last two weeks, especially the provision for banning organizations here.The proposal, embraced by Beijing, has especially alarmed the leaders of Hong Kong's Roman Catholic Church and Protestant denominations. They warn that the law could allow churches to be banned in Hong Kong, as has happened over the years on the mainland, where the Catholic Church and many Protestant groups still face repression.Tung Chee-hwa, the former shipping tycoon who is Hong Kong's chief executive, said in a statement late tonight that he ''was very concerned that a large number of citizens took part in the procession today.'' He repeated previous government assurances, met with considerable skepticism here, that the new legislation would not affect ''the rights and freedoms which have been enjoyed by the people of Hong Kong.''At the demonstration, concern about civil liberties mixed with anger about record unemployment and plunging property prices in Hong Kong and the slow response this spring to the spread of SARS. Much of the venom was directed at Mr. Tung, who is accused of following Beijing's wishes too closely and of discrediting Hong Kong and China alike by not reacting quickly enough to problems.Mr. Tung's effigy was carried through the streets to jeers today.''Tung Chee-hwa is a traitor,'' said Paul Chan, a muscular, 45-year-old construction worker, who added that he had never been to a demonstration before, not even the Tiananmen Square protest in 1989. ''What he does is not good, and the Chinese government is losing face.''Sarah Ng, a 67-year-old seamstress, wore a bell-shaped straw hat and energetically cooled herself with a wooden fan at the start of the demonstration. She said she had never before joined a public protest.''I'm worried about every kind of freedom -- the government can arrest you any time they want'' if the new legislation is approved, she said.Corporate tycoons here were initially wary of the legislation, but soon dropped most objections after the bill was amended to restrict the ability of the police to search and seize financial records, among other changes.Contrary to many warnings, China has not cracked down on civil liberties appreciably since the handover. China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, said here this morning that Hong Kong's freedoms would be protected. He had attended the signing on Sunday of a free trade pact between the mainland and Hong Kong, and went to a flag-raising ceremony to mark the anniversary of the handover, but left Hong Kong before the march.Regina Ip, the Hong Kong secretary of security, said in a telephone interview late Monday afternoon that the legislation had been widely misunderstood, and that it would not impinge on civil liberties. She added that if any violent civil unrest occurred in the months ahead, it would likely take the form of ''unexpected protests by disgruntled groups.''Catholic and Protestant leaders have been urging their congregations in recent days to attend the rally, and held a rare joint prayer vigil in Victoria Park at the beginning of the march.Joseph Zen, the Catholic bishop of Hong Kong, said the security legislation was ''like a knife above our heads.''Only a tenth of Hong Kong's people are Christian, and many non-Christians also marched. Some labor unions helped plan the demonstration, while teachers, students, doctors and journalists also marched.Democracy advocates were out in force. The Basic Law calls vaguely for the government to become more democratic by 2007, when Mr. Tung's current term expires, but his administration has not yet acted on this.Nine months after asking the public's views on security legislation, Mr. Tung and Mrs. Ip are now in the final stages of pushing their bill through the Legislative Council. The government has invoked ''fast-track'' parliamentary rules forcing the council to vote before adjourning later this month.The turnout came despite several government measures that may have discouraged participation. The government distributed 10,000 tickets for matinee movies, and waived admission fees for public swimming pools and museums.The Hong Kong Leisure and Cultural Affairs Department said the free admissions were part of a celebration of the disappearance of SARS; public swimming pools and museums will be free on Sundays this month as well. But democracy activists were suspicious that the government was actually trying to suppress turnout for the march.The government also allowed a pro-Beijing trade union to hold an amateur soccer tournament at Victoria Park at the same time the demonstrators were gathering. A large crowd of Catholics and Protestants attending the prayer vigil was tightly pressed against waist-high steel barriers erected to allow two soccer teams in uniforms to play a match on a large field before several dozen spectators.The crowding and the intense heat -- the Hong Kong Observatory issued its second heat warning of the summer today -- caused people to begin fainting just 20 minutes into the vigil and more than an hour before the march began.The police cleared paths to those who fainted and carried them away, sometimes on stretchers. But they did not remove the barricades, which would have allowed the crowd to spread out more and also would have allowed people to flow in from surrounding streets to join the protest.