http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/09/nyregion/one-constant-in-the-stutter-step-life-of-adam-skelos-his-powerful-father.html
One Constant for Adam Skelos in a Life of Stumbles: His Powerful Father - The New York Times
Skelos  Adam B (1982- ),Skelos  Dean G,New York State,Corruption (Institutional),State Legislatures
May 8, 2015
6865
Adam Skelos jumped from high school to high school, touching down at three in three years. As an employee, he frequently changed jobs and displayed a variable degree of commitment to his work: At least one employer — the re-election campaign of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg — stopped paying him because he stopped showing up for work.As a 20-year-old, he was arrested after his girlfriend accused him of breaking into her house and harassing her. As part of a plea deal he entered a treatment program intended mainly for felons and others with substance abuse problems.Amid these struggles, at least one constant seemed to remain in Adam Skelos’s life: the support of his father, Dean G. Skelos, the powerful Republican majority leader of the New York State Senate. Both men were arrested this week on corruption charges. Senator Skelos is accused of using his political influence to enrich his son, a commitment that could end his long political career and send both men to prison.Why Senator Skelos would go to such lengths to help his son remains an open question, and may be as simple and profound as a father’s love for his only child.Until this week, Adam Skelos, 32 — who lives with his own young family less than a mile from the homes where he grew up in Nassau County — was little known beyond tight political circles in Albany and on Long Island.What emerges from dozens of interviews with neighbors, colleagues and others is a portrait of a young man whose life seemed to lose traction during late adolescence — just as his father was nearing the pinnacle of power in state Republican politics — and who struggled professionally, despite his father’s efforts to help him for more than a decade.“We knew about his dad, though he never brought it up,” said one high school classmate, who, like many people interviewed for this article, requested anonymity to avoid being drawn into the investigation. “But I would get the impression that he wanted to live his life, and he didn’t want to do what was expected of him. I definitely got the sense that he knew there was going to be a certain way and there wasn’t a lot he could do about it.”Both Dean and Adam Skelos have denied the federal charges, and declined through their lawyers to be interviewed for this article. Relatives did not respond to phone messages seeking comment and did not answer the door at their homes.Adam Skelos grew up in Rockville Centre in the increasingly long shadow of his father, who won his first state legislative election in 1980.By the time Adam was 6, his parents had divorced. Public records suggest that he continued to live with his mother, Nancy Moffitt. He attended Lawrence Woodmere Academy, a private school in Woodmere, where he played soccer. Classmates and teachers remembered him as friendly and funny.People knew that his father was a prominent local politician, but Adam rarely, if ever, mentioned it, classmates and teachers said. And while he was not a particularly strong student, he was dutiful in his studies and never caused problems.David Messler, his eighth-grade algebra teacher, described Adam as a “typical middle school boy,” and he still remembers Adam Skelos inscribing his yearbook: “You will be missed.”“He was just a nice kid,” Mr. Messler said.In high school, Adam Skelos was so popular that he was elected freshman class president.“He’s always been a people person,” one classmate said.In the meantime, his father had moved from the State Assembly to the State Senate, representing a district in Nassau County. In 1995, he became deputy majority leader of the Senate, a post he held until 2008.Adam Skelos abruptly withdrew from Lawrence Woodmere Academy during his sophomore year, former classmates and teachers said. It is unclear what precipitated his departure. The school’s current headmaster did not return repeated calls for comment.The move coincided with a shift in Adam’s demeanor, acquaintances said.“He just really had his place carved out” at Lawrence Woodmere, a classmate said. “I don’t think he was happy about going somewhere else, and I don’t know if he found that place again.”Mr. Skelos landed at the Marvelwood School, a small boarding school in northwest Connecticut. There were only 30 or so people in his class, and the school had a reputation, according to one classmate, as a good place for students “who needed a second or third chance.” At Marvelwood, Mr. Skelos played soccer and wrestled. Classmates said he had a good sense of humor and a laid-back attitude, and was part of a close-knit group that sometimes traveled to New York City on weekends, and to Mexico or ski resorts on school breaks.Classmates said Mr. Skelos attended Marvelwood for a year or two. He did not finish high school there for reasons that are unclear. School officials did not respond to repeated requests for comment.He then enrolled in South Side High School, a public school in Rockville Centre and his father’s alma mater, and graduated in 2000. He subsequently enrolled at Hofstra University, where he majored in interdisciplinary studies and graduated in December 2007.Along the way, he took his first steps into the professional world, with stints in the office of Gov. George E. Pataki, at the Long Island Power Authority, at a real estate appraisal service and at a lobbying firm.One of his life’s darker episodes also came during this time.On a summer day in 2003, he was arrested by the Rockville Centre Police Department after the woman who was his girlfriend, Erin Conklin, accused him of breaking into her house and menacing her.According to the police report, the two had fought earlier in the day, and Ms. Conklin’s arms were bruised. When Mr. Skelos returned in the afternoon, Ms. Conklin told him to go away. He refused, instead kicking down the door and grabbing her, the report said.“No, you’re not going to get away from me again,” he told her, according to the report. “You have to learn how to deal with me.”The report concluded: “Complainant is in fear for her life.”Shortly after the arrest, Senator Skelos told Newsday that “as a father I am in enormous pain.” He added, “I love my son and I will stand with him as he answers the allegations.”Reached by phone this week, Ms. Conklin declined to comment. “I don’t want to be involved any more than need be,” she said.As part of a deal with prosecutors, Mr. Skelos pleaded guilty to coercion, a felony, and agreed to enter an alternatives-to-incarceration program that mainly serves felony offenders and parole violators “in need of alcohol and/or drug rehabilitation,” according to state officials and the website of the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services.He also agreed to participate in a boxing program at the Freeport Police Athletic League Boxing Club.Joe Higgins, director and head coach at the club, said in an interview this week that the training seemed to have a therapeutic effect on Mr. Skelos. “You could tell he felt embarrassed to be assigned, I guess, to a program,” Mr. Higgins said.But Mr. Skelos eventually took to the program, developing “good continuity,” the coach said. “He did well.” Under the terms of his plea agreement, his conviction was eventually reduced to disorderly conduct.After graduating from Hofstra, Mr. Skelos worked for a few years as a bartender at the Bridgeview Yacht Club in Island Park, an employee at the club said. In 2009, he worked briefly on Mr. Bloomberg’s re-election campaign. But for most of the past several years, he has been associated with the title insurance business on Long Island.Two colleagues at Chicago Title, one of the firms where he has worked, said Mr. Skelos was not in the office often, and that it was unclear how much business he brought in. One colleague recalled that when Mr. Skelos was in the office, he made many calls “soliciting people unrelated to the title business — water, power. He had a lot of things going on.”Mr. Skelos married Ann Marie Diaz in 2011; in November of that year, she gave birth to their son, Dean, according to Facebook postings by Senator Skelos’s wife, Gail, and his former wife, Nancy Moffitt. Adam Skelos and his wife are also raising another young son, Dylan.In 2013, Adam Skelos bought a $675,000, colonial-style house with a pool on a tidy dead-end street in Rockville Centre. His father gifted him $50,000 to help him secure a mortgage loan for the home, according to the federal complaint. A Mercedes-Benz E350 and a Town & Country minivan with a “Re-Elect Senator Skelos” bumper sticker usually sit in the driveway.In the past several years, federal prosecutors say, the professional lives of Mr. Skelos and his father became intertwined as the two conspired to use Senator Skelos’s position within government “to influence and extort those with business before the state.”For all the personal and professional challenges the son appears to have faced, his conversations with his father, as captured by federal wiretaps, seem to reflect a certain camaraderie.In a secretly recorded call on Dec. 10, 2014, for example, the conversation turned to the weather.A major rainstorm had battered the New York metropolitan area, closing highways, grounding airplanes and setting rainfall records. AbTech Industries, the environmental firm where the younger Mr. Skelos was a consultant, was seeking government contracts to treat storm water on Long Island.“I love it!” the son exclaimed. “Keep it coming Mother Nature! Keep it coming!” And the two men laughed.