http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/23/fashion/donald-trump-family-cleveland.html
Laying Bare the Trump Family’s Costume Designs in Cleveland - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Republican National Convention,Trump  Ivanka,Trump  Melania,Trump  Donald J Jr,Trump  Eric F (1984- )
July 22, 2016
7330
There they were Thursday night in Cleveland, arrayed onstage as confetti and red, white and blue balloons tumbled from the ceiling: the Trump family, resplendent for all to see, smiling and waving and standing around a little awkwardly, but mesmerizing in their consistent style. Rarely has one family looked so, well, coordinated. And well coordinated.When I say “look,” I mean that literally. The Trump children who addressed the Republican National Convention were among the most-lauded speakers: largely positive in their oration during days of fear-mongering and hate-baiting, relentlessly proud of their father and wide-eyed about where they found themselves (onstage for all to see).But they also clearly understood that their statements of support did not stop at the podium and the teleprompter. Offstage, they were still consistently on camera, and while sitting in their family box, they continued the narrative, each playing his or her role.A lot of attention has been paid to the crazy outfits on display on the convention floor (Cheese hats for the Wisconsin delegation! Stars and stripes and stetsons for Texas!) but as was clear after four days of programming, the would-be first family had its own, very specific, sartorial strategy.For example, Donald J. Trump’s sons Donald Jr. and Eric have adopted the quasi-1980s banker style, a combination of sharp suits, colorful ties, stripes and slicked-back hair that looks kind of like a blend of Gordon Gekko in “Wall Street,” Jordan Belfort in “The Wolf of Wall Street” and their father, and that acts like a subliminal wormhole, sending anyone who sees them back to the go-go days of the Reagan era, which have taken on a halcyon quality in Republican mythology.Even Mr. Trump’s youngest son, Barron, popped up on Thursday night in a suit, tie and slicked-back hair. And he’s 10.Their father says he is going to make America great again, and there they are, unapologetically modeling the moment he is talking about.For their part, Mr. Trump’s daughters, Ivanka and Tiffany, as well as Donald Jr. and Eric’s wives adopted a minimalist, manicured style — sleeveless sheath dresses, pumps, simple hair that takes hours to perfect — could be defined as newscaster-meets-“Veep”: a television-friendly version of the high-powered woman’s working wardrobe.It’s a style that is not threatening (see the peach-tone look Ivanka wore to introduce her father Thursday night), but that is also not frivolous, hence emphasizing their testimony about their father’s ambitions for them, as well as his attitude toward promoting women.It is worth noting that Ivanka also wore dresses from her own collection throughout the convention, on Friday tweeting out a link to her Thursday dress so followers could buy it and thus seizing the opportunity to unofficially market her line. As her dad might say: Never lose an opportunity to do business!Then there’s the presidential candidate’s wife, Melania, whose allegiance to white at the convention, as well as to European designer names — she wore Roksanda on Monday and Fendi on Thursday — frames her role as the silent, smiling trophy wife. Also the idea that the Trumps would not play by the usual rules and wear all-American labels, all the time.This may sound one-dimensional, but then, so did many of the speeches. Subtlety does not often play well on the prime-time small screen.If the Republican convention had been a Netflix or HBO series, the costume designer could not have done better. As The New York Times’s TV critic James Poniewozik has pointed out, it is the ultimate show. And if the Trumps understand anything, it is reality TV: how to make viewers relate to what they are seeing, and form a bond with the characters.Which would be them. To think that image does not play a part in the attempt to manipulate perception is to deny a basic reality that any producer, and politician, understands.