https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/politics/surveys-of-voters-signal-dismay-with-both-parties.html
Surveys of Voters Signal Dismay With Both Parties - The New York Times
Polls and Public Opinion,United States Politics and Government,United States,Elections,Midterm Elections (2014),Obama  Barack,Senate,Republican Party,House of Representatives
Nov. 4, 2014
2399
Politically divided Americans were in dour agreement about much as they voted in this year’s midterm elections — broadly distrustful of government, overwhelmingly disapproving of Congress, convinced that the nation’s economic system favors the wealthy and doubtful that the next generation will inherit a better economic future.Republicans went into the contest heavily favored to make significant gains; typically the president’s party is on the defensive in midterm elections, and most of this year’s battles for Senate seats were in conservative states. But voters surveyed after casting their ballots, both at the polls on Tuesday and by phone for those who voted early, signaled deep dismay with both parties and were at least as negative about Republican congressional leaders as about President Obama.Mr. Obama was at the center of the campaign debate, if not on the ballot, as Republicans sought to exploit his unpopularity by tying Democratic candidates to him, especially in the fight for control of the Senate. A majority of voters said they disapproved of how the president was doing his job, and about eight in 10 of those who disapproved supported Republicans.As bleak as Democrats’ prospects were, the party succeeded to some degree in its strategy of focusing on female voters, especially minorities and single women, by attacking Republicans for their legislative actions to limit access to abortion and birth control.Democrats won a majority of women, a traditionally supportive group but one that sided with Republicans by a single percentage point in 2010, the previous midterm election year. That setback four years ago was a big factor in enabling Republicans to win control of the House and of many state legislatures and governorships.On Tuesday, single women supported Democrats over Republicans by more than 20 points. In Senate battlegrounds like Colorado, Georgia, Iowa and North Carolina, Democratic candidates also won a majority of women. But it was not enough to avert losses, given the overwhelming support male voters provided for the Republicans.Yet political independents — a group that six years ago helped propel Mr. Obama to the presidency — once again supported Republicans, though by a smaller margin than in 2010. Democrats also failed again in other ways to rebuild Mr. Obama’s broad coalition of 2008, losing among middle-aged voters, suburbanites and Catholics, though not as badly as in 2010.Democrats did hold onto groups that form their base: union households, gays, blacks, Hispanics, Asians, younger voters, lower-income Americans, political moderates, Northeasterners, city dwellers, Jewish voters and both those without high school educations and those with graduate degrees.The surveys of voters showed that Republicans also won their core supporters: whites, men, older voters, Southerners, white Protestants, veterans, higher-income people, weekly churchgoers, white evangelical Christians and rural residents. Edison Research conducted the surveys for a consortium of news media organizations.As was true in polls throughout the year, the economy was the top issue on most voters’ minds. Nearly half selected this issue as their top concern — nearly double the number that picked health care, the next most pressing issue. Fewer than one in five voters named foreign policy or immigration as their primary concern.Despite a range of good economic news of late, including a declining unemployment rate, many voters are not believers.More than three-quarters said they were worried about where the economy is headed in the next year; a majority of those supported Republicans. Voters split evenly on whether the economy is getting better, worsening or staying the same; those who see it getting better backed Democrats by a three-to-one margin while those who foresee conditions getting worse similarly supported Republicans.But perhaps the most telling sign of Americans’ downbeat state of mind was the measure of their confidence — or lack of it — in the American dream: About half the voters said they expect that the next generation will not enjoy a better life than Americans today. That was a significant increase from 2010. The pessimistic voters backed Republicans two to one, while the half of Americans who believe the next generation will enjoy the same or better lives voted by a similar margin for Democrats.Over all, more than half of voters expressed negative feelings toward both the Democratic and Republican parties. In a cautionary note for Republicans about reading too much into their victories, one-quarter of the voters who supported the party’s candidates did so despite harboring bad feelings about the party. Among voters who backed Democrats, a significantly smaller share was negative toward that party.Voters’ stances on a number of issues emphasized the stark differences between Democrats and Republicans, and suggested why it has been years since many Americans claimed they saw no difference between the parties.Voters closely split on whether same-sex marriage or marijuana should be legal, for example, with those in favor overwhelmingly supporting Democrats and those opposed supporting Republicans by similar margins.On several issues, majorities expressed views in sync with Democrats. A slim majority said abortion should remain legal; supporters favored Democrats and opponents Republicans. A larger majority agreed that climate change is “a serious problem,” and those who did overwhelmingly supported Democrats, while those who disagreed backed Republicans. And most voters favored allowing immigrants here illegally to have a chance to seek legal status — a position at odds with Republican opposition that hardened in the course of the year’s campaigns.Voters remain evenly divided over Mr. Obama’s signature Affordable Care Act, which Republicans sought for a third election cycle to make an albatross around Democrats’ necks. On that issue, too, voters who support the law or say it should have gone farther overwhelmingly went for Democrats while opponents chose Republicans.