https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/realestate/a-family-of-three-prefers-stuyvesant-town-to-midtown.html
A Family of Three Prefers Stuyvesant Town to Midtown - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Renting and Leasing (Real Estate),Stuyvesant Town (Manhattan  NY  Apartments),Manhattan (NYC)
June 2, 2017
8839
When Julie Beaumont Carey and Joe Carey tell people they live in Stuyvesant Town-Peter Cooper Village, they are often met with amazement. “Everyone asks, ‘How did you get in?’” Mr. Carey said.The amazement dissipates when they explain that they didn’t magically score a below-market price unit at New York’s most storied middle-income housing complex — some 5,000 out of about 11,000 units are still below market — they just walked into the leasing office on First Avenue and asked to see a two-bedroom unit. Still, they speak of their relocation as a charmed, even borderline miraculous, event.“I’m not sure we would have moved had we not discovered this,” said Ms. Carey, who first visited the complex for an after-school playdate for her son, Tommy, a first grader at the Epiphany School on East 22nd Street. “We weren’t looking to move.”They had been living in a one-bedroom co-op in the East 50s that the couple had purchased shortly before getting married. Though the kitchen was tiny and the family felt a bit scrunched in the 750-square-foot space, they had no intention of leaving. But after Tommy started school, they kept meeting parents who extolled the virtues of the postwar housing complex.“Everyone kept raving about it, so we were like, ‘O.K., we’ll see an apartment.’ And the first apartment they showed us was like this,” said Ms. Carey, gesturing at the spacious living room and open kitchen of their newly renovated two-bedroom, two-bath unit, which they moved into a little over a year ago, paying $5,239 a month. “The open kitchen was the icing on the cake.”Their housing costs now exceed what they paid previously; though they rent out their co-op, they said that the rent they collect covers little more than its maintenance and subletting fees. But then, moving to Stuy Town, as it’s often called, was never intended to be a cost-cutting move.“This was a quality-of-life decision,” Mr. Carey said.Ms. Carey nodded. “After I visited a few times, I just kept thinking, ‘This is incredible.’ We love the apartment. We love the community. After we moved in, there was just more and more: the Easter egg hunt, the farmers’ market, summer movies.”“They even have an ice-skating rink,” Mr. Carey said.“We feel like we live in a park,” Ms. Carey said.Neither was familiar with the complex before hearing about it from other parents at the school, which is within walking distance. Ms. Carey, who works for a government affairs consulting firm, had spent many of her 20 years in New York on the Upper West Side, from which she commuted frequently to Washington. A mutual friend surreptitiously set her up on a blind date with Mr. Carey, who worked in the Clinton administration and now runs a firm specializing in crisis communications.A complex of apartments built in the late 1940s, Stuy Town passed six relatively uneventful decades as a middle-class refuge. Then, in 2006, Tishman Speyer Properties and BlackRock Realty bought the complex for $5.4 billion — the biggest real estate deal in American history at the time — and defaulted on their mortgage four years later. After several years of limbo and the settlement of a lawsuit over illegal rent overcharges, the Blackstone Group and Ivanhoé Cambridge paid more than $5 billion to take the complex over in 2016.The recent history has produced a fairly wide age and income range among the tenants. “It’s a more diverse community, and that’s one of the really nice things about it,” said Ms. Carey, adding that longtime tenants often ask to step in and look around, curious to check out what the most recent round of renovations looks like.She said that she and her husband have seen a variety of apartments in the complex as well, from modest one-bedrooms last decorated when their occupants moved in right after World War II, to a sprawling five-bedroom duplex cobbled together from two units. They have found that Stuy Town residents seem to have a penchant for neighborliness, whether inviting new tenants in for something to drink or taking in their dry cleaning while they are out and leaving a card to let them know.Another thing residents at the complex are known for, of course, is staying put. And though the Careys have spent only a little over a year there, in this regard, they are already true Stuy Towners.“We’ll stay as long as possible,” Ms. Carey said. “At least the next decade. We joke about moving back to Midtown when Tommy goes to college.”