http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/world/australia/nauru-refugees-abuse-conditions.html
Australia Allows Abuse of Refugees to Deter Others, Rights Groups Say - The New York Times
Australia,Nauru,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Asylum  Right of,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Manus Island (Papua New Guinea),Amnesty International,Human Rights Watch
Aug. 3, 2016
1383
SYDNEY, Australia — Asylum seekers and refugees being held on Nauru under Australia’s harsh immigration laws are being deliberately subjected to suffering to deter others from trying to reach Australia, human rights researchers said after visiting the tiny island nation.“The Australian government is commissioning the abuse of these people,” Anna Neistat, a senior director for research at Amnesty International who spent five days on Nauru in July, said by telephone from Paris on Wednesday. “It pays for the companies that detain the refugees, it pays for the guards, and it fails to provide adequate medical care. Australian taxpayers are funding it. And the world does not know this place exists.”Michael Bochenek, senior counsel for Human Rights Watch, also visited Nauru, one of two offshore Pacific sites where Australia sends migrants who try to reach its shores by sea, and the groups issued a joint report on Tuesday about their findings. It is unusual for rights groups or news organizations to gain access to Nauru, whose government routinely denies them visas; Ms. Neistat and Mr. Bochenek did not identify their employers in their visa applications, according to the report.Between them, the report said, the two spent 12 days interviewing 84 asylum seekers and refugees, including children, and spoke to service providers there. They said that asylum seekers were denied adequate medical care, that they were often the victims of crime and that depression and anxiety were rampant.“Australia’s policy of exiling asylum seekers who arrive by boat is cruel in the extreme,” Ms. Neistat said. “Few other countries go to such lengths to deliberately inflict suffering on people seeking safety and freedom.”Australia’s policy is that no asylum seekers who try to reach the country by sea will ever be allowed to settle here, regardless of whether they are granted refugee status. The government says that policy, which rights groups and the United Nations have criticized, is meant to stop migrants from trying the often dangerous voyage in rickety boats, which have sometimes ended in mass drownings.Migrants intercepted at sea are instead sent to Nauru or to Manus Island, a part of Papua New Guinea, where they are held indefinitely. A few refugees have been resettled in third countries, including Cambodia, and many have been returned to the countries they fled. In April, the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea ruled that the detention center there was illegal.More than 1,000 refugees and asylum seekers, including around 50 children, are being held on Nauru. About 470 live on the grounds of the Australian-funded processing camp, while the rest live elsewhere on the impoverished island.According to the report, asylum seekers who live outside the camp reported that they were often the victims of violent crime, that women were threatened with sexual assault and that children were bullied at school. Refugees said they were anxious, depressed and unable to sleep. Children suffered from nightmares and some wet their beds; one 9-year-old boy, whose father had been suddenly transferred off the island for medical care, spoke openly of wanting to end his life, the report said.Ms. Neistat described the health care provided to asylum seekers as atrocious. Newborns had persistent infections, according to the report. One father said his son had kidney problems but had not been examined by a doctor. A man with diabetes lost 60 pounds and was told by medical employees that the weight loss was normal. One man whose wife gave birth at a clinic on Nauru told researchers that at one point she was lying under a bed that had no mattress, writhing in pain and receiving no help from staff.A spokeswoman for International Health and Medical Services, a company that Australia pays to provide medical services on Nauru, wrote in an email that the company “refutes the claim that asylum seekers and refugees on Nauru are denied treatment by I.H.M.S. or receive poor quality treatment.”Peter Young, a psychiatrist who worked for the company from 2011 to 2014 as the director of mental health services, said the report was consistent with his experiences on Nauru.“I don’t doubt the veracity of the allegations,” Dr. Young said by telephone. “I know there are people there with significant mental health issues. The government is pursuing a policy that makes these people human sacrifices to stop more boats from coming.”This year, two asylum seekers set fire to themselves on Nauru. One, a 23-year old man, died, and the other, a 21-year old woman, had serious burns to more than 80 percent of her body.Sarah Hanson-Young, an Australian senator from the Greens party, said on Wednesday that she would introduce legislation that called for reporters and rights advocates to be given free access to Nauru.Australia’s Department of Immigration and Border Protection said in a statement that it “refutes many of the allegations in the report.” Chris Gordon, corporate and public affairs manager at Broadspectrum, the company that the Australian government pays to provide services for asylum seekers and refugees on Nauru, said that it had “zero tolerance for abuse” and that similar accusations had been raised in the past but not substantiated.Nauru, an island of eight square miles, was ravaged by decades of phosphate mining, and its economy is buoyed by payments and aid from the Australian government, which spent $314 million on its operations there last year, Amnesty said. The Refugee Action Coalition, based in Sydney, said the government spends about $900 million a year on the centers on Nauru and Manus Island.