https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/05/upshot/see-obamacare-rates-for-every-county-in-the-country.html
See Obamacare Rates for Every County in the Country - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates)
Nov. 4, 2016
8356
Average Obamacare insurance rates really are going up by 22 percent.Last week, the Obama administration shared prices for Obamacare health insurance plans in most states. Now that markets in every state have published prices, we have a complete picture and, on average, the price increases are substantial. In 2015, the comparable rate was 4 percent; this year it was 8 percent.Our map shows the price change for the most inexpensive midlevel plan everywhere in the country, thanks to data collected by the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform. We looked at that kind of plan because it tends to be the most popular among Obamacare customers. The administration study looked at a more expensive type of plan, known as the benchmark. Prices for those plans are also going up by an average of 22 percent nationwide.Premiums are rising a lot in many parts of the country, but not everywhere. Despite big increases, like a near-doubling of premiums in parts of Arizona, there are also places where premiums are going down.Percentage changes get a lot of attention, in part because they can shock the household budgets of people who have become accustomed to last year’s prices. But the data show that not all of the places with big price increases look that expensive compared with nearby communities.The numbers below show the monthly price of insurance for a 40-year-old nonsmoker next year. Kansas will have big increases, but still has reasonable premiums, compared with its neighbors. Vermont will have modest increases, but remains expensive. Arizona is the real outlier: as my colleague Abby Goodnough wrote recently, the parts of Arizona that experienced the large increases had been among the cheapest places in the country to buy insurance last year. Now, with near-doubling of premiums, it’s becoming one of the most expensive.Most people who buy Obamacare plans won’t feel the full brunt of these prices — or price increases. More than 80 percent of Obamacare marketplace customers get a form of federal subsidy that is tied to their income. Because of the complexities of the subsidy formula, many people in these markets may even see their share of the premiums go down. But people paying the full price of premiums will feel the sting of these increases, and millions of subsidized people will need to at least switch health plans to keep their premium from going up.If you buy your own insurance, don’t assume that the numbers on these maps mean your costs are going way up. You need to look at your state marketplace website and see what insurance will cost for you. If you need advice picking the best plan for your needs, we created some flow charts that may help. If you get insurance from your job or from a government program, like Medicare, these rates don’t apply to you at all. Premiums for those kinds of insurance are rising at a much slower pace.A crucial question for government officials, insurers and consumers is whether the increases this year are a one-time market correction or a sign that the Obamacare markets have become unstable. There are several good reasons to think 2017 is an unusual year for these markets.But one worrisome sign for the future can be seen in our last map. Obamacare relies on competition among insurance companies to keep prices reasonable, and there are a growing number of places where there is no real competition. According to the McKinsey analysis, about 18 percent of people eligible for Obamacare plans live in places where there is only one choice of insurer.