http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/02/arts/television/02wein.html
Mr. Warmth: The Don Rickles Project - TV - The New York Times
Art,Motion Pictures,Television,Rickles  Don
Dec. 2, 2007
7399
LOS ANGELESDON RICKLES is in a magnanimous mood. Looking country club chic in his lime green shirt and bee-yellow golf sweater, the 81-year-old comic is not going to hurl any zingers for kicks today; he’d much rather munch on wasabi peas and sip hot tea here in the lobby of a Century City hotel near his home, and talk with his old friend John Landis about the peculiar and pleasurable sight of Joe Torre in a Dodgers uniform.“I haven’t watched baseball since Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale,” said Mr. Landis, the director of “The Blues Brothers” and “Trading Places,” who has made a documentary titled “Mr. Warmth: The Don Rickles Project.” That prompts Mr. Rickles — speaking in a hoarse rasp, a result of hours reprising his Mr. Potato Head character for a “Toy Story” theme-park attraction —  to tell a story about throwing out the first ball at a Dodgers game many years ago dressed as the team’s old manager, Tommy Lasorda. “The umpire, Harry Wendelstedt, turned to me in front of 55,000 people and said, ‘Don, can you get me two tickets to the Dean Martin show?’”“Mr. Warmth” is killing: after affectionate receptions at both the New York and American Film Institute film festivals,  it is being shown on HBO starting Sunday night, on the heels of the success of “Rickles’ Book” (Simon & Schuster),  Mr. Rickles’s anecdotal memoir, and he is basking in the encomiums that come when you’re a showbiz legend. That’s not something he makes a habit of doing, even though he has almost 60 years of show business behind him.“I’m a very self-conscious person,” Mr. Rickles said. “But this film does a great job of explaining me.”Mr. Landis figured the best way to capture Mr. Rickles’s very particular art was in live performance, and “Mr. Warmth” uses a show at the old Stardust Resort and Casino in Las Vegas as a framing device. Sandwiched between testimonials from Rickles theorists like Chris Rock, Whoopi Goldberg and Robin Williams  —  who all gamely try to deconstruct the appeal of Mr. Rickles’s brutal yet somehow benign brand of comedy  —  we see Mr. Rickles, a little hunched over but still spry, doing his thing onstage. Flinging put-downs like ninja stars at delighted audience members, riffing off the cuff even though he has a warehouse of old material stored up, he is clearly the the grandmaster of insult comedy, its most famous practitioner.For years Mr. Rickles was  approached about taping his show for posterity, but he shunned all offers. “I didn’t want guys to pick up on my act,” he said, although it is more likely that he did not want his Las Vegas bookings to dry up (he still works 75 nights a year across the country). But his son, Larry, a producer of the film, said it was time for a documentary, before it was too late.Mr. Landis met Mr. Rickles as an 18-year-old production assistant on the set of the film “Kelly’s Heroes” 37 years ago. “I don’t really think people understand Don’s place in show business and what he does,” he said. Most know him from his countless appearances on “The Tonight Show” during Johnny Carson’s long reign, making mob jokes at Frank Sinatra’s expense and poking fun at Ed McMahon’s somnolent demeanor.But it’s the live act, Mr. Landis said, that reveals the essence of Mr. Rickles’s barbed genius. “It’s not stand-up,” Mr. Landis said. “It’s a show built around his persona, and it’s never the same thing. He just creates an ambience onstage where everything becomes funny. Whoopi Goldberg told me that Don says things we would say in anger, but there’s no malice with him.”Perhaps the most revealing insight to be gleaned from “Mr. Warmth” is the fact that for a man that has made a living spewing good-natured venom, Mr. Rickles is remarkably well adjusted. The son of a sturdy matriarch and a Russian immigrant father who sold insurance,  Mr. Rickles grew up in Jackson Heights, Queens, and served in the Philippines during World War II before heading to Los Angeles for work. Soon he found himself onstage at a nightclub called Slate Brothers, insulting gangsters and movie stars with alacrity. This was the scene of his first Sinatra sting: when Mr. Rickles turned to Sinatra, he told the singer he should make himself at home by hitting somebody. A friendship was forged.“Slate Brothers seated maybe 100 people,” Mr. Rickles said. “I used to get dressed in the kitchen. I sweated a lot onstage, and Harry Goins” — Mr. Rickles’s longtime friend and man Friday — “used to douse me with cold water in the alleyway while I stood stark naked.”Slate Brothers is long gone, as are many of the rooms Mr. Rickles used to work.  His Stardust performance in the film was his last there; the casino was razed shortly thereafter. “There are very few of us left,” he said. “Everything’s a big production in Vegas now.”Though he has no water elements or pyrotechnics in his act, Mr. Rickles recently signed with the Orleans Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas for dates in the spring. “The only way I would stop is if my heath goes, God forbid, or the audience isn’t with me anymore,” he said. “Besides, I got to keep going. My manager told me has to put his kid through college. His kid is 10 years old.”