https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/fashion/mens-style/balenciaga-demna-gvasalia-rick-owens-spring-2018.html
Balenciaga and Rick Owens: Two Paths to the Same Idea - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Balenciaga (Fashion Label),Gvasalia  Demna,Owens  Rick
June 23, 2017
8997
PARIS — Back when Paris was suffering under a prolonged equatorial heat spell — on Wednesday, that is — Demna Gvasalia, the Balenciaga designer, staged what he characterized as a family oriented men’s wear show on a wooded path in the Bois de Boulogne.It was 95 degrees at noon and the theme was fathers, Mr. Gvasalia allowing as how he’d recently been looking a lot at pictures of dads with their children. He cast acquaintances to walk alongside the usual models, and with them their own children.Superficially, the presentation was an archaeological riff on the sort of unfashionable stuff that guys unconcerned with fashion might wear for a walk in the park — boxy Lurch jackets, dad jeans with awful bleach finishes, Hawaiian-print shirts, ill-fitting anoraks, clunky brown leather shoes — or already have crammed in their closets.Erase the setting and the high-fashion apparatus (Balenciaga is owned by Kering, the multinational behind Gucci and many other luxury labels), and the clothes could have been judged a bit too yard-sale convincing. But designers are great at taking the unpardonably ugly and making it desirable, as witness the elevation of black knee socks worn with sandals, a look you can hardly top for so-bad-it’s-awesome.In that sense, this could have been just another shrewd show by a designer whose cleverness includes his skill at distracting fans from the formal concerns underpinning his work. Mr. Gvasalia made his name at Vetements, where in taking mainstream labels and infusing them with ineffable cool, he was often mistaken for an ironic collagist or workroom D.J. Champion sweatshirt meets tortured Parisian chic in the hands of a Georgian former club kid-turned-designer. The result? Digital cash registers light up.But the Balenciaga show — set to the techno remix of the 1999 Muse song “Unintended” covered by Mr. Gvasalia’s boyfriend, the musician Loik Gomez — was laden with messages. The first was optimism in the face of atomized political structures and the terrorist perils that have kept this city and country on edge (some clothes bore slogans like “Europa” or, more banally, “Think Big” and “The Power of Dreams”) and also the ongoing homage that Mr. Gvasalia’s designs pay to Cristóbal Balenciaga, the founder of this house.Dominating the impressions that “Balenciaga: Shaping Fashion,” a show of work by the master and his followers on view through February at the Victoria & Albert Museum in London, left on this viewer was Balenciaga’s consideration of the bodies for which he designed. Too often, Balenciaga is likened to an architect or sculptor, when in fact he was an intensely proper anatomist with a deep regard for the frailty of the human form.The masterful clothes, which by the time he retired in 1968 were judged out of touch with a youth culture, used subtle technical wizardry to torque fabric away from the bodies of clients of a certain age. Probably only in youth is the curve at the small of the back a beautiful part of the body. With that understanding, Balenciaga created dresses or coats that, while cinched at the waist, fell free from shoulder to hem. Intensely Catholic and — necessarily for a gay man of the time — closeted, Balenciaga was also a prude.Expressions of overt sexuality seemed to mortify him and, in a way, you might say the same of Mr. Gvasalia, whose party-boy days are so far behind him he has relocated his various concerns to antiseptic Zurich.Whether sternly beautiful or so schlump-y as to become ugly-beautiful, his clothes betray something of the sobered reprobate. The lithe and pretty forms of the boy models cast in his show were almost entirely obscured by the enveloping shapes of enormous jackets. The gaunt, haggard faces of the older men he cast alongside were flesh billboards warning of the wages of sin.The raucous life that Rick Owens, another of the major talents at work here, left behind in his native California was radically unlike the ordered and domestic one he lives today, but you could hardly say he repents of his former debauchery. Actually, he seems to use it as a wellspring of creativity, to judge from the parties he gives that are called things like “Butt Muscle.”Held on Thursday in the courtyard of the Palais de Tokyo, on a vertiginous three-story scaffold of ramps and stairways, Mr. Owens’s show was titled “Dirt” and set to a remix of Egyptian Lover’s often-sampled “I Need a Freak.”Ostensibly, the show was inspired by Mr. Owens’s interest in works by sculptors like Robert Smithson or Michael Heizer, men who impress the marks of their existence on the earth. Show notes offered the claim that it had something to do with making a bid for immortality.In reality, the opposite seemed to be the case. No one as smart as Mr. Owens bothers about posterity and, in the eyes of this viewer, at least, his shows are inevitably about mortality, about the vulnerability of the body that must carry us through. In his work, he cocoons it, armors it, torques it, disguises it, burdens it and sometimes exposes the frailty of its surfaces, structure and shape.In one past presentation, models’ penises were left dangling, like puny appendages hardly worth all the fuss.Here, he exposed thin legs with knobby knees below shorts in dusty colors affixed with pleather bags resembling external bladders, showed pleated tank tops twined as intricately as Japanese bondage knots, shod his cast in tractor-soled sneakers, gave them gorgeous voluminous suits to wear or put them in flowing trousers whose constricting high waists fastened below the nipples of models with chests so bony they looked as if they ought to walk straight off the ramp and into an emergency room.Though Mr. Owens and Mr. Gvasalia grew up at opposite ends of the earth and represent radically different parts of the design spectrum, they have it in common that they seem to operate from a similar respect for humanistic values that, alas, are generally in short supply.