https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/movies/james-gunn-narrates-a-scene-from-guardians-of-the-galaxy-vol-2.html
James Gunn Narrates a Scene From ‘Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2’ - The New York Times
Movies,Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 2 (Movie),Gunn  James (1970- ),Saldana  Zoe
May 4, 2017
6741
One scene in the new “Guardians of the Galaxy” sequel looks a lot like a Hitchcock movie, but with more explosions and spaceships. The director James Gunn took a cue from the crop duster sequence in the thriller “North by Northwest” to stage a battle between Gamora (Zoe Saldana) and her adopted sister Nebula (Karen Gillan). In an interview, Mr. Gunn spoke about why it’s one of the few moments in the film without music and how he was inspired to outdo a “Fast and Furious” movie. Here are excerpts from that conversation.What were your goals for this scene?In “Guardians of the Galaxy,” we often have these emotional character relationships between two people or more. And in this one, it really is the culmination of two movies’ worth of hatred between sisters who do not get along. This first manifests itself in a physical fight here and then leads to an emotional scene where Nebula breaks down. You thought she was the bad guy the whole time. But you realize that actually she was the one who was wronged by her sister when she was young and she’s the one who, in a lot of ways, is the victim in the relationship.Why did you decide not to include music?Simply because there is so much music throughout the movie. I wanted this scene to stand out. I think it’s special and very raw and visual. And I wanted a chance for our sound department, the guys at Skywalker Sound, to really shine and do something that was almost operatic with just sound alone. But I think mostly the reason was just for variety’s sake in the movie.Was this how you always wanted the scene to play?No. When I was writing the screenplay I originally wrote a different action sequence between Nebula and Gamora and I came upon the idea for this one, I think, through watching “North by Northwest.” I decided to rewrite the action sequence between the two of them. But instead of rewriting it, I simply drew it. As a writer-director I oftentimes draw the scenes first as opposed to writing them because that’s more more true to the form that they end up being in.Gamora picks up a giant gun and fires it at Nebula. Could you tell me your idea behind that?I thought that was just a fun way to take things up to the next level. I had seen the Rock do his thing with a giant blaster in “,” which is my friend James Wan’s film, and I decided to one-up that with Zoe Saldana grabbing a gun that’s eight times as big as the Rock’s gun.There are a lot of rich colors in the scene. Could you tell me how you worked out the color palette?Everything in the movie was completely planned out ahead of time in terms of the colors of the various locations And as we have Gamora being chased into this cavern, which is actually a bunch of levels of caverns, I didn’t want the design to be too monotonous. So every single level has its own distinct color. On the outside, we have the teals and oranges that we have through much of the movie. We go inside to the reds and the burnt siennas, which then fall through to the deeper blue colors below. And we actually did this. There are a lot of visual effects in the movie but there’s also a lot of sound stages [where] we created sets with huge rock formations. We shot the different parts of this scene at very different times because we had to recolor the rock formations every day when we were shooting the different levels.