https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/books/review/angie-thomas-writing-tips.html
On Diversity in Publishing, a Young Star Warns: Get It Right - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Thomas  Angie (Author),The Hate U Give (Book)
July 7, 2017
9440
Representing: Angie Thomas’s first novel, “The Hate U Give,” about the police killing of an unarmed black teenager, has been a stalwart of the young adult hardcover list since its release late in February — it debuted at No. 1 and, after 18 weeks on the list, is back in the top position. Thomas’s book made news (including a front-page New York Times profile) partly for its topical story line and partly because Thomas herself, a 29-year-old from Jackson, Miss., is so cheerfully a symbol of change in the publishing industry. Mississippi “has a great literary history, but the other authors are dead or white,” she told her hometown newspaper in March. “As a kid, I would wonder, ‘Is this something that can happen to me, the little black girl from the hood?’” Now that it has, Thomas has become a literary ambassador of sorts, visiting classrooms and, last month, advising would-be authors at BuzzFeed how to represent traditionally underrepresented figures. One tip: Learn your stuff. “If you were writing a legal thriller but have no legal background,” she said, “would you do some research? So why not do the same when approaching marginalized characters? When I was writing ‘The Hate U Give,’ I had to research gangs. I have not been in a gang nor do I have family members who have been in gangs, so I had to research it. I had to look at firsthand accounts of that culture — not just what the media portrays. I watched documentaries and consulted with attorneys. This also applies to identity. If you’re writing about a gay boy or a black girl, you need to talk to a gay boy or black girl. You have to go above and beyond to get it right. The internet is a beautiful thing for a writer, but we have to put in the work. I think that’s key: Put in the work. Whether you’re writing about diversity or a legal thriller, you have to put in the work.” Still, Thomas has found some audiences more receptive than others — a fact that led her to young adult literature in the first place. “Not to throw shade or anything,” she told Cosmopolitan in March, “but I feel like teenagers are much more open-minded and willing to listen.”Filters Off: Conservative commentators have expressed mixed feelings, at best, about President Trump’s volatile Twitter habits. But Eric Bolling, whose book “The Swamp” hits the hardcover nonfiction list at No. 4, is a fan. “How can the same experts who spent the past two decades calling for ‘transparency’ in government be unhappy?” he writes. “I say, tweet away, Mr. President! Don’t hold back!”