https://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/17/world/asia/17migrants.html
Australian Leader Apologizes to ‘Lost Innocents’ - The New York Times
Australia,Children and Youth,Rudd  Kevin
Nov. 16, 2009
4782
The children were gathered up by the tens of thousands, some of them as young as 3, taken from single mothers and impoverished families in Britain, then sent abroad for what was supposed to be a better start in life. What they found was isolation, physical and sexual abuse, and what the prime minister of Australia said Monday was “the absolute tragedy of childhoods lost.”In an emotional address in Canberra, with many in the audience weeping, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd issued a national apology for Australia’s role in child migrant programs that forcibly sent an estimated 150,000 British youngsters — known in Australia as the Lost Innocents — to Australia, Canada and other parts of the Commonwealth. The programs ended about 40 years ago.“We come together today to deal with an ugly chapter of our nation’s history, and we come together today to offer our nation’s apology,” Mr. Rudd said. “The truth is, this is an ugly story, and its ugliness must be told without fear or favor if we are to confront fully the demons of our past.”He said Australia was “sorry for the physical suffering, the emotional starvation and the cold absence of love, of tenderness, of care.”A 1998 report by the British Parliament said that the child migrant program helped relieve financial burdens on Britain’s social service agencies. Also, the report noted, “a further motive was racist: the importation of ‘good white stock’ was seen as a desirable policy objective” that would “maintain the racial unity of Britain’s Empire.”The British prime minister, Gordon Brown, is expected to add Britain’s apology soon.Mr. Rudd also expressed regret Monday about the so-called Forgotten Australians, those children who were placed in state institutions — and suffered there — during the 20th century. A 2004 Senate report said more than 500,000 children were placed in foster homes and orphanages during the last century. Many of those children, the report said, were abused.“The truth is,” said Mr. Rudd, “a great evil has been done.”“Today is your day,” said the opposition leader, Malcolm Turnbull, who also spoke at the ceremony in Canberra, the Australian capital. “Today we acknowledge that with broken hearts and breaking spirits you were left in the custody — we can hardly call it ‘care’ — of too many people whose abuse and neglect of you, whose exploitation of you, made a mockery of their claim that you were taken from your own family ‘for your own good.’ ”Rod Braydon, 65, in an interview with The Associated Press, said he was 6 years old when he was raped by a Salvation Army officer. It was his first night in a Melbourne boys’ home.“When we reported this as kids, we were flogged to within an inch of our lives, locked up in dungeons and isolation cells,” Mr. Braydon said.He reportedly has received a cash settlement from the Salvation Army and has sued the Victoria state government.John Hennessey, 72, from Campbelltown, near Sydney, was a former child migrant who cooperated with the 1998 British parliamentary inquiry. On Monday, he told The A.P. that he was 6 when he was sent from a British orphanage to a boys’ school in Western Australia.Mr. Hennessey still speaks with a stutter that was caused, he said, by a savage beating he received from an Australian headmaster when he was 12. He said his transgression was stealing grapes from a vineyard because he was hungry.