https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/16/us/politics/mike-conaway-russia-inquiry.html
Mike Conaway Emerges From Relative Obscurity to Lead House Russia Inquiry - The New York Times
Conaway  Michael K,House Committee on Intelligence,Russia,Presidential Election of 2016,Cyberwarfare and Defense,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Nunes  Devin G,Texas
April 16, 2017
5623
MIDLAND, Tex. — President Trump does not know Mike Conaway.A Republican congressman from a long brush stroke of West Texas, Mr. Conaway recalled meeting with him at the White House with other House Republicans. And he has shaken hands with Mr. Trump, a “standard, 500-people-on-a-rope-line, shaken-hand kind of thing.”“He wouldn’t know me from third base,” Mr. Conaway said.Whether he has exchanged pleasantries with the president may not have mattered before, but it does now. Mr. Conaway is taking over the House Intelligence Committee’s investigation into Russian meddling in the presidential election. He is replacing Representative Devin Nunes, the California Republican whose suspiciously cozy relationship with Mr. Trump derailed the inquiry before he was ultimately forced to step aside.Mr. Nunes’s missteps have thrust Mr. Conaway, a low-profile, old-guard Republican, into the spotlight as the accidental heir to a potentially explosive investigation swirling around a president from his own party. He said he would dutifully pursue an extraordinary allegation that he appears to find dubious: that Mr. Trump’s associates may have worked with Russian officials to disrupt the election.The vow of a vigorous investigation may be reassuring to some, but in Mr. Conaway’s district, many dismiss it as an effort to disparage Mr. Trump. On top of that, Mr. Conaway has never been under the glare of national scrutiny.“He’s been a congressman from West Texas. But he’s never been exactly in the national spotlight,” said Mark Philpy, Mr. Conaway’s longtime friend and neighbor. “West Texans tend to speak what’s on their mind, and Mike’s going to have to be careful with what he says and what he does, because he’ll be criticized at every turn.”Mr. Conaway, 68, a former high school football star in an area where there are few stronger credentials, is more accustomed to playing the role of hero.Raised in the remote, pockmarked oil country that also produced George W. Bush, Mr. Conaway got an early taste of fame as a member of the 1965 Odessa Permian High School football team — the school’s first to win a state championship, decades before the team inspired the book, movie and television series “Friday Night Lights.”“He played at Odessa Permian,” said Brandon Rottinghaus, a political science professor at the University of Houston. “It’s like being Jesus in Nazareth.”Mr. Conaway’s career trajectory has been a slow walk up a long staircase. He parlayed a football scholarship into a career in accounting in Midland, Tex., which brought him to Mr. Bush. He became the chief financial officer of Mr. Bush’s oil and gas company, which ultimately faltered with the falling oil prices of the mid-1980s. About a decade later, Mr. Bush, by then governor of Texas, appointed Mr. Conaway to a state board overseeing other accountants.In some ways, a hometown-boy aura has followed him throughout his life. Mr. Conaway won his seat in 2004, the beneficiary of efforts by state Republicans who redrew districts with the clear intent of electing him and a handful of others to Congress.Unlike Mr. Nunes’s fealty to Mr. Trump, Mr. Conaway’s loyalties lie with the Republican Party. Years after uncovering an embezzlement scheme by the treasurer of the National Republican Congressional Committee, he agreed in 2013 to be chairman of the House Ethics Committee, a role akin to being the House’s hall monitor. He was later rewarded with the chairmanship of the House Agriculture Committee, a coveted post for a lawmaker who represents farming communities.But Mr. Conaway is also known for speaking his mind, a risky quality for someone leading an investigation. An ordained Baptist deacon, he is known to conclude speeches with jarringly ominous words about regaining God’s favor for a country defiled by abortion practitioners and Hollywood filmmakers.In January, in an interview with The Dallas Morning News, Mr. Conaway likened Russian interference in the election to Mexican stars who campaigned on behalf of Hillary Clinton, remarks that he struggled to explain to a handful of incredulous constituents last week. He conceded that he had done “a poor job of nuancing what I was trying to get at.”Last month, during the Intelligence Committee’s public hearing with the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, Mr. Conaway cast doubt on the intelligence community’s assessment that President Vladimir V. Putin and other Russian officials had sought not only to harm Mrs. Clinton but also to help Mr. Trump. The exchange took a perplexing detour through Texas college football.“My wife’s Red Raiders are playing the Texas Longhorns. She really likes the Red Raiders,” Mr. Conaway said, referring to the teams at the University of Texas and Texas Tech. “I mean, the logic is that because he really didn’t like president — the candidate Clinton, that he automatically liked Trump. That assessment’s based on what?”Now everything Mr. Conaway says about the investigation will come under far greater scrutiny. Leapfrogging from town hall to town hall across his district, Mr. Conaway appeared keen to avoid Mr. Nunes’s missteps, vowing to make as much information public as possible, but at the same time not to speak too much.He promised a fresh start for the investigation. His primary concern is what Russia and the Trump campaign did or did not do, he said. He did not mention leaks to the news media, the fixation of his predecessor.“Whether it helps, whether it hurts, whatever. That’s not my concern right now,” Mr. Conaway told a few dozen constituents gathered in a refurbished train depot in Brownwood, Tex. “I just want to find out what happened.”To some in Mr. Conaway’s district, the investigation into Russian interference looks like a politically motivated attempt to discredit Mr. Trump.“There are some people that have not accepted the fact that Mr. Trump won more electoral votes than Mrs. Clinton, but that’s the way elections run,” Mr. Philpy said. “I think there are some people who are trying to find an occurrence that they may not find.”Both Mr. Conaway and Mr. Trump are overwhelmingly popular in this district, one of the most Republican in the country, where even Geraldine Boyd of Brownwood, an avowed Democrat who voted against Mr. Trump, piped up during a town hall to dismiss the investigation as a waste of time.“If the Democrats had known something that would have helped them, don’t you think they would have used it?” she said.That skepticism comes with a risk for Mr. Conaway back home: that the investigation could uncover something, casting him as the inquisitor against his party’s president.“He could be held to blame by Republicans and by his constituents for being the ringleader that found what was happening,” Mr. Rottinghaus said.Ernest Angelo, who worked for presidential candidates including Ronald Reagan and Ted Cruz, dismissed that possibility. A former mayor of Midland who has known Mr. Conaway since before he was in politics, Mr. Angelo said the congressman’s integrity would carry him with his constituents should the investigation find evidence of wrongdoing.“I think if he finds that, it’ll be because it’s true,” Mr. Angelo said. “And if it’s true, then it’s a problem. I think people would recognize that.”Do they trust him that much?“I think so,” he said. “I would.”