http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/11/world/europe/one-member-of-pussy-riot-is-freed-by-moscow-court.html
One Member of Pussy Riot Is Freed by Moscow Court - The New York Times
Pussy Riot,Russia,Decisions and Verdicts,Sentences (Criminal),Music,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Samutsevich  Yekaterina,Alyokhina  Maria,Tolokonnikova  Nadezhda
Oct. 10, 2012
5615
MOSCOW — An appellate court in Moscow on Wednesday set free one of three jailed members of the punk protest band Pussy Riot but upheld the two-year prison sentences of her band mates, issuing a split decision in a case that has drawn international condemnation of Russia over the suppression of political speech.The ruling, by a three-judge panel of Moscow City Court, upheld the guilty verdict against all three women on charges of hooliganism motivated by religious hatred, stemming from a “punk prayer” performance by the band in the city’s main Orthodox cathedral in February in which they urged the Virgin Mary to rid Russia of Vladimir V. Putin.The judges, however, ordered the immediate release of one of them, Yekaterina Samutsevich, 30, apparently accepting an argument by her new lawyer that she had less of a role in the cathedral stunt than her band mates, and that the lower-court judge who convicted the women in August should have taken that into account.“The method of punishment in the form of imprisonment is to be canceled,” said one judge, Yuri A. Pasyunin, reading the court’s decision. “Samutsevich is to be released.” She emerged free less than an hour later to applause from supporters, clutching her father, tears streaking her face.The appeals hearing, originally scheduled for last week, was postponed after Ms. Samutsevich, citing disagreement over legal strategy, announced that she wanted a new lawyer to represent her alone.The other band members, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, 22, and Maria Alyokhina, 24 — both mothers of young children — will now be sent to a penal colony to serve their sentences. Their lawyers promised continuing appeals.In impassioned speeches on Wednesday, the women insisted that they had committed no crime, and were motivated not by religious hatred but by political opposition to Mr. Putin, who was running for president at the time, and by anger at the Russian Orthodox patriarch, Kirill I, for supporting Mr. Putin.“We are imprisoned for our political convictions,” Ms. Alyokhina said.Ms. Tolokonnikova added: “It is clear as daylight that this performance was purely political. It was under no circumstances antireligious. There is no religious hatred in me.”The split result provided a twist that seemed likely to intensify, rather than quiet, debate over the case.“In the heart of the matter, they committed the exact same actions,” said Mark Feygin, a lawyer on the defense team. “Why couldn’t we have received three suspended sentences then?”At times on Wednesday, it seemed that the Russian judicial system itself was a defendant, as the women and their lawyers attacked the process that led to their conviction.In the end, the judges did not address the concerns the defense had raised about the August trial: what it called the arbitrary disqualification of defense witnesses, the testimony by so-called victims who were not in the cathedral at the time of the episode, the bizarre conflation of alleged spiritual offenses and violations of the state penal code.But the show of leniency for Ms. Samutsevich, and indeed the entire appellate hearing, carried live on the Internet, offered at least the veneer of a normally functioning legal system, and seemed certain to be held up by Mr. Putin and others as evidence that Russia had handled the situation reasonably.Ms. Samutsevich’s new lawyer, Irina V. Khrunova, urged the judges to view her client individually. She said Ms. Samutsevich had intended to participate fully in the punk prayer, but did not.“She was seized and taken out of the cathedral,” Ms. Khrunova said. “She did not have the time to sing, did not scream out any words, did not pray, did not jump, did not do any of what is described by the witnesses and the victims.”