https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/technology/personaltech/moving-your-amazon-music-to-a-new-home.html
Moving Your Amazon Music to a New Home - The New York Times
Computers and the Internet,E-Books and Readers,Amazon Kindle,Music,Audio Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Mobile Applications
July 6, 2017
9522
Q. Is it possible to transfer the music files on an Amazon Kindle to another device?A. If you have upgraded to a newer Kindle Fire tablet, one where you originally purchased and downloaded your music directly from Amazon, you should be able to get access to your collection on the new device when you log into your Amazon account and authorize it to play the songs. (If you have a Kindle Fire and are an Amazon Prime member, you also have access to songs in the Amazon Prime Music catalog.)Music you uploaded to the company’s servers using the Amazon Music cloud service can be played on any authorized mobile gadget or computer running the Amazon Music app. Amazon allows 250 songs to be uploaded to its cloud free, but tracks purchased from the company do not count against that total; you can upload 250,000 songs with an Amazon Music subscription. Even if you did not buy MP3 downloads from Amazon, you may see digitized versions of certain compact discs you previously purchased, thanks to the company’s AutoRip feature.On older Kindles, for which downloading music over a Wi-Fi connection was not an option, you can usually get the music off the device the same way you put it there: over a USB connection. Find the cable that came with the device and connect the Kindle to the computer’s USB port. Go to the Music folder on the Kindle and drag the songs back to the computer’s hard drive. Once there, you can copy them to another connected Kindle or compatible tablet.If the files you originally copied to the Kindle are still on the computer, you can drag them onto a new device over a USB connection. You can also upload them to the Amazon Music cloud to play them on a new Kindle or through the Amazon Music app on a non-Amazon device like an iPad or an Android tablet.