http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/20/upshot/why-voter-id-laws-dont-swing-many-elections.html
Why Voter ID Laws Don’t Swing Many Elections - The New York Times
United States,Voter Registration and Requirements,Identification Devices,United States Politics and Government,Midterm Elections (2014),Republican Party,Democratic Party
Nov. 19, 2014
8748
Many people have understandably blamed low turnout for the Democratic Party’s misfortune on Nov. 4, but some have gone a step further.They argue that turnout was so low because of voter suppression, particularly laws requiring voters to present photo identification. They assert that these laws disenfranchised enough voters to decide several elections, even a Kansas governor’s contest where a Republican won by four percentage points.Voter ID laws might well be a cynical, anti-democratic attempt to disenfranchise voters to help Republicans, as Democrats claim. But that doesn’t mean that voter ID laws are an effective way to steal elections. They just don’t make a difference in anything but the closest contests, when anything and everything matters.This may come as a surprise to those who have read articles hyperventilating about the laws. Dave Weigel at Slate in 2012 said a Pennsylvania voter identification law might disenfranchise 759,000 registered voters, a possibility he described as “an apocalypse.” Pennsylvania’s voter ID law was reversed before the election, but it is not hard to see why so many thought it could be decisive when Mr. Obama won the state with a 309,840 vote margin.But the so-called margin of disenfranchisement — the number of registered voters who do not appear to have photo identification — grossly overstates the potential electoral consequences of these laws.These figures overstate the number of voters who truly lack identification. Those without ID are particularly unlikely to vote. And many who do vote will vote Republican. In the end, the seemingly vast registration gaps dwindle, leaving enough voters to decide only elections determined by fractions of a point.To begin with, the true number of registered voters without photo identification is usually much lower than the statistics on registered voters without identification suggest. The number of voters without photo identification is calculated by matching voter registration files with state ID databases. But perfect matching is impossible, and the effect is to overestimate the number of voters without identification.Take Texas, a state with a particularly onerous voter ID law. If I register to vote as “Nate” but my ID says “Nathan,” I might be counted among the hundreds of thousands of registered voters without a photo ID. But I’ll be fine at the polling station on Election Day with a name that’s “substantially similar” to the one on file.The matching issues run well beyond substantive ones like nicknames. If you’ve ever worked with voter files, you know that they’re rife with minor errors — like a first name in the middle name column — that prevent exact matching. The scale of the matching problem was highlighted in a North Carolina Board of Elections study last year. The state used a long list of matching criteria, ranging from names and Social Security numbers and date of birth to a “soundex” comparison to test for names that were entered slightly off but sound the same. After additional matching criteria, the number of unmatched registered voters plummeted from 1.24 million to 318,643.Even that figure likely overstates the number of registered voters without a valid identification, since many voters have valid identifications that aren’t issued by the states. Passports, student IDs and military IDs are often allowed.I do not have a Washington, D.C., identification, just a Washington State driver’s license and a United States passport. I would be grouped among the voters without a photo identification in a D.C. study, but I would be able to vote using my passport in an actual election. It is hard to say just how many people there are like me, but it probably isn’t an irrelevant number: There are 117 million valid passports in circulation, or enough for about 37 percent of Americans.People without ID are less likely to vote than other registered voters. The North Carolina study found that 43 percent of the unmatched voters — registered voters who could not be matched with a driver’s license — participated in 2012, compared with more than 70 percent of matched voters.It shouldn’t be surprising that more of the unmatched voters stayed home. The demographic profile of voters without identification — young, nonwhite, poor, immobile, elderly — is also similar to the profile of voters who turn out at low rates. It’s also possible that the voter file is the issue. Some people voted in past elections, but have moved since and haven’t been purged from the voter file, even though their ID may have expired (if they had one in the first place). Some elderly voters might just be dead and not yet removed from the voter rolls.It certainly is not clear that those without a photo ID would overwhelmingly support Democrats. There’s no question that voter ID has a disparate impact on Democratic-leaning groups — those young, nonwhite, poor, immobile or elderly voters. The unmatched North Carolina voters were registered as Democrats by a 37-point margin, compared with the 12-point Democratic margin statewide. They were 46 percent nonwhite, compared with 29 percent of all registered voters.But 22 percent of these voters were registered Republicans. The voters without an identification might be breaking something more like 70/30 for Democrats than 95/5.A 70/30 margin is a big deal, and, again, it’s fully consistent with Democratic concerns about voter suppression. But when we’re down to the subset of unmatched voters who don’t have any identification and still vote, a 70/30 margin probably isn’t generating enough votes to decide anything but an extremely close election.Finally, many of the voters without valid identification will cast provisional ballots. The provisional ballot process is not an adequate remedy for voters without an identification; many voters without identification will be dissuaded from voting. Nonetheless, 37 percent of provisional ballots cast because of ID reasons were counted in Kansas and 26 percent were counted in Tennessee in 2012, according to a Government Accountability Office analysis.When all of these mitigating factors come into play, the case for voter ID laws swinging anything but the closest election gets very shaky. The studies ostensibly showing a relationship between voter ID and Republican strength are dubious, at best. They often conflate changes in turnout resulting from other factors, like whether there’s a statewide election, with changes caused by voter ID laws.The impact of voter ID laws is basically indiscernible in the results. Democrats have pulled off impressive wins in states with voter ID, including perhaps the single most impressive electoral feat of the last decade: President Obama’s victory in Indiana in 2008, which came just after the state passed a voter ID law.Voter disenfranchisement is anti-democratic, regardless of whether it swings elections. But voter ID laws haven’t been swinging elections.