https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/02/dining/little-egypt-review-ridgewood-queens-restaurant.html
A Different Kind of Alexandria Library, at Little Egypt - The New York Times
Restaurants,Ridgewood (Queens  NY),Little Egypt (Queens  NY  Restaurant),Egypt,Egyptian food
March 2, 2017
6113
I have never seen branzino look quite like this, like some ancient, jewel-encrusted weapon unearthed from volcanic ash, prickly with glistening shards, crushed obsidian and olivine. Steam rises from the fish’s mouth, a long, pensive exhale.The armor — cracked wheat, cumin, allspice and garlic, blackened over charcoal — crumbles at the knife. It is lemon-bright with a faint, corrective bitterness from its dalliance with fire. Inside, the flesh is immaculate, as juicy and tender as you would wish.It is a grand dish to eat in the humble white-tile storefront of Little Egypt in Ridgewood, Queens. Up front, a cluster of tables are set with plastic black damask place mats and electric candles; in the back, grocery shelves can be read like a library, a scholarship of fava beans and black molasses.Nashaat Youssef, the chef, opened Little Egypt two years ago with his sister, Nagwa Hanna, a chemist with a sideline in pastry. Ridgewood has been his home since he arrived in the United States in 1991. He grew up in Alexandria, Egypt’s largest seaport, and spent a decade cooking at a restaurant steps from the docks. In New York, he took a detour, working for a limousine company, before deciding to return to what he loved.In the front window are relics of the country left behind: a large replica of King Tut’s sarcophagus, a bust of Nefertiti in her turquoise cap-crown, a hookah coiled in on itself (“decoration only,” Mr. Youssef said). Above the tables stands a small figure of Christ carrying the cross. On Sunday mornings, Mr. Youssef makes food for his fellow parishioners at nearby St. Mary and St. Antonios Coptic Orthodox Church, cooking alongside his wife, sister and brother to raise money for people in need in Egypt.At the restaurant, the pleasures are simple and frank: eggplant cut thin and fried just shy of crisp, in a vinaigrette warmed by cumin; chile-haunted sausages imported from Egypt, bundled with bell pepper, tahini and “secret spices” into a happy fever of a sandwich.Kobeba, little torpedoes of cracked wheat and ground beef, emerge from the deep fryer airy and yielding, betraying hardly a bead of oil. Stuffed grape leaves come a dozen per order, according to the menu; my plate had 20, tightly bound and still dewy from steaming in lemon and clarified butter.For the ful medames, a traditional Egyptian breakfast that may be reprised at any hour, fresh fava beans are left unpeeled to retain earthiness and cooked for hours on low heat until they’re creamy but still discrete. Mr. Youssef dresses them with nothing but olive oil and a squeeze of lemon, so their natural funk comes through.Even a side dish of rice is mysteriously good, although Mr. Youssef claims that there is nothing to it — beyond a light browning in butter and a crest of crisped onions, the best of which are nearly burned.Then there is koshari, a miracle of street food, which Mr. Youssef builds out of rice and black lentils nearly melded together, barely cooked macaroni, chickpeas and a liberal heaping of those crisped onions. All are united by dim’a musabika, a loose sauce of fresh tomatoes slowly broken down and tomato paste, deepened with cumin and flares of cayenne.Mr. Youssef’s wife, Yvette, helps in the kitchen, and his sons, Mark, 16, and Wadie, 17, pitch in when not at school. One recent afternoon, during the city’s public school midwinter break, Mark was bussing tables. “You want baklava?” he asked. “We just made it.”It was lovely, as are all of the desserts, Ms. Hanna’s recipes: basboosa, a semolina cake rich with yogurt and rose-water syrup trickling into every pore; konafa with buttery squiggles of shredded phyllo; and, off the menu, kahk, cookies with gooey centers of walnuts robed in honey and enough powdered sugar to leave a trail of snow.The restaurant in Alexandria where Mr. Youssef got his start was called Samakmak, an affectionate diminutive of samak, Arabic for fish. Here, the Samakmak Special is tilapia, baked and cloaked in dim’a musabika. One night, my table couldn’t finish it, because we had ordered too much food.Ms. Youssef looked concerned as she cleared the plates. When I went to the register to pay, Mr. Youssef said, “Next time you come, you will have the best fish.” It was delicious, I protested; we were just full.He shook his head. “Next time,” he promised.