http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/10/us/vincent-t-bugliosi-manson-prosecutor-and-true-crime-author-dies-at-80.html
Vincent T. Bugliosi, Manson Prosecutor and True-Crime Author, Dies at 80 - The New York Times
Deaths (Obituaries),Books and Literature,Manson  Charles,Legal Profession,Writing and Writers,Helter Skelter (Book),Bugliosi  Vincent
June 9, 2015
3831
Vincent T. Bugliosi, who successfully prosecuted the cult leader Charles Manson and several acolytes for the savage murders of the actress Sharon Tate and six other people in August 1969, then became a best-selling writer of true-crime books, died on Saturday in Los Angeles. He was 80.He had been treated for cancer, his son, Vincent Jr., told The Associated Press in confirming the death.The killings of Ms. Tate and four others in the early morning of Aug. 9, 1969, and the murders of Leno and Rosemary LaBianca early the next morning, terrified people in Los Angeles and horrified the American public.The victims were stabbed repeatedly. Some were also shot. Ms. Tate, 26, who was married to the director Roman Polanski and was eight months pregnant, begged for her life before being stabbed, one of the killers, Susan Atkins, recalled later.Mr. Polanski was in London while his wife and several friends were staying in the main house at an estate rented by Mr. Polanski. The houseguests who were killed were Abigail Folger, 25, heiress to a coffee fortune; Jay Sebring, 35, a prominent hairstylist; and Voytek Frykowski, 32, a friend of Mr. Polanski’s. The other victim was Steven Parent, 18, who had stopped by to visit a friend, a caretaker at the estate, and was killed outside.Dipping into the blood they spilled, the killers scrawled “Pig” on a door at the scene of the Tate killings. The next night, at the home of Mr. LaBianca, 44, who owned a grocery store chain, and Ms. LaBianca, 38, the killers used the victims’ blood to print “Death to Pigs,” “Rise” and “Healter Skelter” on walls and a refrigerator door.It became known later that one scrawl was meant to be “Helter Skelter,” after the Beatles song. For Mr. Manson, the term had come to symbolize an Armageddon-like war between whites and blacks. He had convinced some of his followers that the killings would help foment this war, somehow enabling his “family” to survive and prosper. Mr. Bugliosi later titled his book about the case “Helter Skelter.”Strangely, despite the similarities in the Tate and LaBianca killings, the police did not initially link them. After small amounts of cocaine and marijuana were found in the house where Ms. Tate and her friends had been staying, detectives speculated early on that those murders had been drug-related and not tied to the LaBianca killings. No drugs were found at the LaBianca home. And the LaBiancas, though well-to-do, were not celebrities like the first victims.Mr. Bugliosi wrote that the investigation had been hampered not only by premature assumptions but also by miscommunication within the Los Angeles Police Department and between the police and the Los Angeles County sheriff’s office. At the time, the sheriff’s office was investigating the killing of a man just days before the Tate-LaBianca murders. In that crime, also committed by the Manson family, the victim’s blood was used to write “Political Piggy” on a wall. Yet the various teams of investigators were slow to compare notes.Then Ms. Atkins, in jail on another charge, boasted to inmates of her role in the Tate-LaBianca killings.Under Mr. Bugliosi’s questioning, Ms. Atkins willingly told a grand jury about her part in the crimes, sometimes nonchalantly and at other times boastfully. At one point, Mr. Bugliosi recalled, her account drew a collective gasp. “The jurors had looked at the heart of Susan Atkins and seen ice,” he wrote.Ms. Atkins later tried to change her story, but by then the trail had led to Mr. Manson, a rootless petty criminal in his mid-30s, and his “family” of drug-addled misfits, drifters and runaways who lived on a run-down ranch outside Los Angeles.Mr. Bugliosi was a 35-year-old deputy district attorney in Los Angeles when he was chosen to lead the prosecution in 1970. In six years as a prosecutor, he had won convictions in 21 murder cases without a loss.One of his challenges was to convince the jury that Mr. Manson was just as guilty as the knife-wielders and shooters — even though he did not physically participate — because he had inspired them and sent them on their missions. The other defendants were Ms. Atkins, Patricia Krenwinkel and Leslie Van Houten, all in their early 20s.“I hadn’t realized how small he was,” Mr. Bugliosi wrote of seeing the 5-foot-2 Mr. Manson for the first time. “I could not believe that this little guy had done all the things it was said he had.”“He was not only capable of committing murder himself,” Mr. Bugliosi continued, “he also possessed the incredible power to command others to kill for him.”The trial transformed life not only for Mr. Bugliosi but also for his wife, Gail, and their young children, Vincent Jr. and Wendy. He worked 100 hours a week and was accompanied by a bodyguard everywhere he went.The trial, one of the longest criminal proceedings in American history, began in June 1970 and ended in January 1971, with the conviction of the four of murder and conspiracy to commit murder. Two months later, the jury decided that they should die in the gas chamber. But the California Supreme Court overturned the state’s death penalty in 1972, just months before the United States Supreme Court held that capital punishment as it was then administered was unconstitutional. The killers were resentenced to life in prison. Ms. Atkins died in 2009.Charles Watson, known as Tex, who took part in the Tate-LaBianca murders, fought extradition from Texas. He was eventually taken to Los Angeles, prosecuted by Mr. Bugliosi and convicted of murder. He was sentenced to death, but like the earlier defendants was resentenced to life in prison.Mr. Bugliosi’s account of the crimes, “Helter Skelter,” was written with Curt Gentry, who died in 2014. Originally published in 1974, it has sold over seven million copies and is the best-selling true-crime book ever. It won an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America as the best true-crime book of the year.Two of Mr. Bugliosi’s other books, “Till Death Us Do Part,” written with Ken Hurwitz (1978), and “Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy” (2007), won Edgars.His other books included “Outrage: The Five Reasons Why O. J. Simpson Got Away With Murder” (1996) and “The Prosecution of George W. Bush for Murder” (2008), in which Mr. Bugliosi asserted that President Bush had misled Congress and the public in trying to justify the Iraq invasion.Mr. Bugliosi had earlier questioned whether Mr. Bush should have even been in the White House, as he made clear in his scathing 2001 book about the election of 2000, “The Betrayal of America: How the Supreme Court Undermined the Constitution and Chose our President.”Vincent Bugliosi was born in Hibbing, Minn., on Aug. 18, 1934. He graduated from the University of Miami, which he attended on a tennis scholarship, and from law school at the University of California, Los Angeles.He left the district attorney’s office in 1972. He ran unsuccessfully for district attorney in 1972 and 1976 and failed to win the Democratic nomination for state attorney general in 1974. That year, he and a defense lawyer were indicted on charges of leaking nonpublic material to a reporter during the Manson trial; the charges were dismissed.Besides his son, survivors include his wife and daughter.In private practice, Mr. Bugliosi was selective about his clients. “I choose not to defend anyone charged with a violent crime unless I believe he or she is innocent or unless there are substantially mitigating circumstances,” he wrote in his book about the Simpson case.He gave the example of a serial rapist and killer: “What conceivable motivation could I possibly have to knock myself out working a hundred hours a week trying to figure out a way to get this type of person off?”