https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/us/politics/trump-comey-takeaways.html
Comey’s Testimony: Video Highlights and Our Major Takeaways - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Comey  James B,Federal Bureau of Investigation
June 8, 2017
2401
WASHINGTON — During a dramatic two and a half hours of testimony on Thursday, the former F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, gave new insight into his tense relationship with President Trump.Mr. Comey said he was distrustful of the president from their first meeting, in early January, and said he believed that Mr. Trump was trying to get him to end the F.B.I. investigation into his former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn. Mr. Comey also described how Mr. Trump antagonized him on Twitter after firing him. Here are the biggest takeaways from the hearing:Mr. Trump’s Twitter account undermined him once again.Days after Mr. Comey was ousted, The New York Times reported that the two men had dined one-on-one at the White House in January and that Mr. Trump had asked Mr. Comey for his loyalty. On the morning the story was published in the newspaper, the president tweeted, “James Comey better hope that there are no ‘tapes’ of our conversations before he starts leaking to the press!” A flurry of questions ensued, but the White House would not confirm whether Mr. Trump had recorded their discussions.Nevertheless, the tweet set off a series of events, some engineered by Mr. Comey, that helped prompt the appointment of a special counsel to investigate Russian election interference and possible ties to Mr. Trump’s associates, a blow to a White House that has tried to shake off the investigation.Mr. Comey said that three days after Mr. Trump’s tweet, he woke up in the middle of the night and realized that any possible tapes could corroborate his conversations with Mr. Trump — particularly one in February in which the president asked him to end the investigation into Mr. Flynn.Mr. Comey said he decided at that point that he “needed to get that out into the public square,” adding that he had asked a friend to share contents of a memo he had written about the meeting. The Times reported on that memo, and on Mr. Trump’s request that the Flynn investigation be ended, on May 16.Mr. Comey said that he asked his friend to disclose the memo’s contents in the hope that a special counsel would be appointed. The next day, the Justice Department announced one: Robert S. Mueller III, the former F.B.I. director.“Lordy, I hope there are tapes,” Mr. Comey said on Thursday.Mr. Comey made clear on Thursday that the president never gained his trust, and that is why he documented their encounters.At their first meeting, on Jan. 6 in Trump Tower, Mr. Comey briefed Mr. Trump on a dossier compiled by a former British spy that outlines unverified but potentially compromising information that Russian intelligence officials may have on Mr. Trump. The meeting was awkward, Mr. Comey explained, though he did not detail what had troubled him. He said only that “the nature of the person” concerned him, referring to Mr. Trump.“I was honestly concerned that he might lie about the nature of our meeting, and so I thought it really important to document,” Mr. Comey said. “That combination of things, I’d never experienced before, but it led me to believe I’ve got to write it down, and I’ve got to write it down in a very detailed way.”The meeting ended, and Mr. Comey walked out of Trump Tower and into his waiting vehicle, where he immediately began writing a memo about it on a secure F.B.I. laptop. Mr. Comey went on to write memos about every major interaction he had with the president until he was fired in May.Mr. Comey testified that he kept the memos free of classified information to ensure that many of them were not kept secret. By doing so, it made it easier to eventually make them public.“My thinking was, if I write it in such a way that I don’t include anything that would trigger a classification, that’ll make it easier for us to discuss, within the F.B.I. and the government, and to — to hold on to it in a way that makes it accessible to us,” he said.Mr. Comey said he had not written similar memos for his interactions with Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama. Mr. Obama nominated him as F.B.I. director in 2013, and he served as deputy attorney general under Mr. Bush.Mr. Comey believed that Mr. Trump was holding his job over him, he indicated during his testimony.At their dinner in January, one week after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, the president began by talking about Mr. Comey’s job, even though he had already asked him three times about staying on as F.B.I. director, which is a 10-year appointment.“My common sense told me what’s going on here is that he’s looking to get something in exchange for granting my request to stay in the job,” Mr. Comey said Thursday.He added that the comment made him uneasy and he felt that it threatened the established independence of his post.“The reason that Congress created a 10-year term is so that the director is not feeling as if they’re serving at — with political loyalty owed to any particular person,” Mr. Comey said.Later on during dinner, Mr. Trump also asked Mr. Comey twice for his loyalty and Mr. Comey replied only that he would give him his “honest loyalty.”In their last private conversation, on April 11, Mr. Trump called and asked Mr. Comey to put out word that he was not under investigation. Mr. Trump then said that he had been loyal to Mr. Comey. “Because I have been very loyal to you, very loyal; we had that thing, you know,” the president said, according to Mr. Comey’s written testimony.Mr. Comey did not say on Thursday what the president might have meant by “that thing,” though he acknowledged that he didn’t ask him.“It didn’t seem to me to be important for the conversation we were having, to understand it,” Mr. Comey said.He was fired almost a month after that discussion.Mr. Comey testified that the White House had provided inaccurate and misleading information about the state of the F.B.I. Mr. Trump has said, without offering evidence, that Mr. Comey was a bad F.B.I. director and that the bureau was not being run effectively. Mr. Comey has taken those assertions personally.“The administration then chose to defame me and, more importantly, the F.B.I., by saying that the organization was in disarray, that it was poorly led, that the work force had lost confidence in its leader,” Mr. Comey said.“Those were lies, plain and simple, and I am so sorry that the F.B.I. work force had to hear them and I’m so sorry that the American people were told them.”Mr. Comey went on to say that “the F.B.I. will be fine without me.”Asked later about the comments, a White House spokeswoman, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said, “I can definitively say the president is not a liar, and frankly I’m insulted by that question.”