http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/16/us/politics/16facts.html
It Was Clinton vs. Obama on Health Care - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2008,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Obama  Barack,Debating,Democratic Party
Nov. 16, 2007
2679
So whom is an uninsured voter to believe?In one of the liveliest exchanges of the Democratic debate last night, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton said that Senator Barack Obama’s health care plan “would leave 15 million Americans out.” That, Mrs. Clinton  added in an ominous nod to the early nominating states, is “about the population of Nevada, Iowa, South Carolina and New Hampshire.” Mr. Obama countered that “the fact of the matter is that I do provide universal health care.”The crux of their dispute centers on their overall approaches to health care.Mrs. Clinton’s plan would require all Americans to get coverage and would provide subsidies to make it more affordable. Mr. Obama’s plan would require only children to have coverage; his plan would require employers to provide coverage or contribute to a new public program that would make insurance more affordable to people not covered by their jobs or by the government.“The only difference between Senator Clinton’s health care plan and mine is that she thinks the problem for people without health care is that nobody has mandated — forced — them to get health care,” Mr. Obama said. “That’s not what I’m seeing around Nevada. What I see are people who would love to have health care. They desperately want it. But the problem is they can’t afford it.”Many experts in health care  agree that without a mandate, some people would not get coverage. The Clinton campaign puts that figure at 15 million people.The Obama campaign argues that a mandate might not be enforceable, and that if health insurance is affordable and attractive, most people will enroll.About Mrs. Clinton’s demographics of the early nominating states: According to 2006 census figures, the combined population of Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire and South Carolina is closer to 11 million.The idea of an individual mandate — requiring people to have health insurance — has long been debated by experts in health policy. A basic purpose of insurance is to protect people against the risk of high medical costs, and health economists say it is easier to manage such risks if more people, especially healthy people, are in the insurance pool.When the purchase of insurance is voluntary, people who expect to be sick are more likely to buy it, and insurers often try to deny coverage to those whom they expect to have high medical costs. Mrs. Clinton and other supporters of an individual mandate say it would reduce this problem. As a corollary, Mrs. Clinton would require insurers to offer coverage to anyone who applied.John Edwards would also require people to have insurance.Mr. Obama questioned last night how such a mandate would be enforced. “She states that she wants to mandate health care coverage, but she’s not garnishing people’s wages to make sure that they have it,” he said.His aides also circulated an article in which Mrs. Clinton was quoted as saying that she had not yet proposed any punitive measures for people who do not get health insurance. An aide to her said that a Clinton White House would work with Congress to create an enforcement mechanism.The major Democratic proposals to expand coverage would offer federal subsides to help people buy private insurance. The Clinton plan would cost an estimated $110 billion a year, the Edwards plan  $90 billion to $120 billion a year, and the Obama plan  $50 billion to $65 billion a year. All three say  they would pay for their plans in part by rolling back the Bush tax cuts on the wealthy.