https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/09/nyregion/from-the-bridge-scandal-state-another-hard-to-believe-scheme.html
One More Hard-to-Believe Scheme From the Bridge Scandal State - The New York Times
New Jersey,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Smisek  Jeffery A,Christie  Christopher J,Presidential Election of 2016,United Airlines,Samson  David (1939- ),Bribery and Kickbacks,George Washington Bridge,Airlines and Airplanes
Sept. 8, 2015
6379
“And let’s be fair,” Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said in January 2014.By all means.“There are times when there have been investigations around here that led to nothing and have had no basis.”So let’s be fair: A man’s allowed to dream.As we already knew, two of Mr. Christie’s aides are awaiting trial on federal charges that they created traffic jams at the George Washington Bridge for four days to punish a mayor who did not endorse Mr. Christie for re-election.(We pause now for a moment of silent reflection, of awe, at the sheer craziness of such a caper.)But it goes on, as we learned on Tuesday.The chief executive officer of United Airlines, along with two other senior officials, have left their jobs because they are connected to yet another hard-to-believe scheme.It seems that to curry favor with a powerful Christie ally who had influence over facilities at Newark Liberty International Airport, United ran a money-losing flight from Newark to South Carolina, where the official had a vacation home. The official, David Samson, liked to spend weekends there, so on Thursdays, United flew to Columbia, S.C., from Newark, and on Mondays, it flew the other direction.United, under pressure to save money after merging with Continental Airlines, wanted a break on its lease at Newark.Mr. Samson was the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport and was United’s landlord. The airline hoped Mr. Samson could cut its rent by millions of dollars a year.Although Mr. Samson advocated United’s cause at the Port Authority, he was opposed by the executive director of the authority, Patrick J. Foye, and the campaign for a rent break stalled. Then it emerged that people Mr. Samson had hired were involved in the bridge traffic jam scandal.Mr. Samson resigned as chairman of the Port Authority. A few days later, still stuck with what it regarded as high rent bills but no prospect of getting help from Mr. Samson, United ended the flights to his South Carolina vacation home.Got that?The bridge traffic jam brought down a bunch of people, including the chairman of the Port Authority. That, indirectly, has brought down the top executive at United Airlines, Jeff Smisek, who never was able to get the rent breaks that he hoped Mr. Samson was going to deliver. This year, United sued the Port Authority over the amount of rent it is being charged.(Mr. Smisek departs with what looks like a mighty fine separation package: In a filing United made Tuesday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the airline said he would get nearly $4.9 million in cash, stock worth $3.4 million, lifetime free flights and free parking, and more goodies potentially worth tens of millions in cash and stock, depending on the company’s performance. However, he may have to give up some of that if he pleads guilty to any crime of “moral turpitude” involving his work at United. If prosecutors believe a crime was committed in setting up the flight for Mr. Samson, they will have to decide if United and its executives were happy to pay graft or were victims of a shakedown. Mr. Samson’s lawyer, Michael Chertoff, has said that the circumstances are entirely innocent.)Had things gone well for Mr. Christie, he might have been chaperoned by Mr. Samson at various political proms that are part of the primaries. For instance, when Mr. Christie took over the Republican Governors Association, he brought Mr. Samson along to the first meeting.Last year, at news conferences blaming other people for the traffic jam scandal, Mr. Christie referred to him reverentially as “General Samson,” because Mr. Samson was a former attorney general of New Jersey. That is not the same kind of general as Dwight D. Eisenhower, but Mr. Samson apparently liked having people call him general.So that is how he was referred to by various New Jersey patronage employees at the Port Authority, and by Randy Mastro, the private lawyer hired by Mr. Christie to get to the bottom of the traffic jam scandal. Mr. Mastro issued a report of more than 300 pages that he said exonerated Mr. Christie and Mr. Samson. However, he never actually interviewed General Samson about the agency he ran.Maybe if things do not work out for Mr. Christie’s presidential campaign — reminder: he is running for president — the governor could become a cabinet secretary in the next Republican administration.Secretary of transportation comes to mind.