https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/us/politics/in-drama-of-first-gop-debate-donald-trump-is-without-a-script.html
Donald Trump and the G.O.P. Debate: Policy Is Not His Point - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Trump  Donald J,Polls and Public Opinion,News and News Media,Fox News Channel,Republican Party
Aug. 5, 2015
7394
He announced a “foolproof” plan to destroy the Islamic State, but said, “I’m not going to tell you what it is tonight.”He proposed a “great wall” to keep out illegal immigrants, but changed his mind when he visited the Mexican border.He donated $10,000 to re-elect Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, but in attacking Mr. Walker, blithely revealed that he had no idea of the governor’s record when he made the contribution.Donald J. Trump, who will be at the center of the first Republican presidential debate Thursday night, may prove as elusive a target to his rivals as a puff of smoke.That is because Mr. Trump’s popularity — his support in some polls is double that of his closest competitors — is built on his unfettered style, rather than on his positions, which have proved highly fungible.He may be the first post-policy candidate.Mr. Trump’s website, unlike those of nearly every other candidate, has no issues page. He has given no policy addresses. He has boasted that he is not spending time plowing through briefing books or practicing answers to imagined questions, the customary ways to prepare for a debate.Yet many of Mr. Trump’s positions have an improvisational air, shifting in their specifics as he seems to dream them up or reconsider them on the fly and out loud, in free-associative speeches or shoot-from-the-hip interviews.What some have called “Trumpism” is founded not on a specific agenda, like the bullet-point Contract With America in 1994 that led to the Republican takeover of the House.Rather, it is built on boiling grass-roots anger over the ineffectiveness and scripted talking points of conventional politicians on matters like illegal immigration and America’s global power.“Everybody in the establishment misunderstands the game he’s playing,” said Newt Gingrich, the author of the Contract With America and onetime House speaker who was himself a Republican presidential candidate in 2012. “His opponents want to talk about policies. He’s saying if you don’t have a leader capable of cutting through the baloney, all this policy stuff is an excuse for inaction.”Anticipating the debate on Wednesday, Mr. Trump said, “I’d rather just discuss the issues.” But he added in an interview on ABC’s “Good Morning America” that he would respond in kind if targeted by a rival. “If I’m attacked, I have to, you know, do something back, but I’d like it to be very civil,” he said.Waffling, flip-flopping and inconsistencies, all of which might hobble a conventional candidate, have not dimmed Mr. Trump’s appeal to his Republican supporters.He seemed to lose no ground as rivals and the news media pointed out the stark reversal in his ideology since he flirted with a presidential run in 1999. Back then, Mr. Trump supported abortion rights and a soak-the-rich tax on fortunes in excess of $10 million.When another presidential contender, former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, called him “a cancer on conservatism” last month, pointing out Mr. Trump’s previous advocacy for single-payer health care and his support of Hillary Rodham Clinton, it was Mr. Perry, castigated on social media, who paid a price.A senior adviser to Mr. Perry, Sam Clovis, the chairman of his campaign in Iowa, called Mr. Trump’s appeal “a cult of personality,” and faulted the news media for focusing on his inflammatory remarks and insults rather than on the substance of his candidacy. (On Tuesday, an online news site, Independent Journal Review, posted a compilation of video clips showing Mr. Trump delivering insults; it was 10 hours long.)“When are the media going to start asking for specific solutions to specific problems?” Mr. Clovis asked in an interview. “I put that on you guys.”Mr. Trump’s positions and history as a political changeling have begun to receive a vetting in the news media. Following up on his promise to replace the Affordable Care Act with “something terrific,” Bloomberg Politics dug into the somewhat vague details he had cited and concluded that his plan “sounds quite a bit like Obamacare.”After Mr. Trump dodged Fox News’s Greta Van Susteren on his plan to defeat the Islamic State, pleading, “I don’t want the enemy to know what I’m doing,” he told Anderson Cooper of CNN, who also pressed him about the issue, that he would “bomb the hell” out of Iraqi oil fields held by the Islamic group.CNN followed up with military analysts who called this an ineffective strategy.Still, as a post-policy candidate, Mr. Trump may be somewhat impervious to being pinned down, whether by the news media or by his rivals.Citing the danger that lurks for other Republicans in taking on Mr. Trump, a ferocious counterpuncher, some debate veterans speculated that his rivals would prefer to demur.“My impression is every one of them will go in with a line or two ready to go, if Trump seizes upon them and they can’t ignore it without looking weak,” said Dan Senor, who helped Paul Ryan prepare for his 2012 vice-presidential debate with Joseph R. Biden Jr. “But I think they’re all hoping to not have to use it.”Mr. Trump’s seeming mutability is not limited to his own positions; in Iowa recently, he said he had not known much about Mr. Walker’s record as governor before donating to his 2014 re-election. “I didn’t know what the hell he was doing, but he was fighting, and I like a fighter. Does that make sense?” Mr. Trump said.Perhaps Mr. Trump’s most consistent policy stance has been his opposition to trade deals, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership, that he blames for the loss of blue-collar jobs. His proposal of a 35 percent tax on goods from Mexico and higher tariffs on Chinese imports is a ratcheting up, rather than a reversal, of positions he took more than a decade ago. (Back then, as an independent espousing liberal views, he called for a one-time 14.25 percent tax on fortunes above $10 million.)His seizing on trade and immigration in this campaign has allowed Mr. Trump to tap into the economic anxieties of American workers who have lost out in the global economy, and to capitalize on nativist fears.Which makes attacking him on those issues, above all, a risky proposition in a Republican primary debate.“This is a guy who’s saying some outrageous, but not inaccurate, things many people feel,” Mr. Senor said.“I don’t think it’s any candidate’s best interest in trying to take him down.”