https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/30/arts/design/long-before-twitter-martin-luther-was-a-media-pioneer.html
Long Before Twitter, Martin Luther Was a Media Pioneer - The New York Times
Museums,Art,Luther  Martin,Word and Image: Martin Luther's Reformation (Exhibit),Morgan Library & Museum,Law and Grace: Martin Luther  Lucas Cranach and the Promise of Salvation (Exhibit),Emory University,Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation (Exhibit),Minneapolis Institute of Arts,Here I Stand  Luther Exhibitions USA 2016,Fine Arts Exhibits,Colleges and Universities
Oct. 28, 2016
3451
Americans may know the basics of how Martin Luther was said to have nailed his 95 theses to a church door in Wittenberg, Germany, in 1517, condemning the Roman Catholic Church’s sale of indulgences, but they probably don’t realize how Luther strategically used the media of his time: books, paintings, prints and music.This monk in a town at the edge of Germany took on the Holy Roman emperor and the pope — then the most powerful men in Europe — 500 years ago, and won, dividing the church, setting in play “one of the most successful media campaigns in history” and altering Western society and culture, said John T. McQuillen, assistant curator of printed books and bindings at the Morgan Library & Museum in New York.That message and its resonance are being celebrated at three institutions in honor of the coming 500th anniversary of Martin Luther’s action and the beginning of the Reformation. Each of the shows — in Manhattan, Atlanta and Minneapolis — is unique. Featured among them are hundreds of objects: liturgical vestments; illuminated manuscripts; satirical woodcuts; one of six existing single-sheet printed copies of the 95 theses; the pulpit where Luther last preached; personal belongings, like Luther’s traveling spoon and beer stein; and items from recent archaeological excavations in Germany, including household goods and toys linked to Luther’s childhood.Many items, like some Bibles translated into German, have never been shown outside Germany before, and most will be on view in the United States for the first time. The shows’ primary theme is to demonstrate how “Luther made extremely good use of the new media at his disposal” to disseminate his teachings, said Tomoko Emmerling, project manager for “‘Here I Stand’ … Luther Exhibitions USA 2016,” a United States-German partnership presenting the shows. (The title refers to words Luther is thought to have said, underscoring his convictions: “Here I stand, I can do no other.”)Luther’s pamphlets were distributed at markets and taken by cart to other cities and read aloud publicly for those unable to read, Dr. Emmerling said. “We like to say if Martin Luther was alive today, he would use Twitter,” she added.Many works on view are from the workshop of Lucas Cranach the Elder, an artist who was Luther’s neighbor and friend and with whom he frequently collaborated.“The ideas of the Reformation happened because of Luther’s words, and because of all the imagery that went along with it,” said Dr. McQuillen of the Morgan. “It was a revolution in terms of media usage,” with the printing press and the combination of text and art.Dr. McQuillen said he hoped that the Morgan’s exhibition, “Word and Image: Martin Luther’s Reformation,” would convey a more accurate view of Luther’s strategic and striking use of media. “So much romance and legend surrounds the posting of the 95 theses,” he said, “but it’s not completely historically accurate.”Such an act was not revolutionary; it was just one more event in the daily life of a university, Dr. McQuillen said. The document was written in Latin for theology students to debate, not for the average person. “Luther wrote hymns and was the first one to develop the hymnal,” which fostered congregant participation, Dr. McQuillen added. “But probably the most critical and important thing Luther invented was the Reformation pamphlet”: short theater-playbill-size tracts of eight to 16 pages, written, printed and spread quickly to the public. (About 20 are on view at the Morgan.) Typical texts by Luther might have had 15 printings, and been distributed from 15 cities, with about 10,000 copies in the region. The immediate spread of his message and its popularity are “the thing that pushed the Reformation so far, so quickly,” Dr. McQuillen said.He said he hoped that viewers would leave with an understanding of the scale of Luther’s undertaking and that it was not only what Luther said, but how he said it. “One person can change the world with a strong message,” Dr. McQuillen said.The Atlanta exhibition, “Law and Grace: Martin Luther, Lucas Cranach and the Promise of Salvation,” at the Emory University Pitts Theology Library, focuses on Lucas Cranach the Younger’s allegorical painting “Law and Grace,” which reflects Luther’s view that faith is the path to salvation. The meaning of the painting’s motifs and iconography are explored through works from Germany and the library.“We have a really rich Reformation collection,” with more than 3,700 rare books, pamphlets, manuscripts and documents, said Rebekah Bedard, the library’s reference librarian and outreach coordinator.Kaywin Feldman, director and president of the Minneapolis Institute of Art, whose show is “Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation,” said a surprising element in some materials on view were the insults that Luther — and his opponents — hurled. “I am shocked by the vitriol of his words; they packed a punch,” Ms. Feldman said. “But I have been struck by the incredible conviction and courageousness of Luther; he took a stand on something he felt so passionate about.”Featuring some 250 objects, the Minneapolis exhibition is the largest. Lectures on human rights, political satire and censorship will complement the show.The exhibitions in the United States were developed with the support of Germany’s Foreign Office and in partnership with four German institutions: the State Museum of Prehistory in Halle; the Luther Memorials Foundation of Saxony-Anhalt; the German Historical Museum in Berlin; and the Foundation Schloss Friedenstein in Gotha.Much of Luther’s success was attributed to fast writing and enormous stamina, but he was also hands-on and detail-oriented, constantly checking with printers, said Andrew Pettegree, a professor at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland and founding director of its Reformation Studies Institute. “Luther understood the process from the ground up, and this gave him a tremendous advantage over his opponents,” said Dr. Pettegree, author of “Brand Luther.”His pamphlets, with “beautiful, decorative title pages, used space, design and typography in a uniform way to make a recognizable brand,” Dr. Pettegree said.“He created a media storm with virtually no precedent in the age of print and became the most published author in the history of publishing, up to that moment,” he said. “Great men and women seize the moment, and I think he did.”New York“Word and Image: Martin Luther’s Reformation” is on view at the Morgan Library & Museum through Jan. 22. In 1911 the Morgan’s founder, Pierpont Morgan, bought a letter handwritten by Luther in 1521 and addressed to Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, arguing his case for reform. The letter, which was never delivered and was given by Mr. Morgan as a gift to Germany, is on display.Atlanta“Law and Grace: Martin Luther, Lucas Cranach and the Promise of Salvation,” at the Pitts Theology Library of the Candler School of Theology at Emory University, runs through Jan. 16. The library is home to the renowned Richard C. Kessler Reformation Collection.Minneapolis“Martin Luther: Art and the Reformation,” at the Minneapolis Institute of Art, runs through Jan. 15. The region, with its large Lutheran population, is often called America’s Lutheran heartland.Germany“The Luther Effect,” at the German Historical Museum in Berlin from April 12 through Nov. 5, 2017, will focus on Protestantism globally.“Luther and the Germans,” at Wartburg Castle in Eisenach, where Martin Luther sought refuge and translated the New Testament into German, runs from May 4 through Nov. 5, 2017; it will explore the evolution of his image in Germany.“Luther! 95 Treasures — 95 People,” at the Luther House in Wittenberg from May 13 through Nov. 5, 2017, will feature 95 of Luther’s personal belongings and other treasures from the Reformation, and highlight 95 people he influenced, including J. S. Bach and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.