https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/13/sports/football/jimmy-garoppolo-deflategate-patriots-cardinals.html
Jimmy Garoppolo Rises From the Ashes of Deflategate - The New York Times
Football,Arizona Cardinals,New England Patriots,Brady  Tom,Garoppolo  Jimmy (1991- )
Sept. 12, 2016
3635
Passionate partisans on both sides of the Deflategate debate — and there are still many out there — will tell you that it was a battle between right and wrong, truth and lies, even good and evil.But fundamentally it was a battle over whether Jimmy Garoppolo would play four games at quarterback for the Patriots in place of Tom Brady.After several twists and turns in rulings by the N.F.L., an arbitrator and courts of law, the Patriots and Brady ended up losing. Garoppolo started the first of those four games Sunday night in Week 1 of the N.F.L. season, against the Arizona Cardinals.And after his efficient first drive — four of five pass completions and a beauty of a 37-yard touchdown pass to Chris Hogan — many must have been wondering: What was all the fuss about?The scandal — or farce — brought some unforgettable oddities. A destroyed phone, mysterious texts about a “deflator” and even the length of a bathroom visit became fodder for debate. But the competing scientific studies of air pressure, the voluminous Wells report, and the angry denunciations by Patriots officials and fans might now seem a bit overblown after Garoppolo’s performance in the Patriots’ 23-21 win.Before the game, the identity of New England’s quarterback seemed to matter a great deal. Both teams were elite last year, each coming a game short of the Super Bowl. In ordinary circumstances, one might expect Arizona to be a small favorite at home. But with the Patriots starting Garoppolo instead of Brady, the Cardinals were picked to win by as many as 9 points.Playing without the Patriots’ injured star tight end, Rob Gronkowski, Garoppolo finished the game with sterling numbers, going 24 of 33 for 264 yards and no interceptions. He capped it with the game-winning drive. Going into Monday night’s games, Garoppolo ranked eighth in the league in quarterback rating.Last year’s Most Valuable Player Award candidate Carson Palmer was a very comparable 24 of 27 for 271.And Garoppolo put up those numbers despite having little N.F.L. experience. He threw 27 passes in cameo appearances in his rookie year, 2014, but just four last season.The Patriots did not change their offense drastically for Brady’s understudy. Garoppolo threw on 52 percent of downs; last year, the Patriots threw on 62.Patriots fans hoping to place the suspension in a positive light said that it would provide a useful audition for Garoppolo, 24, to see if he is the man to eventually replace Brady, 39.A second-round pick out of Eastern Illinois, Garoppolo (pronounced Guh-ROP-uh-low) came into the league far less heralded than some of this season’s top picks, like Jared Goff and Carson Wentz. But then so did Brady, a sixth-round pick.Still, second-round quarterbacks seldom succeed as N.F.L. stars. For every Brett Favre or Drew Brees, there is a Jimmy Clausen, or worse, a Marques Tuiasosopo or Brian Brohm.Garoppolo’s performance might have reminded some of Matt Cassel, a seventh-round pick who filled in for Brady in 2008, the only season when Brady missed any significant time. Cassel’s numbers were somewhat worse than Brady’s, but the team was still fairly successful, going 11-5 and missing a playoff berth on a tiebreaker. Cassel went on to play seven more seasons, including some good ones in Kansas City.Garoppolo’s four-game stretch will continue with three significantly easier games, all at home, against the Dolphins, the Texans and the Bills. If his numbers stay the same, or improve with a little experience, and the Patriots come out 3-1 or even 4-0, maybe everyone will take a deep breath and let Deflategate go.Probably not, though.