http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/14/us/suspect-in-california-salon-killings-was-in-bitter-custody-battle-victims-kin-say.html
Suspect in California Salon Killings Was in Bitter Custody Battle, Victims’ Kin Say - The New York Times
Child Custody and Support,Murders and Attempted Murders,California
Oct. 13, 2011
7966
LOS ANGELES — The gunman who killed eight people at a Seal Beach, Calif., hair salon on Wednesday may have been enraged by a custody fight with his former wife, who worked at the salon, according to friends and family members of some of the victims.The Seal Beach police have identified the suspect as Scott E. DeKraai, 42, of nearby Huntington Beach, who was arrested without incident soon after the rampage. He faces multiple counts of murder.The massacre on Wednesday afternoon rocked the small, usually quiet seaside city, where many residents knew at least one of the victims. Six people were found dead in Salon Meritage by the time the authorities arrived, and two more died later that day at a hospital.The police identified the dead as Mr. DeKraai’s ex-wife, Michelle Fournier; Randy Fannin, the salon’s owner; Victoria Buzzo; Lucia Kondas; Laura Elody; Christy Wilson; Michelle Fast; and David Caouette. The lone surviving victim, a woman, remains in critical condition, the police said. Richele Steele, a spokeswoman for Long Beach Memorial Medical Center, would not confirm the patient’s identity, but said her condition was improving.The police would not speculate about a motive. But several friends and relatives of the victims suspected that Mr. DeKraai had targeted his ex-wife, a hairdresser at the salon.Jody Davis sat outside a nearby library on Wednesday evening, where many local residents had gathered to cry and support one another. She said Mr. DeKraai and his ex-wife had been involved in a long fight over custody of their young son. “I’m angry,” Ms. Davis said. “It was selfish on his part. I know they were in court hearings and he wasn’t winning, and this was his way to win. Now the son loses.”Lydia Sosa, a former salon employee, said that a tugboat accident several years ago — which killed a crewmate and left Mr. DeKraai disabled — had led to a severe change in his demeanor.“He has never been the same since,” Ms. Sosa said.