http://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/20/us/the-ad-campaign-the-vice-president-presents-himself.html
THE AD CAMPAIGN; The Vice President Presents Himself - The New York Times
GORE  AL,POLITICAL ADVERTISING,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000
Oct. 20, 1999
4755
This new 60-second television commercial is being broadcast in Iowa and New Hampshire for the next three weeks. The commercial is a sweeping, if quick, biography to introduce Mr. Gore to voters.PRODUCER -- Century Media Group.ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with black-and-white photographs of a youthful Mr. Gore. He is first pictured in his Army uniform with his late father, a former senator who was defeated in 1970 in part because of his opposition to the Vietnam War. The sound of helicopters is heard. Next come pictures of newspaper stories written by Mr. Gore as a reporter for The Tennesseean in Nashville. After that is the famous photograph of the killings at Kent State University, then the camera shows a newspaper headline about Watergate.The commercial changes to live color pictures of Mr. Gore, many with children. He is seen standing behind a lectern on the South Lawn of the White House and is shown with his wife, Tipper.THE SCRIPT -- A male announcer says: ''He saw his father defeated for the Senate because of his support of civil rights and gun control. And he came home from Vietnam doubting politics could make a difference. He studied religion at Vanderbilt. Started a family. And worked as a reporter exposing corruption. Al Gore was only 28, but he'd seen a lot about what could go wrong in America -- and decided to fight back.''He won a seat in Congress and became a national leader on the environment. Stood against the tide opposing the Reagan budget cuts. In health, education and help for the poor. As Vice President, he defied the gun lobby and cast the tie-breaking vote to keep guns away from criminals. His cause is working families. Improved health care for every American. Affordable prescription drugs. Revolutionary improvements in education so our test scores will be the highest in the world.''The young man who decided to fight for principle is still leading the way. Al Gore. Change that works for working families.''ACCURACY -- The commercial attributes Mr. Gore's father's 1970 Senate defeat to his support for civil rights and gun control. While those were unpopular positions, the elder Mr. Gore was also criticized as losing touch with his constituents.SCORECARD -- Although Mr. Gore has been Vice President for seven years and ran for President in 1988, the public knows little about him except that he has served as President Clinton's loyal lieutenant. The campaign wants to convey a more thoughtful, multidimensional person who is his own man. The commercial does not mention that Mr. Gore grew up in Washington. Not to place a candidate in a geographical context is unusual for a biography, but the Washington boyhood would send the wrong message. So would the biggest moment of his life: being picked as Bill Clinton's running mate.The campaign also seeks to counter a public perception that Mr. Gore is too cautious. It tries to supplant popular images of Mr. Gore as understudy to Mr. Clinton with images of him as understudy to his more principled father. It also casts the Vice President as  ''against the tide'' of Reagan budget cuts and one who ''decided to fight for principle.''The point is also to reinforce a theme that Mr. Gore is making about his rival for the Democratic nomination, former Senator Bill Bradley, who voted for the Reagan budget cuts and quit the Senate.The commercial seeks to show that Mr. Gore has served at the White House and is ready to be President. Putting him in that context seems a bit risky, since the image could remind viewers of Mr. Clinton, whom the commercial never mentions.KATHARINE Q. SEELYE