https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/22/nyregion/at-demonstrations-a-change-in-tone-after-officers-are-killed.html
At Demonstrations, a Change in Tone After Officers Are Killed - The New York Times
Liu  Wenjian (1982-2014),Ramos  Rafael (1974-2014),Attacks on Police,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Police Department (NYC),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Brinsley  Ismaaiyl Abdullah,Justice League NYC,National Action Network,Garner  Eric,New York City
Dec. 21, 2014
7150
For weeks after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white police officer in the chokehold death of a black man, civil rights rallies in New York City had gathered momentum and spurred dialogue among activists and city officials.But the conversation, in one shocking instant on Saturday, took an unexpected turn.One day after two police officers were fatally shot at point-blank range as they sat in their squad car in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, leaders of several groups who had been rallying for criminal justice reform scrambled to condemn the killings while still keeping the push for police reform alive.Justice League NYC, an organization that had met with Mayor Bill de Blasio on Friday, held a march as planned on Sunday night. But after the killings, the route was redirected to end at First Corinthian Baptist Church in Harlem for a service of healing to remember all victims of violence — including police officers.“An act of violence is against humanity,” Carmen Perez, a co-founder of Justice League NYC, said in a telephone interview. The group is an organization of criminal justice advocates that has planned several of the recent protests. “It’s not mutually exclusive. We can mourn Eric Garner and the two officers. It’s O.K. to do that.”On Sunday, it was too early to predict how the killings would affect future protests. But that night, the march in Harlem, attended by more than 200, was subdued.Instead of chanting Mr. Garner’s last words, “I can’t breathe,” participants held candles as they walked and sang the children’s gospel song “This Little Light of Mine.”Less than 30 minutes later in Brooklyn, the song’s refrain of “I’m gonna let it shine” echoed on Myrtle Avenue, where 30 marchers walked to the spot where the two officers, Wenjian Liu, 32, and Rafael Ramos, 40, were killed the day before. The marchers met a group of tearful police officers and about 150 mourners at a memorial, where those gathered thanked the officers for their service. Earlier in the day, the Rev. Al Sharpton held a news conference at the National Action Network in Harlem, standing beside the mother and the widow of Mr. Garner, the Staten Island man who died in July after an officer trying to arrest him placed him in a chokehold.Mr. Garner’s family denounced the police killings as senseless violence. “I would ask that everyone who is protesting with us to protest in a nonviolent way,” Esaw Garner, Mr. Garner’s widow, said. “My husband was not a violent man.”“We do not feel these killings had anything to do with us directly,” said Mr. Sharpton, who added that he had received anonymous death threats, including one that accused him of killing innocent people. “The results are being misused by people on the right to blame elements of the protest movement.”The protests in New York have largely been peaceful, but on Dec. 13 some activists assaulted two lieutenants on the Brooklyn Bridge, worsening tensions between the Police Department and City Hall.After the killings on Saturday, the protest motto of “Black Lives Matter” was joined by a chorus of “Blue Lives Matter” on social media, in support of officers.On Sunday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo spoke outside the family home of Officer Ramos and praised both officers who were killed.Asked how the killings might affect policy change, he said: “I’ve said there are reforms that we should make to the system to make the system better. I’m open to them, and I’m researching them, and I will discuss them. If people want to protest, fine, they have a right to protest. They don’t have a right to break the law. They don’t have a right to abuse police officers. That’s how we govern this city.”So what becomes of the budding police reform movement?“We cannot not respond to this with new laws, because we only create the climate where this is going to continue to happen,” Mr. Sharpton said. “We need to solve it, not scapegoat it on either side.”Dante Barry, the founder of Million Hoodies Movement for Justice, one of the groups involved in the New York demonstrations, said, “I fear that we’re going to see people who don’t want to risk getting involved in the protests.”