http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/17/sports/sports-of-the-times-the-hype-is-legit-this-time.html
Sports of The Times; The Hype Is Legit This Time - The New York Times
LEWIS  LENNOX,RAHMAN  HASIM,BOXING,SPORTS OF THE TIMES (TIMES COLUMN)
Nov. 17, 2001
1111
THEY don't like each other. That's a boxing promoter's oldest hype. The fighters go along with it, staring or snarling for the cameras. But sometimes it's real. And when Hasim Rahman defends two-thirds of the world heavyweight title tonight in his rematch with Lennox Lewis, that dislike will be more grudge than fudge.Maybe you remember the ESPN interview in August during their promotional tour. Rahman (pronounced ROCK-mon) and Lewis grappled each other to the floor with the Rock on top, their combined 500 pounds splintering a table. Pulled apart, they growled at each other, then departed with angry over-the-shoulder glances.With the World Boxing Council and International Boxing Federation belts at stake, some people assumed the commotion had been choreographed to stir the pay-per-view market, but to anyone who remembered the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier fracas in a television studio before their second fight in 1974, it was a serious scuffle.With a sneer, Ali called Frazier ''ignorant.'' Frazier hopped out of his chair and they wrestled, angrily. To anyone who was there, as I was, and knew Frazier's distaste for Ali, this was not a stunt. Frazier, who had earned a unanimous decision in their 1971 fight, couldn't accept ''ignorant'' as just another Ali taunt.At the ESPN incident, the flash word was ''gay.'' In recent years Lewis, a bachelor, has had to cope with rumors about his sexuality.''I am definitely, definitely not gay and never have been,'' he told London's Daily Telegraph last year. ''I love women.''But Rahman had used the word ''gay'' earlier in the week on a Baltimore radio program. Hearing the word again, Lewis flared.''Why are you calling me gay?'' Lewis said, spinning in his chair toward Rahman.''I said what you did was gay,'' Rahman said. ''It was gay taking it to the court.''That's when they stood and grappled. Rahman had referred to Lewis's litigation that forced this rematch of their South Africa bout. Rahman, a 20-1 underdog who feared the referee might stop that fight because of a deep cut near Rahman's left eye, landed a right hand that dethroned Lewis in a fifth-round knockout.Ever since that scuffle, their dislike has festered. Rahman, a trash talker from the Baltimore streets, has continued to taunt Lewis, who has maintained his refined, distant British cool.Near the end of Wednesday's news conference in the Mandalay Bay Events Center, Lewis departed rather than be photographed with Rahman. Across the dais, Rahman stood and shouted: ''C'mon back, Lennox. I'm not going to hit you until Saturday.''When Lewis never reappeared, Rahman smiled and yelled, ''He probably went to see his cardiologist.''The promoter Don King didn't need to be told to use this story line. Two brown-uniformed security guards had stood between Rahman and Lewis on the dais. At Thursday's weigh-in, an aluminum-plexiglass contraption separated the scales where Rahman weighed an expected 236 and Lewis a trimmer 246 1/2, down from 253 in South Africa.With a 38-2-1 record with 29 knockouts, Lewis needs to salvage his legacy as a memorable heavyweight champion, but the 7-2 betting favorite has a history of being cautious against heavy punchers.He didn't pursue Evander Holyfield in the late rounds of their 1999 fight at Madison Square Garden in order to avert being tagged with a big punch, a strategy that resulted in their debatable draw. After a second-round knockout by Oliver McCall in 1994, he tiptoed early in their rematch before registering a fifth-round knockout.Against Rahman tonight, Lewis's trainer, Emanuel Steward, wants him to be aggressive immediately.''If Lennox is tentative, the other guy's confidence is going to grow,'' Steward said. ''I've told Lennox he's got to come out hard, but he's a chess player, he always thinks too much. No matter what I tell him, I never know what Lennox is going to do until the bell rings.''Rahman, 35-2 with 29 knockouts, appears determined not to be another Buster Douglas, the Ohio heavyweight who shocked Mike Tyson with a 10th-round knockout. Blubbery in his first defense, Douglas was dethroned by Holyfield in a third-round knockout.That determination, which is more important than the dislike, is why I like Rahman to land another big punch, this time for a sixth-round knockout.