https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/business/obituary-stanley-whitman-bal-harbour-shops-developer.html
Stanley F. Whitman, Who Saw Luxury as a Shopping Center Lure, Dies at 98 - The New York Times
Whitman  Stanley F (1918-2017),Shopping Centers and Malls,Bal Harbour Shops (Bal Harbour  Fla),Deaths (Obituaries)
June 1, 2017
8878
Stanley F. Whitman, a real estate developer who was hailed as a visionary in the mid-1960s when he had the idea of building an open-air shopping center near Miami Beach for luxury retailers, naming it Bal Harbour Shops, died on May 24 at his home in Miami Shores, Fla. He was 98.His family announced his death. A week before he died, officials in the village of Bal Harbour approved a 350,000-square-foot expansion of Bal Harbour Shops, almost doubling its size. He had helped incorporate the village, at the north end of the Miami Beach barrier island, in 1946.Mr. Whitman was one of the first developers to see the potential of bringing upscale retailers like Neiman Marcus and Saks Fifth Avenue to a shopping center in an outdoor tropical setting. He opened Bal Harbour Shops after visiting retail stores around the world on a kind of fact-finding mission.Landscaped with palm and orange trees, the shopping center is today a stage for more than 100 high-end fashion brands, including Chloé, Dolce & Gabbana, Gucci, Prada and Louis Vuitton. With 450,000 square feet of retail space, it is also one of the biggest revenue creators among American malls, generating $2,555 a square foot in sales a year, according to Mr. Whitman’s company, Whitman Family Development.“He touched so many people’s lives and changed the shopping center industry,” said Cheryl Stephenson, a friend who worked for Mr. Whitman. In the succeeding years, many luxury retail centers have been built, among them the Beverly Center in Los Angeles and The Shops at Crystals in Las Vegas.Stanley Finch Whitman was born on Nov. 15, 1918, in Evanston, Ill., to William and Leona E. Whitman. His father owned a printing company in Chicago and also developed real estate properties in the Miami area.The tropical beach setting of Bal Harbour Shops harked back to Mr. Whitman’s upbringing. He grew up in Miami Beach with his brothers, Bill and Dudley, in a single-family home on the ocean at 32nd Street and Collins Avenue.Mr. Whitman attended Duke University, where he met his future wife, Dottie Stivers. After graduating during World War II, he joined the Navy’s officer training school and went on to oversee a fleet of submarine chasers. He was honorably discharged as a lieutenant commander in 1945.By the time he returned from the war, his father had died. Mr. Whitman assumed responsibility for one of the family’s Miami Beach properties on Lincoln Road, which was one of the hottest shopping districts during the 1920s but was beginning to decline.His grandson, Matthew W. Lazenby, who now leads the company, said Mr. Whitman had worked diligently to keep the Lincoln Road building immaculate. But he grew frustrated with other real estate owners who put little effort into maintaining their properties, contributing to Lincoln Road’s even greater loss of allure in the 1950s and ’60s, Mr. Lazenby said.It was the long-lost glamour of Lincoln Road that inspired Mr. Whitman’s vision for Bal Harbour Shops, Mr. Lazenby said.Mr. Whitman was one of the 25 people who incorporated what would become the village of Bal Harbour in 1946. He teamed up with Robert Graham, a developer there, to build a business district and later bought out Mr. Graham in pursuing his vision for Bal Harbour Shops.Besides Mr. Lazenby, Mr. Whitman is survived by a son, Randall, who has also been involved in the business; a daughter, Gwen W. Lazenby; three other grandchildren; and four great-grandsons. His wife died in 2008.Mr. Whitman’s family described him as an avid weight lifter and tennis player. After his wife, a bicycling enthusiast, suffered a stroke about a year before her death, Mr. Lazenby said, Mr. Whitman spent weeks researching special bicycles for the handicapped until finding one, a two-seater, that allowed her to sit in the rear while he pedaled from the front.