https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/your-money/philanthropists-decision-making.html
Award-Winning Philanthropists Explain the Roots of Their Giving - The New York Times
Philanthropy,Awards  Decorations and Honors,High Net Worth Individuals
July 7, 2017
7094
Long before Jeffrey Skoll helped Pierre Omidyar build eBay into a company that made them both billionaires, he wanted to tell stories. He said a yearlong backpacking trip to Pakistan and India after he graduated from college opened his eyes to a world he didn’t know.Coming out of Stanford University’s business school in 1995, he was hired by Mr. Omidyar as the auction site’s first employee. He wrote the business plan the company followed, and when eBay went public in 1998 he was wealthy beyond belief. His estimated net worth is $5.6 billion, according to Wealth-X, a financial research firm.“This is where the philanthropy part starts for me,” Mr. Skoll said in an interview. “I was tasked with finding a way to share the success of the company with the people who helped make it what it was. I decided to start a company foundation.”After that foundation was up and running, he returned to his desire to tell stories, now as someone with the means to fund people and their ideas.“We gravitated to the idea of social entrepreneurs when it was a fairly nascent thing,” he said. “We began to build the organization, focused on investing in and celebrating social entrepreneurs. Not long after that, we realized there was another opportunity to help bring them together and tell their stories.”Since then, telling stories to bring awareness to issues has been the unifying force of his giving. That includes the Skoll Awards, which recognize social entrepreneurs, and his funding for documentary and feature films like “An Inconvenient Truth,” on climate change, and “Spotlight,” on the cover-up of clergy sexual abuse in Boston, which won two Academy Awards.From the start of the Skoll Awards, in 2004, the aim was to do more “than just giving people a grant,” he said.“We felt that a lot of social entrepreneurs do very hard work and they’re on the front lines,” he explained, “but most of them are not very well known. We felt that part of our mission was to create a ceremony where these folks are given more notoriety.”How the biggest philanthropists in America choose their causes isn’t always apparent from how they made their money. But those donors who have put a lot of thought into their choices not only have the best success in keeping themselves focused on those projects but also on making an impact on issues where billions of dollars could easily be squandered.“With the really wealthy, they begin to realize their power and their ability to have impact,” said Ann Limberg, head for philanthropic solutions and the family office of U.S. Trust. “They don’t want to put a Band-Aid on it. They want to create change.”An admirable aspiration but not an easy one to fulfill. “For wealthy donors, the greatest challenge they have is finding what causes they care about and where they’re going to donate,” Ms. Limberg added.U.S. Trust and the Lilly Family School of Philanthropy at Indiana University found in a recent study that two-thirds of wealthy donors struggled with this decision.Most people who give to charity start off with donations to their alma mater, their house of worship or a hospital or social service agency that helped them, according to the annual Giving USA report, which found that charitable giving was up 2.7 percent, to $390 billion, in 2016.A separate report commissioned for the biannual Carnegie Medal of Philanthropy — of which Mr. Skoll is one of nine recipients this year — found that most philanthropists go through a six- to seven-step process in their evolution as philanthropists.What begins as reactive giving — a cause catches their attention, a friend asks for a donation — evolves into proactive charity, and for a few, the type of philanthropy and strategic giving that can bring about change.Vartan Gregorian, president of the Carnegie Corporation — which announced this year’s winners in June and will award the philanthropy medals in October — said the recipients were selected for having given consistently through their lives to causes focused on people. The medal serves to shine a spotlight on what they have done.Another of this year’s winners, Julian Robertson, the hedge fund pioneer who created Tiger Management, began giving early in his career to his alma maters, the Episcopal High School in Alexandria, Va., and the University of North Carolina. As his wealth grew, he said, he began expanding his giving to areas that could be seen as having a focus on education or research.He is active in funding the creation of charter schools in New York City and has made several large donations to Teach for America. He said he was also proud of the money he had given to cancer research.“You get it right some times on some things,” Mr. Robertson said.Philanthropists whose major giving rose out of their careers said it was a natural extension of their work.Kristine McDivitt Tompkins’s philanthropy came out of the culture in which she worked. She was an early employee at Patagonia, the outdoor apparel company, where she became chief executive. In the early 1990s, she married Douglas Tompkins, a founder of the North Face, another outdoor apparel company.Her life was intertwined with being outdoors and enjoying nature. Conservation and protection of the natural world was a logical extension of her philanthropy.Together she and Mr. Tompkins, who died in 2015, have donated millions of acres to Chile and Argentina for national forest land. This year, she worked with the government of Chile to turn 11 million acres — three times the size of Yosemite National Park — into national park land.“If we can finish up what we started, we’ll have 11 national parks created and 12 million to 15 million acres conserved,” Ms. Tompkins, also a Carnegie Medal winner, said. “I’m feeling good about what we’ve accomplished so far.”H. F. Lenfest, whose cable company was acquired by Comcast in 2000, said he looked to do the most good for institutions and places that had helped him, like Columbia University, where he went to law school, and the city of Philadelphia, where his cable company was based.But after he came to own Philadelphia’s two main newspapers and news website, Mr. Lenfest, another of this year’s Carnegie Medal winners, started to think about how he could ensure that the institutions remained viable.“I saw the erosion of circulation and advertising over the years, and it’s only a matter of time before printed newspapers go out of business,” he said. “I created the Lenfest Institute of Journalism to try to solve that problem of what will happen when the printed newspaper is no longer around.”He donated his media holdings to a nonprofit group, called the Philadelphia Media Network. And he donated additional money to the Lenfest Institute for it to do research on how news organizations can evolve as print media declines.Ms. Limberg of U.S. Trust said developing a philanthropic focus could involve defining the giver’s “value set” — an exercise that donors big or small could benefit from.She gave an example of a person who had been giving to mental health charities for years and wanted to do more but didn’t know how. After meeting with several neuroscientists, the donor focused his giving on autism research.“It’s about helping people get smarter about how they do it and make them feel like they’re evolving,” Ms. Limberg said.Mr. Skoll said that in the past 18 years he had made mistakes along the way. But what has kept him focused, he said, was “having a game plan from the start.”