https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/06/us/politics/annotated-executive-order-immigration-travel-ban.html
Analyzing Trump’s New Travel Ban - The New York Times
Executive Orders and Memorandums,Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Trump  Donald J
March 6, 2017
3589
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday morning approved a new travel ban executive order, replacing the one he issued in January that had spawned chaos nationwide and was blocked by federal courts. The new order bars entry of some people from six predominantly Muslim countries — Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen — for 90 days and suspends entry of some refugees for 120 days. But it carves out many exceptions and is less sweeping than the original. The administration hopes that the narrower order will survive court challenges.Here are some excerpts from the executive order, with comments by The New York Times. The full text of the order is available here.This is toned down from Mr. Trump’s original order, which invoked the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, even though none of the 19 hijackers were refugees or nationals of the countries targeted by the directive, which had also included Iraq.During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump flatly proposed banning Muslims from entering the United States. That evolved into his original order, which permanently barred Syrian refugees and temporarily barred entry of nationals from seven Muslim-majority countries, while prioritizing admission of refugees who are persecuted religious minorities — an exception that many understood to be an implicit reference to welcoming Christians from the Middle East. One of the federal judges who blocked the original order, citing its history and context, ruled that it likely amounted to unconstitutional religious discrimination.Mr. Trump’s original order blocked Iraqis, too, but his new one left them out. The Pentagon had lobbied the White House to drop Iraq from the list because the backlash was undermining the joint campaign to battle the Islamic State. The new order emphasizes that Iraqis who have battled ISIS have “earned enduring respect.” It also says that since the original order, Iraq has undertaken unspecified steps to improve travel documentation and information sharing.Obviously, officials screening visa applicants and refugees are already looking for security threats and already gather many types of information for that purpose. The order justifies undertaking this pause so officials can try to think up some additional category of information to ask for while vetting people from troubled countries.One of the controversies of Mr. Trump’s original order was that it swept too broadly, initially including green-card holders, people who already had valid visas, and refugees whose travel to the United States had already been approved. His new order specifically exempts numerous such categories of travelers. It also includes a potentially huge exception for everyone else: consular officials are empowered to permit new applicants to travel immediately on case by case.The original order shut down entry by most refugees for 120 days and barred Syrian refugees permanently. The new version is significantly watered down. Syrians are not singled out for a permanent ban, and refugees whose travel has already been approved may still come into the United States without delay. Like the original order, however, the new order caps the number of refugees who may be admitted each year at 50,000, down from 110,000 under President Barack Obama.Mr. Trump is directing the government to generate a regular cycle of news stories focusing people’s attention on crimes committed by noncitizens.