https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/sports/nfl-scores-schedule.html
N.F.L. Scores: Dallas Cowboys Have a Legitimate Quarterback Controversy - The New York Times
Football,National Football League
Oct. 16, 2016
3623
Here’s what we learned in Week 6 of the N.F.L. season:■ Dak Prescott is really good. Prescott, Tony Romo’s fill-in, threw for 247 yards and three touchdowns in a 30-16 Cowboys victory in Green Bay, and increased speculation that the job will remain his even after Romo returns.■ The N.F.C. East is for real. Dallas improved to 5-1, the Eagles (3-2) and Redskins (4-2) played a tough game against each other, and the Giants (3-3) were resilient in beating the Ravens. Last season, Washington won the sorry division at 9-7 and got whipped by Green Bay at home in the first round.■ The Patriots are worthy Super Bowl favorites. Pats haters held out hope that last week’s huge effort by Tom Brady was fueled by bitterness over his four-game suspension. Well, either his bitterness lasted two weeks, or he really is still the Tom Brady we all remember. Brady torched the Bengals for 376 yards in a 35-17 win.■ The Steelers are not worthy Super Bowl favorites. Pittsburgh looked bad on both sides of the ball in losing to a previously poor Dolphins team, 30-15. Ben Roethlisberger briefly left the game with an injury, and if he’s not healthy, the Steelers are a middle-of-the-pack team.■ After a huge win over red-hot Atlanta, the Seattle Seahawks once again look like the team to beat in the N.F.C. Last year’s team to beat, the Carolina Panthers, are 1-5 and searching for answers.The Cowboys beat the Packers in Green Bay, 30-16, in a game that drew attention for Dak Prescott’s record breaking and Mike McCarthy’s decision making.Prescott, who took over at quarterback for the Cowboys when Tony Romo broke a bone in his back in preseason, has played extremely well in leading the Cowboys to a 5-1 record. Early on against the Packers, he completed his 163rd straight pass without an interception to start a career, a new record. The previous record holder was Tom Brady. Prescott eventuallly threw an interception, but finished 18 for 27 for 247 yards and three touchdowns, outplaying Aaron Rodgers.Prescott’s strong start has led to open speculation that he will retain the starting job, even after Romo returns, as he is expected to do around midseason. The Cowboys have insisted Romo will reclaim the spot when he is ready, but every week that Prescott plays well increases the pressure on the decision. Athletes and fans alike took to social media to make the argument for keeping Romo on the bench:The Packers struggled in part because of some fouth-down decisions by coach McCarthy. Trailing 7-0, with a 4th-and-1 at the Cowboys’ 19, McCarthy elected to kick a field goal. Down 7-3, he kicked again on 4th-and-2 at the 25. Then, with a 4th-and-5 at the Cowboys’ 38 and trailing 10-6, he decided to go for it. Rodgers’s pass attempt fell incomplete.The Packers were trailing by 20-6 early in the fourth quarter when they found themselves with a fourth down and 10 at Dallas’s 16. Despite being in deep hole on the scoreboard, they went back to opting for points on the board, kicking a field goal that only closed them to within 11. The Cowboys responded with a touchdown drive to pull ahead, 27-9.Rodgers, the two-time M.V.P., continued to play below his standards. He missed open receivers, threw his fourth interception of the year, and fumbled near the end zone to kill a Packers’ drive in the fourth quarter. The Lambeau Field faithful let him have it with a chorus of boos late in the game. He hasn’t had a 300-yard passing game since Week 9 of last season.Seahawks Slug It Out With Falcons: Steven Hauschka’s 44-yard field goal with 1:57 remaining capped the 20th career fourth quarter or overtime comeback for Seattle quarterback Russell Wilson, and the Seahawks pulled out a wild 26-24 win over the Atlanta Falcons on Sunday. Here’s how they won.The Panthers had to win. Off to a 1-4 start a year after a dazzling 15-1 Super Bowl season last year, the team mounted a furious comeback against the Saints only to lose on a 52-yard field goal, 41-38.The 21-point deficit the Panthers overcame would have been the biggest in team history had they won.Drew Brees completed an 87-yard bomb to Brandin Cooks, to give the Saints a 14-0 lead. It was the second longest touchdown pass of the season. The longest, 98 yards, was also Brees to Cooks, against the Raiders. Brees was 34-49 for 465 yards in the wild game.After trailing 21-0, the Panthers came all the way back and scored a fourth-quarter touchdown to close the score to 31-30. Then they missed the extra point.But Cam Newton dove into the end zone with three minutes left after a long pass interference call and completed a 2-point conversion to tie the game at 38-38.There was enough time for one more New Orleans drive, which culminated in the 52-yarder by kicker Wil Lutz.Cam Newton, last year’s MVP, was 26-46 for 312 yards, two touchdowns and one interception. Carolina is now 1-5, quintupling last year’s regular season loss total. The Saints improved to 2-3.For a minute there it looked like Tom Brady and the New England Patriots might be in a little bit of trouble.A week after Brady played like Superman in his return from suspension, Andy Dalton of the Bengals was matching him pass-for-pass, and the Patriots held a slender 10-7 lead at halftime.But normal service resumed in the third quarter. Brady repeatedly found his old favorite, Rob Gronkowski, and the host Patriots raced into a comfortable lead they would not relinquish. Brady’s final numbers were again magnificent: 29-for-35 for 376 yards and three touchdowns. Gronkowski had seven catches for 162 yards and a touchdown. The Patriots won with ease, 35-17In the end it was not really a return to form for Dalton, who has struggled to match last year’s eye-opening numbers. Dalton finished 21-31 for 254. The Bengals, who have made the playoffs six of the last seven years, fell to 2-4.The Steelers’ fast start to the season came to a screeching halt as they were completely outplayed by the Dolphins, 30-15.Ben Roethlisberger went down with a left knee injury late in the first half. He left under his own power after being hit by Jordan Phillips, but he was limping. To make matters worse, he was intercepted on the play. Landry Jones came in to finish the half for Pittsburgh.Roethlisberger emerged for the second half though, and entered the game at the first opportunity. But the Steelers offense never got in gear.Roethlisberger was 19-34 for 189 yards. But the team was blanked in the second and third quarters, and a garbage time touchdown in the fourth was no help. The Steelers had been riding high at 4-1 and figured to have little trouble in Miami against the 1-4 Dolphins. Read more here.Chiefs Humble Raiders: With two weeks to stew over a lopsided loss, the Kansas City Chiefs went back to basics and put together a balanced offense that allowed the running game to shine. Spencer Ware ran for a career-high 131 yards and a touchdown, Alex Smith picked apart Oakland’s struggling defense and the Kansas City Chiefs shut out Derek Carr and the Raiders in the second half of a 26-10 victory Sunday. Here’s how the Chiefs won.Giants Snap Losing Streak: The Giants, winless in their three previous games, fumbled the football on their first offensive play of Sunday’s game against the Baltimore Ravens. They did not have a first down in the first quarter, when they fell behind by 10 points, a development that had sellout crowd at MetLife Stadium booing early and often.Then, in the second quarter, the Giants’ chief offensive weapon, wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr., jogged to the locker room with an injury.But if the dispiriting opening sequences of Sunday’s contest were all too familiar to Giants fans, who have endured four successive seasons without a playoff appearance, the rest of the game revealed a new Giants resilience. Led by two of the players who had been most maligned during the recent losing streak — quarterback Eli Manning and Beckham, who returned to the game — the Giants (3-3) stormed back twice to stun the Ravens (3-3) and earn a 27-23 victory. Read Bill Pennington’s report here.Redskins Beat Eagles: Kirk Cousins threw for 263 yards and two touchdowns and the Washington Redskins ran roughshod over one of the NFL’s top defenses in a 27-20 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday.The three-headed running attack of Matt Jones, Robert Kelley and Chris Thompson combined for 231 yards and a touchdown as the Redskins (4-2) won their fourth consecutive game. After starting the season 0-3, Washington has its best record through six games since 2008. Here’s how the Redskins won.Lions Beat Rams: The Detroit Lions are starting to turn around their season, finding ways to make enough plays on both sides of the ball in the final minutes to win. Matt Prater made a tiebreaking, 34-yard field goal with 1:29 left and Rafael Bush followed with a victory-sealing interception two plays later, giving Detroit a 31-28 win over the Los Angeles Rams on Sunday. Read more here.The nation had been watching San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick kneel during the national anthem this season in protest against police brutality and racism. What it hadn’t seen in quite a while was Kaepernick throw a football, or scramble out of the pocket.In his first start since last season, Kaepernick gave San Francisco 49ers fans something to cheer about with a 53-yard score to Torrey Smith in the second quarter of the 49ers game against the Buffalo Bills on Sunday. It was a brief celebration. Glass-half-empty Niners fans probably noticed that Smith was wide open on the play, but Kaepernick underthrew him, and he had to come back and catch it at his heels.Ultimately, the 49ers were thoroughly outplayed by the Bills, who won, 45-16. Kaepernick, who kneeled again during the anthem, finished an uninspiring 13-29 for 187 yards and that lone touchdown.