https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/22/world/asia/thailand-military.html
Thai Military Gathers Rivals for Talks on Standoff - The New York Times
Bangkok (Thailand),Defense and Military Forces,Martial Law,Niwattumrong Boonsongpaisan,Suthep Thaugsuban,Thaksin Shinawatra,Prayuth Chan-ocha,Thailand
May 21, 2014
9149
BANGKOK — A day after imposing martial law, the Thai military on Wednesday put leaders of the country’s polarized political camps in the same room in an effort to end six months of political deadlock.The military summoned the participants in a television announcement. It was first time that all sides of the political conflict had attended talks together. The army invited the country’s caretaker government, the two main political parties and protest leaders from both pro- and antigovernment movements.The meeting, which lasted two and a half hours, was “positive” said a military spokesman, Col. Weerachon Sukhonthapatipak. “Of course, the very first day we were not able to come up with a solution,” he said. A second meeting was planned for Thursday afternoon.In a possible sign of hesitation by the elected government, Thailand’s caretaker prime minister, Niwattumrong Boonsongpaisan, declined to attend the meeting and sent cabinet ministers in his place.But Suthep Thaugsuban, the leader of the movement that has blocked elections and tried to overthrow the government, consented, an apparent shift for the movement, which is backed by the Bangkok establishment. Until Wednesday, Mr. Suthep had repeatedly refused negotiations with the government.One key person was not at the table: Thaksin Shinawatra, the founder of the governing party and the target of the antigovernment movement’s ire. Mr. Thaksin, a former prime minister, was deposed by the military in a 2006 coup and resides overseas. His movement has won every election since 2001 but has antagonized the traditional elites in Bangkok. His sister Yingluck Shinawatra was ousted as prime minister this month.The military imposed martial law on Tuesday using an obscure, century-old law that is so archaic it allows the army to inspect telegraph messages and requisition “beasts of burden.”The military has acted quickly in stamping out what it considers partisan news media, banning at least 14 television channels and 3,000 radio stations. As part of its wide-ranging attempts to control debate in the country, the army also issued an unusual order prohibiting the media from interviewing anyone “not currently holding an official position.”Critics say the military’s attempt to control the news media in a freewheeling country like Thailand is pointless. Thai newspapers on Wednesday carried skeptical comments about martial law and Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, the head of the army.“The cycle of military intervention with 18 coups in eight decades has to end for Thais to grow up and learn to take responsibility for themselves,” said Pravit Rojanaphruk, a columnist for The Nation newspaper. “You may mean well, General Prayuth. And I hope this is the case. But what you are doing now is a disservice to Thailand.”Criticism also came from within state agencies. Supinya Klangnarong, a member of the National Broadcast & Telecommunication Commission, predicted that the army’s attempts to censor debate would fail.“Martial law does not cover new technology like the Internet. It’s not realistic and practical,” she said.Ms. Supinya said she agreed with the army’s decision to suspend partisan broadcasters who carry hate speech. But she called for a “thorough discussion” of further censorship.“If the army is trying to convince us that this is not a coup and they are going to be the mediator, they have to ensure that free debate is allowed,” Ms. Supinya said.