http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/11/nyregion/3-rivals-join-a-protest-but-just-one-wants-to-be-arrested-and-is.html
De Blasio Arrested, Just as He Wanted - The New York Times
de Blasio  Bill,Weiner  Anthony D,Liu  John C,Long Island College Hospital,Elections  Mayors,State University of New York,New York State Nurses' Assn,Service Employees International Union,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,New York City,Shutdowns (Institutional)
July 10, 2013
4906
Bill de Blasio, a candidate for mayor, was slapped into plastic cuffs on Wednesday and driven off in a white police van from outside the Midtown Manhattan offices of the State University of New York chancellor, where Mr. de Blasio led a demonstration against the possible closing of Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.Mr. de Blasio was joined at the protest by two other Democratic primary mayoral rivals, Anthony D. Weiner and John C. Liu, who stayed in the background and avoided arrest. But the police did take away more than a dozen protesters, including Stephen Levin, the City Council member from Brooklyn Heights, which the hospital serves, and two leaders of the New York State Nurses Association.The nurses’ group and another union, 1199 S.E.I.U., had organized the morning demonstration and invited the candidates. The powerful 1199 union has endorsed Mr. de Blasio for mayor; the nurses’ association has not endorsed a candidate.Plans for the protest – and for Mr. de Blasio and others to commit civil disobedience and invite arrest – had been leaked the night before to reporters, who were sworn to silence. But by 10 a.m. on Wednesday, the New York Police Department had massed five vans, several police cars and multiple officers in front of the SUNY offices on 42nd Street, opposite the New York Public Library.As the standoff began, Mr. de Blasio, all 6-foot-5 of him, took up his position like a beacon outside Bryant Park, surrounded by about 100 shouting, clapping and tambourine- and guitar-playing hospital workers and community activists.Suddenly who should appear but Mr. Weiner, in blue shirt sleeves, looking uncertain about whether to line up behind his opponent. Instead, he hugged an 1199 member, Monet Simmons, who happily hugged him back.“What’s happening, what’s going on buddy?” Mr. Weiner asked Mr. Simmons. “You making trouble?” (“As a union, we support Bill de Blasio, but I know him personally,” Mr. Simmons said of Mr. Weiner.)Then, with impeccable political instincts, Mr. Weiner turned and gave Mr. de Blasio a big bear hug for the cameras – both television and tourist — as well.Mr. de Blasio then led the crowd across 42nd Street, where he blocked the door to the SUNY offices, chanting, “No hospital, no peace.” He demanded that SUNY “tell us the truth” about its finances, and accused it of not caring about the health of brownstone Brooklyn residents and of wanting to close the hospital so it could be sold for its real estate value. (It has harbor views of the Statue of Liberty.)A SUNY staff member monitoring the protest said, “No comment,” and Mr. de Blasio was hustled off by police officers shortly before 11 a.m. He said later he had been taken to the Midtown South police station, where he shared a cell with Mr. Levin, and was released with a disorderly conduct summons about 1:30 p.m.Mr. Weiner and Mr. Liu, meanwhile, faded into the crowd of protesters and disappeared.