http://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/20/business/at-t-s-cable-deal-the-overview-comcast-wins-bid-for-at-t-s-cable.html
AT&T;'S CABLE DEAL: THE OVERVIEW; COMCAST WINS BID FOR AT&T;'S CABLE - The New York Times
MICROSOFT CORP,AT&T CORP,COMCAST CORP,AOL TIME WARNER,ROBERTS  RALPH J,ARMSTRONG  C MICHAEL,ROBERTS  BRIAN L,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,TELEVISION,INTERACTIVE (TWO-WAY) TELEVISION,TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS,COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET
Dec. 20, 2001
9815
AT&T agreed yesterday to sell its cable television business, the nation's largest, to the Comcast Corporation for about $47 billion in stock.The deal would create a cable giant with more than 22 million subscribers, almost twice the size of the next-biggest cable operator, AOL Time Warner, which was a losing bidder in the deal.The combined company, to be called the AT&T Comcast Corporation, would have lines into one-fifth of the nation's homes -- links capable of providing not only cable television programs but high-speed Internet access and, in some cases, telephone service. The company could also be well positioned to roll out new generations of services like interactive television.The Internet and interactive television possibilities were a lure to Microsoft, which backed Comcast in the deal. If the merger wins the approval of regulators and shareholders, Microsoft would have its most direct link yet into households across the United States. [Page C1.]Despite combining the No. 1 and No. 3 cable companies, with a presence in 41 states and a concentration in the populous band from central New Jersey to Washington, the merger is not expected to encounter serious obstacles among regulators.  [Page C8.]Policy analysts noted last night that recent court decisions favorable to the cable industry and the leanings of the Bush administration have created a new era of deregulation in the communications industry.Comcast beat out both AOL Time Warner and Cox Communications, the fifth-largest cable company, in a bidding war that essentially began last summer. As the media and communications sectors come under the control of a small coterie of huge companies, AT&T's cable unit was a powerful lure to companies trying to expand their scope.For Comcast, based in Philadelphia, and the Roberts family, which controls the company, the agreement caps four decades of deal making that began when Ralph J. Roberts sold his family's belt business for the money to begin laying television cables.''This transaction is the most rewarding and important step Comcast has taken since I started the company nearly four decades ago,'' Mr. Roberts said in a statement yesterday. ''Combining Comcast with AT&T Broadband is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that creates immediate value and positions the company for additional growth in the future.''Mr. Roberts's son, Brian, Comcast's president, will be chief executive of the merged company, which will be based in Philadelphia. The chairman of AT&T Comcast will be AT&T's current chairman and chief executive, C. Michael Armstrong.If completed, the deal would end AT&T's three-year foray into the cable business and return that company to its roots in providing telephone and data communications services.Mr. Armstrong, a former I.B.M. and Hughes Electronics executive, took over as AT&T's chairman in 1997 with a mandate to remake the company. Moving quickly to establish direct links with homes, he assembled AT&T's cable operation by acquiring Tele-Communications Inc. and the MediaOne Group.After spinning off its wireless communications business this summer and completing the deal to sell the cable operation, AT&T -- or what remains of it -- will look fairly similar to the company that Mr. Armstrong took over four years ago. The company will focus on business customers and plans to issue a new stock to track its consumer businesses next year.If yesterday's deal is completed at the end of next year, as expected, Mr. Armstrong's agreement to join the cable company means that he will leave the AT&T Corporation before his scheduled retirement in May 2003. David W. Dorman, AT&T's president, appears to be the front-runner to succeed Mr. Armstrong.Mr. Armstrong declared victory yesterday. ''This is a leap forward in realizing a vision that thousands of AT&T people have worked toward -- bringing greater choice in affordable broadband video, voice and data services to even more American homes,'' he said. ''AT&T Broadband and Comcast can accomplish more together than we could alone.''Even though the Roberts family will own less than 1 percent of the company, it will control 33 percent of the company's voting interests -- effectively controlling the company because the other 67 percent will be distributed among millions of individual and institutional investors. AT&T and Comcast will split the board seats evenly.In addition to AT&T's cable business, Comcast will also be acquiring AT&T's 25.5 percent stake in Time Warner Entertainment, a complicated partnership between AT&T and AOL Time Warner that the two companies have been trying to unravel for years.AOL Time Warner has wanted to buy that stake, but has been reluctant to meet AT&T's asking price. It is likely that AOL Time Warner will take up negotiations with AT&T Comcast over Time Warner Entertainment, which includes some of AOL Time Warner's cable systems, the HBO cable channel and Warner Brothers film studio.Comcast already has stakes in cable programming, including QVC, E Entertainment and the Golf Channel.Comcast will assume about $20 billion in debt as part of the deal, debt that had accumulated from AT&T's cable acquisitions since 1997. Comcast will also assume $5 billion of preferred AT&T stock owned by Microsoft, which will be converted into 115 million AT&T Comcast shares.Yesterday's deal values AT&T's cable subscribers at $4,500 each -- about $400 more than the average price AT&T paid per subscriber when it acquired TCI and MediaOne.Shares of Comcast fell 94 cents, or 2.41 percent, yesterday to close at $38.09, apparently in expectation that the company would win the auction, taking on a sizable debt and diluting the value of its shares. AT&T shares rose 15 cents, to $16.80.Under Mr. Armstrong, AT&T assembled its cable properties with the dream of competing against the Bell local phone companies by offering television, data and video services over cable lines. But investors grew impatient with what they perceived as AT&T's slow progress in upgrading the cable systems it had acquired to provide the advanced services it had promised.Under intense pressure from Wall Street, AT&T announced last year that it would spin off its cable unit as an independent company in 2002.For the financial sharks in the media business, that announcement was tantamount to blood in the water. In July, Comcast made an unsolicited $44.5 billion bid for the AT&T cable unit. Under the terms of that offer, the Roberts family would have controlled about 42 percent of the vote at the combined company, rather than the 33 percent under yesterday's deal.AT&T rejected Comcast's July proposal and instead opened itself to bids from a number of suitors. While some, like the Walt Disney Company, had only a cursory interest, AOL Time Warner, Comcast and Cox remained in the running until yesterday.