https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/24/business/global/dartmouth-president-is-obamas-pick-for-world-bank.html
College President Is Obama’s Pick for World Bank Chief - The New York Times
World Bank,Kim  Jim Yong,Obama  Barack,Appointments and Executive Changes
March 23, 2012
592
WASHINGTON — The White House on Friday named Jim Yong Kim, the president of Dartmouth College and a global health expert, as its nominee to lead the World Bank.That makes Dr. Kim the front-runner to take the helm of the multinational development institution on June 30, when its current president, Robert B. Zoellick, will step down at the end of his five-year term. Tradition has held that Washington selects the head of the World Bank and Europe the leader of its sister institution, the International Monetary Fund, since they were founded during World War II.Dr. Kim’s name was not among those widely bandied about since Mr. Zoellick announced his plans to move on last month. Highly respected among global health experts, Dr. Kim is an anthropologist and a physician who co-founded the nonprofit Partners in Health and a former director of the department of H.I.V./AIDS at the World Health Organization.“The leader of the World Bank should have a deep understanding of both the role that development plays in the world and the importance of creating conditions where assistance is no longer needed,” President Obama said Friday. “It’s time for a development professional to lead the world’s largest development agency.”In a statement, Timothy F. Geithner, the Treasury secretary and an alumnus of Dartmouth, praised Dr. Kim, with whom he is friendly: “Development is his lifetime commitment and it is his passion. And in a world with so much potential to improve living standards, we have a unique opportunity to harness that passion and experience at the helm of the World Bank.”The White House had scrutinized Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts; Lawrence H. Summers, the former Treasury secretary and Obama economic adviser; and Susan E. Rice, the United States ambassador for the United Nations, for the World Bank job.But all three might make good candidates for high-ranking administration positions in the event that President Obama won a second term. Moreover, President Obama wanted to name a development expert, particularly one with experience aiding the world’s poorest. That led the White House to select Dr. Kim.President Obama was particularly drawn to Dr. Kim’s work in poor countries, a senior administration official said, as well as his personal history as an immigrant from South Korea, a country that was impoverished 50 years ago but has since vaulted into high-income status.As a public health advocate, Dr. Kim has a reputation as a data- and design-driven technocrat, one who pushes for programs to ease poverty and cure disease to prove their efficacy.While working with Partners in Health in Lima, Peru, in the mid-1990s, Dr. Kim helped develop a treatment program for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, the first large-scale treatment of that disease in a poor country. He also spearheaded the successful effort to reduce the price of the drugs used to treat this form of tuberculosis.He later led the division of the World Health Organization devoted to eradicating H.I.V./AIDS, where he headed an initiative to provide three million people living with the disease with antiretroviral treatment.“Jim’s really good at looking at the evidence for a certain intervention, and then applying that knowledge to specific programs,” said Paul Farmer, a co-founder of Partners in Health, in an interview.That technocratic reputation followed Dr. Kim to Dartmouth College, colleagues said, where he is also known for encouraging students to think globally.“Most every college president has to get up and say it’s important to go off and change the world,” said Jonathan S. Skinner, an economist at Dartmouth. “But there aren’t many college presidents who’ve gone out and have changed the world.”Dr. Kim has received some criticism from students and professors while at Dartmouth, including over his handling of hazing in the school’s fraternities and over the perception that he was not fully committed to staying at the institution in the long term.He is known for his self-deprecating sense of humor, cracking witticisms in meetings and even singing and dancing at a Dartmouth student show.His ascension to the head of the World Bank is not a sure thing. But the United States supported the candidacy of Christine Lagarde, the former French finance minister, to head the International Monetary Fund last year, presumably assuring that Europe would support Dr. Kim’s nomination.In recent years, major emerging economies have criticized the decades-old gentlemen’s agreement giving the United States control of the World Bank’s presidency. The Group of 20 countries has called for a fairer, more transparent selection process for the top posts at the World Bank and the I.M.F., and the World Bank itself has reaffirmed its commitment to an open and merit-based process.“We are trying to ensure that we start having a process whereby we can choose the most qualified person, regardless of nationality,” said Amar Bhattacharya, the director of the Group of 24, an umbrella group of developing countries. “The struggle is about the credibility of the process as much as it is about who wins.”The response to Dr. Kim’s nomination was largely positive. But some development experts raised some questions about his experience and his vision for the institution.“The nomination suggests, on the face of it, a vision of the bank that is narrower than might be ideal,” said Nancy Birdsall, the president of the Center for Global Development, a research organization based in Washington.Dr. Kim clearly had experience perfecting individual programs and working in very poor countries, Ms. Birdsall said. But she added that it was not clear how Dr. Kim would tackle transnational issues affecting the poor, like climate change and corruption. She also questioned how Dr. Kim viewed the bank’s role in rapidly growing emerging economies, like China, Brazil, India and Turkey.Dr. Kim will seek to answer some of those criticisms and drum up support in a global tour that will begin shortly, a senior administration official said. Ms. Lagarde, the I.M.F. chief, did the same to support her candidacy last year.Dr. Kim is not the only candidate for the World Bank job. On Friday, Angola, South Africa and Nigeria put forward Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the Nigerian finance minister and former World Bank official. José Antonio Ocampo, a former finance minister of Colombia and a professor at Columbia University in New York, has also been mentioned.The World Bank intends to select its new president in time for the World Bank and International Monetary Fund spring meetings in April.Dr. Kim, who was awarded a prestigious MacArthur Fellowship in 2003, was born in Seoul, South Korea, in 1959 and moved with his family to the United States when he was 5. He graduated from Brown University in 1982, earned an M.D. from Harvard University in 1991 and received a Ph.D. in anthropology there in 1993.He was the first Asian-American to head an Ivy League institution when he took the Dartmouth post in 2009.