https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/14/us/politics/andrew-puzder-labor-secretary.html
Democrats Set Sights on Blocking Trump’s Labor Secretary Pick - The New York Times
Puzder  Andrew F,United States Politics and Government,Labor and Jobs,Wages and Salaries,Fast Food Industry,Appointments and Executive Changes,Senate,Trump  Donald J,United States
Feb. 14, 2017
6680
WASHINGTON — Democrats failed to block an education secretary who had no experience in public schools. They have gotten little traction against a nominee to lead the Energy Department who once called for the agency’s abolition, or a potential head of the Environmental Protection Agency who has made a career out of suing it.But on Thursday, Democrats will have their best chance to topple one of President Trump’s cabinet choices when Andrew F. Puzder testifies before the Senate to become the country’s next labor secretary.And from a history of suppressing wages to an undocumented housekeeper to tales of marital strife that include a tape from the “Oprah Winfrey Show” of an incognito abuse victim, opponents will have their ammunition. Already, four Republican senators have declined to commit to backing Mr. Puzder, enough to block his confirmation if, as is likely, Democrats remain united in opposition.“They ought to withdraw the nomination of Puzder before he further embarrasses this administration and further exposes the hypocrisy of President Trump,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader.Signs of the fast-food restaurant executive’s vulnerability have been swirling in recent weeks as his hearing was delayed several times because of the complexity of his vast financial portfolio, including millions of dollars in preferred stock in the parent company of Hardee’s and Carl’s Jr., CKE. Protesters have swarmed those fast-food restaurants across the country to express outrage that the person chosen to look out for America’s wage workers has a record of fighting for owners’ interests. On Thursday, more than a thousand federal contractors are planning to converge on the Capitol to demonstrate in opposition to Mr. Puzder.“Puzder literally likes robots more than workers and does not believe in raising the minimum wage,” said Ben Jealous, a former head of the N.A.A.C.P. and founding board chairman of the labor group Good Jobs Defenders, who is organizing protests.Mr. Jealous said Republicans should remember that Mr. Trump promised to protect working-class Americans, adding, “If the G.O.P. in the Senate want to guarantee that he keeps his promise, then Puzder should not be confirmed.”The proceedings are also likely to get personal. Opponents of Mr. Puzder have made his contentious divorce from nearly three decades ago an issue, surfacing since-recanted allegations from his former wife that he abused her in the 1980s.Pressed by the liberal group Campaign for Accountability, a Missouri circuit court on Tuesday night released some of Mr. Puzder’s divorce records detailing the original allegations of abuse. Those court documents offered a glimpse of an episode on May 22, 1986, when Lisa Puzder accused Mr. Puzder of “striking her violently about the face, chest, back, shoulders and neck, without provocation or cause.”According to the records, the encounter caused “bruises and contusions to the chest, back, shoulders and neck,” two ruptured disks, two bulging disks and “severe and permanent damage.”George Thompson, a spokesman for Mr. Puzder, said on Tuesday evening that the contents of the filing were not new and that Mr. Puzder and his former wife are now friends. He called the release a smear campaign.“Perpetuating these retracted 30-year-old allegations and an impulsive decision to appear on a talk show is nothing more than a desperate attempt to tarnish Andy Puzder at the expense of Lisa and their family,” Mr. Thompson said.The allegations that Mr. Puzder had assaulted his former wife have been circulating around in Congress, where lawmakers of both parties gathered in the past week for screenings of a 1990 episode of the “Oprah Winfrey Show” in which Mr. Puzder’s former spouse appeared in disguise to discuss her story of abuse. The Oprah Winfrey Network has not made the video publicly available — it provided a special copy for senators — but discussion of the old footage has been buzzing among senators and congressional staff members ahead of the hearing.“It really raised some very troubling issues and I think has to be the equation of how we view this candidate,” Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, said in an interview Tuesday.The effect of the tape remains unclear. Four Republican senators on the committee — Johnny Isakson of Georgia, Tim Scott of South Carolina, Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska — have not committed to backing Mr. Puzder.Ms. Collins said on Monday that she was “reviewing the other information that has come to light” and that she looked forward to exploring it at the hearing. Mr. Scott said that he wanted to see how Mr. Puzder performed in person before making a decision. However, he acknowledged that he had concerns about Mr. Puzder’s failure to pay taxes on an undocumented housekeeper.Although Mr. Puzder is not the first of Mr. Trump’s nominees to fail to pay taxes or employ an undocumented immigrant, critics say that the oversights are particularly egregious for a businessman who would lead the Labor Department. Ms. Murray said that the revelation about Mr. Puzder’s housekeeper, which emerged only last week, was ironic considering Mr. Trump’s promises to crack down on illegal immigration.Democrats are also expected to seize upon comments that Mr. Puzder has made in support of automation and his stances against overtime pay. The provocative television commercials featuring bikini-clad models eating juicy hamburgers that were produced by CKE during his tenure are also likely to come up. One news release in 2011 explained the company’s marketing strategy when it blared: “We believe in putting hot models in our commercials, because ugly ones don’t sell burgers.”Despite all of the criticism of Mr. Puzder, whose brash personality is sometimes compared to Mr. Trump’s, most Republicans and members of the business world have rallied around him.State restaurant groups in Maine and Alaska have sent letters to Ms. Collins and Ms. Murkowski to express support for Mr. Puzder, hailing him as an experienced job creator. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce sent a letter to lawmakers arguing that Mr. Puzder’s executive experience would make him less likely to impose onerous regulations.“He will know better than any other secretary the impact that the department’s actions have on companies and the economy,” wrote Neil Bradley, the group’s chief policy officer.Even Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee, emerged from the sidelines this week to urge Republicans to stick with Mr. Puzder. Pointing to the nominee’s humble beginnings, Mr. Romney said he was certain that Mr. Puzder could relate to the plight of regular workers.“He knows how hard Americans work, and how much that work means to them and their families,” Mr. Romney wrote in a Facebook post.If Democrats are unsuccessful at blocking Mr. Puzder at the committee on Thursday, it will not be their final opportunity to pick off one of Mr. Trump’s top nominees. Representative Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, who has been tapped to be the White House’s budget director, is expected to get a vote on Thursday from the full Senate.Mr. Mulvaney raised eyebrows at his confirmation hearing when he admitted that he did not pay taxes on a nanny his family employed. His backing of deep cuts to military spending rankled some Republicans, such as Senator John McCain of Arizona, the Armed Services Committee chairman, who accused him of showing insufficient support for the military.Mr. McCain described Mr. Mulvaney as “anti-defense” on Tuesday while he lamented his vote to remove troops from Afghanistan. The margin of error for Mr. Mulvaney’s confirmation appeared to have narrowed.“I’m voting against him — most likely,” Mr. McCain said.