https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/14/books/review/swan-huntley-we-could-be-beautiful.html
In a Debut Thriller, Suspicion Mars an Upper-Crust Engagement - The New York Times
Books and Literature,We Could Be Beautiful (Book),Huntley  Swan (1982- )
Aug. 12, 2016
4194
WE COULD BE BEAUTIFULBy Swan Huntley340 pp. Doubleday. $25.95.At age 43, Catherine West — the narrator of Swan Huntley’s debut novel, “We Could Be Beautiful” — has almost everything she’s ever wanted. She has an impeccably decorated West Village apartment, an eye-popping trust fund and an extraordinarily patient support staff. She has a job/vanity project in the form of a high-end stationery store, and she has a body that, we are told, has really held up. Despite it all, Catherine is unhappy. She longs for a husband and a family, to the point of misery, but she is aware that her wealth complicates her right to be so despondent: “If you had money, you had no excuse. And people didn’t feel sorry for you either. . . . They said, If you’re sad, can’t you buy a new house somewhere, can’t you take a trip? Don’t you have so many choices, so many resources? They said, We’re not stupid and we know you can’t buy happiness, but we also know you sort of can, too.”Catherine’s hyperactive self-awareness serves multiple functions throughout “We Could Be Beautiful.” With her privilege pre-emptively critiqued, readers don’t have to worry about doing it for her; instead, we can relax into the pleasures of gawking at, envying and deriding her 1 percent lifestyle, which is almost as much fun. Catherine’s acknowledgment of her own absurdities, as well as her perilous proximity to stereotype, is also a source of much of the book’s humor: “I hated to be such a cliché, but if I had nothing to do, I shopped. Which was bad, but better than drugs. Of course I was grateful to have the luxury to buy whatever I wanted, but I also knew I didn’t fully understand material things like other people did. By ‘other people’ I obviously meant poorer people, which also happened to be most people. . . . I actually resented my good fortune sometimes — I may have had distorted, oversimplified notions that romanticized a hunter-gatherer, stranded-on-a-desert-island-in-a-good-way(?)-type life — and this, the resenting, proved that I didn’t get it at all.”By suggesting she doesn’t deserve our pity, Catherine goes a long way toward earning it. From the beginning, she’s haunted by a sense of emptiness that seems darker and weirder than loneliness. “I had always felt incomplete,” she explains, “even as a small child. I have a memory of myself, age 4, cheek pressed against the cold black smoky design of the bathroom tiles, my hot breath fogging the smooth marble, thinking, I am dead. . . . I am dead and this is a dream.” The adult Catherine’s world isn’t devoid of companionship — she goes shopping with her best friend; she has lunch dates with her sister and their ailing mother; she banters with her housekeeper and her trainer and her preternaturally committed massage therapist — but there’s something emotionally bankrupt about most of these dynamics. A mercenary, transactional feeling inflects even the most intimate of Catherine’s relationships, and this problem seems deeper and more interesting than anything another person can solve.Enter William Stockton: monstrously tall, enigmatically accented and endlessly devoted to Catherine. William’s family, it turns out, are old friends of Catherine’s; their love, apparently, is meant to be. William quickly moves in, then proposes. Catherine tries to relax into her happiness, telling herself that, yes, some people are indeed this lucky. Huntley is adept at deploying Catherine’s good fortune as a fulcrum of suspense. After all, doesn’t Catherine deserve to have something bad happen to her, just once? And isn’t it inevitable that, sooner or later, her luck will run out?William is, of course, a little too perfect from the get-go. Catherine can find no fault with him beyond his baffling devotion to Roman Catholicism and his much maligned dachshund, Herman. Everything about William — his precision, his formality (he doesn’t even swear!), his relentless sincerity — invites us to anticipate something truly sinister. Much of the book’s dramatic tension comes from waiting for the other shoe to drop.Many of the early warning signs, however, seem minor. William is vague about his past, intensely private about his possessions. His artistic taste seems ­symbolically ominous. Catherine’s mother dislikes him, ostensibly because he broke one of her vases when he was a child — but, then again, Catherine’s mother dislikes almost everyone, and she has Alzheimer’s. Much more ominous is a brutal sexual encounter early in the engagement, which Catherine forcefully ­dismisses. William just got carried away, she tells herself. Huntley deftly establishes Catherine’s tendency to rationalize and repress. Her robust capacity for denial — and her bracing streak of self-loathing — seem to be the truest aspects of her ­personality.Instead of dumping (or reporting) William, Catherine obsesses over the arrangements for her marriage. This is a particularly lively stretch of the book. Here and elsewhere, Huntley writes with wit and verve, excelling at economically hilarious descriptions. Catherine’s wedding planner is “a short, flashy ­Colombian with carnie hands and thoughtfully contoured eyebrows.” At her shop, a beleaguered employee’s “chunky highlights gave the impression that several skunks were parked on top of her head. This was a common New Jersey mistake.” When William coaxes Catherine into attending Mass at a musty old cathedral, she ­notices a portrait of Jesus “frozen in the stance of the most flamboyant shot-putter I had ever seen.”Less engaging is the hazy, unconvincing threat looming in the distance. Catherine is nagged by the sense that she and William have met before, though she can’t remember when. In search of clues, she hunts down her mother’s old journal, which contains a surprising amount of information relevant to Catherine’s present circumstances. (Similarly, many of the secondary characters seem to exist mainly to populate Catherine’s life rather than their own.) The journal leads Catherine to her old nanny, who reveals a secret about William that’s so odd and unsatisfying that we tend to agree when she concludes it probably isn’t true. At the very least, we think, there must be a whole lot more to the story.This mystery is far less intriguing than Catherine’s deteriorating mental state. She grows increasingly anxious and paranoid — to the puzzlement of kindly William — and her descent keeps the reader engaged, even in the absence of conventional sources of suspense, until almost the end of the novel. By then, “We Could Be Beautiful” has so resolutely subverted the conventions of a psychological thriller that it seems not to be one at all — or if it is, it’s of an entirely different sort. Perhaps, we tell ourselves, nothing is really all that wrong; perhaps the person destroying Catherine’s life is Catherine herself.This gaslighting feat is one of the book’s best achievements, and it suggests that more complicated possibilities lie ahead. Instead, the narrative swerves, hastily committing to the terms of a more straightforward novel, then failing to satisfy them. There are abrupt revelations — one obvious, one ludicrous — followed by a pat resolution. But does it really matter if we find the plot retroactively disappointing when there’s been so much to enjoy in the journey to the finish line? The book’s strengths lie elsewhere: in the zippy social satire, in the portrait of a dysfunctional family (Catherine’s relationship with her sister turns out to be especially affecting) and, most of all, in Catherine’s voice — strange and funny and engaging to the very end.