https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/arts/poster-passion-a-rock-n-roll-fans-lifelong-quest.html
Poster Passion: A Rock ’n’ Roll Fan’s Lifelong Quest - The New York Times
Swartz  David (1962- ),Posters,Pop and Rock Music,Collectors and Collections,Auctions,Art,The Rock Poster Society
May 4, 2017
953
David Swartz, an intrepid collector of rock ’n’ roll concert posters and memorabilia, has amassed over 5,000 first-edition pieces. His collection is worth a total of well over $10 million, or about 9.4 million euros. Mr. Swartz, 54, was one of the heirs to the Timberland outdoor clothing and footwear brand, which was sold in 2011. He spent 14 years in the family business until 2000, when he left to pursue his interests and investments, including his passion for music mementos.He has spent almost 30 years competitively searching for, and obtaining, posters that highlight iconic bands of the 1960s, psychedelic venues and clubs, and geographic areas in New England. (He is originally from Boston.) He now lives in New York City with his wife, Diana Castellanos, and their two children. Following is a condensed and edited version of a conversation with Mr. Swartz.Q. Why posters?A. Posters document and frame specific moments in history, which, when you look at them, bring you back to a time that’s gone. What I collect is the soundtrack to the most exciting period of the 20th century.What are some favorites?I own the Beatles ’65 & ’66 at Shea Stadium; Dylan ’63 at Town Hall, which was considered his first major concert venue gig; Joplin ’68 at the opening of Bill Graham’s Fillmore East; the Stones ’64 at Carnegie Hall, which was the final two shows of their very first U.S. tour; and an original ’62 poster for J.F.K.’s birthday at the Garden where Marilyn sang him “Happy Birthday.”Which fairs have you been to?Paper, record, antique, and sports. I’ve done flea markets, and auction houses. The most important one for this industry is TRPS, The Rock Poster Society. The annual show is in October in San Francisco.Best find at a fair?Out of the 200 or 300 posters I’ve bought at fairs, most of which were haphazardly tossed under tables or thrown in milk crates, my best two were a ’65 Beach Boys surfing poster, which I bought for $200 and is worth $2,500; and the Who at the Music Hall, ’68, for which I paid $175 and is worth $7,000 to $10,000.How do you navigate the fairs?They can be overwhelming but are invaluable. It’s where you meet legitimate resources, players, dealers, artists, and can network. Lap first, take everything in, and know what people are selling. See if artists are doing signings. These can cost an additional $100 to $150, or as much as half more than the original asking price. But it can be worth it. Look for rarity, condition, dates, artist credit, low number of printing and first prints, which are always better investments than reprints or second printings.What’s something no one tells you?There was a time when posters were plentiful, now they’re not, so people are looking for strategic advantage. Collectors, and some dealers, don’t want to share information about what’s valuable, or give hints as to how to search or where to look. But you can still find something unique or special.First significant hunt?Eleven years ago, I’d found this guy in Buffalo who had this amazing collection of posters from the Boston area. I was hit hard with the flu, and it was snowing. I’d spent six years talking with him, hoping he would invite me to his home, so when he finally said, “O.K.,” I couldn’t turn it down. I felt horrible, but got on a plane. My wife thought I was crazy, but I left with 15 to 20 posters. The thrill of the chase is sometimes better than the prize, but this was equally as great.Which poster would you save in a fire?The Hendrix “wire hair” ’69, done by the artist Günther Kieser. The colors are rich and resonate with Jimi’s aura. It’s a rare original that’s visually compelling, historical, and perfectly crosses over from poster to art, as Kieser’s work has been showcased in the MoMA, among other museums.First poster you bought?The Who, ’73, done by the artist David Singer, which I found at an antique store on Newbury Street. I was in my 20s and paid $100 or $150, which was a big investment back then. As a kid, I would go to Harvard Square to buy bootleg vinyls. Posters were a natural evolution from the audio format to the visual one.How do you find these artifacts? It’s a research game and hunting people down. Being in the field you develop a network of dealers, collectors, promoters and artists who created the posters. I’ve bought college yearbooks to find the student body and social committee responsible for putting on the shows in the hope of locating something. Then there’s eBay, poster shows, art fairs and auction houses.Most expensive poster you own? I have a few from the ’50s called boxing-style, which were done in big, block lettering. Really rare ones had photos. Four exist of Elvis from his 1956 tour. Each is worth $500,000 to a million dollars. I’m fortunate to have three.Biggest regret? There was a Beatles ’66 Shea Stadium oversized poster, which was in great condition. Maybe six exist. It was offered to me 10 years ago for $50,000, which was a staggering amount, so I didn’t buy it. At auction shortly after it went for $133,000, the most money a poster has sold for publicly.