http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/21/us/new-details-released-in-sandra-blands-death-in-texas-jail.html
New Details Released in Sandra Bland’s Death in Texas Jail - The New York Times
Bland  Sandra (1987-2015),Texas,Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Waller County (Tex),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks,Women and Girls,Prisons and Prisoners
July 20, 2015
4596
HEMPSTEAD, Tex. — The authorities on Monday offered new details of the final hours of the life of a Chicago-area woman who was found hanged in a jail cell in Texas three days after she was arrested during a traffic stop.A Waller County sheriff’s official described a timeline for the jail cell of the woman, Sandra Bland, that started early in the morning of July 13, when she refused a breakfast tray around 6:30 a.m., until a jailer found her hanging shortly after 9 a.m. For about 90 minutes during that period, there was no movement by jail officials in the hallway leading to her cell, according to a video that the authorities released from a camera inside the jail.“This investigation is still being treated just as it would be a murder investigation,” the Waller County district attorney, Elton Mathis, said. He said the case is likely to be turned over to a grand jury expected to be impaneled in August.Mr. Mathis said he expected investigators to release a dashboard camera video of Ms. Bland’s arrest on Tuesday.“There are too many questions that need to be resolved,” Mr. Mathis told reporters, saying that the Bland family “does make valid points” that Ms. Bland seemed to “have a lot of things going on in her life for good.”Capt. Brian Cantrell of the Waller County Sheriff’s Office said that Ms. Bland replied “I’m fine” when a jailer was conducting rounds shortly after 7 a.m. and later inquired about how to make a phone call. But shortly after 9 a.m., a female jailer saw Ms. Bland hanging in her cell and summoned help. Other officers and emergency medical personnel tried unsuccessfully to administer CPR.The death of Ms. Bland has set off protests and calls for a federal investigation from her relatives and supporters, who have sharply disputed the official ruling by the Harris County medical examiner that her death was a suicide. They said Ms. Bland, who was black, was a vocal opponent of police brutality, and they have requested an independent autopsy.United States Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, a Texas Democrat, on Monday urged the Justice Department to investigate the death.“Someone’s child died; some young woman died that this family loves, and we owe them an explanation,” Ms. Jackson Lee said in asking Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch to begin an inquiry. “I cannot sense under the facts that I know now that a 28-year-old young woman, excited about a new job, posed a threat to anybody in Waller County, including any law enforcement officer.”The Texas Department of Public Safety has said the Texas Rangers and the F.B.I. are also investigating the case.Hempstead, the county seat of Waller County, is about 60 miles northwest of Houston. Ms. Bland had come to the county from her home in Naperville, Ill., for a job at Prairie View A&M University.Ms. Bland was arrested on July 10 in Waller County by an officer with the Department of Public Safety on a charge of assaulting a public servant. She had been pulled over for failing to signal a lane change.A lawyer for the family, Cannon Lambert, told NBC News that the dashcam video showed that the encounter between Ms. Bland and the state trooper became confrontational after she refused the officer’s demand to put out a cigarette.The authorities said she hanged herself with a plastic bag, resulting in death by self-inflicted asphyxiation.A handful of supporters of Ms. Bland gathered Monday in sweltering midday heat outside the Waller County Sheriff’s Office, which holds the jail cell where she died, continuing a vigil that began last week. Brandi Holmes of Houston held a sign reading, “What happened to Sandy Bland?” Another sign read, “State police profiling — you stopped her for what.”The Rev. David Madison, president of the A.M.E. Ministers Alliance in Houston, said the demonstrators were united behind the calls for a Justice Department investigation.“We’re not accepting the report of death suicide,” said the minister, who is pastor of the Greater Ward A.M.E. Church in Houston. “Sandra Bland had just moved from Chicago to Houston to start a new job. You don’t come all the way to Houston just to kill yourself.”The death has fueled additional tensions over the treatment of African-Americans in police custody and comes roughly three months after the death of Freddie Gray, 25, an unarmed African-American in Baltimore who died from injuries sustained while being transported in a police van.Ms. Jackson Lee was among a bipartisan group of Houston-area officials who were in Hempstead over the week to express concern about the case and meet with members of Ms. Bland’s family. The group included Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, a Republican; State Senator Rodney Ellis, a Houston Democrat; and State Senator Lois Kolkhorst, a Republican from Brenham.