https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/smarter-living/5-cheap-ish-things-that-could-disproportionately-improve-your-life.html
5 Cheap(ish) Things That Could Disproportionately Improve Your Life - The New York Times
Headphones and Headsets
July 16, 2017
491
Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. Editor Tim Herrera emails readers once a week with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox every Monday morning.I never would’ve thought a thin, black, six-foot iPhone charging cable would change my life.Yet here we are, and that magic cable is the Amazon Basics lightning-to-USB iPhone charging cable (also available in micro-USB). This little wonder of PVC and copper wiring solves an irritatingly modern non-problem problem: the three-foot leash that is the stock charging cable usually bundled with most smartphones.Cue the tiny violin.But once you’re able to roam just a little farther, you realize how much that three-foot leash affects the way you navigate your living space. How you orient yourself at home while charging your phone changes. The happiness of lying on my couch while charging far outweighed the cable’s $7.99 price tag.As with all of the items in this list, you never knew you wanted one, but once you have it there’s no going back.In collaboration with Wirecutter — a New York Times company — here are four other under-$50 items that might similarly improve your life.White Noise MachineIt seems counterintuitive: For a better night’s sleep, turn on something noisy. But these little devices can make it easier to fall asleep and stay asleep by fighting noise with noise: “The white noise basically creates a wall of sound defense, protecting you from intruding noises that could engage your brain during sleep.”Wirecutter’s pick is the LectroFan by ASTI. Sleep tight.Wireless HeadphonesWireless headphones can also solve more mini non-problem problems: There are no wires to get caught on your jacket and yank the buds out of your ears; no plug to get worn down and start shorting out; and, most important, you’re free of untangling those eternally tangled earbud wires.The Anker Soundbuds Sport IE20 is Wirecutter’s favorite under $50. And if you’re a runner like me, the JLab Epic 2 headphones are simply fantastic; I bought a pair last week and they’ve been great.A Truly Great ScrewdriverUnless you’re among those gifted few who are truly handy around the house, you can generally get away with a few reliable, multipurpose tools. A screwdriver that does it all is one of them.The MegaPro 13-in-1 Multi-Bit Ratcheting Screwdiver is Wirecutter’s favorite.Travel MugThis mug. THIS MUG. I cannot say enough about this incredible mug. It’s a weird thing to be obsessed with, but I love my Zojirushi stainless travel mug. Fill it with coffee at 8 a.m., and your coffee will still be hot at 4 p.m. What a world. But that’s just me. If you’re an obsessive consumer of coffee, tea or water, opting to have a dedicated vessel for your drink of choice will enhance your daily routine.What’s a cheap-ish item that has improved your life? Let me know! Write me at tim@nytimes.com and put “My item” in the subject line, or tweet me @timherrera.Have a great week!— Tim• Where Does the Time Go? You Can Find Out, if You Dare: An activity tracker helped the Sketch Guy discover how much time he was frittering away. And now he is equipped to make changes.• Want to Raise Your Child to Love Reading? Read These Secrets: Our children’s books editor talks about our new guide for getting children hooked on books and celebrates how kid lit has become more diverse.• Where to Stream Emmy-Nominated Shows: “Westworld” leads this year’s nominations with 22. The HBO show and many other nominees are available to watch at home.• Short Answers to Hard Questions About Climate Change: The issue can be overwhelming. The science is complicated. We get it. This is your cheat sheet.• How to Have a Perfect Road Trip: Create music playlists, pack snacks and a phone charger, and build in time for sightseeing.• 10 New Books That Times Editors Think You Should Read: Suggested reading from critics and editors at The New York Times.• Don’t let the stress of your job ruin your personal life.• Though some stress can actually be beneficial.• Try harder. Fail more.• Some things to consider before quitting a job you like.• How decision fatigue makes you pay.• The questions you can’t be asked in a job interview.• Your digital clutter feels an awful lot like your physical clutter.• Stop spending too much money on food.• Don’t let unemployment derail your retirement savings.• You can use office supplies in your kitchen.• Why do we always use PDFs?