https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/10/sports/tennis/french-open-casey-dellacqua-womens-doubles.html
Australia’s Casey Dellacqua Chases Elusive Title With Persistence and Pride - The New York Times
French Open (Tennis),Tennis,Dellacqua  Casey (1985- ),Court  Margaret
June 10, 2017
6523
PARIS — With many of her tennis peers rallied around her, Casey Dellacqua has reached another Grand Slam doubles final. On Sunday, she will be hoping that No. 7 brings her luck at Roland Garros.Dellacqua, who has lost all six of her previous appearances in Grand Slam women’s doubles finals, advanced on Friday at the French Open with her partner, Ashleigh Barty. They will face the top-seeded pair, Bethanie Mattek-Sands and Lucie Safarova.“Obviously, I’ve done it many times — and I’ve won a mixed title — but I haven’t got one of the women’s doubles,” Dellacqua said after she and Barty, an unseeded pair of Australians, won their semifinal in three sets against the sixth-seeded pair from the Czech Republic, Lucie Hradecka and Katerina Siniakova.“I’m not concerned, in that sense, because there’s plenty of people who can’t sit here and say that they’ve made seven Grand Slam finals,” said Dellacqua, 32, who has reached four of her women’s doubles finals with Barty, 21. “So in that respect, I’m very proud of my achievements.”After Dellacqua and Barty lost in the finals of the three other Grand Slam tournaments in 2013, their partnership went on hiatus, as Barty left tennis to escape the grind of the tour (and to play cricket).With a new partner, Yaroslava Shvedova of Kazakhstan, Dellacqua reached the finals of the French and United States Opens in 2015, but then had to take a long break to deal with postconcussion symptoms after an on-court fall.“I’m just thrilled that Ash and I have given ourselves another opportunity to win one another time around,” Dellacqua said.An unassuming player who has rarely sought the spotlight, Dellacqua stepped into the center of a controversy in the days before the French Open. She responded on Twitter after Margaret Court, Australia’s 24-time Grand Slam singles champion, said late last month that she would avoid flying on Qantas because of its support for same-sex marriage, which is not legal in Australia.Dellacqua posted an image of a letter that Court had written to a newspaper in 2013, about the birth of Dellacqua’s first child with her life partner, Amanda Judd.“Personally, I have nothing against Casey Dellacqua and her ‘partner,’” said Court’s letter, which was not widely distributed until Dellacqua’s post. “I simply want to champion the rights of the family over the rights of the individual to engineer social norms and produce children into their relationships.”“Enough is enough,” Dellacqua wrote on Twitter above the image of the letter. Her post was shared thousands of times, by many fellow tennis players among others.Court, now 74 and a pastor, had spoken out against gay rights several times before. But few players had responded until the Twitter post called attention to her criticism of Dellacqua, who is from Court’s hometown, Perth, and had played tennis with her as a child.Several players called on the Australian Open to change the name of Margaret Court Arena. Others simply spoke of their affection for Dellacqua.“I love Casey,” said Jaimee Fourlis, 17, who recently spent time with Dellacqua and her family while traveling with the Australian Fed Cup team. “And two women can parent as good as a man and a woman. I’ve seen the way Casey is parenting, and her two kids are unbelievable. They’re incredible, they’re so cute. So, yeah, there’s nothing to say. That kind of shows it for itself.”Dellacqua said she did not find the support she received particularly noteworthy.“Regardless of what’s happened, I feel like I get along with most people on tour,” she said. “I am who I am, and I always like to treat people the way that you want to be treated.”Court continued her criticism of Dellacqua during the Open, accusing her and others of bullying and comparing their career achievements: “Casey has never won a Grand Slam. I won 24.”Court was referring to her singles titles; she won 64 altogether. Dellacqua won the 2011 mixed doubles at the French Open with Scott Lipsky, an American. They were unseeded but beat the defending champions in the final.Dellacqua said Court’s comments had nothing to do with the way she and Barty had played at Roland Garros. The pair, after all, had just won at the WTA event in Strasbourg, France. But Barty said the matches here had turned out to be a port in the storm.“When we step on the court, for us it’s just been really nice to focus about what we’re doing,” Barty said. “When we’re on the court, we’re not thinking of anything but what’s ahead.”