http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/08/sports/tennis/maria-sharapova-wins-french-open.html
Resurgent Maria Sharapova Holds Off Simona Halep to Win French Open - The New York Times
Tennis,French Open (Tennis),Sharapova  Maria,Halep  Simona
June 7, 2014
9415
PARIS —  Before the women’s final at the French Open on Saturday, much of the discussion was about Simona Halep’s year.Halep, 22, was playing for her first Grand Slam title after rising from No. 57 to No. 4 in the rankings and winning seven tournaments since losing in the first round of last year’s French Open.But her opponent, Maria Sharapova, the 2012 champion here and the 2013 runner-up, had come a long way in a year, too.After the French Open last year, she lost in the second round at Wimbledon, missed most of the rest of the season with a shoulder injury, changed coaches twice and slipped to eighth in the rankings, from fourth.She returned to the tour at the beginning of this season still motivated to add to her trophy case.“I don’t think I would form a new team together and that I would go through the efforts of trying to come back if I didn’t have it,” she said late last year. “It’s a lot of work, a lot of work, and I wouldn’t be doing it if I didn’t feel strongly about what my goals are and what I feel I can accomplish.”After a slow start, she did not make winning the French Open one of those goals, she said. But in a surprise at this stage in her career, clay was her springboard.Sharapova won her second French Open in three years with a 6-4, 6-7 (5), 6-4 victory over Halep for her third clay-court title in a 19-1 season on the surface.It is Sharapova’s fifth career Grand Slam championship, but for the first time, she has won the same major twice. She has more victories at the French Open (50) than at the other three Grand Slam tournaments.“If somebody had told me that I’d win at some stage in my career, that I’d have more Roland Garros titles than any other Grand Slam, I’d probably go get drunk,” she said Saturday. “Or tell them to get drunk, one or the other.”The 6-foot-2 Sharapova and the 5-6 Halep presented a tantalizing matchup of power versus guile, experience versus new blood, and they did not disappoint, giving Roland Garros its first three-set women’s final since 2001.But just as she had all tournament, Sharapova raised her game when she was down.She was trailing by a break early in the first set but rallied to win it. Halep served for the second set twice but could not close out Sharapova until a tiebreaker. When Sharapova lost her lead in the third set, she mercilessly took it back, winning the last eight points of the match.“This is the toughest Grand Slam final I’ve ever played,” Sharapova said.Halep was trying to become the first Romanian woman to become a Grand Slam champion since her manager, Virginia Ruzici, won the French Open in 1978. Halep, who will rise to No. 3 in the new rankings on Monday, had not lost a set in the tournament but also had not faced a top-10 opponent.After being broken in an erratic first game, Sharapova looked as if she was going to lose another first set, as she had in her three previous matches. But she reeled off five straight games in the middle of the set. Broken when she served for the set at 5-3, Sharapova zoned in for the next game and broke back to take the set.When Sharapova broke Halep early in the second set, she seemed on the verge of pulling away. But she was broken in the next game.The battle of wills was on. Sharapova won a game despite having three double faults. At 4-4, Halep won a remarkable 20-shot rally to earn a break point and converted. Given a chance to serve for the set, she was broken when a Sharapova shot clipped the net cord and dropped just over the net.Halep broke Sharapova again for another chance to serve out the set, but she tightened up. She was broken at love and with emphasis, when Sharapova smashed a poor lob attempt right back at Halep.In the ensuing tiebreaker, Sharapova jumped to a 5-3 lead but made four straight errors, and Halep took the second set.They traded breaks to open the third set, giving them six breaks of serve in a row. But at 1-2, Sharapova saved two break points to hold, then quickly built a 0-40 lead in the next game and eventually broke Halep to go up, 3-2. But Sharapova’s 11th and 12th double faults helped Halep even the set at 4-4.On the first point of the next game, Halep and the chair umpire Kader Nouni had a disagreement after he overruled a line judge’s out call and gave Sharapova the point rather than replaying it.“After that, I couldn’t manage my nerves maybe and I couldn’t stay very focused for the next points,” Halep said. “That’s it. That’s life.”Sharapova broke her at love from there, capping it with a beautiful backhand to the corner.Serving for the match at the three-hour mark, Sharapova won with conviction, crushing a forehand that Halep knocked wide.Sharapova sat on the court on her knees, leaned back, pumped her fists and screamed. Then she climbed into her box for a group hug with her coach, Sven Groeneveld; her hitting coach, Dieter Kindlmann; and her physical therapist, Jérôme Bianchi.Halep sat in her chair with a towel over her head and cried. But a few minutes later, she was smiling.“I have to be happy, to smile, because I did everything on court,” Halep said, adding: “I didn’t expect three sets, three hours, but it happened, and I’m really happy that I could stay very long time on court. The atmosphere was incredible. Of course, forever I will not forget this match.”Sharapova called it the most emotional victory of her career.“I feel like as I get older I appreciate those situations so much more,” said Sharapova, who won her first Grand Slam title as a 17-year-old at Wimbledon 10 years ago.When she got her hands on the trophy, she hugged it tightly. When she sat down for her postmatch news conference, she hugged the trophy again, laying her head on it tenderly.“There is a reason why I haven’t been to one shop while I have been in Paris,” she said of the trophy. “It’s because I want this. I haven’t eaten many macarons, either. It’s because I want this.”To get that trophy, Sharapova played a high-risk, high-reward game. She had 46 winners but 52 unforced errors to go with the 12 double faults. There were 16 breaks of serve in the match.But she has now won her last 20 three-set matches on clay, including eight at the French Open, because she refuses to give up — on a match or on improving her clay-court game.“We’ve had champions in the past not be good on a surface, whether it’s the Spaniards on grass or the Americans on clay,” said Lindsay Davenport, one of those Americans who struggled on clay. “Most of the time, players just throw the towel in. Pete Sampras, I’m sure, never spent months and months trying to become a better clay-courter. And what Sharapova has done is amazing.”