http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/05/world/asia/05taiwan.html
Flights Begin From China to Taiwan - The New York Times
China,Taiwan,Airlines and Airplanes,International Relations
July 5, 2008
966
TAIPEI, Taiwan — The first regular nonstop weekend flights between China and Taiwan landed here Friday,  in the latest breakthrough in cross-strait relations that are rapidly improving  under the island’s new president, Ma Ying-jeou.The first flights from the mainland carried 662 passengers on package tours from five cities. The number of travelers is expected to grow    to as many as 3,000 a day.Several nonstop flights also carried passengers from Taiwan to the mainland on Friday.In Taiwan, the Chinese tourists were greeted with a warm welcome that included traditional lion dances and performances by Taiwanese aboriginal groups.“We’re all one family,” said Liu Shao-yong, at Taipei’s Taoyuan airport. Mr. Liu, the president of China’s Southern Airlines, was one of the pilots on the first flight from Guangzhou to Taiwan.This is the first time that “ordinary” Chinese citizens will be allowed to visit Taiwan as tourists. Before, only Chinese who were permanent residents of a foreign country or those with special permission for business or cultural exchanges could visit the island.China considers Taiwan to be part of its territory and has long threatened to use force to back up its claim.Analysts said the flights and the increase in tourism were part of a significant easing of tensions.“It marks a big step for closer interactions between the people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait,” said Alexander Huang, an expert in cross-strait security at Tamkang University in Taiwan. “This will be the first time for ordinary Chinese people to see Taiwan for themselves. I think that, over time, Taiwanese will feel more comfortable with their cousins on the other side.”Some Chinese got an immediate taste of Taiwan’s freedoms. Two members of Falun Gong — a sect combining Buddhist and Taoist influences that is banned in China — held up signs to welcome the tourists at one airport.The round-trip weekend flights are nonstop. Previously, most people traveling across the strait had to land in a third location, such as Hong Kong, adding hours of travel time.The two sides agreed to the weekend charter flights and more tourism in talks in Beijing in June.Political analysts said that Mr. Ma’s election in March made the flights and the tourist deal possible. His predecessor, Chen Shui-bian, angered Beijing by trumpeting Taiwan’s distinct identity and seeking to cement its de facto independence. Mr. Ma ran on a platform that included expanding economic ties and improving relations with the mainland.His government is rapidly moving to make good on those promises.Earlier this week, Taiwan allowed currency exchange on the island between Chinese yuan and the New Taiwan dollar to ease travel. It expanded Taiwan-China travel by ferry via the islands of Kinmen and Matsu to all Taiwanese citizens. And on Thursday, Taiwan’s government said it would allow mutual funds to invest a higher percentage of their money in China-listed stocks.Other economic measures on the agenda include lifting restrictions on corporate investment in China, allowing Chinese investment in Taiwan’s property market, and allowing Taiwanese banks to do retail business in the mainland. Hopes are high on the island that the tourism and other measures will help Taiwan’s lackluster economy. Those hopes have become more urgent as Taiwan has raised fuel prices and seen its stock market fall dramatically by as much as 20 percent in Mr. Ma’s first six weeks in office.