https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/nyregion/a-co-working-space-in-soho-15-years-in-the-making.html
A Co-Working Space in SoHo, 15 Years in the Making - The New York Times
Co-Working,Real Estate (Commercial),Architecture,Parks and Other Recreation Areas,European American Bank,Zion  Robert L,SoHo (Manhattan  NY),Omari Properties LLC
Sept. 19, 2016
2939
With its broad expanses of glass, the gleaming white six-story structure at 433 Broadway is obviously modern, though it seems comfortably at home with its nearby 19th-century cast-iron cousins. It is one of the first co-working spaces in New York built from the ground up, rather than having been renovated from another use.Though the $10 million project opened this spring, it has been under development for 15 years, longer perhaps than the “co-working” coinage has existed for shared office space.For more than 35 years, the site of 433 Broadway was occupied by the oddest structure among the cast-iron lofts of SoHo: a one-story, hexagonal, vaguely neo-Colonial bank set in a vest-pocket park.The landscape architect Robert L. Zion, designer of Paley Park in Midtown Manhattan, had suggested the idea of a bank-in-a-park to Arthur T. Roth, the chairman of the Franklin National Bank, who embraced it.So did Thomas Hoving, who was the city’s parks commissioner when the plan was announced in 1966. “My job is to find parks and open spaces any way I can,” he said. “The best way is free.”In 1973, the site was included in the SoHo-Cast Iron Historic District, placing it under the regulatory authority of the Landmarks Preservation Commission. Just as fatefully, Franklin National collapsed in 1974, after Mr. Roth was forced out and the Italian financier Michele Sindona had taken over.Omari Properties bought the site in 1996 from the European American Bank, the successor to Franklin.The partners in Omari are Eddie Omri (spelled without an “a”) and his brothers Uri Omari and Manny Omari. Mr. Omri’s son-in-law Edan Abehsera is the chief executive of Cubico, as the co-working space is called.Omari Properties felled the trees in the park and, for about five years, ran a flea market there. In 2001, the owners hired RKTB Architects to design a new building. In 2002, the landmarks commission permitted the demolition of the bank. The next year, it approved a new structure of six full floors and a penthouse.At first, Omari planned a hotel. Plans were switched to a conventional office building, with a steel frame and a facade made of Alucobond, aluminum sheets bonded to a polyethylene core.As the foundations were being excavated in 2011, the abutting building at 48 Howard Street began to move. This has been the home and studio since 1964 of the artist Christo and — until her death in 2009 — his wife and collaborator, Jeanne-Claude.Christo, who is best known in New York for “The Gates” in Central Park and who recaptured the world spotlight this summer with “The Floating Piers” in Italy, said he could feel the vibration next door when the excavation was taking place. Cracks developed in the basement, though there was no other damage. City inspectors found that 48 Howard Street was leaning one to two inches out of plumb.“We had to get the Buildings Department to issue a stop-work order in court,” Christo said. A settlement was reached under which Omari installed bracing for Christo’s building, with Christo picking up the cost.Work resumed. This year, Omari began marketing 433 Broadway as Cubico — with glass-enclosed cubicles from 90 square feet ($850 a month) to 350 square feet ($6,000 a month). Mr. Abehsera said that about 120 companies now occupy the building and that 85 percent of the office space was leased.The project has taken up nearly one-third of the career of Carmi Bee, the president of RKTB Architects. “I only stuck with it because I knew it would be a good building on a prominent site,” he said.Mr. Bee smiled — a bit wistfully, a bit ruefully — as he finished telling the tale of 433 Broadway.“What’s 15 years?” he asked. After all, RKTB’s project at 455 Central Park West, incorporating the former Towers Nursing Home, took 25.