https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/13/nyregion/where-stop-and-frisk-tactic-is-business-as-usual-skepticism-prevails.html
Where Stop-and-Frisk Tactic Is Business as Usual, Skepticism Prevails - The New York Times
Police Department (NYC),Brownsville (Brooklyn  NY),Racial Profiling,Search and Seizure,Scheindlin  Shira A,Police,New York City
Aug. 12, 2013
1424
In the Brooklyn neighborhood perhaps most accustomed to the stop-and-frisk policing strategy, word that a federal judge had ruled that the practice violated the constitutional rights of minority New Yorkers prompted some residents to say that they understood — and even supported — the rationale behind the strategy, though not how it unfolded around them day after day.Judge Shira A. Scheindlin’s decision only affirmed what many people in Brownsville said they already knew: that the Police Department practice violated their rights with tactics that amounted to racial profiling. Yet only some called for an end to the practice.“We all want security, but we don’t want security by treading on your constitutional rights,” said Winston Cooper, 62, who told of being stopped about eight times, sometimes just for re-entering his building. “I would understand if there’s a genuine thing — that’s cool,” he added. “But don’t tell me every night, people are coming in, needing to be stopped.”Distrust of the police runs deep in the Brownsville Houses and the Langston Hughes Houses, which are part of a police service area in East Brooklyn that had 3,020 police stops in the first quarter of 2013. And young black men (and some not so young), who have borne the brunt of the stops, said they had little hope that even as the rule book of stop-and-frisk policing changed, the practice would change along with it.“Thank God,” muttered Steve Doughty, 38, when he heard about the judge’s decision, standing outside the Brownsville Houses on Blake Avenue. He said he had been stopped several times, once for walking between his building and his parked car while wearing a hoodie.He quickly dismissed any possibility of an improvement. “It’s what’s instilled in the cops,” he said. “They just have this instilled racism in them.”Yet like others interviewed in Brownsville on Monday morning, he said he also appreciated the need for a strong police presence to combat crime in this, one of the city’s most dangerous neighborhoods. He added, however, that large, frequent police patrols should be enough to deter those looking for trouble.Others said they could see the merits of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s argument that stop-and-frisk tactics could be an invaluable crime-fighting tool, one that city officials insist has helped cut crime in New York to record lows. But if the idea sounded good, they said, the way the practice played out in a real-life, high-crime neighborhood amounted to a perversion of justice.“They stop you for the stupidest stuff,” said Eugene Myers, 57, “but for the real stuff, it seems like the police don’t even go after that.” He had been stopped for wearing a hoodie or for resembling suspects in other crimes, he said, but assaults in the hallways of his building seemed to go unnoticed.While several said that guns and drugs were major problems in the neighborhood and that stops were a legitimate way to address them, they said that in their experience, the stops targeted appearances and behaviors that had little or no relation to crime.“Do what you’re supposed to do, but stop stopping people who aren’t doing anything,” said Dante Johnson, 43, unspooling a list of innocuous activities he said he had seen people stopped for, like riding bikes and walking dogs.In a courtyard of the Brownsville Houses, a group of young men gathered around, one holding a smartphone, reading aloud a news account of the court ruling. They had each been stopped dozens of times, they said, and all said they believed the Police Department had institutional quotas for stopping and frisking; a few, reflecting the neighborhood’s endemic wariness of the police, said the practice was a conspiracy among officers to give young black men records and turn them out of their homes.“They’ve been talking about the stop-and-frisk thing for five, six, seven years and nothing’s changed,” said Gregory Campbell, 41. “They just say it, say it, say it, but the cops come out here and keep doing it. It’s going to take a lot more than just talk.”And to the residents of Police Service Area No. 2, that was all Judge Scheindlin’s decision was: talk.“The judge is in the chamber,” said Demetrius Denson, 35. He said that though officers might be instructed to use less force or stop fewer people, officers could sidestep any new rules by provoking people on the street into acting nervously or suspiciously.He lived in Brownsville until about three years ago, he said, but moved upstate because “it’s too much like a jail.”Taurel Price, 22, said he had racked up more than $400 in traffic tickets from being pulled over in his own car.“It might change in certain areas,” he said, “but definitely not in Brownsville.”