https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/us/politics/republicans-tax-cuts-service-cuts-for-poor.html
A Risky Mix: Cutting Taxes for the Rich and Aid for the Poor - The New York Times
Taxation,United States Politics and Government,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Trump  Donald J,Bannon  Stephen K,Norquist  Grover G,Republican Party,Mnuchin  Steven T
July 12, 2017
59
WASHINGTON — The tough lessons are piling up for Republicans as they struggle to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but one stands out as a harbinger of things to come: Tax cuts for the rich, paired with reduced services for the poor, are a politically unpalatable combination.Unable to get the first version of their health care bill off the ground, Senate Republicans are expected to release a revised bill on Thursday that would keep two of the taxes on the wealthy that were imposed by President Barack Obama’s health law: the 3.8 percent tax on investment income and the 0.9 percent surcharge on Medicare taxes, both imposed on high-income earners.Republicans have long said that these taxes are killing jobs and strangling economic growth, but the juxtaposition of repealing hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes for the wealthy and cutting deeply into Medicaid has become untenable.That Republicans may now preserve these taxes could bode poorly for their hopes of introducing deep tax cuts later this year that analysts say could disproportionately benefit the wealthiest Americans.“It’s not necessarily the cutting taxes on the rich; it’s the cutting taxes on the top end and offsetting that with spending reductions,” said Kyle Pomerleau, director of federal projects at the Tax Foundation, a research group. “Republicans need to realize how challenging it is to do that.”The Republican plan to overhaul the tax code continues to be a work in progress, with legislation not expected to emerge until September after a succession of delays and setbacks.So far the White House and congressional leaders have said they hope their plan will not add to the deficit over a period of 10 years. But ideas to broaden the tax base or eliminate deductions to offset tax-rate reductions have been met with fierce resistance from business groups and lobbyists.Conservative lawmakers have instead called for spending cuts on programs that benefit the poor so that they can avoid raising taxes on anyone. Last month members of the hard-line conservative House Freedom Caucus said that food stamps and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families should be restructured as part of the tax plan.The experience with the health bill suggests this will be a tough sell in the Senate.Since releasing a one-page outline in April, the Trump administration has been offering mixed signals about its tax plan. According to a news report on the website Axios this month, Stephen K. Bannon, President Trump’s chief strategist, has been pushing for a tax increase on the rich in which the top individual rate would rise above 40 percent from 39.6 percent. However, Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, dismissed the idea this week and said the White House wanted to cut taxes for everyone.Mr. Mnuchin has also recently walked back his promise from earlier this year that the wealthy would see no absolute tax cut under the tax legislation that Mr. Trump ultimately signs. Democrats had tried to hold him to the promise by calling it the “Mnuchin rule.”Breaking that rule could be hard to avoid. A report released on Wednesday by the Tax Policy Center showed that Republicans might face a problem with overhauling taxes that is similar to the one they are facing with health care, with the policy benefiting those who are already the most prosperous. The tax research group analyzed the rough tax details that the Trump administration has released and found that 40 percent of the total $7.8 trillion tax cut would flow to the wealthiest 1 percent of all households.One thing that could make the calculus easier for Republicans is simply abandoning their aspirations for tax “reform” and settling for tax cuts.“I think that the dynamics of a bill that cuts benefits at the same time as it reduces taxes for others may be different from the dynamics of a bill that just cuts taxes,” said Itai Grinberg, a tax expert at Georgetown University’s law school.The leftover Affordable Care Act taxes could also complicate the tax overhaul in procedural ways. One reason that Republicans chose to address health care first is that budgeting rules would allow them to make more sizable cuts to tax rates without adding to the deficit if the health taxes were already out of the way.Even though some Republicans are disappointed that any taxes introduced by Mr. Obama remain, they will probably get another chance to erase them. Jonathan Traub, a tax expert at the accounting and consulting firm Deloitte and a former staff director for the House Ways and Means Committee, said Republican tax writers in Congress would be under pressure to find a way to address those taxes when they move on to tax legislation. Doing so outside the context of health care, Mr. Traub said, could be easier.“The argument is being made that the health care law is a tax cut for the wealthy being paid for by spending cuts for the poor,” Mr. Traub said.For the most conservative Republicans and for anti-tax crusaders like Grover Norquist, the Affordable Care Act taxes should be killed because they never should have been enacted at all.Mr. Norquist, the president of Americans for Tax Reform, said the decision to keep the taxes was “stupid,” but he predicted that disappointment from small-business groups would help Republicans eventually see the light.“There’s a tax cut coming, so we’ll get this,” Mr. Norquist said. “This is three-dimensional chess.”