http://www.nytimes.com/1998/10/02/nyregion/restoration-liberates-grand-vistas-and-ideas.html
Restoration Liberates Grand Vistas, and Ideas - The New York Times
GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL (NYC),RESTORATION AND REHABILITATION,RAILROADS,STATIONS AND TERMINALS (PASSENGER)
Oct. 2, 1998
9037
Lasers, acrobats, a symphony for orchestra and train whistle, flamenco dancers, a mariachi band, a 1 1/2-ton cast-iron bald eagle, vintage trains and even politicians: These were among the attractions yesterday and today in New York's celebration of the rededication of Grand Central Terminal.Such a grand and gaudy civic vaudeville show is entirely in keeping with the spirit of this, the palace of all train stations. Designed by Warren & Wetmore with Reed & Stem, Grand Central is the mecca of preservationists, commuters and city-lovers alike.And the restoration of the 1913 landmark, by the New York firm of Beyer Blinder Belle, is a triumphant piece of work.With the possible exception of Central Park's renovation, started in the 1980's under the direction of Elizabeth Barlow Rogers of the Central Park Conservancy, this is the greatest feat of historical preservation in the city's history. The restoration of the main concourse's ceiling alone, the perfect sky for city-dwellers who seldom get to see much of the real one, easily deserves aerial somersaults by the Big Apple Circus trapeze artists scheduled to soar this evening beneath its twinkling stellar constellation.But this year also is the 20th anniversary of the Supreme Court decision that affirmed the city's right to protect Grand Central and, by extension, other landmark buildings, from destruction. That is reason for the whole town to burst into flamenco. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the terminal's owner, should be serenaded by mariachi players for investing $200 million in a project that conforms so enthusiastically to the spirit of the court's decision.This week's festivities focus on the completion of work on the main concourse, the station's architectural heart. The restored Waiting Room, now used for exhibitions, parties and other events, opened two years ago, and the food court taking shape on the lower concourse will not be completed until next year. Impressive as the building's major public spaces are, however, Beyer Blinder Belle's greatest accomplishment has been to reveal that Grand Central is above all a monument to movement. The Mercury figure in the sculpture group facing Park Avenue South is not an idle idol. The entire building is governed by ideas of freedom of access and circulation.Who doesn't love taking a taxi on the viaduct that wraps around Grand Central before plunging through the arches in the Helmsley Building? The ride offers an exhilarating liberation from the urban grid. The restoration has clarified the degree to which that sense of freedom permeates the building itself.The architects have contributed two main architectural features to the main concourse. The new eastern staircase, which threatened to diminish the room's amplitude, has the opposite effect of magnifying it. By increasing access to the concourse balconies, it adds an observation deck that renders the scene below an epic urban spectacle.Even more impressive is the uncovering of the ramps, located just behind the ticket windows, that lead down to the lower level and its fabled Oyster Bar. Instead of acting as a barrier, the ticket booths now serve as a screen, enlarging the space and the vista of possibilities. Along with the escalators leading to the lobby of the Metlife Building, the ramps enhance the terminal's identity as a place of vertical as well as horizontal circulation, a hub where trains, subways, elevators, taxis and pedestrians briefly converge before setting off in different directions.Beyer Blinder Belle has labored to make the station a destination, a place for shopping and dining, like Union Station in Washington. Rents from these operations will help finance the renovations. Fortunately, unlike Union Station's designers, Beyer Blinder Belle has accomplished this without destroying the building's architectural grandeur. (Most shops will be located along corridors leading from the concourse to Lexington Avenue.)More important, the architects have retained the idea that the station is primarily a place of transition. Like Ellis Island, whose restoration in 1991 was also designed by Beyer Blinder Belle, Grand Central is one of the most thrilling symbols of the city's receptivity, its openness to people and to ideas. Metaphorically, it stands not just for the movement of people, but also for the freedom of thought that occurs during movement -- the ideas, the shifts in perspective, that arise from the refusal to remain stuck in a fixed place or time.Much as I like all those trapeze artists, light shows and bald eagles, I chose a more perverse way to celebrate Grand Central's rededication. I rented a video of John Frankenheimer's 1966 thriller, ''Seconds.'' For those too young to have seen it, the plot goes like this: a beaten-down, middle-aged banker is about to board the train home to Scarsdale when a stranger hands him a note with an address scribbled on it. This encounter leads the banker into the clutches of The Company, a sinister outfit that stages fake deaths for life's disappointed, overhauls their bodies, gives them new identities and a fresh start in life. After much plastic surgery and months of physical training, the banker emerges as -- Rock Hudson!Rock moves to Malibu and becomes a swinger, but eventually it transpires that his new world is something like the town in ''The Truman Show'' -- artificial and controlled. His neighbors are also ''reborns,'' or security officers from The Company. And when Rock tries to escape, he finds that there's no getting out alive.Now the building where the banker met his fate has had a face lift of its own. The results are stunning, better than Rock's. But this transformation, too, has a noirish aspect. It has to do with what the building itself is about: that literal and metaphorical freedom of circulation. This freedom is one of New York's most important traditions, but in recent decades it has become severely circumscribed. Nowhere is this more evident than in New York's failure to encourage architecture that is either artistically first-rate or socially progressive.The anniversary of the Supreme Court's decision is indeed cause for celebration, with lasers, symphonies, the works. But only the wildest wishful thinking could imagine that a single building of landmark quality has been constructed in Manhattan in the intervening decades. This may or may not be coincidence. But it is certainly true that landmarks preservation -- architectural history -- has been asked to do the work of architecture. The result has not, as yet, turned the city into a stage set like ''The Truman Show.'' But it reflects a city that has turned in on itself, and in doing so has lost its receptivity to change.I'm not drawing this parallel with a horror movie because I want to rain on Grand Central's parade. On the contrary, I would like the building's underlying message to be as clear as its beautifully restored architecture.