https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/fashion/fishbowl-midtown-lounge-night-life.html
Pinball and Other Games at Fishbowl, a New Midtown Lounge - The New York Times
Bars and Nightclubs,Fishbowl (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Midtown Area (Manhattan  NY)
May 16, 2017
4210
If dodging selfie sticks and renegade Elmos in the theater district doesn’t pack enough Pac-Man-style diversion in Midtown Manhattan, consider Fishbowl, a bar-lounge north of Times Square that doubles as a grown-up game den.Opened in February in the basement of the Dream Midtown hotel, Fishbowl caters to millennials seeking retro distractions like Skee-Ball and bowling. On a recent visit, I found the bar filled with 20-somethings trying to play vintage games while Snapchatting.The PlaceOn West 55th Street between Seventh Avenue and Broadway, Fishbowl is guarded by a doorman who directs patrons away from the Dream hotel’s glossy lobby, down a curving staircase and toward a wood-paneled bar that suggests a rec room in a McMansion. In addition to various bar games, there are red leather bar stools, plaid-covered banquettes and a 5,000-gallon aquarium.The CrowdBy 11:30 p.m. on a recent Saturday, the bar was sparsely populated by groups of young men in polo shirts and jeans and women in strappy dresses. A preppy post-grad couple challenged each other to Skee-Ball. Near the red D.J. booth, a young woman in a bandeau sat by herself, pursing her lips and taking a selfie by a wall painted like a backgammon board.The PlaylistExpect upbeat vibes all night. “We are mixing feel-good songs from ’70s to today across all formats,” said Matt Strauss, a managing partner of the TAO Group, which operates the bar. “The music can jump from Bananarama to Major Lazer.”Getting InThere’s no cover, and the black velvet ropes and spiffy doorman outside only look intimidating. So head down in your cutoffs and tank top, head held high. You’re here to play.DrinksThe cocktail menu offers quirky takes on classics. The Thai Tea with Belvedere is made with fresh lime, ginger syrup and orange bitters ($13; $90 for a “fishbowl” that serves eight), and the Marble Queen is a frothy sendup of a coconut margarita garnished with a flower ($13). Bar snacks include tuna poke ($16), chicken pibil sliders ($14) and a crudité spread ($13).