https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/technology/uber-board-bill-gurley.html
Amid Tumult at Uber, Bill Gurley Is Said to Be Leaving Board - The New York Times
Uber Technologies Inc,Car Services and Livery Cabs,Benchmark Capital,TPG Capital,Gurley  Bill,Kalanick  Travis,Appointments and Executive Changes,Boards of Directors,Venture Capital,Cohler  Matt,Bonderman  David
June 21, 2017
6985
Uber’s board of directors is undergoing more changes, a day after the resignation of the company’s chief executive, Travis Kalanick.Bill Gurley, a longtime Uber board member who is an investor at the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Benchmark, is leaving the ride-hailing company’s board, according to a person familiar with the move who asked to remain anonymous because the details are confidential. Mr. Gurley will be replaced by a fellow Benchmark partner, Matt Cohler, this person said.In addition, David Trujillo, a partner at the private equity firm TPG Capital, is joining Uber’s board to replace David Bonderman, a TPG partner who resigned from the board this month after making a sexist remark at a company presentation, according to other people with knowledge of the move.Uber and TPG declined to comment. Benchmark didn’t respond to a request for comment. Bloomberg earlier reported that Mr. Trujillo was joining Uber’s board and that Mr. Gurley was in talks to leave.The changes follow a turbulent period for Uber. On Tuesday, Mr. Kalanick stepped down from the privately held company as its chief executive after a shareholder revolt against his leadership. He will remain on Uber’s board of directors and is still the company’s largest single shareholder. His exit leaves something of a void at the top of the company, with a committee of executives sharing the responsibilities of running Uber.Uber’s board has shifted drastically in recent weeks. Aside from the replacements of Mr. Gurley and Mr. Bonderman, the Nestlé executive Wan Ling Martello recently joined the board.Mr. Gurley’s departure represents an end to one of the most opinionated voices on Uber’s board. He was one of the earliest supporters of Uber and Mr. Kalanick, with whom he occasionally clashed. The changes may improve the long-term relationships on Uber’s board, which in recent weeks has grown fractious as members have jostled over the company’s leadership decisions.