https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/20/us/health-officials-investigating-second-plague-case-in-california.html
Health Officials Investigating Second Plague Case in California - The New York Times
Plague,Yosemite National Park (Calif),Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Aug. 19, 2015
387
For the second time this summer, health officials in California are investigating a case of plague that a camper most likely contracted while visiting Yosemite National Park.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is testing a visitor from Georgia who camped at Yosemite, the Sierra National Forest and the surrounding areas in early August. Two campgrounds were closed after another case was announced two weeks ago. Since then the authorities have been warning visitors of possible plague risks.“Those warnings helped the patient get the prompt medical attention necessary to recover from this illness,” Dr. Karen Smith, the state’s health officer, said in a statement. Health officials maintained that the risk to humans is low.In the first plague case, a child from Los Angeles County was hospitalized after visiting the park in mid-July. The child is recovering, health officials said.Plague, which has killed millions and wiped out an estimated one-third of Europe’s population during the “Black Death” of the 14th century, is now rare among humans. There have been 42 human cases in California since 1970, nine of which were fatal. Before July, the state’s last case occurred in 2006.In recent decades, there has been an average of seven U.S. cases per year, according to the C.D.C. Two people have died from plague in Colorado this year.The disease is found among squirrels, chipmunks and other rodents in the southwestern U.S., according to the California Department of Public Health. People can be infected by close contact with an infected animal, or if they are bitten by a flea from an infected animal. It is treatable by antibiotics, but can be fatal if left untreated.It is not transmitted from human to human unless the patient also has a lung infection and is coughing.