https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/world/americas/venezuela-attorney-general-investigation.html
Venezuela Opens Inquiry Into a Critic: Its Attorney General - The New York Times
Venezuela,Politics and Government,Ortega  Luisa (1958- ),Maduro  Nicolas,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots
June 20, 2017
1169
Venezuela’s Supreme Court said Tuesday that it had begun an investigation that could lead to the removal of the country’s attorney general from office, a step that was widely viewed as an effort to silence the most outspoken government critic of President Nicolás Maduro.In a statement, the court said it had opened an investigation into “alleged commission of serious offenses in the exercise of office” by the attorney general, Luisa Ortega. The court said it was responding to a complaint by Pedro Carreño, a leftist lawmaker in Mr. Maduro’s governing party, who said Ms. Ortega was mentally ill.Ms. Ortega has become a surprise opponent of the president’s authoritarianism — as a top official in his government — denouncing his crackdown against demonstrators and demanding that the jailed protesters be tried in civilian courts, not military ones, as Mr. Maduro has ordered.On Tuesday night, Ms. Ortega condemned the investigation as evidence that democracy was failing in Venezuela. “They are trying to snuff out any dissidence,” she said. “It is a shame to say it, but I believe the state has dissolved.”She has also become a thorn in the side of the court itself, which is controlled by allies of the president. In late March, the Supreme Court judges issued a ruling stripping the country’s legislators of power and granting themselves the ability to write laws. Ms. Ortega held a news conference and said the move was a “rupture of the constitutional order.”The move set off speculation that members of Mr. Maduro’s party were turning against him. Soon after, the president ordered the court to reverse much of its ruling. Ms. Ortega has continued to fight the court, issuing a legal challenge against the legitimacy of its judges’ elections, a move that irked Mr. Maduro’s allies.Yet despite her open dissent, no official moves have been taken to stop her — until now.In his complaint against Ms. Ortega, Mr. Carreño said that the attorney general had tried to “violate, threaten and undermine the fundamental principles of the Constitution” and that she acted “with a grave and inexcusable ignorance” of the country’s laws.“She should not just be dismissed — she can and should be prosecuted,” he added.José Vicente Haro, a constitutional law expert in Caracas, the capital, said that while the court had the ability to open an investigation into wrongdoing, only the National Assembly, controlled by opposition lawmakers, could remove her from office. However, many expect the court could remove her anyway given its pattern of decision making that experts have considered legally dubious during a year of mounting pressure against the president.While Ms. Ortega has in the past supported crackdowns against demonstrations, her actions have earned her more support among those involved in Venezuela’s current wave of protests, now in their third month.So far, at least 74 people have been killed during the protests. Among the latest reported deaths was Fabián Urbina, identified by local news media as a 17-year-old who died Monday after clashes with the National Guard.