https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/arts/television/whats-on-tv-monday-loaded-and-the-bachelorette.html
What’s on TV Monday: ‘Loaded’ and ‘The Bachelorette’ - The New York Times
Television,Web-Original Programming
July 17, 2017
9419
A cadre of British tech whizzes grapple with their newfound wealth and their mouthy American boss in “Loaded.” And Rachel goes home with the four remaining suitors on “The Bachelorette.”LOADED 10 p.m. on AMC. Four British tech geniuses (Samuel Anderson, Nick Helm, Jim Howick and Jonny Sweet) become megamillionaires after selling their video game company, maker of a popular iPhone app, to an American company with a verbally abusive vice president, Casey (Mary McCormack). “I want you to think of me as a sexy Darth Vader, because yesterday you got bought out by the Empire,” she says. “And behind me there’s an Emperor.” It might be tempting to think of this funny new series “as ‘Silicon Valley’ with British accents,” but don’t, Neil Genzlinger wrote in The New York Times. “The tone here is different from the acclaimed HBO series — more caustic, a bit more crude — and so is the emphasis,” he said, adding, “This is a story line of our age: people coming into vast amounts of money who aren’t prepared for it.”THE BACHELORETTE 8 p.m. on ABC. Rachel travels to the hometowns of the four remaining men — to Baltimore with Eric; Miami with Bryan; Madison, Wis., with Peter; and Aspen, Colo., with Dean — and wonders if she’s falling in love with more than one of them.PRESENTING PRINCESS SHAW (2016) 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Samantha Montgomery is an aspiring singer with a hard New Orleans life who calls herself Princess Shaw and posts videos of herself performing original songs without accompaniment. Ophir Kutiel is an Israeli electronic wizard who takes YouTube videos by amateur musicians and turns them into sophisticated pop recordings. The filmmaker Ido Haar watches what happens when the two collaborate in Tel Aviv. The documentary, presented here by “POV,” is uplifting, but it “insists on presenting Ms. Montgomery’s good fortune without noting what it might mean to her financially,” Stephen Holden wrote in The Times.STARLET (2012) on Fandor. Jane (Dree Hemingway), a pretty young thing floating through the San Fernando Valley in California, insinuates herself into the life of Sadie (Besedka Johnson), a grumpy octogenarian, after buying a thermos at her yard sale and discovering a wad of cash inside. “Ms. Hemingway gives Jane an offbeat charm that steers ‘Starlet’ away from sentimentality, and a generosity that is of a piece with its gentle humanist vision,” Dennis Lim wrote in The Times about this meditation on loneliness and friendship directed by Sean Baker.TALK TO HER (2002) on Amazon, iTunes and Sundance Now. Talk to her — just don’t expect her to talk back. Two men (a nurse and a journalist) share a friendship while caring for their girlfriends (a dancer and a matador), who are both comatose. But not all devotion is what it seems, and suddenly romance is tinged with horror. Like all great doomed affairs, Pedro Almodóvar’s story “is full of lovely, sweet suffering,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times.