http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/03/business/worldbusiness/china-backs-away-fromunocal-bid.html
China backs away fromUnocal bid - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Aug. 3, 2005
8243
SHANGHAI — Cnooc, the giant state-owned Chinese oil company, said Tuesday that it had withdrawn its $18.5 billion takeover bid for the American oil company Unocal because of fierce political opposition in Washington. The decision ended a hotly contested battle between Unocal and Chevron, the second-largest U.S. oil company, which were both vying to acquire Unocal's valuable oil and natural gas assets, most of which are based in the United States and Asia. "This political environment has made it very difficult for us to accurately assess our chance of success," Cnooc said in a statement, "creating a level of uncertainty that presents an unacceptable risk to our ability to secure this transaction." The move by Cnooc, or China National Offshore Oil Corp., clears the way for Chevron to finalize its acquisition of Unocal for about $17 billion in cash and stock. Unocal shareholders are expected to vote on whether to accept Chevron's bid on Aug. 10. Cnooc's all-cash bid for Unocal in late June was the largest takeover attempt ever made in the United States by a Chinese company. It came just two months after Chevron and Unocal had already agreed to a merger, sparking a takeover battle that eventually forced Chevron to sweeten its bid to $17.6 billion in cash and stock from $16.8 billion. Politicians in Washington came out in strong opposition to Cnooc's efforts to win Unocal, saying the state-owned oil company was acting as a proxy for the Chinese government and seeking to secure strategically valuable U.S. energy assets. The monthlong fight between the companies that ensued came to symbolize the growing trade and political tensions that have emerged this year between China and the United States. People involved in the Cnooc bid said that China's largest offshore oil and natural gas company was determined to acquire Unocal, and that Cnooc's board was even considering raising its already superior cash offer to as much as $20 billion this week to edge Chevron out of the bidding. But in the end, Cnooc officials said they were reluctant to go that high amid signs that Washington remained unlikely to approve the deal. Some American lawmakers have said they would push legislation that would effectively block a Chinese takeover of Unocal. Analysts said the failed attempt by Cnooc could further strain relations between the United States and China and might intensify trade and currency disputes between the two countries. Chinese experts accused Washington politicians of wrecking the deal and said the failed bid could affect other Chinese companies seeking to do business in the United States. "The way the U.S. government has treated Cnooc and politicized the deal will largely frustrate Chinese companies," said Han Xiaoping, the chief information officer at Falcon Power, an energy consulting firm that is based in Beijing. "The companies not only in oil but all other industries will not want to play the game by the U.S. rules," he said. The two countries - which are increasingly important economic and trade partners - also lead the world in oil consumption. But China's economy is growing at a rapid clip, driving its state-owned oil and energy companies to scouring the globe in recent years for new sources of energy. Cnooc has been one of China's most aggressive companies in that regard. It has been on an acquisition hunt for the past few years. Its bid for Unocal - the most ambitious yet - was dubbed "Operation Treasure Ship," and it came with tremendous financial support from Wall Street's leading banks and China's state-owned banks, which were prepared to give Cnooc billions of dollars worth of low-interest loans to acquire the American oil company. The Chinese government and Cnooc officials insisted that the takeover bid was solely a commercial deal and had nothing to do with politics. Cnooc officials pleaded with officials in Washington and at Unocal, saying that they were simply attempting a "friendly" takeover of Unocal with a higher bid and would even pay the $500 million breakup to Chevron if Unocal agreed to break its earlier agreement with Chevron, according to people involved in Cnooc's talks to acquire Unocal. The people declined to be named because of the confidential nature of the talks. Cnooc officials also said they were even willing to dispose of most of the U.S.-based assets of Unocal if that would win U.S. government approval. What is more, Cnooc hired high-powered Washington lobbyists and had the backing of two of Wall Street's most powerful investment banks, Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan, to help push its deal for Unocal. But Chevron came to the negotiating table equally armed, having hired Morgan Stanley and Lehman Brothers to advise it in its bid. A host of congressmen who were recipients of Chevron political donations also argued in Washington against the Cnooc deal, saying such a deal could threaten America's long-term energy interests, these people said. Cnooc's chairman, Fu Chengyu, still held out some hope in the last few days. The company held lengthy conference calls with people involved in the deal, hoping to work out a higher bid. But the political opposition in Washington appeared too difficult to overcome. "It was an agonizing process," said one person involved in the talks. "We thought we could win. The frustrating thing was how much of a political firestorm do you want? Even if we did win, could the deal be delayed and drag on? The political risks became so difficult to ascertain." One official working with Cnooc said company officials said that even if Unocal accepted the Cnooc bid, there were fears that Congress might pass legislation to block the deal. Several people who worked for Cnooc said company officials had grown increasingly grim in recent days, and were visibly angry at how the deal had collapsed. One official said Fu, the chairman, had long argued in company meetings that Cnooc ought to avoid countries in Africa and the Middle East because of the political risks associated with some countries there. They said Fu had pushed to make an acquisition in the United States because the political risk would be very small. "This is a pretty rude awakening," one person involved in the Cnooc deal said. "The political risk turned out to be higher in America." 