https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/sports/tennis/wimbledon-royal-box.html
Inside the Royal Box at Wimbledon: Astronauts and V.I.P. Strawberries - The New York Times
Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Tennis,Royal Families,Great Britain,Royal Box (Wimbledon)
July 16, 2017
9390
WIMBLEDON, England — To be among the few who receive an invitation to watch tennis from one of the 74 seats in the royal box at Wimbledon’s Centre Court is akin to getting an acceptance letter from Hogwarts.“There is a view, among those who have attended the royal box, that it is one of the most special experiences in sport,” said Alexandra Willis, the head of communications for the All England Club. “It’s because of the fact that it’s by invitation only — you can’t just decide it’s something you want to attend.”The oak-lined royal box sits right behind the south baseline of the court, clearly visible to spectators and cameras. While its placement is prominent, its perks are protected.“Keeping some mystery and not giving away too much of what that experience is like” is important, Willis said.“The only people who really know are those who have had it themselves,” she added.Many who had been invited are eager to divulge details, however. They often consider the visit one of the most memorable occasions of their lives.Invitations arrive two to three months before the tournament and read:“The Chairman and Committee of Management of The Championships request the pleasure of the company of [name] & Guest in the Royal Box on [date].“This invitation to the Royal Box includes lunch in the Clubhouse prior to the commencement of play, afternoon tea and drinks at the end of the day.”There is a dress code: jackets and ties for men, and no skirts or dresses ending above the knee for women.It is best to arrive by noon for the lunch, which is hosted by the club’s chairman, Philip Brook, and his wife, Gill, before play, which begins at 1 p.m. on most days. Brook opens with a brief talk about the tournament and the matches that guests will see on Centre Court that day.The food served is substantial and decadent; several visitors mentioned poached lobster as a favorite.Strawberries, the traditional snack of Wimbledon, are also offered, but not merely those sold to other fans on the grounds. Royal box guests enjoy an especially exquisite variety, called a Driscoll Jubilee, which is treasured for its firmness and sweetness and reserved for their consumption.The group adjourns to the court 10 minutes before the first match begins and stays there throughout the day. Afternoon tea is served from 3:45 p.m. to 5:15 p.m. For those wanting further nibbles, a small leather-bound bucket of candies is discreetly passed through the box during play. If it becomes chilly, as it often does, blankets arrive.Guests are assigned woven-wicker seats in the box, each with their name, a commemorative program and a small gift. This year, the gift was a green leather zippered bag embossed with the Wimbledon logo and the words “Royal Box 2017.” Guests also receive sterling silver lapel pins and a commemorative photograph of match action from that day’s play with the box visible in the background, paired with a seating chart.More than the amenities, what guests treasure most is the company. Ken Solomon, the chairman and chief executive of Tennis Channel, called it “a cross section of the most interesting people who are in the U.K. at that moment.”Solomon said he could only compare the camaraderie of the shared experience at Wimbledon to what he has felt as a guest of the American president.“When you meet someone at the White House, it doesn’t matter who they are — you know they are having one of the greatest days of their life as well,” Solomon said. “No matter who you are, how important, you can’t buy your way into that space, and there’s only a handful of people who are there, and it’s very special. You’re going to remember it the rest of your life, and you know they are, too.”Donald Dell, a pioneer in the business of professional tennis, said the unexpected meetings were his favorite part. This year, he sat with the golfer Ernie Els and John Witherow, the editor of The Times of London.“Every year, it’s a different group, and that’s the fun of it: who you see when you’re there,” Dell said.Most players say they take little notice of the stars above them, but others are inspired to shine themselves. When she first reached the Wimbledon final, in 2007, Marion Bartoli credited her semifinal win to spotting her favorite actor in the royal box.“I was focusing on Pierce Brosnan because he is so beautiful,” she said.Having won Wimbledon in 2013, Bartoli now mixes with the stars herself as an annual guest. Last year, she delighted in meeting the comedian Ellen DeGeneres, one of her favorite celebrities.“There are some cute boys invited as well, so I can sneak up in there, trying to get some phone numbers,” Bartoli said, laughing.Mansour Bahrami, an Iranian player participating in the legends’ exhibitions, most enjoyed meeting the singer Shirley Bassey last year.“I used to have her songs in my headphones as I’d sleep,” he said, giddily.Spectators in the stadium and watching at home on television often focus on the box. This year, the seatmates Ian McKellen and Maggie Smith delighted with their expressive faces and sharing of binoculars.The titular royal presence in the box was more conspicuous years ago, when players bowed or curtsied toward the box as they entered Centre Court. The Duke of Kent scrapped the tradition in 2003, though there remains an exception if the queen or the Prince of Wales attends.Queen Elizabeth II, never much of a tennis fan, has shown up only once since the change, fleetingly in 2010. She ate lunch, watched an Andy Murray match, and then left. Her eldest son, Charles, has also appeared only once, in 2012.The most avid tennis fan among prominent royals is Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, who this year was named patron of the All England Club. The duchess, who will succeed the Duke of Kent in presenting trophies on court, had humbler beginnings at Wimbledon, recalling to the BBC how she had lined up for tickets during her days as a commoner.“I was very fortunate that I did get through — it was quite late in the day,” she said. “But, luckily, play went on quite late in the evening.”The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge both watched Sunday’s men’s final from the royal box, as did Prime Minister Theresa May and Prince Albert II of Monaco. The actors Bradley Cooper, Hugh Grant and Eddie Redmayne also attended.When play goes late on Centre Court because of additional matches being appended to its order of play, the royal box can thin out considerably.“Yesterday when we started the match, there were five people in the box,” Jamie Murray said of his mixed doubles quarterfinal. Murray had recognized them all: Martin Corrie, president of the Lawn Tennis Association and his wife, Janet; former Prime Minister David Cameron and his mother, Mary Fleur Cameron; and John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons.Murray seemed more impressed by a guest he had been introduced to after his semifinal on Friday.“Just met Tim Peake,” Murray said, naming a British astronaut. “That was cool.”Another astronaut, Andrew Feustel of the United States, had also been in the royal box that day.On Friday there were also singers: Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees and the Welsh mezzo-soprano Katherine Jenkins. There were television nature guides: David Attenborough was there, as was Bear Grylls, a host of survival-focused shows. The actor Jude Law and the agent Ari Emanuel attended, too.From other sports: the Indian cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar and the Formula One world champion Nico Rosberg.Rosberg was initially denied entry because he showed up without socks. He was given a pair and ultimately allowed in.