https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/magazine/the-surprising-elegance-of-braised-beef-tongue.html
The Surprising Elegance of Braised Beef Tongue - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 13, 2017
2904
I’ve always run a few off-cuts and offals and weird meats on the menu at Prune, since opening in 1999, because I grew up with them and they are a part of who I am as a cook and eater. These days, it could come off as some kind of perverse or precocious kind of gustatory bragging to say that as a child I adored the blob of marrow from the soup bones and had a particular love of the brains in brown butter with capers that my mother cooked. But it was nothing to impress with at the time. Frankly, to have to explain that funky rillettes sandwich in your oily paper lunch bag to your schoolmates with their American cheese on Wonder Bread felt in the vicinity of shameful. In our house, these meats were just a pragmatic and cultural fact of what my French mother cooked to feed a family of seven.Many people are squeamish about the off-cuts, and I can see why the livery taste of liver and the urine taste of kidneys and the custard texture of brains and the stench of chitlins during the initial boiling, the crunch of tendon, the sponge of lung and tripe can be a turn off. But with beef tongue, I’ve never understood the revulsion — other than the idea of the thing — because it holds none of these challenges: It’s clean, meaty, beefy, muscley and fleshy. Tongue is one fine piece of meat. Once boiled and peeled, it can be served warm and sticky in its own braising liquid like a good pot roast, with root vegetables and potatoes. You can shave it paper thin and dress it with hot chili oil and scallions and snow peas and toasted sesame seeds. Cold, it can be sliced like a deli meat and makes an excellent sandwich with horseradish mayo on rye bread. Here, dressed with a classic sauce gribiche lively with tarragon and parsley, cornichons and capers, it makes an elegant, unexpected first-course salad fit for, believe it or not, a summer wedding feast.Before I opened Prune, I had a long 10 years as a cook in high-end catering, and one thing that dented my soul that entire time was the uniformity and conformity of the weddings; the way the party planner would sell the same wedding over and over, to the same couple, more or less, again and again. I never knew whom I felt more bothered by: the party planner who was just doing her job, strategically and efficiently, making the couple feel unique and discerning by the fact of their choosing the apricot-glazed chicken rather than the beef tenderloin with red-wine reduction; or the couples themselves, who seemed to have no personal story of their own that they wished to express at their own wedding feast.It’s a tremendous pleasure to now have the experience once or twice a year of meeting with a couple who say to me, ‘‘We care a lot that the food at our wedding be very good, and Prune is our favorite restaurant in the world.’’ To meet the kind of people who think Prune, with its long and overt disposition toward the low cuts and the innards, who think boiled beef tongue with a pickle dressing would be an accurate and specific expression of themselves at their wedding feast, is to feel a little like falling in love. So much so that later in August, when we build the three-level wood-fire cooking pit at their grandparents’ farm and roast whole lambs over a mix of ash and apple wood and set out smoked eggplant with first-press olive oil and boiled beef tongue with sauce gribiche on the long wooden tables under the fairy-tale tents, it feels not like we are working our brains out but more like we are going on a date.And not a chaste one at that. A big fat tongue on your cutting board on its way into the braising pot is never not funny. I haven’t met a beef tongue in 20 years that hasn’t had the whole kitchen, as well as any bridesmaids passing through the prep tent on their way to hair and makeup and fitting, reduced to uncontrollable giggles at the sight.The sauce gribiche is a perfect partner to the boiled tongue, but even if you aren’t the tongue type, try the sauce anyway. It’s like a tartar sauce with chopped hard-boiled egg and olive oil standing in for the mayonnaise and sour cream, and it pairs very well with cold poached salmon. If you’re already into tongue, don’t forget to peel it while it’s still warm, when the outer sheath — which feels uncannily like a brittle old dishwashing glove lost under the sink cabinet — will tear off in satisfying sheets. (When cold, it is troublesome and won’t yield.) Once it is peeled, return the tongue to be held in its own reduced braising liquid.To put cold boiled tongue on your menu is a bit like placing a personal ad in which you confess that you are moody and disorganized and that you just adopted a puppy from a rescue shelter who shows signs of permanent incontinence. You know the ones who answer are yours for life.Recipes: Braised Tongue | Sauce Gribiche