https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/19/world/asia/china-gambia-taiwan-diplomatic-relations.html
China Resumes Diplomatic Relations With Gambia, Shutting Out Taiwan - The New York Times
International Relations,Gambia,China,Taiwan,Jammeh  Yahya,Ma Ying-jeou,United Nations
March 18, 2016
3492
HONG KONG — China announced on Thursday that it had resumed diplomatic relations with Gambia, an African nation that had maintained ties with Taiwan for nearly two decades.As Taiwan prepares to transition from a president who has deepened links with China to one who is far more cautious about cross-strait ties, the move signals a possible resumption of the contest between China and Taiwan to woo countries around the world.China considers Taiwan to be part of its territory, and it has sought to limit the self-ruled island’s international relationships and recognition. Since 1949, when Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists fled to Taiwan after losing a civil war, the two sides have competed over diplomatic allies, which since the 1970s have largely flowed to Beijing.Gambia, the smallest nation in continental Africa, has shifted between the two. After independence from Britain in 1965, it recognized Taiwan, officially known as the Republic of China. Then, after Beijing took over China’s seat in the United Nations in 1971, Gambia shifted its recognition to the People’s Republic of China.In 1995, one year after the authoritarian leader Yahya Jammeh was installed in a coup, it switched back to recognizing Taiwan. In 2013, Mr. Jammeh severed ties with Taiwan, which diplomats said was the result of Taiwan’s refusal to increase its foreign aid to his country.Beijing, however, was pursuing closer ties with Taiwan and its China-friendly president, Ma Ying-jeou, and did not immediately resume relations with Gambia in order to not be seen as pressuring Taiwan.Mr. Ma is stepping down in May after the election in January of Tsai Ing-wen, whose independence-leaning Democratic Progressive Party has expressed concern about Taiwan’s growing economic dependence on China. Ms. Tsai has said she plans to maintain the cross-strait status quo, but the relationship is unlikely to facilitate the surge in trade and travel that Mr. Ma encouraged. Beijing’s decision to resume relations with Gambia raises the prospect that China may continue the contest over diplomatic ties in an effort to pressure Ms. Tsai into adopting a position more accommodating to Beijing.The joint communiqué signed by China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, and Gambia’s foreign minister, Neneh MacDouall Gaye, emphasized Gambia’s stance on Taiwan. Gambia said “that there is only one China in the world, and that the government of the People’s Republic of China is the sole legal government representing the whole of China and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory.” It added that Gambia would not engage in any official contacts with Taiwan.Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs expressed “regret” at the move.“Regarding the international pressure placed upon us by the Chinese mainland, our overseas missions will continue to be vigilant,” it said in a written statement.