https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/28/business/media/seaworld-questions-ethics-of-blackfish-investigator.html
SeaWorld Questions Ethics of ‘Blackfish’ Investigator - The New York Times
SeaWorld Entertainment Inc,Animal Abuse  Rights and Welfare,SeaWorld Adventure Parks,Blackfish (Movie),Documentary Films and Programs,Whales and Whaling,Cowperthwaite  Gabriela,Movies,Padgett  Lara A
Feb. 27, 2014
6387
LOS ANGELES — SeaWorld Entertainment, which has come under fire after the release of “Blackfish,” a critical documentary about whales in captivity, struck back Thursday at one of its government monitors for her supposed cozy relations with animal-rights activists and involvement in the film.“Blackfish” has become a rallying point for those who oppose the use of killer whales for entertainment in the SeaWorld parks, and it has drawn large audiences in theaters and on TV. But SeaWorld has defended its practices, mounting an aggressive pushback against the film.The company continued its counterattack with a complaint delivered Thursday to the Labor Department. It accuses the official examining an orca’s 2010 fatal attack on a SeaWorld trainer of ethical violations, including leaking confidential documents to the makers of “Blackfish.”SeaWorld asked the agency to investigate the leak, and accused the investigator, Lara A. Padgett, of having improper dealing with both animal-rights activists and the makers of the film, whom she cheered via social media and joined at the Sundance Film Festival and at a New York premiere last year.“Blackfish,” which is directed by Gabriela Cowperthwaite, focuses on the killing of the trainer, Dawn Brancheau, by an orca named Tilikum. The film was acquired by Magnolia Pictures and CNN Films at Sundance in 2013, and took in about $2.1 million at the domestic box office. It then rolled up a large audience when the CNN cable channel first broadcast it in October, and has since become available from Netflix.The singers Willie Nelson and Martina McBride backed out of SeaWorld’s “Bands, Brews & BBQ” concert series under pressure from animal-rights groups. Activists also protested SeaWorld floats at the Rose Bowl and Macy’s Thanksgiving Day parades.SeaWorld has responded with a fierce public relations campaign that included an unusual open letter to movie critics claiming that “Blackfish” was misleading and agenda-driven.With its filing Thursday, SeaWorld added a demand that the government remove Ms. Padgett, a compliance officer with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, from oversight of its parks while reviewing her conduct.Ms. Padgett’s review of Ms. Brancheau’s death led to an enforcement action that severely limited interaction between SeaWorld trainers and orcas. SeaWorld’s legal team, led by Eugene Scalia — the son of the Supreme Court justice Antonin Scalia — has appealed, and the case is pending before the United States Court of Appeals District of Columbia Circuit.Ms. Padgett did not respond to an email on Thursday. A call to her Florida office was routed to a supervisor, who did not respond.Luiz Santos, a Labor Department spokesman, declined to comment.Last month, The Orlando Sentinel reported that Ms. Padgett’s ties to “Blackfish” were already under scrutiny, after a posting of photographs on the MiceChat.com website showing her at Sundance and elsewhere with the makers of the film.The SeaWorld complaint said Ms. Padgett provided confidential documents from the safety review and a subsequent mediation to one of the film’s producers, Tim Zimmermann. To support that claim, the complaint details an account by an eyewitness — whom the company said it would identify to investigators on receiving assurances of protection — of Ms. Padgett and Mr. Zimmermann working over a laptop from which the documents were apparently transferred to a thumb drive.Mr. Zimmermann did not respond to an email. In a phone interview, Ms. Cowperthwaite said she never received confidential documents from Ms. Padgett, and was unaware of any transfer of such material to anyone connected with the film.“That’s just so patently wrong,” Ms. Cowperthwaite said of any claim of improper collaboration. She noted that the film was already finished at the time of the claimed encounter between Mr. Zimmermann and Ms. Padgett, which is said to have occurred at Sundance.SeaWorld’s six-page complaint was supported by more than 200 pages of documentation, much of it drawn from Ms. Padgett’s Facebook postings. While several of her official emails, also included in the documents, reflected a seemingly objective approach to the SeaWorld review, her expressions on social media openly cheered on the filmmakers.“Wow ... take that Sea World!!!! They’ve got to be getting nervous now,” she wrote last July, after linking to a report, “Blackfish on the move in Europe.”In its objections to Ms. Padgett’s conduct, SeaWorld cited a government ethical code barring officials from using their position to benefit those with whom they are privately affiliated, or from appearing to imply official endorsement for a private activity.Whether the film and a subsequent debate about the propriety of orca captivity have taken a toll on SeaWorld’s business — a publicly traded company with a stock market value of more than $3 billion — remains an open question.SeaWorld’s namesake marine parks in Orlando, Fla., San Diego and San Antonio posted what the company said was record attendance in the final three months of 2013. But overall attendance at the company’s parks, which include the Busch Gardens attractions and others, had declined about 5 percent during the first nine months of last year.When it opened last July, “Blackfish” was viewed as a contender for a best documentary Oscar. But the film did not make a list of nominees that are now in contention for that prize at the Academy Awards ceremony on Sunday. Ms. Cowperthwaite said she did not know whether SeaWorld’s pushback had hurt her film in the awards race.As for Ms. Padgett’s Sundance visit, Ms. Cowperthwaite said she believed the investigator had mainly been interested in seeing how her own agency was depicted. She said she did not know whether Ms. Padgett had stayed, free of charge, at a vacation home that had been rented by the film’s producers.“People crashed there,” Ms. Cowperthwaite said. “At Sundance, that’s what people do.”