http://www.nytimes.com/1972/02/06/archives/this-dr-jekyll-makes-people-want-to-hide.html
Television - The New York Times
TELEVISION AND RADIO,PROGRAMS,SPECIFIC PROGRAMS
Feb. 6, 1972
7400
LESS like caviar than like stuffed derma, the comedy of Don Rickles might fall under the heading “acquired taste.” For some, it will always remain tasteless. For others, it has its delicious moments of madness.For television writers, it is a problem.Rickles recently returned to television with a new situation comedy series. Presented Fridays at 10:30 P.M. over the Columbia Broadcasting System's network, it is called the “The Don Rickles Show.” Of course, within the given situation, Rickles plays a character called Don Robinson. That is standard TV practice. For precedent, consult “The Mary Tyler Moore Show,” “The New Dick Van Dyke Show,” “The Doris Day Show,” and so on down the puzzling line.Although the first few episodes of “The Don Rickles Show” have been fairly successful in the ratings, pulling over‐30 shares of the audience for its time period, the basic situation of the series is not successful. The problem is not in the stars, so to speak, but in the peculiar brand of Rickles's comedy.The comedian's humor relies primarily on the tricky art of insult, kept rapidly boiling in a deep vat of nastiness. Balding, built like a truck driver, Rickles snarls his misanthropic way through set routines that spare neither the famous nor the paying customers at ringside. In a nightclub, he is free to be as outrageous as egos will allow. On television, outrageousness is not a top seller.His special appearances on television can be effective. On the second annual “Entertainer of the Year Awards,” he came on the stage of a Las Vegas club for five minutes and managed to put the generally ridiculous proceedings into proper perspective. After some scathing remarks about producer‐host Ed Sullivan, about the awards and the recipients, he launched into a sermon about comedy knowing no racial, ethnic or religious barriers.As an example, he singled out in the audience a “gentleman from the Philippines.” This was followed by a look of hurt surprise: “You're not from the Philippines? I'm terribly sorry.” A bit later, Rickles looked at the man and growled, “Have you ever considered surgery?” Finally, in open hostility, he ended up shouting, “Listen, you're getting on my nerves. Why don't you just get out of here?”As it turned out, Rickles was presenting the award of “Novelty Act of the Year.” The winner was an acrobatic troupe called the Flying Alexanders, which happened be between engagements. “When you appear again,” Rickles said consolingly, “you'll call us.”At his best, Rickles can be funny. The question is whether that best is capable of being neatly tucked into the structured little world of a situation comedy. This time around, on “The Don Rickles Show” created by Sam Denoff, the answer still appears to be negative.The situation is, if anything, even more innocuous than usual. Don Robinson is an advertising executive, complete with pretty wife (Louise Sorel) and cute daughter (Erin Moran). Shifting between Madison Avenue office and status house in the suburbs, the action could revolve around any office executive, complete with any pretty wife and any cute daughter.For some curious reason, most of the plots have so far used the awkward device of flashbacks. Robinson is in bed with a cold, and that triggers a total recall of the time his wife was pregnant and he was looking for a job. Robinson is in court and the reasons are recounted in flashback.The trick, obviously, is in somehow creating the image of a recognizably warm family man while, at the same time, retaining the essence of Rickles's fine madness. More often than not, however, the result lands somewhere in between, which is precisely nowhere.One minute Rickles Is tenderly blowing kisses at his wife. The next he is intimating that she would make a strong candidate for a lobotomy. She never loses her understanding smile. The daughter is ushered in and out of camera range quickly to allow Rickles occasional stints as a loving father, but then he will pat her on the head rather menacingly and mutter something about “Daddy's little exemption.”The better moments in the series are when Rickles breaks out of the inane situation and takes off on a routine of his own. In the first episode, a doctor interrupted his golf game long enough to visit the ailing hero. As his wife recalled past illnesses, Robinson objected the “yo‐yo” doctor that “I'm slowly slipping away and she's taking you down Memory Lane.”When his wife announces that she has gone into labor, the anxious Robinson runs and promptly breaks his ankle. She has to drive to the hospital and he grabs the waiting wheel chair. That sets up a bit with a sarcastic nurse:Nurse: “Fill out these forms, please.”Robinson (irate): “I have a broken ankle!”Nurse: “Then don't write with your foot.”Robinson (defeated): “Could we cut out the red tape and get right to the heavy sedation?”Not bad, as routines go. But there is still the small matter of maintaining the basic situation of the comedy, and the vintage Rickles outbursts are reduced to sporadic moments.They do erupt. While dictating a letter to his secretary, for instance, Robinson stops suddenly, stares at the elaborate coiffeur balanced atop her head and matter‐offactly warns: “Do me a favor. Get yourself a haircut and get rid of that Harpo Marx trick‐or‐treat job you got there.”But then perhaps a good many secretaries across the country might resent this brand of humor. In fact a good many viewers across the country might resent the basic brand of Rickles humor without a good deal of dilution. Without that pretty wife and cute daughter, they may suspect that there is a serious side to his nastiness. That would be upsetting, and television producers do not want to upset their audiences.Archie Bunker in “All in the Family” has upset some critics but he doesn't seem to have posed much of a threat to the mass audience. The show recently has been attracting a startling over‐60 share of the audience tuned into television on Saturday evenings at 8 o'clock.Archie, though, for all of the grumping, does not have to be taken too seriously. In the end, he is the unfailing butt of the humor and is transparently manipulated by wiser heads, notably those of his dizzy wife (out Gracie Allen) or his daughter and son‐in‐law. Lately, in fact, as Archie's “bigotry” has taken second plotting place to more general social observations, that manipulation has become a touch too transparent, and some ominous grumbling is beginning to be heard among devoted fans.Is there room for some undiluted insults and nastiness in television comedy? The medium itself would seem provide endless inspiration. “The Don Rickles Show,” however, seems determined to stay as uninspired as is electronically possible.