https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/02/upshot/is-global-warming-real-most-in-US-believe-in-climate-change.html
Is Global Warming Real? Most Americans Say Yes - The New York Times
Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Polls and Public Opinion,Global Warming,United States
June 1, 2014
4215
The Obama administration announced new regulations Monday meant to reduce carbon emissions and combat climate change.What do Americans believe about climate change, and how have those beliefs changed? Our overview follows.First, a majority of Americans say that global warming is indeed happening, and the numbers have held relatively steady since the mid-2000s.Every pollster uses different wording, producing varied results, but the overall pattern is consistent. According to Pew Research Center, 67 percent of Americans say there is “solid evidence that the earth is warming.” Gallup shows that 54 percent say the “effects of global warming have already begun.” In a CBS News poll conducted in May, only 11 percent said global warming did not exist.The number of Americans who believe in global warming has declined slightly since 2008, but there is reason to suspect that decline may soon reverse.Temperature trends, not economic trends, seem to drive changes in opinion.Jon Krosnick of Stanford University and colleagues studied the post-2008 drop in the number of people who think global warming is occurring and concluded it had little to do with two major events of that year: the economic recession or the media coverage of “Climategate” — the release of thousands of emails and documents related to global warming research.Rather, they found that opinion about global warming seemed to fluctuate with temperature changes. Although the beliefs of people who trust natural scientists remain steady over time, climate beliefs among the one-third of Americans who don’t trust natural scientists are influenced by the prior year’s average world temperature.“Following record-high-temperature years, low-trust people are more likely to believe that the world has been warming,” Mr. Krosnick said. “Extreme weather events, however, have not had notable impact on public judgments of the existence or the seriousness of global warming.”There is reason to think that global temperatures, after having been somewhat steady in recent years, are likely to begin rising again, thanks to a buildup of carbon emissions and the arrival of El Niño. If so, belief in global warming may soon rise again, too.Democrats trust scientists much more than Republicans do — and believe more in the existence of warming.Eighty percent of Democrats report having high trust in scientists, compared with 63 percent of independents and 46 percent of Republicans, according to the Stanford poll data. Partly as a result, Democrats’ concern about climate change is far higher than Republicans’ concern. Americans, as a whole, are less concerned about global warming than people in other rich countries largely because of low levels of concern among Republicans.While Americans believe global warming is happening, it’s not one of their top concerns.Other policy issues tend to outrank global warming; in recent years, many Americans have instead named the economy, jobs or the deficit as their top worries. Even among environmental issues, climate change is not Americans’ main concern. When Gallup asked about a number of environmental issues, global warming was last on the list, with worry about drinking water pollution ranking 25 points higher.Although the economy’s ups and downs do not seem to affect beliefs about the existence of global warming, the economy’s condition can affect how seriously people view climate change as a problem. When the economy is weak, as it has been in recent years, many people list other issues as higher priorities.But that’s not to say that Americans aren’t concerned at all.More than half of Americans say that global warming is a very serious problem both for the United States and the rest of the world if nothing is done to reduce it. In 2013, polls found that about 7 in 10 Americans said they had seen the effects of global warming, and 4 in 10 Americans said that their local community had experienced an extreme weather event in the past year.Most Americans say they are ready for their government to act. A majority say the United States government should be doing a great deal or a lot about global warming, while just 1 in 5 say the government should do little or nothing. There is majority support for limits on greenhouse gas emissions and for requiring utilities to produce energy from renewable sources, but less support for providing incentives for nuclear power.Poll questions, however, often struggle to convey the political arguments on both sides of the climate debate — which may mean that climate proposals fare less well in actual political debates than in polls. For instance, a cap-and-trade program for carbon emissions — the plan the Obama administration favors to reduce carbon emissions — is notoriously difficult to ask about in polling. Few Americans have heard of the policy, which provides pollsters with the dilemma of asking a question that provides an explanation of the issue or asking a question that has minimal detail, relying on what the respondent can bring to the question.In December, the Stanford/USA Today survey  randomly assigned respondents to one of three different questions on the policy, all of which explained a cap-and-trade system. Support ranged from 48 percent to 70 percent. Yet none of the questions warned that consumer prices may rise — the main argument opponents make against cap-and-trade.A February 2010 poll by Pew took the more minimalist route, and after asking about knowledge of the cap-and-trade bill, found that 52 percent supported setting limits on carbon dioxide emissions and making companies pay for their emissions, even if it meant higher energy prices — but offered no details on how the proposal would work.Americans think that climate change will hurt future generations more than current generations. Nearly a third of Americans say that if nothing is done to reduce global warming, they themselves will be hurt a lot or a great deal, according to the Stanford/USA Today poll. As for future generations, two-thirds say they will be hurt a lot or a great deal.