http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/17/dining/reviews/17brief-001.html
Checking Out Mayahuel and Revisiting Benoit - The New York Times
Bars,Tequila,Alcoholic Beverages
June 16, 2009
6074
Mayahuel304 East Sixth Street (Second Avenue), (212) 253-5888.Mayahuel may be the world’s first tequila bar with a hypothesis — not a theme, like Spring Break Forever or That Night in Cabo, but an actual theory to be argued and defended.With Mayahuel, the cocktail lounge he opened in the East Village in May, Philip Ward painstakingly makes his case that tequila and its cousin, mezcal, are not occasions for sunburned debauchery, but rather opportunities for contemplative drinking. There’s not a margarita in sight, frozen or otherwise. The menu goes on for pages, so it’s unlikely that Mr. Ward just forgot. Clearly, a stand is being taken against the view of tequila as mindless fun.That doesn’t mean Mr. Ward, a veteran barman who built a following at Death & Co., one block east on Sixth Street, is against pleasure. But he is acutely interested in the savory, vegetal flavors of agave, wrapping spirits distilled from it in layers of smoke, spice and bitterness. The tequila in a great drink named Git Ur Lapsang Souchong (all cocktails are $13) is infused with smoked tea and topped off with tamarind soda.Even his fruity drinks have a serious edge. To drink the alluringly pink and soothingly sweet Watermelon Sugar, you must press your lips to a glass rimmed with salt and cayenne pepper. A cool, green number called Pilot Punch is a refreshing glass of cucumber, lime and blanco tequila with mint. It starts innocently enough until  a slow burn grips the back of your throat and you realize the drink has been packing an invisible hit of jalapeño.Tight quarters discourage rowdiness, let alone table-hopping. But glazed tiles and dark woodwork at least give you something to look at while you’re pinned in your straight-backed booth.There’s food, too, and it’s good enough to fortify two or three rounds of cocktails, without being so good that anybody will mistake Mayahuel for a restaurant. Tamales ($9) are dry, bland and heartless, but fatty pork belly ($12) more than makes up for it. Above all, the kitchen can fry. The best items here are hot tortilla chips  with three salsas ($8) and the churros ($8), which come with a dish of melted chocolate sprinkled, of course, with cayenne, just so you don’t forget where you are.