https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/30/arts/design/the-gallery-invasion-more-foreign-based-businesses-extend-to-us.html
The Gallery Invasion: More Foreign-Based Businesses Extend to U.S. - The New York Times
Art,Art Galleries,New York City,Los Angeles (Calif),Europe,Latin America,Fine Arts Exhibits
Oct. 27, 2016
3454
The gallery world is undergoing rapid change this year, as big international dealers expand their presence in the United States and abroad, and smaller European and Latin American art businesses establish their first outposts in New York and Los Angeles.The expansion is driven by multiple factors: a need to enlarge audiences, please artists and, in some cases, satisfy highly personal desires. But whatever the reason, the growing presence is striking.The outcroppings range from the London dealer Timothy Taylor’s intimate 544-square-foot space in an early-20th-century townhouse in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan to the 116,000-square-foot complex in downtown Los Angeles occupied by Hauser Wirth & Schimmel, an outpost of the European dealers Hauser & Wirth.Nicholas Cinque, director of Sotheby’s S|2 Gallery, the private sale and gallery arm of the auction house’s contemporary art department, partly attributes the American expansion to a need for platforms enabling artists to explore new projects and to engage with different audiences.“With these geographic outposts, they are able to interact with new collectors, curators and critics, as well as with the greater public over all,” Mr. Cinque said, adding, “The new spaces offer the opportunity to engage the art community on their home fields.”Natasha Degen, chairwoman of the art-market master’s program at the Fashion Institute of Technology, essentially agreed, while saying that many galleries are opening overseas outposts for the same reasons they always have: “to broaden their collector base, develop a more international reputation, grow their business.”But the larger galleries choosing to flex their muscles in the United States may present a slightly different case, she said, in that “their growth is more about attracting and retaining artists.”“The standard for international representation is still Leo Castelli’s so-called ‘global cooperative gallery model,’ where artists show with one gallery in New York, another in Paris, etc., and the galleries must cooperate with each other,” Ms. Degen said. Mega-galleries, in particular, are frustrated by the need to juggle all this, though, “especially as art fairs demand greater coordination and create more competition for fresh material.” The ideal, she said, is to represent an artist in every market worldwide.Other economic issues are also at play in New York and Los Angeles. While the British gallery Lisson set up a huge new outpost in Chelsea last spring, more galleries are setting up in smaller New York spaces or in neighborhoods where rents are lower than in prime Chelsea locations on Manhattan’s Far West Side — the Lower East Side or the flower district south of Midtown, for example.The availability of less expensive gallery space in Los Angeles is no doubt an impetus for expansion there by the far-flung galleries Hauser & Wirth and Sprüth Magers. Los Angeles is also home for many artists they represent, like Mark Bradford, Thomas Houseago and Paul McCarthy, for Hauser Wirth & Schimmel, and John Baldessari, Ryan Trecartin and Ed Ruscha, for Sprüth Magers.Then there are personal factors, like the desires of a younger generation. The New York branches of Lisson and of Almine Rech, which is expanding from Brussels, Paris and London to the Upper East Side, are run by children of the galleries’ founders. Galeria Nara Roesler, based in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, opened in Manhattan’s flower district in January; Alexandre Roesler, a son of Nara Roesler, oversees the New York space from Brazil.Mr. Taylor, who opened his Chelsea gallery last month, said he had been visiting New York and watching its art scene since the early 1980s. “I very much like the energy of the city — at this time of my life, I feel like it’s the right thing to do,” he said.David Hoyland, owner of the London-based gallery Seventeen, which plans to open a 3,000-square-foot space next month on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, is in the process of moving to New York himself and calls his choice “more personal than business.”Yet dealers like Matthew Flowers, of Flowers Gallery in Chelsea — whose business was founded by his mother, Angela — warn that competition for newcomers could be tough. Mr. Flowers ran galleries in Los Angeles and on Manhattan’s Upper East Side before establishing the one in Chelsea in 2009.“There may not be quite enough collectors to keep everyone happy.” he said. “You have to work hard at it — it’s not an easy business to be in.”Gallerygoers have been intrigued by some of the inaugural exhibitions. Lisson’s featured recent works by Carmen Herrera, a 101-year-old Havana-born, New York-based abstract artist. Timothy Taylor is providing a showcase for the Pritzker Prize-winning Mexican architect Luis Barragán and artists inspired by his work. Almine Rech is showing over 50 works created between 1912 and 1967 by Calder and Picasso, with grandsons of the artists as curators.But more important, the overseas galleries are eventually likely to bring in artists who are not as well known in the United States, said Paul Melton, who runs the master’s degree program in art business at Sotheby’s Institute of Art in New York. “They can provide a broader cross-section of what’s going on, particularly in the world of contemporary art,” he said. “We all benefit from that.”Overseas galleries are newly setting up shop in the United States. Here’s a look at some of them.GALERIA NARA ROESLER Based in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro; opened a 950-square-foot gallery in Manhattan’s flower district in January.LISSON A British gallery with two outposts in London and one in Milan; opened an 8,500-square-foot gallery in Chelsea in May.TIMOTHY TAYLOR A London gallery that opened a 544-square-foot space, Timothy Taylor 16×34, in an early-20th-century Chelsea townhouse last month.SPRÜTH MAGERS Has galleries in Berlin and London; opened its first gallery in the United States in Los Angeles in February.ALMINE RECH Has galleries in Brussels, Paris and London and is opening one this month on Manhattan’s Upper East Side.SEVENTEEN An 11-year-old gallery in the Dalston section of London; plans to open a 3,000-square-foot space on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in November.HAUSER & WIRTH This gallery teamed up with Paul Schimmel, former chief curator of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, on a 116,000-square-foot complex that opened in March in Los Angeles’s downtown arts district. It is also building a 38,000-square-foot gallery in Chelsea, scheduled to open in 2018. It has another gallery on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.GALERIE PERROTIN It has operated a 4,300-square-foot gallery space in a 1932 building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan since 2013, will move to a 25,000-square-foot building on the Lower East Side next spring.