https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/20/science/juno-hobbled-but-healthy-after-glitch-nasa-says.html
Juno Hobbled but Healthy After Glitch, NASA Says - The New York Times
Juno (Spacecraft),Jupiter (Planet),National Aeronautics and Space Administration,Southwest Research Institute
Oct. 19, 2016
4974
Hours before a close flyby of Jupiter on Wednesday, NASA’s Juno spacecraft experienced a malfunction that scrambled plans for peering deep into the planet.At 1:47 a.m. Eastern, the spacecraft put itself into “safe mode” and restarted its computer. Juno’s instruments shut down, scuttling observations that were to take place as it passed 3,000 miles above Jupiter’s clouds.NASA officials said that Juno appeared healthy, however, and engineers were working to pinpoint what went wrong.“The spacecraft is in totally safe condition,” said Scott Bolton of Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, the mission’s principal investigator, at a news conference on Wednesday.The computer problem followed a glitch that led mission managers last week to put off one last firing of Juno’s main engine in order to refine its orbit. Occurring at closest approach, that engine burn would have shortened Juno’s orbit, bringing it close to Jupiter every 14 days instead of every 53.With each close pass, instruments on Juno are to peer beneath Jupiter’s dense clouds. With enough passes, scientists should be able to piece together a picture of the planet’s composition.But as the propulsion system was being turned on last week, there were problems with valves that regulate the flow of helium that pressurizes the engine fuel. Two valves took several minutes to open, instead of a few seconds, raising concern.“We need to better understand this issue before moving forward with a burn of the main engine,” Rick Nybakken, the Juno project manager at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said in a statement.The next opportunity to shorten the orbit will be during Juno’s close approach on Dec. 11.Juno launched on Aug. 5, 2011, and entered orbit around Jupiter on July 4. On Aug. 27, the spacecraft made the first close swing by Jupiter with its instruments turned on. Even that one pass has revealed interesting hints about the solar system’s largest planet.Juno measured radio waves emanating from 215 to 250 miles below Jupiter’s colorful striped cloud tops. The data shows that these mysterious stripes descend toward the surface.“Whatever is making those colors, whatever is making those stripes, is still existing pretty far down into Jupiter,” Dr. Bolton said.Meanwhile, Juno’s camera provided the first clear pictures of Jupiter’s polar regions. A huge hexagonal cloud pattern sits over Saturn’s north pole, and scientists had wondered if similar patterns might appear on Jupiter. So far they have not.But Juno did observe a cyclone that rose higher than the surrounding clouds like a thunderhead, casting a shadow. The storm was nearly 4,000 miles across. “That’s more than half the size of the earth,” Dr. Bolton said. “It is a truly towering beast of a storm.”Dr. Bolton said that even if there turned out to be a serious failure with the engine and Juno needed to remain in its current orbit, the mission could achieve its scientific objectives, but it would take longer.“The worst-case scenario is I have to be patient,” Dr. Bolton said.