https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/09/fashion/the-lot-radio-bar-brooklyn-williamsburg.html
A Makeshift Bar on a Dusty Brooklyn Patch - The New York Times
Lot Radio (Brooklyn  NY  Bar),Bars and Nightclubs,Williamsburg (Brooklyn  NY)
May 9, 2017
4211
Although the Lot Radio lies within spitting distance of Williamsburg’s looming hotels and overflowing nightclubs, this makeshift hangout, which began as an internet radio station and coffee shop, conjures a charmingly antediluvian era. Housed in a shipping container without running water, it began selling alcohol in January, and has shown that something spontaneous and genuine can still thrive here.“We didn’t want a place that was that impressive,” said Francois Vaxelaire, the founder. On a sunny Monday, he sat at a blistered wooden table as muted house music blooped. Nearby, a woman with gold teeth and a Black Flag-inspired shirt cracked open a drink. “We have a lot of old regulars who come with their dogs.”The PlaceA triangular patch along Nassau Avenue, hemmed in by warehouses, a public school and a church. The black shipping container is split into a D.J. booth and a kiosk. In the yard, mismatched chairs, stacked pallet tables and umbrellas rest on a bed of gravel and cigarette butts. There is a portable toilet and, sometimes, a fire pit. It would not be out of place next to a flea market in the Catskills.The CrowdEclectic weekend throngs: indie rock dudes, women in overalls and Spielberg caps, tourist families, meandering bros in board shorts caught in the limbo between nearby Berry Park and Spritzenhaus. “It’s not a bar,” said Lloyd Harris, a director, who D.J.s under the name Lloydski. “But, oddly enough, there is no other place for you to chill outside and have a beer and a conversation.”PlaylistThe emphasis on electronic music, disco and soul is a buzzing undercurrent, but there is rarely dancing, even when D.J.s like Nina Kraviz, Francois K and Busy P spin (programming runs from 8 a.m. to midnight). “It’s not a spectacle,” Mr. Vaxelaire said. In recent months, the Lot has broadcast from Marfa and held its anniversary party at Brooklyn Bazaar.Getting InAll ages, but must be over 21 to drink.DrinksCheap. Warsteiner cans are $4. Wine is sold by the glass ($7) or, preferably, the bottle ($30) and shared in paper cups. Coffee and pastries are $4 or less.