https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/sports/basketball/new-york-knicks-free-agency.html
Knicks Again Find Themselves at a Crossroads for Free Agency - The New York Times
Basketball,New York Knicks,Free Agents (Sports),Jackson  Phil (1945- ),Baker  Ron (1993- ),Rose  Derrick
June 29, 2017
3570
The Phil Jackson era is over, ending just in time for the chaos of free agency, which begins at 12:01 a.m. Saturday. And as is almost always the case, the Knicks find themselves at a crossroads.They could use help at point guard and on the wings and, for that matter, need someone to replace Jackson at the top of the organization. But finding that person could take a while.More pressing are decisions to be made about the current roster — whom to subtract and whom to possibly add — and leading that effort will be Steve Mills, who remains on board as the Knicks’ general manager. It remains to be seen if Mills will hew to some of Jackson’s personnel preferences.Ron Baker may serve as an example. While Baker, an undrafted point guard, played sparingly as a rookie last season, averaging 16.5 minutes in 52 games, he was a favorite of Jackson’s. It had been hard not to think the Knicks would try to re-sign Baker, who is now a restricted free agent. But with Jackson gone, will that logic still hold?Baker is one of four Knicks who become free agents, although the other three — point guard Derrick Rose, small forward Justin Holiday and guard Sasha Vujacic — are all unrestricted.The Knicks also have 11 players under contract, although the deals for Maurice Ndour, Chasson Randle and Marshall Plumlee are not fully guaranteed.While Jackson had remained open to Rose’s return, even after drafting guard Frank Ntilikina with the eighth pick in last week’s N.B.A. draft and Rose professing a desire to return, remaining with the Knicks could prove complicated. Rose underwent knee surgery, again, in April, and it remains to be seen how he views his value and whether he would accept a modest short-term deal.The Knicks might have about $20 million in cap space when free agency begins. They could spend some on bringing back Holiday, the 6-foot 6-inch, 28-year-old swingman who was a nice find last season.Holiday can make 3-pointers and is a long-limbed and capable defender. Of the Knicks’ nine best-rated lineups last season that played at least 25 minutes together, Holiday was a part of seven.But the Knicks may have their eyes on larger targets. Point guard Jrue Holiday, Justin’s younger brother, will also be a free agent and the team has been linked to him.Jrue Holiday, who is 27, averaged 15.4 points and 7.3 assists for the New Orleans Pelicans last year, but with the cap expected to be $99 million, Holiday could command an average salary of $20 million or more and become too pricey for the Knicks.The same could be said of Kyle Lowry, a three-time All-Star for the Toronto Raptors who could end up as the best point guard on the market and will almost certainly cost more than Holiday will.If the Knicks determine they are in definite need of a point guard, they could also chase Jeff Teague or George Hill. Teague, 29, made $8 million with the Indiana Pacers last season but could double that this summer. Hill, 31, is a strong shooter and defender but could choose to stay with a playoff team in Utah.If the Knicks are chasing firepower on the wings, they could set their eyes on Danilo Gallinari or Dion Waiters, or on P. J. Tucker if they seek a defensive stopper. All could be affordable enough to sign but would leave the team with little wiggle room to fill out the roster.But the biggest decision weighing on the Knicks is not just whom they should acquire but also whom they should keep. Although Jackson is gone, Carmelo Anthony’s future with the club remains uncertain. He has two years and a little over $54 million remaining on his contract, which includes a player option for the final season. He also maintains a no-trade clause that gives him power over his exit.Jackson, of course, wanted Anthony gone. Others still in the Knicks’ front office may feel the same way. But the odds are that Anthony will still be a Knick when next season rolls around, but with at least a few new teammates.