https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/theater/david-oyelowo-othello-new-york-theater-workshop.html
For David Oyelowo, the Time Has Come to Play Othello - The New York Times
Theater,Actors and Actresses,Othello (Play),Shakespeare  William,Oyelowo  David,New York Theater Workshop,Broccoli  Barbara (1960- ),Nyong'o  Lupita,Craig  Daniel
Nov. 16, 2016
6753
For a long time, the British-Nigerian actor David Oyelowo didn’t want to play Othello. Years ago, before his move from London to Los Angeles, a few producers approached him. He turned them down. He loved Shakespeare, of course, but the roles that excited him were Coriolanus, Macbeth, Henry V. Not the Moor. “I don’t want to do anything that feels pedestrian or obvious,” he said.But Mr. Oyelowo, 40, changed his mind. Beginning on Tuesday, Nov. 22, he’ll play the title role in New York Theater Workshop’s modern-dress production of “Othello,” directed by Sam Gold and featuring the action star Daniel Craig, doing secret service as Iago.Still, that change took its time coming. Barbara Broccoli, a producer, was determined to have him and worked on him for more than two years before he agreed. (“His performance is going to be legendary,” she wrote in an email.)What convinced him? It had been a decade since he last appeared onstage, in Aquila Theater Company’s “Prometheus Bound,” and in the intervening years he had noted skeptical attitudes toward President Obama, a man he admires. He had also witnessed #OscarsSoWhite, in which the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences had neglected to nominate any actors of color in 2016. The year before, the academy rebuffed his own nuanced depiction of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the 2014 film “Selma,” a portrayal A. O. Scott in The New York Times approvingly described as shaded with “grace and dignity and also with streaks of humor, weariness and doubt.”After the “Selma” snub, Mr. Oyelowo told an audience at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival, “We, as black people, have been celebrated more for when we are subservient, when we are not being leaders or kings or being at the center of our own narrative.”In these circumstances, Mr. Oyelowo began to feel that Othello, the brilliant general whom the Venetian state both honors and mistrusts, would offer him the chance to explore “what it means to be celebrated on the basis of your talent but to be derided on the basis of your color,” he said. The role also offers an opportunity to investigate some of his closely held beliefs about faith, marriage and the vulnerabilities of virtue. He and Mr. Craig preferred a more intimate Off Broadway theater for this work, making “Othello” one of the most difficult and coveted tickets of the season.It’s not every actor who can manage eloquence while eating a vegan chicken sandwich. Mr. Oyelowo can. Still dressed in his Army fatigues costume, he spoke in an East Village cafe on the Wednesday after the presidential election, when the gray and gloomy weather seemed to mirror the moods of most everyone in the neighborhood.Mr. Oyelowo was careful, almost cagey, in discussing the election and the recent “Brexit” vote, but he did return several times to the idea that while these contests were about “so much more than race,” the winning voters in each expressed a hankering for a time when “the power base as it pertains to people of color was different,” he said.On film, on television and in the theater, Mr. Oyelowo’s power and talent have rarely been in question. His face is a study in soft circles — full lips, plump cheeks, round melt-away eyes — but there’s muscularity there, too, a contrast the camera loves, and a deep moral seriousness that twines with his surface geniality.“He’s kind of an amazing balance of import and also a kind of levity and light,” said the director J. J. Abrams, who produced Mr. Oyelowo’s forthcoming film, “The God Particle.” Rosamund Pike, who stars opposite him in “A United Kingdom,” described him as “truthful, eloquent, impassioned, soulful and powerful.”Mr. Oyelowo grew up in England and Nigeria. His interest in theater “always comes back to a girl — as Othello would also say,” he joked. When he was a teenager, the pastor’s daughter he was keen on enticed him to a youth theater. He never got the girl (he later dated her sister), but he did get the acting bug.Not long after graduating from the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, he was cast as Henry VI in a Royal Shakespeare Company production, reportedly the first time a major troupe had hired a black actor to play an English king. He followed that up with three seasons on the BBC spy series “Spooks” and then moved to America in search of better roles.In the last several years, in addition to “Selma,” he has been nominated for an Emmy for his work in the TV movie “Nightingale,” and now appears in Mira Nair’s “Queen of Katwe” and “A United Kingdom,” Amma Assante’s biographical story of an interracial marriage. (Unlike Othello’s, the marriage between President Seretse Khama of Botswana and his white English wife, Ruth Williams Khama, endured happily and without strangling.)He is cautious in his choice of roles and concerned with what they convey about black men. Eventually he might like to play a drug dealer or a drug addict. He might like to play a pimp or another sort of criminal. Or a servant. Or a best friend. But not now. And not soon. “I don’t have that luxury,” he said.Instead, Mr. Oyelowo has built his career on playing good men and on making that goodness interesting. Many actors gravitate toward morally suspect characters, but he is committed to portraying virtue as “something to be celebrated — entertaining, compelling, dramatic,” he said. Sacrifice is interesting to him. So is devotion. So is ennobled suffering, though he imbues his characters with enough flawed humanity that they come across as people, not icons.He approaches his work with “purity of spirit,” said Lupita Nyong’o, his co-star in “Queen of Katwe,” the story of a Ugandan chess prodigy. “Without making him sound saintly, which he is not, there’s just honest-to-goodness goodness about him.”He and his wife, the actress Jessica Oyelowo, whom he met as a teenager in the National Musical Youth Theater, are both born-again Christians; that experience of faith informs the parts he plays and how he plays them.As Mr. Gold, the director of “Othello,” said in a telephone conversation: “David connects very well to a man with a strict moral code. David seems very grounded in the moral code that comes with a Christian view of love and marriage and a military view of brotherhood.”His Othello is explicitly a convert to Christianity and is clearly influenced by Mr. Oyelowo’s own experience of marriage and what he might feel if that marriage were compromised. Of Othello’s union with Desdemona (Rachel Brosnahan), he said: “When you make vows that you actually truly keep, and you are consistently putting the other person first, there are massive rewards, familially, personally, emotionally, spiritually. When it is decimated and desecrated there’s real loss.”Ms. Oyelowo is, like Desdemona, white, and Mr. Oyelowo alluded to prejudice they had encountered early in their courtship. Mr. Oyelowo’s own father had opposed the engagement. “His refrain was, ‘One day she’s going to wake up and realize you’re black.’”But his father now adores his wife and their four children. “So that’s been a beautiful thing, to watch him heal through my marriage,” he said. And while Mr. Oyelowo often adopts a method acting approach to his roles, he hasn’t felt any particular marital jealousy while rehearsing. “Thankfully, I haven’t taken it to that level,” he said.Mr. Oyelowo was reluctant to dwell on racism he has experienced personally or professionally and how that might relate to the tragedy. Considering the play and his career through the lens of race were perspectives he found limiting. “It diminishes my ability to express myself as a man, as a husband, as a father, as all the things I also am,” he said somberly.He suggested that if I were speaking to Mr. Craig, his “amazing co-star,” whiteness would not be a point of interest. “The conversation would never go to, ‘Have you ever felt racist feelings toward black people; have you ever felt real jealousy?’” Mr. Oyelowo said.In a brief chat at the end of a rehearsal, the conversation did go there, but Mr. Craig sidestepped the question fluidly. “What’s amazing about this play is that it’s so emotionally charged, it’s so complicated, it’s not defined by the fact that Othello is black and Iago is white,” he said. He added: “But it’s really important that you address that within the play.”Mr. Craig was more direct in his admiration for Mr. Oyelowo, “a stupendous actor,” he said. “He has access to a huge amount of emotion, but not just in a raw way, in a very accurate, intelligent way.”“Othello” is somewhat unusual in that the adversaries Othello and Iago are both allotted lead roles. Othello gets the title, Iago gets the lines. And though this production is distinguished by having those roles played by two men who have played James Bond (Mr. Craig in several blockbuster films, Mr. Oyelowo in the recent audiobook of “Trigger Mortis”), the rivalry between them seems to be friendly, built on mutual respect and rapport.“The more you like each other, the more mean you can be to each other,” Mr. Oyelowo said. “I’ve got to know him well enough that I can throw him about the room and spit at him.”Perhaps these are other reasons he took on Othello. It fuses the kinds of roles he specializes in with the kinds he doesn’t usually allow himself to play. Othello is both the lead role and the best-friend part, central to the narrative and peripheral to the plot against him. He is hero and villain, victim and murderer, lover and killer, leader and follower. Othello is utterly unlike Mr. Oyelowo, and yet for a man still working for recognition and equality, perhaps not always so far apart.“He wants to thrive,” Mr. Oyelowo said. “He has this talent of being a man of war, but that’s not enough — he has to integrate into this society.”