http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/11/fashion/attaboy-in-the-lower-east-side.html
Attaboy on the Lower East Side - The New York Times
Bars and Nightclubs,Cocktails,Alcoholic Beverages,Attaboy (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Lower East Side (Manhattan  NY)
July 10, 2013
6147
When Milk & Honey closed on New Year’s Eve 2012, disciples of the neo-speakeasy were left without a place of worship. No longer. In March, two longstanding bartenders from Milk & Honey — Sam Ross and Michael McIlroy (tending bar above) — rechristened the bar as Attaboy.Pressed tin ceilings were ripped out. Booths were removed. And the byzantine reservations system was scrapped. But much remains the same. There is still no menu. For the staff, suspenders remain de rigueur. And the cocktails are still a mixologist’s dream.THE PLACEUnassuming is an understatement. As before, an unmarked steel door is set back from the sidewalk on a desolate stretch of Eldridge Street. Inside, the space feels roomier than it did during the Milk & Honey days, welcoming enough to warrant mingling. Flickering candles, amber bulbs of light, and a vintage exit sign evoke the feeling of a decades-old den.THE CROWDDowntown denizens in their 20s and 30s who are weary enough of handmade cocktails not to whip out their smartphones to Instagram every round. Hoodies mingle happily with high heels. There are baseball caps and bow ties, sometimes on the same person. Regulars greet bartenders with bro hugs and high-fives.THE PLAYLISTMusic takes a back seat to spirited conversation. A recent evening featured the soulful croons of Solomon Burke (at a patron’s request) and an instrumental version of “Ain’t No Sunshine” reminiscent of Phish.GETTING INUnlike the original Milk & Honey, the bar does not take reservations. Knock repeatedly but with restraint. If that doesn’t work, press the buzzer. Arrive before 9 p.m. for booths or a bar stool. By 11 p.m., especially on weekends, lines form outside, and parties larger than four may be turned away because of space limitations.DRINKSCocktails are $16, wine starts at $12, and beer starts at $9. There is no written menu. The bartender may ask for a liquor of choice, and whether one prefers “light and citrusy or more intense?” Opt for intense and you may receive a white Negroni made with Avèze.  SHEILA MARIKAR 