https://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/09/realestate/09livi.html
Wal-Mart Far; Reservoirs Near - The New York Times
Westchester County (NY),Housing,Real Estate
Nov. 7, 2008
8872
LAURA KEY, who moved to this sprawling town on the northern edge of Westchester County 18 months ago, isn’t the least bit fazed by having to drive six miles for a quart of milk and a loaf of bread. In fact, it seems a small price to pay for the tranquillity that Somers has in abundance.“I don’t mind at all not having a Wal-Mart store close by,” said Mrs. Key, who came from densely populated Williamsburg, Va., with her two sons and her husband, Sanford, a priest at the local St. Luke’s Episcopal Church.Outi and Richard Crannell, on the other hand, moved to Somers 15 years ago from North Salem, which they found too remote and undeveloped. Their son and daughter grew up here, and both now attend the local high school. For Mrs. Crannell, a watercolorist who also teaches Finnish part time in Manhattan, Somers is “all about sharing a very strong sense of community.”She is active in a community group that cooks for families undergoing difficult times. The group became very involved in helping families affected by the terrorist attacks of 2001.“The word goes out when someone is in need, and people here pitch right in,” Mrs. Crannell said. “I have come to appreciate that quality about the townspeople very much,” she said.But people venturing to Somers from more heavily populated areas can express misgivings about isolation,  real estate agents say. Sometimes Somers can be a hard sell.“When they don’t see shopping centers, sidewalks or streetlights,” said Christina Kevelin, a broker for Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage, “some buyers just can’t handle it, and they get right back in the car. Not everyone can take all this open space.”To which Mary Beth Murphy, the town supervisor, responds, maybe outsiders just aren’t able to appreciate the area’s beauty. For the most part, Ms. Murphy, who is an advocate of preserving open space in the 33-acre town, says she has been preaching to the choir during her 11 years in office. And the choir has grown: the population, 20,045 today, was 18,281 in 2000.All but a quarter square mile of Somers lies within the New York City watershed area, so despite opposition from some developers and their lawyers, the town has succeeded in the steps it has taken to keep development at bay.A decade ago, it shifted to two- and three-acre zoning for many areas and restricted tree-cutting. In 2005 it acquired the 654-acre Angle Fly Preserve, one of the last natural brook trout spawning streams in Westchester. The acquisition was a  result of  a collective effort involving the town, the county and local preservation groups. A developer had proposed building 108 homes there.WHAT YOU’LL FINDNone of that is to suggest that the area is free of development. Just south of Putnam County, the landscape of trees, hills and reservoirs is punctuated by buildings, most tucked discreetly in along winding, hilly streets.The largest and most noticeable is Heritage Hills, a 2,600-unit town-house condominium complex on 1,100 acres, built over a 30-year period beginning in the 1970s. The development, which was originally age-restricted, occupies about 5 percent of Somers’s 33 square miles; its 4,000 residents represent about 20 percent of the population.The town boomed in the 1980s and 1990s after I.B.M. moved in and made Somers real estate a hot commodity. In the late 1970s Wilner Road was the site of the first colonials, splits and ranches built with I.B.M. executives in mind. They offer 2,500 square feet of space, which at the time was considered large.During the next decades, more spacious homes began to line the streets, with middle management moving into the older houses and upper management buying the newer models, said Ms. Kevelin of Coldwell Banker.Somers is bounded by Yorktown on the west and the Muscoot Reservoir on the east and south. It is composed of small neighborhoods including Lincolndale, Shenorock, Purdys, Amawalk and Granite Springs. In all, there are nine post office addresses within Somers, including Katonah and Mahopac.The Elephant Hotel, built in the early 1800s and now on the National Register of Historic Places, serves as the town hall. It is at the junction of Routes 202 and 100, along with a cluster of professional buildings and several small shops. The intersection bears little resemblance to a town center. But Somers is reviewing a proposal to build a mixed-use development with residences, stores and a village green, on a 79-acre site elsewhere in town.WHAT YOU’LL PAYAs it has in most places this year, the housing market has slowed considerably in Somers. The median sale price of a single-family home in late October was $505,000; the average length of time on the market was 152 days. Five years ago at the same time, the median sale price was $530,000 and days on the market averaged 133.From the beginning of this year through October, 88 single-family homes sold; the figure for the same period last year was 139.In some parts of town, smaller homes can be bought for less than $200,000, like a 78-year-old four-room cottage listed for $179,000, down from $199,900 a month ago. A four-bedroom 40-year-old raised ranch, which has been on the market since July, is listed at $649,900. And a 14-year-old colonial with four bedrooms is going for $979,000, down from $1.49 million in April.Houses priced over $1 million are taking the longest to sell. Because sales have slowed and credit is tight, rentals have become a popular option, Ms. Kevelin said. So far this year, 64 apartments and houses have been rented, with two-bedroom units ranging in price from $1,450 to $4,700.WHAT TO DOResidents like Mr. and Mrs. Key and their sons, 12 and 7, are fans of Somers’s parks, among them the 82-acre Reis Park, which has a 1.5-mile fitness trail with exercise stations along the way for pulse checks, leg stretches, chinning and sit-ups, among other things. The park also includes picnic tables, ball fields, tennis and basketball courts, an area for skateboarders, a dance pavilion and a library. For hikers, the 68-acre Koegel Park offers myriad trails.Sightseers as well as residents often head for the county’s Muscoot Farm, a functioning restoration of a 19th-century farm, with barnyard animals, milking demonstrations and hayrides.Another county park in Somers is Landson Bird Sanctuary, which has hiking and cross-country skiing trails.For the movies and other entertainment, most Somers residents travel to Yorktown or across the Connecticut border to Danbury.THE SCHOOLSThe Somers Central School District includes an elementary school for kindergarten through second grade, an intermediate school for Grades 3 through 5, a middle school for Grades 6 through 8, and the high school, which serves Grades 9 through 12.The football team, the Tuskers, were  undefeated this year until the semifinals of the sectional tournament.Enrollment has grown by about 1,000 students over the last decade, said Joanne Marien, the superintendent of schools. To accommodate the current enrollment of 3,400, the district recently completed a middle-school addition, consisting of classrooms, a new cafeteria and a performing arts center, and a high school addition of  science classrooms, a cafeteria, a new gymnasium and two synthetic turf fields. To finance the construction, district voters approved a $53.4 million bond referendum on the first vote three years ago.SAT averages last spring were 560 in reading, 573 in math and 562 in writing, Dr. Marien said. Statewide averages were 488, 503 and 475.Of the 235 who graduated last year, 82 percent are attending four-year colleges and 12 percent are enrolled in two-year institutions.THE COMMUTEThe 50-mile train ride to Manhattan on Metro-North Railroad’s Harlem Line takes about 65 minutes from stations in Katonah and Goldens Bridge, just outside Somers. For either station, a round-trip ticket costs $22.80 and a monthly commuter pass costs $255.78 if bought online.THE HISTORYThe Elephant Hotel was built in the early 1820s by Hachaliah Bailey, a local farmer who in 1805 had bought an African elephant  — one of the first ever imported to the United States — having found her for sale at a cattle market in New York. He named her Old Bet and originally planned to use her as a draft animal, but he ended up forming a traveling menagerie that eventually grew into the Ringling Brothers Barnum & Bailey Circus.The hotel, which over the years served as a meeting place for circus owners and a stagecoach stop, was built in the elephant’s memory; a statue of Old Bet stands out front.