https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/us/rights-groups-sue-over-police-tactics-in-baton-rouge-protests.html
Rights Groups Sue Over Police Tactics in Baton Rouge Protests - The New York Times
Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,American Civil Liberties Union,Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Baton Rouge (La),Blacks
July 13, 2016
3662
BATON ROUGE, La. — Local justice organizations and the American Civil Liberties Union sued local and state officials and law enforcement agencies in federal court on Wednesday, accusing them of abusing peaceful protesters and violating their constitutional rights.In their lawsuit, the organizations asked for a temporary restraining order and a permanent injunction prohibiting the police from using strong-arm tactics against protesters.The Baton Rouge Police and Louisiana State Police came under harsh criticism on Sunday after hundreds of people were arrested over the weekend during rallies to protest the police killing of a Alton Sterling, who had been selling bootleg CDs. Police were videotaped using military-style gear and pulling protesters off private property. Several journalists were also arrested.“This has completely chilled the environment, where communities feel unsafe,” said Sima Atri, a staff lawyer at the New Orleans Workers’ Center for Racial Justice. “It’s having a serious effect not only on the First Amendment and the right to protest but also a much broader effect on the movement.”The lawsuit was accompanied by several affidavits from protesters — including the executive director of the A.C.L.U. of Louisiana, Marjorie R. Esman — detailing the tactics.“I watched as the cops brutally tackled, shoved and arrested protesters,” a protester, Caressa Chester, wrote in her affidavit.L’Jean McKneely, a Baton Rouge Police spokesman, said the department did not comment on pending litigation. Cpl. Doug Cain of the State Police said the agency needed time to review the lawsuit before commenting.Earlier this week, he told local reporters that the police were justified in keeping roads from being blocked.“If we get a group that wants to be disruptive to the highway system, we’re going to put people in place to shut it down,” Corporal Cain told The Advocate newspaper.The lawsuit came after the teenage son of Mr. Sterling faced reporters to urge the nation to protest peacefully in his father’s name.“I feel people in general, no matter their race is, should come together as one united family,” Cameron Sterling, 15, said at a news conference held in front of the convenience store where his father died. “There should be no more arguments, disagreements, crimes — everyone should be one united family.”Mr. Sterling was killed July 5 after two Baton Rouge officers went to the Triple S Food Mart in north Baton Rouge responding to a complaint of someone who had threatened another man with a gun. The police said Mr. Sterling matched that description, but he refused to obey police orders.Video showed the officers sitting on top of him and firing upon him after another officer alerted that Mr. Sterling had a gun. An affidavit filed in court to obtain a search warrant for the store’s surveillance video asserted that Mr. Sterling reached for his gun, but protesters who have watched the video over and over again say Mr. Sterling had already been subdued.“My father was a good man: That was his sacrifice to show everyone what had been going on in life,” Cameron said. “It should give everyone a push that everyone should be together, not against each other. Everyone needs to be on one chord, not a different note. Everyone needs to be together, not apart.”