http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/01/fashion/01GOLDSMITH.html
Why Is the Millionaire Zac Goldsmith Running for Parliament? - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Families and Family Life,Goldsmith  Zac
Oct. 30, 2009
6010
LONDONZAC GOLDSMITH, millionaire playboy,  eco-warrior and quixotic Conservative candidate for Parliament, is trying to explain why his bid for political power should be seen as more than a rich kid’s flight of environmental fancy.“I mean, what is so radical about pushing for a clean car fleet in five years or environmental taxes,” he said, as he drove his banged-up Prius through the dark streets of Richmond, the affluent London suburb in which he is waging his campaign. The nub of a hand-rolled cigarette  — at least his 20th of the day —  is clenched in his teeth, but it does little to slow the rat-a-tat-tat of his aristocratic patter.“Our green manifesto is the greenest in the history of the Conservative Party,” he continued, but said it would be a challenge, as he praised the environmental bona fides of the Conservative Party chief David Cameron, whom he had introduced at a political event earlier that evening. “You know I don’t really have faith in politicians  —  this is quite a sleazy business. But there is no law which says that all politicians will turn out to be  scumbags.”True enough, and for rookie politicians like Mr. Goldsmith, another first law of politics is do no harm to the party leader  —  especially when he is riding high in the polls, as is Mr. Cameron, who will face the embattled Gordon Brown in a general election this spring.So, after a brief introduction by Mr. Goldsmith, the show belonged to Mr. Cameron. Afterward, Mr. Cameron was off, without even a handshake for the man he had come to support.Asked about the abrupt departure, Mr. Cameron’s aides pleaded the heaviest of schedules. But doing away with the usual grips and smiles is a reminder that, as the election approaches, the Tories are not quite sure what to do with Frank Zacharias Robin Goldsmith.He is, after all, a 34-year-old chain-smoking multimillionaire who was kicked out of Eton, pushes an activist environmental agenda that is more Greenpeace than Al Gore and whose pursuit of  his brother’s sister-in-law, the society fixture Alice Rothschild  — Mr. Goldsmith recently separated from his wife, Sheherazade Ventura, with whom he has three young children  —  has been red meat for London’s predatory tabloids. (“Goldsmith’s secret visits to heiress,” blared The Daily Mail three years ago when the affair became public.)To understand the son, however, one must start with the father  —  Sir James Goldsmith, the buccaneering corporate raider whose mix of effortless charm, hard-edged ambition and love of sweeping, controversial ideas offers up a complex paternal template.The similarities are many. Like his father, Mr. Goldsmith left Eton early, spurned higher education and finds beautiful women hard to resist  (Sir James once said that when you marry your mistress you create a vacancy, and he had children from three women). Also like his father, he loves to gamble, has a low esteem for the press and is convinced that drastic, radical action is required in order to save the planet.With his tall, tilting manner and his easy, gentlemanly way, Mr. Goldsmith has full command of most rooms that he enters  —  combining an informal Obama-like cool of dark suits and tieless white shirts with the calculation of a carefully tousled mop of blond hair.Earlier in October, he was in his element at a fund-raising auction in a chic Soho club, surrounded by friends, family and other supporters including Ade, the portly character actor who played the getaway driver in Guy Ritchie’s “Snatch,” and  the billionaire businessmen brothers Simon and David Reuben.“This country has come to a standstill,” he said. “I have to win in Richmond Park so I hope you will be generous tonight.”And indeed the money did flow  —  £10,000, or about $16,500,  for a weekend for four couples on a yacht in Nice, sponsored by the Reubens. And £11,000, or $18,000, for two prizes donated by Mr. Goldsmith’s good friend Sting  —  a weekend in Paris to see him in concert and a signed bass guitar.“There is no such thing as hundreds in the Goldsmith entourage,” the auctioneer needled, as he urged the well-heeled crowd to dig deeper.Quite so.As with questions about his marriage, Mr. Goldsmith politely declines to discuss his wealth, and reports have ranged from £10 million to £300 million. Over the past 30 months, he has spent £248,000, or over $400,000, and his opponent, Susan Kramer, a well regarded Liberal Democrat who remains popular in Richmond, admits to being overwhelmed. “Money makes a difference,” she said. “We have been outspent by multiples.”Mr. Goldsmith disputes that claim, but argues that it is organization and the issues, not money, that will count in the end. But his celebrity may work to his advantage.After all, he spent his childhood in Richmond with his younger brother, Ben, and his elder sister, Jemima, who has also lived much of her adult life in the public glare  —  first for her marriage to the Pakistani cricket star Imran Khan and then for her relationship with the actor Hugh Grant.For decades, the controversies of Sir James’s deal making and his open marriages made him and the Goldsmith family the ultimate tabloid target.So Richmond, a wealthy suburb in its own right, is no stranger to the peculiarities of the rich  —  especially when it comes to the Goldsmiths.“I do not organize my private life with an eye to my career,” Mr. Goldsmith said. “I am who I am, and so far, I have not had one question about my private life in Richmond.”Unlike many rich guys in the United States, who leap first into politics and then try to figure out why they did so, Mr. Goldsmith’s plunge is driven by a furious passion to quite literally save the world, if not his constituents.Describing a case of a poor aged woman in his district who was being hounded by a group of local louts, he fairly shook with rage, saying he wanted to “shoot these people” and that if the local council would not address her complaints, he himself would do it personally.He is a forceful advocate for eating local and organic food and says he practices what he preaches on his 300-acre farm in Devon where he raises pigs for sausage, cows for milk and many other organic treats.While he can seem naïve at times, his energy and high profile can also produce results.  He played a significant role in the successful opposition to a third runway at Heathrow over the last two years and fought to make such a stand part of the Conservative Party platform.In a brief interview, Mr. Cameron said that Mr. Goldsmith is “no ecological dreamer” and that his ideas were being “carried out all over the world.”Indeed, when Mr. Cameron took over the party in 2005, he welcomed Mr. Goldsmith’s environmental agenda, adding a dose of hip green politics to what had been the grayest of Britain’s political parties  — although since then the party has become less vocal on environmental matters.Among its more controversial bits, the manifesto called for limiting free parking at shopping centers (in support of small-town shops) and initiatives that would discourage the production of certain types of energy-wasting plasma TV’s  —  not to mention meatier proposals like lowering taxes for green homes and imposing taxes on domestic flights.Mr. Goldsmith traces his devotion to things green to a love for books written by the naturalist Gerald Durrell and early prodding from his father who, dating back to the 1960s, would warn bemused friends and associates about depleted fishing stocks and other environmental depredations.Until recently, he had a sufficient platform at The Ecologist, the obscure but well-regarded environmental magazine founded by his uncle Teddy, a green activist in his own right. But Mr. Goldsmith says that working at the family magazine, to say nothing of his bright-young-thing lifestyle, was not going to give him the respect and gravitas he craves.“Look, I could just go to the horse races and take lovely holidays,” he said. “But I have some strong views, and I want to make a difference.”Not to mention pleasing his father.“I was heavily influenced by him,” he said, as he paced around the block of his brother’s London office. “I would love to know now what he thinks of all these issues  —  he was the most interesting man I ever met.”Sir James would no doubt approve  —  as for Richmond’s voters, well, some remain torn. While Mr. Goldsmith’s élan has galvanized younger voters who are attracted to his overflowing pot of act-local-think-global ideas,  others wonder about his lack of experience (running The Ecologist has been his only job of serious note).“I just haven’t decided,” Carol Hegedus, a middle-age voter, said as she left the Cameron event. “He is a good environmentalist, but there is an unknown quality to him.”