http://www.nytimes.com/2006/02/03/theater/reviews/03rabb.html
Rabbit Hole - Review - Theater - The New York Times
Lindsay-Abaire  David,Nixon  Cynthia,Theater,Manhattan Theater Club,Biltmore Theater,Sullivan  Daniel,Daly  Tyne,Beatty  John Lee,Rabbit Hole (Play)
Feb. 3, 2006
3190
THE Biltmore Theater had better be paid up on its flood insurance. "Rabbit Hole," the wrenching new play by David Lindsay-Abaire that opened there last night, inspires such copious weeping among its audience that you wonder early on if you should have taken a life jacket. Do your best, though, to keep your eyes clear. Otherwise, you might miss some of the most revealingly nuanced acting to be seen on a stage or screen this year.Thanks to a certain former American president, it has become almost impossible to say that you feel someone else's pain without its sounding like a punch line. Yet the sad, sweet release of "Rabbit Hole" lies precisely in the access it allows to the pain of others, in its meticulously mapped empathy. With an exceptional, emotionally transparent five-member cast led by Cynthia Nixon and directed by Daniel Sullivan, this anatomy of grief doesn't so much jerk tears as tap them, from a reservoir of feelings common to anyone who  has experienced the landscape-shifting vacuum left by a death in the family.The plot of "Rabbit Hole," centered on the impact of the accidental killing of a small child, is one used regularly on television channels that specialize in domestic tales of redemption. You could even say that this play's shape is determined, as such television fare often is, by the steps of mourning commonly described in self-help manuals and support groups.Yet with "Rabbit Hole," a Manhattan Theater Club production, you never feel as if you have been mauled by a sentimental brute who keeps telling you to go ahead and cry, Honey. There's too much honesty, accuracy and humor in the details provided by the play and by the ensemble, which also includes Tyne Daly in an invigorating return to Broadway.With works like "Fuddy Meers" and "Kimberly Akimbo," Mr. Lindsay-Abaire established himself as a lyrical and understanding chronicler of people who somehow become displaced within their own lives. Like his peer in poetic empathy, Craig Lucas, Mr. Lindsay-Abaire has also shown a special affinity for female characters suddenly forced to re-evaluate the roles by which they define themselves.In this sense, "Rabbit Hole" runs true to form. But the drama also marks a significant departure for Mr. Lindsay-Abaire, which may leave his fans wondering if they have come to the right theater. A sprawling sense of whimsy and the grotesque has hitherto been Mr. Lindsay-Abaire's most conspicuous hallmark, with characters who suffer from extreme and exotic medical conditions, like amnesia or premature aging."Rabbit Hole" dispenses with the flashy metaphors. It is as if Mr. Lindsay-Abaire had set for himself the task of holding up a mirror to life that for once didn't come from a fun house. The resulting work belongs squarely to the school of what were once called kitchen-sink dramas. But the sink, in this instance, has been polished to a high, reflective sheen. The dialogue is blessed with Mr. Lindsay-Abaire's customary grace and wit. But it never sounds less than organic, at least not from the mouths of these superlative performers.Ms. Nixon — in her first Broadway appearance since the end of her hit television series, "Sex and the City" — portrays Becca, a onetime Sotheby's employee turned stay-at-home mom in a gleaming beige-toned residence in Larchmont, N.Y. (John Lee Beatty's revolving set and Christopher Akerland's lighting are subtly infused with an aura of fractured solidity.)That Becca's very reason to be has vanished registers by affecting degrees in the first scene, which finds her sorting laundry from a basket as she chats with her younger, all-too-lively sister, Izzy (Mary Catherine Garrison). But a loud silence pervades the room. And while the talk is inflected with the ritualistic familial rhythms of fondness and annoyance, the strain of something unspoken pulses. It takes you perhaps five minutes to realize that the child-size clothes Ms. Nixon is folding with such mechanical efficiency belonged to Becca's son, a 4-year-old boy named Danny who was struck and killed by a car eight months earlier.Every action, big and small, and every word that follows are informed by our awareness of the characters' awareness of Danny's death. Grief has obviously not brought the members of Becca's family — including her husband, Howie (John Slattery), and her mother, Nat (Ms. Daly) — closer together. Sorrow isolates them. Anything that anyone says is almost guaranteed to be the wrong thing.Jokes and cute anecdotes only wound; kindly advice is received as if it were a slap in the face. Family conversations are shaped by a spastic pattern of recrimination and apology, of irritation and misdirected comfort. This rueful awkwardness is only enhanced by the unexpected appearance of the high school student, Jason (John Gallagher Jr.), who was driving the car that killed Danny.This may sound like the stuff of blistering confrontations. Yet "Rabbit Hole" is, by and large, a quiet play. Mr. Sullivan's masterly,  cadenced production is filled with the silent ceremonial bustle and surface numbness that Emily Dickinson describes in her poems about houses where someone has recently died. Yet the internal despair of each character is always, unmistakably visible. It's as if every ensemble member were made of a glass that magnifies all thoughts and sensations within.Ms. Nixon, always an actress of rare integrity, astonishes here with the pure eloquence of her restraint. You never feel that you're watching an actress strategically working the brakes; instead, you believe that it's the control-craving Becca who is keeping her emotions on such a tight rein. This is achieved without the usual signals of folded lips and clenched hands. Ms. Nixon is too good to signal. Like all first-class magicians, she achieves her artistry invisibly.The same can be said of the rest of the cast. Note the stunning resourcefulness and economy of Mr. Slattery's two scenes in front of a television set, on which Howie watches videotapes of Danny. Consider the forms of discomfort Mr. Gallagher conveys without moving from the corner of a sofa. Or the way Ms.  Garrison's effervescent Izzy is so clearly waging an unending battle with her desire to be the center of attention.Whether in television ("Judging Amy") or theater ("Gypsy"), Ms. Daly is one of the finest American actresses working. She enfolds the vulgar, overbearing Nat in a compassionate embrace that avoids condescension and exaggeration. Mr. Lindsay-Abaire has given Nat the play's most beguilingly off-center dialogue. (Her monologue on "the Kennedy curse" is priceless.) But Ms. Daly never simply plays the comedy instead of the character.Such turns of plot as there are in "Rabbit Hole" are, in description, clichés, involving sibling jealousy, conjugal estrangement, the rivalry of grief and the urge to blame. And while the play probably ends the only way it could, given Mr. Lindsay-Abaire's obvious love for his characters, its conclusion doesn't take you anywhere that you haven't anticipated. As beautifully observed as "Rabbit Hole" is, it never rises to the shock of greatness.But as embodied by Ms. Nixon, the self-contained, order-obsessed Becca may offer more immediate catharsis to contemporary theatergoers than more grandly bereaved mothers like Medea and Mary Tyrone. At one point, Nat, helping Becca clear out Danny's room, picks up a tiny sneaker and freezes. "Don't," says Becca, without looking up. "Quick and clean, like a Band-Aid. Otherwise, we'd never get through it."Anyone who has ever gone through the possessions of a deceased family member or close friend understands instantly the crispness of Becca's tone. But without even flinching, Ms. Nixon makes it clear that the wound beneath the Band-Aid never really stops hurting. Nat, who lost a son of her own, says as much later in the scene. But the cast has already let us know this with an expressiveness that — like great sorrow — is beyond words.Rabbit HoleBy David Lindsay-Abaire; directed by Daniel Sullivan; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by Jennifer von Mayrhauser; lighting by Christopher Akerland; original music and sound design by John Gromada; production stage manager, Roy Harris; director of artistic operations, Mandy Greenfield; production manager, Ryan McMahon; director of development, Jill Turner Lloyd; director of marketing, Debra A. Waxman; general manager, Florie Seery; director of artistic development, Paige Evans; director of artistic production, Michael Bush. Presented by Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, executive producer. At the Biltmore Theater, 261 West 47th Street; (212) 239-6200. Running time: 2 hours 10 minutes.WITH: Cynthia Nixon (Becca), Mary Catherine Garrison (Izzy), John Slattery (Howie), Tyne Daly (Nat) and John Gallagher Jr. (Jason).