https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/dining/wine-school-thirst-quenchers-vin-de-soif-quaffer.html
Don’t Think, Just Drink - The New York Times
Wines
June 29, 2017
1817
Deliciousness and simplicity can be prized things in a wine. On some occasions, they are all you need and exactly what you want.This may seem like a confusing sentiment for Wine School, which has long taken a stand against the “all that matters is what’s in the glass” way of thinking. But the key words here are “some occasions.” It’s our firm belief that every good wine has a time and a place to be the ideal choice.That is especially true with the thirst-quenching wines we have been drinking over the last few weeks. These easygoing wines are primarily focused on the No. 1 task of any wine: to refresh. They do so deliciously, but these wines don’t offer much to think about.They are the lawn-mower beers of wine, ready to stimulate, energize and invigorate. They provoke physical reactions, and do not leave much room for contemplation.Is that sacrilegious? Only if it’s assumed that wine must be deep, complex and thought-provoking to be praiseworthy. But that’s a narrow view of a wine’s power, or maybe a cramped view of the various roles it can play.Here at Wine School, we believe the beauty of wine is in its range and diversity. Exquisite bottles come from all over the world, from all sorts of grapes and in many different styles. The wines present themselves, like people, in all stages of life, from young, fresh and vibrant to old and evolved with a wisdom born only of time.Each good wine, regardless of place of origin, style or age, has a moment when it can be the perfect bottle. Part of every wine lover’s education is learning how to identify the occasion and recognize what sort of wine it demands.As a wise old friend once explained to me, “Sometimes a good Beaujolais is a better choice than La Tâche.” Did he mean that a young Beaujolais could be an objectively greater wine than La Tâche, one of the most revered and sought-after grand crus of Burgundy, made only by Domaine de la Romanée-Conti?Of course not. He meant that at certain times, perhaps almost always, the simpler, more easily available bottle is preferable to the rare and precious wine.I mention all this as an act of self-criticism. I should have talked about it earlier, when introducing these thirst-quenching wines, which the English call quaffers and the French, vins de soif. It seemed from many of the comments on this month’s subject that the idea of these wines was not satisfying.Bill T. of Port Jefferson, N.Y., thought the idea of thirst quenchers was not exciting, and he had a suggestion. “I realize you are probably trying to give us exposure to all types of wines,” he said, “but perhaps throw some classic reds in between these outliers.”I understand what he meant. He would prefer bottles that reward the sort of thoughtful contemplation that we ordinarily apply to many of the subjects in Wine School. Dan Barron of New York made a similar point. He complained that the wines lacked mystery.“I’m not sure I get what’s so great about simple,” he said.I would like to suggest that the problem was not the wines themselves, but the occasion. Drinking them for Wine School created exactly the wrong sort of atmosphere for enjoying these wines.Our way of doing business, in which we drink wines with food in a social setting while paying close attention to the wines and our reactions, did not do these quaffers justice. Why? Because these are the sorts of wines that paradoxically reward inattention.That’s anything but a deficiency.As odd as it may seem, it is difficult to make wine delicious enough to give pleasure but simple enough not to require contemplation. Bottles like these turn wine-drinking into an unconscious activity, which in many ways is an antidote to the self-consciousness that so often governs the American approach to wine.Though we learn about wine by paying attention to it, some moments call for not paying attention to it, just as you can enjoy a meal without analyzing the bread or the meat. I realize now that the questions I asked in introducing these wines created an impossible situation. I essentially told you to examine the wines to determine the qualities that allow you to enjoy them without paying attention to them.I know. It hurts my brain, too.Simplicity itself is not necessarily a virtue. Just as with lawn-mower beers, straightforward wines can run the gamut from insipid to exhilarating. Allow me to extend the beer analogy. When the craft beer movement first gathered momentum, very few brewers wanted to make plain styles like pilsner. That was Budweiser, the enemy. Instead, they turned to the deliciously complex styles that the mass-market brewers had ignored for so long.Eventually, the craft brewers came back to pilsners, learning not only that simple beers were hard to master but also that they could be beautiful in their simplicity.But back to the thirst quenchers. I love drinking these sorts of wines, and adored each of the three wines I recommended: Matthiasson California Tendu 2015, Lapierre Vin de France Raisins Gaulois 2015 and Éric Texier Côtes du Rhône Chat Fou 2014.Tendu proves a long-held contention of mine: California can make tremendous moderately priced wines when producers give up trying to imitate expensive wines. Instead of making an insipid $18 cabernet sauvignon, doctored with flavorings, tannins, enzymes and wood chips to badly imitate a rich, expensive Napa Valley cabernet, Steve Matthiasson found an assortment of Italian grapes — montepulciano, barbera and aglianico — in the warm Dunnigan Hills region, which he rounded out with 15 percent mixed red grapes.The grapes were harvested early to maintain freshness, aged in neutral barrels for five months, and bottled without filtering and with no added sulfur dioxide. I found the wine juicy and fruity but not overbearingly so, dry, refreshing and simply delicious.The Lapierre was made entirely of gamay, mostly of young vines in Morgon, home territory for the great Lapierre Morgons, but also from elsewhere in Beaujolais. It, like the Tendu, was juicy, fruity and pure, without the minerality or earthiness that would be in a Morgon. The Lapierre is straightforward, for downing.The Texier, one year older and made mostly with grenache blended with three types of white grapes — clairette, viognier and chasselas — was a bit more complex. The fruit flavors are still vibrant, but it has noticeable earthy undertones. Nonetheless, this is just an accent, and does not detract from the utter vivacity of the wine.I drank these wines on a Sunday night, after a tiring couple of days. I had made a batch of chili con carne (perversely, for you Texas chili fans, with pinto beans and pork shoulder), which we ate as my wife and I binge-watched “Master of None” on Netflix.It was a delightful combination, and I didn’t miss a thing.Ferguson from Princeton, N.J., said she thought the inexpensive price of the wines rather than their simplicity played a greater role in her reaction to them. “You can talk to guests and think about something else while swallowing and not feel guilty,” she said.Exactly. They do not have to be the center of attention, though I should say that no wine should ever make you feel guilty.Ferguson said she drank the wines with her spouse, their son and the son’s girlfriend, who had a reaction to the wines. “She said she missed the way the taste developed and changed from the first hit on the tongue to the depth of the aftertaste in more complex wines,” Ferguson reported.I think that’s an accurate description of these wines. They are just right for those occasions when you don’t feel like paying attention to the depth of the aftertaste.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.