https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/asia/mitch-mcconnell-myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi.html
Myanmar’s Leader Has a Longtime Champion in Mitch McConnell - The New York Times
Aung San Suu Kyi,Myanmar,McConnell  Mitch,United States International Relations
Sept. 14, 2016
2542
WASHINGTON — As Myanmar’s pro-democracy figure and government leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, makes her way through Washington’s power centers this week, one face is particularly familiar: Senator Mitch McConnell, who has been watching her for decades, usually at great remove.Mr. McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, has spent nearly three decades trying to promote democracy in the country formerly known as Burma, about which he once lamented, “I have never spent more time on an issue and made less difference.”He has been a lead sponsor of every major sanctions measure against the Burmese government over the last 20 years and has worked quietly and tirelessly with several administrations to try to bring democracy to the country. In 2002, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi wrote to thank him for his support in a letter she had secretly sent out of the country.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi impressed Mr. McConnell with her steely resolve during years of house arrest, which kept her from visiting her dying husband, and her refusal to leave for countries offering refuge, the senator said.“She could have chosen the route of Gandhi and just been an icon,” Mr. McConnell said in an interview Wednesday. “Instead she chose the route of Margaret Thatcher by accepting responsibility by bringing along a country that was essentially in the dark ages.”Mr. McConnell first took an interest in Burma the late 1980s and early ’90s, long before most Americans had ever heard of it, when the military invalidated election results. “It was a totally unknown cause,” said Robin Cleveland, Mr. McConnell’s former longtime foreign affairs adviser.“In the case of South Africa, there was a huge constituency in this country and a rallying call against apartheid,” she said. “Here, there were like three guys on the U.S.-Burma campaign who had been tortured, and that was it. It was his commitment to the person and the principle that drove him.”Their relationship, which was fostered with phone calls and other correspondence over the years, grew closer in 2012 when Mr. McConnell visited her in Yangon, and Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi visited him in Kentucky later during her first visit to the United States.Mr. McConnell’s support is not unlike his early push for sanctions in South Africa, at the time unpopular with many Republicans, including President Ronald Reagan, and another component of the senator’s longstanding interest in civil rights.“You can tell from observing him that the issue of Burma is deeply felt,” said Derek Mitchell, a former ambassador to Myanmar, who encouraged the foreign minister to issue Mr. McConnell a closely held visa. “There is a strong affection and commitment he has shown to her personally when he was driving sanctions.”Mr. McConnell introduced the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act in 2003, imposing additional sanctions on the Burmese government, which was adopted that year after Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s motorcade was attacked by junta operatives. Further sanctions followed. In 2008, Mr. McConnell and Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, introduced legislation to award her the Congressional Gold Medal.In early 2009, when Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was about to embark on a diplomatic outreach effort to Myanmar’s military leaders, she went to see Mr. McConnell in his office first. Mr. McConnell was skeptical, she said, mindful of his importance to Burma policy, but acknowledged that the sanctions-only approach had not produced results. He grudgingly agreed to support her diplomatic efforts.In 2011, Mr. McConnell talked to Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi for the first time, by telephone, and began to work with Mrs. Clinton and the State Department to re-examine the United States’s relationship with the changing nation.In 2012 the senator traveled to Yangon where Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi greeted him with an embrace on the front porch of the house where she had lived under house arrest for years. “It was actually quite an emotional moment,” he said.Late that year, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi visited Mr. McConnell in Kentucky during a packed trip to the United States. During a day of downtime that she had built into the trip, Mr. McConnell showed her horses, which he had learned she loved from childhood, in central Kentucky.“I wanted to come here because of Senator McConnell,” she said, “because I wanted to see what his home was like. I wanted to thank him for everything he did for us over, well, two decades. That’s a long time.” (She also got to finally collect her gold medal in Washington.)On Wednesday, Mr. McConnell joined a small group of lawmakers at the residence of Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. for breakfast with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi. One of them, Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, expressed the sort of impatience that some lawmakers and human rights advocates have expressed about her nascent leadership. Critics have faulted her reluctance to condemn the systematic mistreatment of Myanmar’s Muslim Rohingya minority.“While we certainly appreciate the work Aung San Suu Kyi has done to ensure a democratic transition in Burma,” Mr. Corker said in a news release, “I am somewhat appalled by her dismissive reaction to concerns I raised this morning about the problem of human trafficking in her country.”Mr. McConnell said “inevitable disappointment” with the pace of change, especially among her compatriots, was part of the less pleasant aspects of accountability that Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi had agreed to take on.On Thursday Mr. McConnell will once again greet his friend at the Capitol, and he will continue to take her advice on how to proceed with sanctions. “This woman is truly heroic,” the senator said Wednesday, “and it’s so gratifying to see her today as, in fact, the head of state.”