http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/29/nyregion/representative-michael-grimm-is-indicted-on-fraud-charges.html
Grimm, Staten Island Lawmaker, Is Charged With Fraud  - The New York Times
Grimm  Michael G,Frauds and Swindling,House of Representatives,Upper East Side (Manhattan  NY),Federal Taxes (US),Restaurants,New York City,Politics and Government
April 28, 2014
2392
For more than two years, federal investigators delved into the background of Representative Michael G. Grimm, a Republican from Staten Island now in his second term. They looked into his campaign finances, and examined the potential mob ties of one business associate and the illegal doings of another.On Monday, Mr. Grimm was indicted in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, but the charges arose not from his career in Congress, but from his earlier one — as a health-food restaurateur.In a 20-count indictment, Mr. Grimm was accused of underreporting wages and revenue while running an Upper East Side restaurant, essentially keeping two sets of records. The fraudulent records, prosecutors said, went to his accountant, leading to inaccurate tax forms being filed with the government.Prosecutors say that Mr. Grimm concealed more than $1 million in gross receipts for the restaurant, and failed to report hundreds of thousands of dollars in employee wages, thus fraudulently lowering his federal and state tax payments. According to the indictment, unsealed on Monday, he also lied under oath in a deposition taken in January 2013, while he was a member of Congress.Mr. Grimm was charged with, among other things, perjury, wire fraud, mail fraud, obstruction of justice, employment of illegal immigrants, obstructing and impeding tax laws, and conspiracy to defraud the United States.Mr. Grimm, 44, is a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent and Marine who emphasized his upright image while he ran for Congress, where he represents Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn. He surrendered to F.B.I. agents early on Monday, and pleaded not guilty in court later in the day.He was released on $400,000 bail, secured by his house on Staten Island, and left the courthouse saying he would return to work and to his campaign for a third term.“After two and a half years of just being deluged and bombarded with allegation after allegation after allegation, I haven’t been able to fully defend myself,” Mr. Grimm said at a news conference after his arraignment. While he declined to comment on the charges, he said he would “fight tooth and nail” against them.Mr. Grimm also informed the House speaker, John A. Boehner, that he was stepping aside from his position on the Financial Services Committee. A spokesman for the speaker said Mr. Boehner believed that the move was “appropriate under the circumstances.”The indictment creates potential problems for the Republican Party, which has backed Mr. Grimm, the only Republican in the New York City delegation, in his bid for a third congressional term this November against the Democratic challenger, Domenic M. Recchia Jr. The deadline to turn down his party’s nomination passed two weeks ago, meaning that Mr. Grimm is highly likely to stay on the ballot no matter what happens with the federal case.Though the investigation, by the United States attorney’s office for the Eastern District of New York and the F.B.I., began by focusing on fund-raising, it took a turn midcourse to focus on the restaurant. Two fund-raisers on Mr. Grimm’s campaign have been charged: Diana Durand of Houston, who was accused of illegally giving more than $10,000 to his campaign, and Ofer Biton, who was being investigated to determine whether he had helped Mr. Grimm get around campaign-donation limits. Mr. Biton has pleaded guilty to visa fraud charges.Mr. Biton and another man, Wayne Muratore, a certified public accountant from Brooklyn, were involved in both Mr. Grimm’s 2010 campaign and his restaurant business, providing a possible link that could have turned investigators from looking at the campaign to looking at Healthalicious. Mr. Muratore has not been charged.Loretta E. Lynch, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, did not detail why the investigation had changed. “Whenever there’s an investigation into someone’s business activities, it is usually very broad-reaching,” she said, adding that a larger investigation was continuing.But, she said, Mr. Grimm had a sophisticated understanding of the law and finance, thanks in part to his background as an F.B.I. agent, where he did undercover work on Wall Street.An F.B.I. assistant director, George Venizelos, said revisiting Mr. Grimm’s F.B.I. work, given the charges, is “something we definitely will look at.”At the heart of Mr. Grimm’s indictment was a “very simple scheme,” Ms. Lynch said. After leaving the F.B.I. in 2006, Mr. Grimm opened Healthalicious, a salad-and-wrap restaurant on Second Avenue near East 83rd Street.Between 2007 and 2010, the indictment says, Mr. Grimm paid “a significant portion” of employees’ wages in cash, with many workers receiving about half their pay through direct deposit or check, and the other half in cash. He kept two sets of payroll records, and concealed the electronic spreadsheets that detailed what he was actually paying from payroll-processing companies and an accountant, the indictment says. That led to the payroll companies’ inadvertently filing erroneous tax forms, since the forms were based on the fake records.In some cases, the indictment says, Mr. Grimm paid employees entirely in cash so that the payroll processors had no records of those workers at all.The indictment describes how, from March 2010 to June 2010, Mr. Grimm sent emails to the restaurant manager that had “excerpts from the second set of payroll records, detailing how much cash each Healthalicious employee should receive for a particular week.” Those emails, as well as the mailed tax returns that were said to be based on inaccurate information, resulted in the wire and mail fraud charges.The concealment, perjury and obstruction of justice charges come in connection with a January 2013 deposition given by Mr. Grimm as part of a lawsuit by two former Healthalicious employees who accused  him of not paying them minimum wages or overtime.The indictment accuses Mr. Grimm of lying under oath about whether he paid employees in cash, whether he corresponded through an email account regarding the Healthalicious business, and whether he still had access to such an account.Speaking after his arraignment, Mr. Grimm described the investigation as a “vendetta” and a “witch hunt” meant to “assassinate my character and remove me from office.”“I will not abandon my post,” he said, “and then, on top of all that, I have an election to win.”Mr. Grimm’s comments came after a brief, but bizarre, chase scene outside court. His lawyers, Elizabeth S. Kase and John L. Kase of Kase & Druker, had indicated he would talk to the news media, but when the congressman left the courthouse, he ignored dozens of cameras and the shouts of reporters, and walked away.Mr. Grimm would be talking in 15 minutes, the lawyers explained, but at a location of their making: a lectern they had set up in front of a nearby veterans’ plaza, the lectern decorated with the Great Seal of the United States.