https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/08/arts/design/deblasio-museums-cultural-plan-funding.html
Arts Groups on Edge as New York City Re-evaluates Cultural Funding - The New York Times
Culture (Arts),de Blasio  Bill,Museums,New York City,Finances,Budgets and Budgeting
May 8, 2017
320
The elite, majestic museums of Manhattan never had to worry about competing for city money with the small-fry arts groups of Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island and the Bronx. Those organizations, hardly world famous or well connected, had to accept scraps while the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Lincoln Center and other giants enjoyed a relative feast of resources under the city’s century-old formula for financing cultural institutions.But this two-tiered system of haves and have-nots is poised for its biggest transformation in decades. Mayor Bill de Blasio and his lieutenants are deep into a re-examination of New York City’s $178 million arts budget and other cultural resources to try to give a higher profile — and perhaps more taxpayer money — to smaller institutions in disadvantaged neighborhoods.The prospect of a new approach, with an emphasis on greater equity, has some major arts organizations fearful they will end up with less of the municipal-funding pie, while more marginalized groups are hopeful about finally receiving more.The de Blasio administration’s intentions and vision will become clearer with the release of the city’s first “cultural plan,” which represents the mayor’s big chance to put his stamp on the artistic landscape of the city and counteract his reputation for caring little about culture. City Hall declined to comment.But in pursuing these changes, city officials could be setting the stage for an art-world version of class warfare, with cultural giants and their well-heeled patrons pitted against smaller, less-glamorous institutions that focus chiefly on serving racially and economically diverse local audiences. Mayor de Blasio, a progressive with national political ambitions, has tried to make equity a theme of his tenure.The mayor’s team is to submit the cultural plan to the City Council by July 1. Next week, in a prelude of sorts, city officials will release a summary of the views of some 20,000 residents who have commented about culture during public meetings on the plan during the past year throughout city’s the five boroughs.Jimmy Van Bramer, majority leader of the City Council and chairman of its Cultural Affairs Committee, said he helped spearhead legislation to create the plan and identify inequities in order to establish “more funding opportunities for small, emerging, community-based nonprofit cultural organizations.”But in a recent interview, he acknowledged a potential unintended consequence.“There is great concern out there that somehow folks would have funding pulled as a result of this process,” he said, adding, “I don’t think you need to take from one to give to another, to rob Peter to pay Paul.”Tom Finkelpearl, the city’s commissioner of cultural affairs, said the plan would not necessarily hurt larger groups.“There will be something that says there are parts of New York City that are under-resourced, and that’s going to be something we want to address,” Mr. Finkelpearl said. “It’s also going to say that there is great recognition on the part of this administration of the value of major cultural institutions. These are very important, not just for tourism — which we do care about — but also to the spirit of the city.”The city’s re-evaluation is taking place as arts organizations nationwide struggle to cut costs and raise revenue amid President Trump’s threatened elimination of the National Endowment for the Arts, dwindling philanthropic dollars and increasing competition for donors and audiences. In the face of potential cutbacks, major cultural institutions like New York City Center are trying to make clear how much the city’s funding matters to them.“The support we receive from the city is essential for us,” Arlene Shuler, City Center’s president and chief executive, said, “to carry out our responsibilities as caretakers of this exquisite landmark building that houses one of New York City’s pre-eminent cultural institutions.”City Center is one of the 33 arts groups in city-owned buildings, on city-owned land, or both, that make up the Cultural Institutions Group. These institutions collectively receive about 63 percent of the $178.3 million municipal arts budget. The Metropolitan Museum receives the largest annual allocation, $26 million, while the Bronx County Historical Society receives the least, $184,072.The remaining 37 percent of the budget is distributed through a competitive application process among nearly 1,000 organizations that are not in or on city property.Less prominent arts organizations, some of them also part of the Cultural Institutions Group, say this might be an opportunity for them to catch up a little.“We are serving an underserved community in southeast Queens; we are what the cultural plan is all about,” said Cathy Hung, executive director of the Jamaica Center for Arts and Learning, which will depend on the city to cover about half of its $1.3 million costs next year.“In this neighborhood, we don’t have the private resources — I don’t have the corporations and foundations and individuals,” Ms. Hung added. “However you flip the coin, we are always on the wrong side.”The current funding formula lacks clear criteria or consistency, city and arts officials say. Funding has been determined on a case-by-case basis as organizations joined the Cultural Institutions Group, and city arts leaders have long questioned the formula. The amounts have remained largely stable, with the biggest and often wealthiest institutions receiving the most money.But that doesn’t mean larger organizations are financially healthy, arts managers say. The Met’s allocation, for example, represents just a small fraction of its $332 million annual operating budget.Struggling with a deficit, the Met formally asked permission from the city last week to raise revenue by charging admission to visitors from outside the state, an idea Mayor de Blasio supports. Such revenue could conceivably compensate for a loss in city funds. Anne Pasternak, the new director of the Brooklyn Museum, recently said that she would consider a similar admission policy. Because the Met and the Brooklyn Museum are part of the Cultural Institutions Group, such changes must be approved by the city.Some say the city should focus on trying to increase its arts budget over all, so that every organization is fortified.“What is needed is more money — there is simply not enough,” said Karen Brooks Hopkins, president emeritus of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, who is on the Citizens’ Advisory Committee appointed by the mayor to consult on the cultural plan.“You see other cities like London making a big investment in culture,” she added. “It’s not about fighting over crumbs; it’s about expanding the pot.”In addition, some arts leaders say, these larger organizations make a significant contribution to the mayor’s cultural priorities, namely educating children. “It’s not one big cocktail party with rich people,” Mr. Van Bramer said. “They are getting the mission part, too, and that’s got to be respected.”In an indication of the mayor’s sympathies, the city used a $10 million increase in the culture budget last year to give smaller arts organizations a 12 percent increase and larger ones a 6 percent increase.Darren Walker, president of the Ford Foundation, which financed the cultural plan’s research, said this kind of redistribution makes sense. While organizations like New York City Ballet, a Cultural Institutions Group member on whose board Mr. Walker serves, are important for tourism and other parts of the city’s economy, smaller arts groups outside Manhattan are also crucial, he said, and have a harder time.“Larger organizations have more capacity to raise private funds” compared with arts groups “in low-income communities of color and in places like Staten Island,” he said.“If culture in New York only means large, rich organizations, then we lose the lifeblood, which are the small, innovative, entrepreneurial, off-the-beaten track kind of organizations with small budgets that the city should also be funding,” Mr. Walker said. “If it’s not possible for those organizations to thrive anymore, New York will have all of the features of an unequal city.”The results of this re-examination period won’t be felt right away; Mr. Finkelpearl noted that the cultural plan will come out after the city has finalized next year’s budget. But because the city’s cultural funds are finite, the process is expected to affect how much public support arts organizations will be able to count on in years to come.“I understand that resources are limited,” Mr. Van Bramer said. “But budgets are statements of values, budgets are about priorities.”