https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/opinion/jane-austen-sexism.html
No, Jane Austen Is Not Your Bestie - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Writing and Writers,Austen  Jane,Pride and Prejudice (Book)
July 19, 2017
746
LONDON — For the occasion of the 200th anniversary of Jane Austen’s death, the Bank of England has just issued new 10 pound bank notes printed with her likeness. A new honor for the writer. Or a new indignity, depending upon your point of view.I propose we get our noses out of Jane Austen. Not her books, her life. A victim of the most inane biographical rummaging at the best of times, Jane Austen is suffering unconscionable prying two centuries after her death. Where she lived, how she felt, how long her headaches lasted, whom she danced with, whom she loved, who loved her. Ask yourself which of her characters would interest themselves in tittle-tattle of this sort: Mr. Knightley or Mr. Collins, Fanny Price or Mary Crawford, Elizabeth Bennet or Lydia Bennet.As for referring to Jane Austen as “Jane,” as many enthusiasts do, it is more than an impertinence; it is singularly cloth-eared, considering the precise forms that address takes in Jane Austen’s work. It isn’t only manners that are at stake when one person trespasses on another’s privacy and distance, it’s morality.In novel after novel, we see how disregard for the niceties of respect will lead to what is described in “Mansfield Park” as “too horrible a confusion of guilt, too gross a complication of evil.” Outside the barriers that ceremony erects, “barbarism” lies in wait.And if that sounds altogether too prim and unforgiving a view of human society, then you haven’t read Jane Austen.Perhaps it’s in order to refuse the stern admonitions of her novels that we choose to call her “Jane,” hoping the familiarity will rub off on the act of reading her. But there’s more than a little sexism in the condescension. We don’t call Charles Dickens, Charles; Joseph Conrad, Joseph; or Franz Kafka, Franz.“Seeing Franz curled up like a cockroach on the ceiling of his Prague apartment, his father suppressed a cry of mild surprise and requested his son to come down at once” is not a sentence we expect to read in even the most bookclub-friendly biography of the writer. Is that because Kafka, the alienated Czech Jew, is perceived to be apocalyptic, yet the provincial spinster “Jane” cannot possibly be that?By personalizing Jane Austen, and trying to make the world of her novels continuous with our own, we denigrate her seriousness.True, she wrote easily accessible romances. It might be that no other novelist makes us hope so ardently that where there is love, there will be happiness. I’m not sure it would be supportable to read a “Pride and Prejudice” in which Elizabeth Bennet and Mr. Darcy didn’t clear up their misunderstandings and end up in each other’s arms.Yet, for all our involvement, these love stories are about more than the incidental felicity of the lovers. If their love fails, society too fails. Let them be intelligent and capable of introspection, let them be astute about themselves and considerate of others, and what they promise is a vision of societal harmony, even civilization itself. For which reason, Jane Austen will bend all likelihood to ensure a happy outcome.A shadow story tracks the actual story in “Persuasion,” a story in which Anne Elliot and Captain Wentworth aren’t restored to each other, after all. The sense of fragility we feel at the end of that novel is attributable to this other, more likely outcome.Thus their happiness is not escapism. It is a favor, a kindness bestowed, in the face of a tragedy that could have been. Grief is never more than a page turn away.Only “Mansfield Park” speaks overtly of “barbarism.” But the prospect of moral chaos is never far away in any of her mature novels. Her seriousness of intent is not the stuff of literary prattle. Never mind whom she loved. And she isn’t Jane, your best friend. She is Jane Austen, a novelist of unfamiliar and uncomfortable genius.