https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/06/theater/lucas-hnaths-the-christians-tackles-a-schism-among-the-flock.html
Lucas Hnath’s ‘The Christians’ Tackles a Schism Among the Flock - The New York Times
Theater,Hnath  Lucas,Playwrights Horizons,Christians and Christianity,The Christians (Play),Christians  The (Play)
Sept. 3, 2015
6759
Lucas Hnath grew up in an evangelical church. His mother became a minister, and he thought he might do the same. Instead, he became a playwright, and now he’s written a knowing script about congregational tremors set off by a doctrinal dispute inside a megachurch.But what does the author of “The Christians” believe himself? That, he’s not going to tell you.“It’s funny — there’s a production in the U.K. right now, and almost immediately after it opened, somebody tweeted, ‘I want to know about the playwright’s relationship to Christianity,’ ” he said. “How long did it take for that to happen? Almost immediately, as if answering that question answers a question about the play. I would prefer not to give people that excuse.”Playwrights Horizons, which is presenting the New York premiere of “The Christians,” is inviting audiences to respond to the play — which offers the kind of serious look inside contemporary American Christianity that is infrequently seen on the New York stage — by sharing their own stories.On a chalkboard in the lobby, theatergoers are invited to answer the questions, “What faith did you grow up with?” and “Have your beliefs changed?” On poster board, they are asked to use colored Post-it strips to answer “Do you believe in a higher power?” and “How often do you attend a house of worship?” And the theater is encouraging audiences to discuss the show on social media with the exhortation “Share your beliefs.”But Mr. Hnath (pronounced nayth) is not going there himself. He has written an essay for the theater’s website, and the show’s program, explaining that he is choosing not to discuss his own beliefs or practices, believing that audiences need to decide for themselves how to respond to a play that depicts a typical American megachurch fractured by a dispute over salvation and damnation. Mr. Hnath, 36, is happy to talk about his upbringing — he went to Christian elementary and middle schools, helped out with youth ministry, tagged along with his mother to seminary classes — but his religious life after high school is off limits, leaving it up to theatergoers to ponder whether “The Christians” is fundamentally sympathetic to, or critical of, the kind of community it depicts.“A lot of people say the best way to go in and pitch a TV show is to tell a little story about your personal life that tells how you got to the story, and I remember hearing that and going: ‘Oh, come on! That has nothing to do with whether the idea is going to be a good idea,’ ” Mr. Hnath said.“I always have this fear, the people are not going to actually engage with the thing, which is much harder — it takes a lot more time, and it takes a lot more thinking on your own.”His play, set on the stage of a megachurch and produced with a full choir, is attracting quite a bit of interest from presenters: It began at the Humana Festival of New American Plays (where Charles Isherwood of The New York Times called it “the finest of the bunch” and Mr. Hnath “one of the brightest new voices of his generation”) and has already been staged at theaters in Austin, Tex., and Columbus, Ohio, in addition to the Playwrights Horizons mounting, which is in previews and officially opens on Sept. 17.A London production starts on Tuesday at the Gate Theater, and others are scheduled at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles and at Hope College in Michigan.Mr. Hnath, a prolific writer whose previous works, “Isaac’s Eye” and “A Public Reading of an Unproduced Screenplay About the Death of Walt Disney,” were well received in New York, actually has two plays having Off Broadway premieres this season; “Red Speedo,” about doping in sports, will begin performances in February at New York Theater Workshop.He is soft-spoken and quirky, with an oft-furrowed brow and luxuriant graying hair that he nervously fingers; he once played Seymour, the nebbishy botanist, in a high school production of “Little Shop of Horrors.” He loves magic (“I used to do Gospel lessons with magic tricks — I did a candle-through-the-arm routine illustrating something about the armor of God. Theologically they were not sound sermons”); dislikes cars (“Many times I failed the driver’s-license test — I’m just too conscious of how heavy the machinery is, and how fast it’s moving, and how many other heavy pieces of machinery are also moving down the road with me”); and rarely sees Broadway plays (“I’m so cheap. I want somebody to get me comps.”)He once wanted to be a preacher, but he was also friendly with a number of preachers’ kids and realized how often other people go to them for advice. “What if you tell them the wrong thing?” he explained. “That seemed horrible.”He came to New York intending to go to medical school but couldn’t stop writing; during his last semester of college, he took a job answering phones at Playwrights Horizons, which is now producing his play.Mr. Hnath said he had long wanted to write about a rift in a large church, but he actually turned to the project somewhat unexpectedly.He had been working on a rap musical titled “Kanye West Performs the Rise and Fall of George W. Bush” when a copyright case against an Off Broadway comedy, “3C,” caused him to worry about his legal footing. He had a commission to produce a play for the Humana Festival, and, noting its location in a religious corner of the country, decided that was the time to turn to “The Christians.”“I was having a very difficult time thinking of other contemporary plays that took on the subject of religion, and specifically Christianity, that did so without satirizing it or prompting us to roll our eyes at ‘those Christians,’ and it seemed to me that there was a lack of effort to try to understand what’s at stake in those beliefs,” he said.Mr. Hnath began to experiment: He invited a group of nonreligious actors to watch tapes of preachers, including Kathryn Kuhlman, Joel Hunter and Steve Brown, and to jot down words that made them cringe. And then he set about writing a sermon that included none of those words, “just to find a way to talk about Christianity in a way that sidestepped certain preconceptions that made people want to quickly dismiss it.”He consulted with more theologically minded friends. The Rev. David R. Collins, a high school classmate who is now a pastor of Maitland Presbyterian Church in Florida, talked with him about the challenges of leading a congregation, saying, “I tried to be as honest as I could about some of the pitfalls you can face as a pastor.” He praised the resulting work for “being true to life.”Mark Schultz, a playwright who is studying to be an Episcopal priest, helped with the doctrine; he called the play “liturgically precise” and said, “He gets faith, I think, in a really fundamental way.”The result is an unusual play: The main character, the pastor of a large church that has just finished paying for a major renovation, delivers a sermon about salvation that divides his congregation; those divisions play out in a series of intense conversations between the pastor (Andrew Garman) and an associate pastor (Larry Powell), a church elder (Philip Kerr), the pastor’s wife (Linda Powell) and a congregant (Emily Donahoe).All the exchanges take place on the church’s stage, with hand-held microphones — Mr. Hnath has an idiosyncratic fondness for both microphones and the tangles of cable that often trail them — suggesting the public implications of even private conversations at the highest levels of a large church. In the end, it is difficult to tell where the playwright’s sympathies lie — which is just as he wants it.The play, not surprisingly, has roots in Mr. Hnath’s own life experience. The tension in the congregation, over debt and doctrine, reflects what Mr. Hnath recalls about issues facing his childhood congregation, an Assemblies of God church in Orlando, Fla. And the congregant in the play — a single mother who has depended on the church for help — is inspired by Mr. Hnath’s own mother, who turned to food stamps and church clothing donations while going through a difficult divorce.But Mr. Hnath said efforts to connect the play to contemporary doctrinal disputes — Christian theatergoers who have seen it often think the play is inspired by recent controversies involving the pastors Rob Bell or Carlton Pearson — are misplaced, and that “it’s just as much based on ‘Antigone,’ with Pastor Paul as Creon.”He said that his depiction of tensions within church leadership is informed by relationships he has observed between the artistic directors of theaters and their staffs and boards, as well as by faculty disagreements in academia.His own wide-ranging curiosity has now led him to other writing projects — all his plays, he said, are “in some way are about that problem of how do you know what you know and are you sure you know that?” — but is turning from religion to history.He is writing a play for London’s Royal Court Theater, tentatively titled “Early Days,” about Britain in the year 410. He working on a play inspired by an early 1990s federal government report, titled “Expert Judgment on Markers to Deter Inadvertent Human Intrusion into the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant,” about efforts to design a long-lasting warning sign for a nuclear waste repository. And he has been commissioned by the Civilians, the documentary theater troupe, to write a play about his mother, who, as a hospice chaplain, was once taken hostage by a psych ward patient.As for religion, Mr. Hnath said he believes other playwrights are seizing on its absence as a serious subject for contemporary theater, and are responding.“Other people have noticed that there’s this gap — that there’s this subject that’s not being thoughtfully enough considered,” he said. “When there is such a clear gap, it’s a matter of time before something rushes into fill it. I’m not the only one.”