https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/dining/savory-carrot-cake-recipe.html
The Savory Side of Carrot Cake - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Bakeries and Baked Products,Cakes,Carrots
June 16, 2017
6100
When I was a child, I wanted carrot cake for every birthday. I wasn’t a fan of bakery cakes, expertly plastered with supersweet butter-free frostings in pastel colors. (I did like the realistic decorative little roses, though.) Those fine-crumbed white or yellow cakes did not have much appeal for me, somehow both dry and gummy.Carrot cake, on the other hand, had many enticing qualities to recommend it. It was gloriously moist and dark, with raisins and walnuts, sweetly spiced with clove, cinnamon and nutmeg. The fact that the cake was full of carrots barely registered, and it certainly didn’t taste like carrots. I adored the tangy cream-cheese frosting.Despite the vivid and fond memories, I haven’t tasted carrot cake — or any cake, for that matter — in years. My sweet tooth is satisfied with a couple of good cookies, maybe some gelato. I tend more toward salt than sugar, so lately I have been toying with savory baked goods, experimenting with various spices to flavor flatbreads, griddlecakes and biscotti.As it happened, I had invited guests, one of whom was celebrating a birthday, to a dinner party recently. Carrot cake immediately came to mind, and I was determined to make it a savory one.I could picture it clearly: a well-spiced cake with not a speck of sugar. It would be iced with thick crème fraîche and adorned with cilantro sprigs, black sesame seeds and red pepper, with a single candle at the center. At first glance, it would look like dessert. Very trompe l’oeil.Recipe development began. I can report a few failures. I wanted a tender cake with a carrot-colored interior, but a relatively low fat content. Several stodgy versions later, I happily settled on a white cornbread batter into which I folded grated carrots, scallions, South Asian aromatics (cumin, mustard seeds, turmeric and cayenne) and crumbled feta cheese. Success. The cake can even be baked a day in advance if stored in an airtight tin.If you are not in the mood to frost and decorate this savory carrot cake, cut it in wedges, call it glorified cornbread and serve it alongside whatever you’re having for breakfast, lunch or dinner. It is very good toasted a day later, smeared with butter, or to accompany salads, leafy or otherwise.But all dressed up, it really shines as a special-occasion cake.Recipe: Savory Spiced Carrot CakeFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.