http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/23/business/media/23starz.html
Albrecht Named President and Chief Executive of Starz - The New York Times
Home Box Office,Albrecht  Chris,Starz,Cable Television,Television
Dec. 22, 2009
9797
Chris Albrecht, the former chief executive of HBO who oversaw development of some of that cable channel’s biggest hits, will take over on Jan. 1 as president and chief executive of Starz, a Liberty Media company that includes the Starz pay-cable company.Starz, which announced the move Tuesday, is already a couple of years into an effort to greatly expand its original programming. During his tenure at HBO, Mr. Albrecht helped to transform the channel from a slate of film reruns to one anchored by highly popular series that became cultural touchstones, including “The Sopranos” and “Sex and the City.”In addition to overseeing Starz Entertainment, which includes the Starz and Encore pay channels, Mr. Albrecht will supervise the operations of the company’s production and distribution entities, which include Overture Films, Anchor Bay Entertainment and Film Roman.Starz has been searching for a new leader since Robert B. Clasen announced in August that he would retire as chairman and chief executive at the end of the year.Greg Maffei, president and chief executive of Liberty Media, said in an interview that while Mr. Albrecht had “obviously demonstrated his expertise in original programming” during his tenure at HBO, he also had the management skills to “examine how the film business is changing and how Hollywood is changing.”Starz’s subscriber base has declined this year, to 17.3 million currently from 17.7 million at the end of 2008, a change that the company attributes to economic conditions and rate increases. Its Encore channel has 30.7 million subscribers.Mr. Albrecht resigned from HBO in May 2007, a few days after he was arrested and charged with assaulting a girlfriend in a Las Vegas hotel parking lot. He pleaded no contest to a charge of battery and agreed to pay a $1,000 fine and attend domestic violence counseling in exchange for a six-month suspended sentence.In September 2007, Mr. Albrecht joined IMG Global Media, the talent agency owned by Forstmann Little, a private equity firm, but he left less than a year later amid differences with Theodore J. Forstmann, the firm’s principal.In an interview, Mr. Albrecht said he was “extremely grateful and excited about this opportunity” at Starz and that he was “extremely comfortable and happy where I am in my personal and professional life.”Starz has been expanding its original programming in the last couple of years, with the comedy series “Head Case” and “Party Down” and the drama series “Crash,” based on the Oscar-winning film. On Monday, the pay channel announced it was ordering a second season of “Spartacus: Blood and Sand,” even before the first season has its premiere on Jan. 22. The series stars Andy Whitfield, an Australian actor, in the title role, with Lucy Lawless, best known for “Xena: Warrior Princess,” as Lucretia.Mr. Albrecht also has been developing an hourlong drama series for Starz about a female fashion photographer, a project that is expected to go forward.While Starz has its headquarters near Denver, Mr. Albrecht will work primarily from Los Angeles, he said, traveling frequently back and forth to Colorado.