http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/27/theater/reviews/the-glass-menagerie-stars-cherry-jones-and-zachary-quinto.html
‘The Glass Menagerie’ Stars Cherry Jones and Zachary Quinto - The New York Times
Theater,The Glass Menagerie (Play),Williams  Tennessee,Jones  Cherry,Smith  Brian J,Muhly  Nico,Hoggett  Steven,Quinto  Zachary,Tiffany  John,Keenan-Bolger  Celia,American Repertory Theater,Glass Menagerie  The (Play)
Sept. 26, 2013
6763
How can something be this delicate and this strong, so elusive and yet so tenacious? That question radiates from John Tiffany’s stunning production of Tennessee Williams’s “Glass Menagerie,” which opened on Thursday night at the Booth Theater and promises to be the most revealing revival of a cornerstone classic for many a year to come.More than any interpretation I’ve seen of the 1944 drama that made Williams’s name, this “Menagerie” — which stars Cherry Jones and Zachary Quinto in career-defining performances — finds the brute force in a play often described, a bit condescendingly, as lyrical, wispy, elegiac. Yes, the tapered fingers of poetry shape “The Glass Menagerie.” But when these fingers curl into a fist — and they do so again and again in this production, before you quite realize it — be prepared to have the breath knocked out of you.You’re already familiar with the feeling of that blow. It’s what everyone experiences when a sound or an image from the past suddenly looms larger than the present, and, whether happy or sad, is almost too hurtful to be borne. As Tom (Mr. Quinto), the work’s narrator, looking back on a shattering chapter in his family’s life, states simply, “This play is memory.”Williams always insisted that memory was not only the subject of “Menagerie” but also its form. But I have never before seen a production that captures so completely or originally the idea of memory as this play’s driving dynamic, of recollection as a tyrannical, exorcism-proof ghost waiting to grab you by the ankle.You could even call memory the protagonist here: It’s what causes Tom to stumble into the past and back into the story that he always hates to tell but has to. That stumble has been given physical reality, as a seemingly involuntary lurch. It — along with the heart-stoppingly staged moment in which a girl from long ago stakes her claim on Tom’s thoughts — occurs in the opening minutes of the production, one of many resonant choreographic details by Steven Hoggett, the show’s movement director. (Mr. Tiffany and Mr. Hoggett, collaborators on the Tony-winning “Once,” proved themselves masters of recapturing time in the Scottish drama “Black Watch.”)From that moment, no one is on terra firma — not Tom, not the family he summons in a vision of its last weeks together in the cramped St. Louis digs they share at the height of the Great Depression, and certainly not we, the theatergoers. The designer Bob Crowley, artfully aided by Natasha Katz (lighting), Clive Goodwin (sound) and Nico Muhly (music), has summoned into being a world that seems to float amid shadowy seas.Pools of dark, viscous liquid separate the stage from the audience. The shabby St. Louis apartment inhabited by the Wingfields — Tom; his mother, Amanda (Ms. Jones); and his sister, Laura (Celia Keenan-Bolger) — is rendered in ways both skeletal and oddly specific. It’s a style that suggests how memory seldom paints a complete portrait of the places you have known, but focuses instead on objects of totemic significance, or if you will (Tom will), symbols. Memory turns us all into poets.Don’t think, though, that this is a world seen through softening, forgiving gauze. As Tom recalls his encounters with the mother and sister he loathes and loves with all his confused heart, they acquire a heightened brightness that scalds.When I first saw this production in February, at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., the play’s startling atmospherics were all in place, and the acting already so fine, that I presumed that revisiting “Menagerie” would be like calling on an old acquaintance. I hadn’t accounted for the ways in which deeply gifted stage artists can enrich their performances over time.The conceptual core of their interpretations remains the same. But they have been honed to an emotional sharpness that kept me in tears through much of the first act. (By the devastating second act, I was beyond tears.) Ms. Jones, a two-time Tony winner, gave a wonderful performance in Cambridge. What she’s doing now, though, is one for the ages, an Amanda that may someday be spoken of with the awe that surrounds Laurette Taylor’s creation of the part nearly 70 years ago.A onetime Southern belle, long ago abandoned by her husband, the father of her children, Amanda is a classic Williams woman, tethered to a beautiful past and struggling to stay on her feet in an ugly present. You can see why pretty much every formidable actress of a certain age has wanted to have a go at her. The list of those I’ve seen, onstage and on screen, includes Maureen Stapleton, Jessica Tandy, Julie Harris, Joanne Woodward, Katharine Hepburn, Sally Field and Jessica Lange.Some of them, though fewer than you would think, were good. Ms. Jones is great. She gives the foolish, garrulous Amanda — forever nagging her damaged children to be successes and nattering about the social triumphs of her youth — a towering, pathos-steeped gallantry. She is big because the world shrank on her, and she keeps trying to pretend that it hasn’t, even when she’s reduced to selling magazine subscriptions on the phone.Dressed in the cotillion gown of her youth for the fabled “Gentleman Caller” scene, she keeps flying into the empyrean of the past and then falling to the hard earth of the present. Just listen to how she signals this descent in the drop of her voice.Her tiny world is an insular, fatally divided kingdom of three, comprising Amanda; the restless Tom, a poet trapped in a dead-end warehouse job; and the agoraphobic, disabled Laura, who exists obdurately in an other-world populated by the little glass animals of the title.Despite the unending friction among these desperate souls, I believed in them as a painfully cohesive unit. And for the first time, I sensed a grudging, loving rapport between Tom and Amanda. (They almost flirt when they scrap.) And our awareness of how they’re bonded by their protectiveness of Laura, played with a wondrously centered clarity by Ms. Keenan-Bolger, has never been more acute.Nor has the sense of the self-contained, self-mythologizing planet on which this family (like all families) lives. It seems so right when Tom describes a friend from work he invites for dinner, at his mother’s insistence, as “an emissary from a world we were somehow set apart from.” It’s a lonely planet, and there are heartbreaking, out-of-time moments when each of the Wingfields stands at the edge of the stage in the shadows, groping for a supporting arm that is never there.Brian J. Smith plays the emissary, whose glory days as a high school hero are behind him, in a performance that more than holds its own amid the histrionics of the Wingfields. He makes it clear that while this Gentleman Caller may hail from the bustling land of reality, he, too, seesaws between highs of illusion and the harshness of life as it is. And his scene alone with Laura — in which he gives her and himself a lecture on becoming a positive person — may be the best version of it we’ll ever see.Perhaps what’s most surprising about this production, though, is how thoroughly it makes us understand that Tom is the center, nay the author, of “The Glass Menagerie.” Mr. Quinto (best known as Mr. Spock in the current “Star Trek” movie franchise) plays Tom with more than a touch of the author who conceived him. This kinetically charged, purple-prose-spouting Tom is an angry young man who, in his way, is as self-dramatizing as Amanda and as much of an outcast as Laura. No wonder he feels he has to run away; at home, there are too many mirrors.He doesn’t run away, though, no matter how far he travels. The faces of Amanda, frozen in affronted affection, and of Laura, in isolating self-communion, will glow in a reproachful eternity. This production makes clear that “The Glass Menagerie” belongs on the same exclusive shelf as “Long Day’s Journey Into Night,” “Death of a Salesman” and Williams’s own “Streetcar Named Desire.” It is not a lovely little memory play; it’s a great memory tragedy.