https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/television/netflix-friends-from-college-review.html
Review: With Grating ‘Friends From College,’ Who Needs Enemies? - The New York Times
Television,Friends From College (TV Program),Netflix Inc,Smulders  Cobie,Key  Keegan-Michael,Parisse  Annie
July 13, 2017
2357
Everyone has those acquaintances — a friend, or preferably the friend of a friend — of whom a little goes a long way. They’re entertaining when diluted by the company of others, enjoyable as long as you part before you remember how exhausting they are, how everything needs to be about them.In Netflix’s “Friends From College,” arriving on Friday, nearly everyone is that friend. And well before the end of the eight-episode season, they and the series have overstayed their welcome.This ensemble cringe comedy centers on the marriage of Lisa (Cobie Smulders), a lawyer, and Ethan (Keegan-Michael Key), a writer of well-reviewed and less-well-purchased novels. They’ve decided to move from Chicago to New York, which puts them back in the orbit of their old group of pals from Harvard.They end up crashing on the couch of Marianne (Jae Suh Park), a flighty, free-spirited actress, and catching up on their old friendships, which have become more competitive and complicated. “We’ve got 20 years of grievances built up and ready to explode,” Lisa says.Little does she know about the biggest time bomb: Ethan has been having a two-decade affair with Sam (Annie Parisse), trysting with her when she visits Chicago. She’s also married, and once Ethan arrives in New York, they agree it can’t go on.It does, of course, maybe because the dalliance returns Ethan and Sam to a time when their possibilities seemed limitless. In bed, they’re still 20. In the real world, biological clocks are ticking (Lisa and Ethan are undergoing expensive fertility treatments) as are career ones. “I am 40 years old,” Ethan says. “The drawbridge is going up.”Set to a 1990s soundtrack — Cornershop, Liz Phair, Oasis — “Friends From College” is about curdled nostalgia, the dark side of those “Wanna Feel Old?” online listicles.On paper, this has great potential — at least if the paper in question is the call sheet, crammed with sharp comedy actors. Fred Savage (“The Grinder”) plays Max, Ethan’s puppyish college chum and literary agent, who steers him toward the young-adult genre. Kate McKinnon has a nicely loopy cameo as a superstar young-adult author. Nat Faxon (“Married”) is the amiable trust-fund bro, Nick; Greg Germann (“Ally McBeal”), Sam’s laid-back, wealthy husband. Ike Barinholtz (“The Mindy Project”) and Seth Rogen turn up as well.Created by Nicholas Stoller and Francesca Delbanco (who are, like their characters, married Harvard grads), “Friends From College” has moments of funny slapstick and observational comedy. But what promises to be an appealing adult relationship sitcom becomes a sour story of self-absorption and infidelity. Think of it as “How I Cheated on Your Mother.”It would be too simplistic to say that the problem is unlikable characters. Flawed, abrasive and selfish characters are responsible for some of the best TV in the past several years — “Girls,” for instance, or “You’re the Worst.”But you need some payoff, some insight, for putting in the time with them. No one here is unlikable in any interesting way. They’re just aging and dissatisfied with what life has given them (which, for most of them, has been plenty, materially at least). Yet the show’s vantage point leaves little space to appreciate it if you find the characters insufferable.The cast members compensate by leaning into their characters with manic energy. There’s an extended set piece in which Ethan and Max play tennis, grunting so showily that it drives their neighbors on the court batty, which is often the experience of watching. (Billy Eichner plays Max’s reserved, long-suffering partner, Felix, and when Billy Eichner gives the most subdued performance on your show, that is saying something.)The result is a comedy-drama whose comedy is grating and whose drama doesn’t really engage with its essential sadness. To its credit, “Friends From College” is conscious of how tough its core group can be to take. But what it does best — reproducing the experience of going out with an insular gang whose members aren’t as clever or adorable as they think — is exactly the sort of thing you try to avoid by staying home and watching Netflix.