https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/23/nyregion/ccrb-nypd-daniel-pantaleo-eric-garner.html
Employee Accused of Records Leak in Eric Garner Case Resigns - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Pantaleo  Daniel,Civilian Complaint Review Board,Police Department (NYC)
March 23, 2017
7707
A New York City agency charged with investigating police wrongdoing on Thursday forced an employee to resign after discovering that the employee had leaked the disciplinary history of the officer who placed Eric Garner in a fatal chokehold. The agency also confirmed for the first time that the records, which showed that the officer faced no stronger punishment for abusing his authority than retraining and the loss of two vacation days, were authentic.The resignation, coming a day after the New York Police Department publicly railed against what it called an illegal and improper leak, again brought into focus the city’s strained position on police transparency. Mayor Bill de Blasio has called for overturning a state law to allow the city to disclose details about disciplinary actions taken against police officers, even as the city has been fighting in court to prevent the release of those details about the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, who put Mr. Garner in a chokehold in 2014.The employee, who was not identified, was a junior staff member who had worked at the agency, the Civilian Complaint Review Board, for less than a year. The person had not been involved in investigating any of the misconduct cases in the disciplinary records of Officer Pantaleo, which were published this week by the liberal news site ThinkProgress. The employee resigned on Thursday after being faced with the prospect of being fired.“After a swift and thorough internal investigation, the Civilian Complaint Review Board identified the employee who was the source of the leak,” Jerika Richardson, senior adviser and secretary to the board, said in a statement. “As of today, that individual no longer works at C.C.R.B.”The Police Department’s deputy commissioner of legal matters, Lawrence Byrne, had said at a news conference on Wednesday that the department was working with the review board to find the person who leaked the records. But it was unclear what, if any, jurisdiction the Police Department would have had to be involved. The review board said it had conducted the investigation on its own and that the Police Department had not played a role. It said it did not believe anyone else had been involved in the leak.It was not clear whether any criminal charges would be brought against the employee.The leaked records showed that the review board had found enough evidence to substantiate four claims that Officer Pantaleo had abused his authority, two of them related to a 2012 street stop and the other two related to a vehicle stop and search in 2011.Cynthia Conti-Cook, a staff lawyer for Legal Aid, which has been seeking to force the city to disclose details on officer discipline, said the release of Officer Pantaleo’s records has exposed Mr. de Blasio’s conflicting messages on police transparency.“They’re going to fire a C.C.R.B. leaker before they will fire a man who killed an unarmed man on duty as a police officer,” Ms. Conti-Cook said, referring to Officer Pantaleo, who remains on desk duty at the Police Department. “It’s pretty troubling.”