https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/15/podcasts/katy-perrys-witness-experiment-gone-wrong-and-understanding-how-our-culture-treats-victims.html
Katy Perry’s ‘Witness’ Experiment Gone Wrong, and Understanding How Our Culture Treats Victims - The New York Times
Podcasts
June 15, 2017
4191
Over the weekend, we watched in amusement as the musician Katy Perry turned herself into a reality star to promote her new album, “Witness.” Perry put herself on a live-streamed trial for 96 hours, while she sang, cooked, attended a therapy session and cried her way through an interview with the activist DeRay Mckesson, lamenting her history of cultural appropriation (she dressed up as a geisha during a 2013 live performance, among other missteps). Her music, ostensibly the occasion for this emotional display, rarely came up. Perry painted herself as a victim of ignorance, and the whole spectacle made us think about the elaborate performances of self that people stage in public to sell their image.That line of thinking leads us into a conversation about Bill Cosby, whose trial we closely followed. As he enters the courtroom each day, Cosby, who is charged with three felony counts for the alleged drugging and assault of Andrea Constand, has been playing up his status as a cultural hero, reminding the public of the various roles he has played over the years, from the patriarch Cliff Huxtable to the character he voiced on his popular 1970s cartoon “Fat Albert.” He’s challenging the version of the predator Constand says he is with the upstanding family man most of America knew him to be.From there, we turn to James Comey, the fired director of the F.B.I., and examine the unexpected similarities between his and Constand’s testimonies and how differently they were received. We’re trying to understand how our culture views victims and expects them to be accountable for what happens to them.And, on a lighter note: You asked, and we listened: Here is a tidy playlist of our favorite jams of the summer from last week’s episode. You can listen at the beach or from the muss-free comfort of your living room.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.