https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/realestate/what-you-get-700000-homes-pennsylvania-nebraska-texas.html
$700,000 Homes in Pennsylvania, Nebraska and Texas - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Bucks County (Pa),Houston (Tex),Omaha (Neb)
June 14, 2017
8823
WHAT A two-story house built around 1705, with two bedrooms and two bathroomsHOW MUCH $699,000SIZE 1,296 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $539SETTING This stone cottage in Bucks County is surrounded by rolling hills and fields. The center of New Hope is about three and a half miles away, with cafes, galleries, antiques stores and a theater. Lambertville, N.J., is half a mile farther, across a bridge over the Delaware River; Philadelphia is about 40 miles south.INDOORS The house, renovated about three years ago by the architect who owns it, retains much of its original charm, with features like stone fireplaces, exposed beams, early windows and doors, period hardware and wide-plank pine floors. The front door opens into the living room, where one wall is dominated by a floor-to-ceiling fireplace. To one side, there are two steps down to a bedroom, currently used as a media room, and an updated bathroom with a marble tiled shower beneath a skylight. To the other side is the kitchen, which also has a skylight, as well as custom cabinetry with leather pulls, a farm sink topped by a two-inch-thick Carrara marble counter and Wolf, Liebherr and Miele appliances. Upstairs, the master bedroom has a vaulted open-beam ceiling and a connecting bathroom with a free-standing soaking tub, marble vanity on metal legs and heated towel rack.OUTDOOR SPACE The 2.3-acre lot has been updated with new fences and a front garden that has a burbling fish pond and perennial plantings. There is a large, grassy backyard with a stone path leading to a summer house of roughly 350 square feet. Inside is a wood stove and space for a writer’s studio or overnight guests; outside is a pergola on a pebble terrace. There is also a garden shed and a detached two-car garage.TAXES $6,415 a yearCONTACT Marilyn Vaughn, Fox & Roach Realtors, 215-862-3385, ext. 8436; foxroach.com •WHAT A 1975 house with three bedrooms and three bathroomsHOW MUCH $715,900SIZE 3,890 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $184SETTING This house is in Omaha’s leafy District 66 neighborhood, near the end of a quiet cul-de-sac. The property backs onto Towl Park, which is adjacent to two golf courses. It is about 10 miles from downtown.INDOORS The cedar house was designed by Neil Astle, who was a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects before his death in 2000, and most of its original details remain. The front door is set in a courtyard and opens into a hallway with a transparent ceiling, offering views of the trees above and blurring the distinction between indoor and outdoor space. Most of the floors are glazed brick, the same material used outside. There are many walls of glass between exposed-wood structural members, as well as clerestory windows that bring in abundant natural light.To one side of the sun-filled hallway is a large open kitchen with a long U-shaped granite counter and updated stainless-steel Dacor appliances. The living room is a few steps down, with higher ceilings and a distinctive brick fireplace. To the other side of the hallway are bedrooms and bathrooms, and a media room. A hallway off the living area leads to the master suite, where a wall of built-in cabinetry separates the bedroom from an office area. The master bathroom, tiled in stone, has a section of transparent ceiling and two vanities, and connects to a large walk-in closet with a dressing area.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.74-acre lot with extensive landscaping, including gates, gardens and various sculptural elements. There are multiple seating areas, including a wooden deck and a limestone patio.TAXES $13,457 a yearCONTACT Ralph Marasco, CBSHome, 402-690-7777; cbshome.com •WHAT A 1981 house with three bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $689,000SIZE 1,916 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $360SETTING This two-story house is inside the Interstate 610 loop that circles the center of Houston, on a cul-de-sac lined with homes designed by the architect Alan Hirschfield. Evelyn’s Park, a new five-acre green space designed by SWA Group and Lake Flato, is a block away, and a variety of restaurants and stores are a few blocks farther. The upscale Galleria shopping center is less than four miles away, and downtown Houston is about nine miles away.INDOORS A wrought-iron gate at the front of the house leads to a courtyard providing access to the main entrance. Inside, black slate floors flow into a dining room that is open to a living room with a wood-burning fireplace and a double-height ceiling. Two sliding glass doors open to the backyard. The kitchen has black granite counters, updated stainless-steel appliances, an island, a pass-through to the dining room and its own sunny dining area with a built-in desk.The upstairs flooring is engineered oak. The master bedroom has a sliding-glass door that opens onto a private deck and connects to an area with two closets and a bathroom with a double vanity. There are two other bedrooms, one of them a loftlike space that overlooks the living room below.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.11-acre lot and has a wraparound deck at the back that steps down to a lawn and gardens with trees, ground cover and landscape lighting. In the front is a driveway leading to an attached two-car garage with a laundry room, as well as an additional paved area that offers extra off-street parking.TAXES $11,298 a year; homeowners association fee, $250 a yearCONTACT Mike Livingston, Keller Williams Realty Metropolitan, 713-764-9850; kw.com