https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/13/business/media/frozen-finds-a-theme-park-home-at-epcot.html
‘Frozen’ Finds a Theme Park Home at Epcot - The New York Times
Disney  Walt  World (Lake Buena Vista  Fla),Movies,Amusement and Theme Parks,Frozen (Movie)
Sept. 12, 2014
7357
LOS ANGELES — Walt Disney World is ripping out one of its biggest cult hits in the name of Elsa and Anna.Thomas O. Staggs, chairman of Walt Disney Parks & Resorts, on Friday announced the start of construction on a “Frozen” attraction that will replace the dark and damp Maelstrom, a quirky 1980s-era flume ride at the Norway pavilion at Epcot. Fans of “Frozen,” which features Norwegian culture, will no doubt rejoice.But Disney also risks criticism from Maelstrom lovers. Unlike some older rides that Disney has bulldozed, Maelstrom – musty smell, cheesy Viking imagery, bizarre troll scene and all – still attracts throngs of riders. Unusually for a boat ride, its fast current floats riders both forward and in reverse.Perhaps to blunt any protest, Mr. Staggs began his announcement by citing a well-worn quote from the company’s founder. “When Walt Disney promised that Disneyland would never be completed, so long as there is imagination left in the world, he made a promise to our guests that we take seriously,” Mr. Staggs said.Epcot, which attracts 11 million visitors annually, has lacked blockbuster new rides, particularly for children, making “Frozen” an especially enticing addition from a business standpoint. Mr. Staggs, unveiling the news in a blog post, offered no further details, except to say that the ride “will take our guests to Arendelle and immerse them in many of their favorite moments and music from the film.”New Disney rides typically cost tens of millions of dollars at a minimum.Disney also announced new “Frozen”-related experiences in other areas of Walt Disney World, which is in Orlando, Fla., including the transformation of Cinderella Castle into “an ice palace” every night starting in November, a singalong at Disney’s Hollywood Studios park and a play area with real snow.