http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/15/world/europe/greece-bailout-vote.html
As Greek Bailout Deal Passes, Alexis Tsipras Faces Rebellion - The New York Times
Greece,Tsipras  Alexis,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),Eurozone,Coalition of the Radical Left (Greece)
Aug. 14, 2015
7467
ATHENS — The Greek Parliament and eurozone ministers approved an international loan deal on Friday that the Greek government needs to avoid defaulting on a debt payment next week. But an all-night debate required in Greece, and a growing rebellion within Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s leftist Syriza party, seemed to have pushed his coalition closer to spinning apart.The dissent may force Mr. Tsipras to soon call for a vote of confidence in his government.With 222 Greek lawmakers approving the bill, 75 voting against it or abstaining, and three absent, Parliament signed off on a package that would grant Greece as much as 86 billion euros, or about $95 billion. Later in the day, the deal was ratified  by eurozone finance ministers in an emergency meeting in Brussels. The accord requires Greece to put in place strict spending limits, new tax increases and sweeping changes in the way it manages its economy.But the terms, which also include raising the retirement age and opening various parts of the Greek economy to greater competition, have proved unacceptable to a growing number of lawmakers in Mr. Tsipras’s government.While the measure received the support of some members of the opposition, it had the backing of only 118 lawmakers in the government coalition — fewer than the 120 lawmakers that Mr. Tsipras needs to survive politically.Among the 149 members of the Syriza party in Parliament, 42 broke ranks with Mr. Tsipras, either by voting against the bailout or abstaining. One other was absent.After the vote, an official close to Mr. Tsipras said the prime minister would call for a vote of confidence in his government after Aug. 20, when Greece needs to repay a €3.2 billion debt, or $3.6 billion, to the European Central Bank. Mr. Tsipras is counting on the bailout being approved by all parties by that day, so that Athens can make the payment.In a stormy parliamentary debate that began at 2 a.m. and lasted until 9:30 a.m. on Friday, Mr. Tsipras eventually took the floor and defended his decision to press for the loan agreement.But in making that case, the prime minister once again seemed to contradict the position he had taken just last month, when he exhorted the nation before a referendum to reject the sort of austerity terms that the new deal demands of Greece and its people.The bailout deal, which has severely undermined Mr. Tsipras’s base in Parliament, was “a necessary choice” to avoid returning to the drachma, the currency before Greece joined the eurozone, which would have been the equivalent of “committing suicide,” the prime minister told lawmakers during the all-night debate.“I do not regret choosing compromise,” he said, adding that accepting the bailout would allow Greece to eventually emerge from recession and “start returning to growth” by 2018.The new signs of instability in the Tsipras government raised fears among some of Greece’s eurozone critics that Athens could not be counted on to carry out the tough terms of the bailout plans.But the eurozone finance ministers overcame those doubts on Friday, as well as months of bitterness that threatened to split the single currency.The finance ministers ended lengthy talks in Brussels after finessing the final elements of the deal. The sticking points had included the role of the International Monetary Fund and the possibility of reducing Greece’s debt-repayment burden and the process for recapitalizing the country’s beleaguered banks.“The past six months have been difficult,” Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, the European Union executive body that helped broker the deal, said in a statement. “Together, we have looked into the abyss. But today, I am glad to say that all sides have respected their commitments,” he said.The managing director of the I.M.F., Christine Lagarde, said in a statement that the agreement in Brussels “reverses much of the policy backtracking that caused the previous program to run seriously off track.”But Ms. Lagarde said that the fund was not yet in a position to lend more money to Greece. She called on “Greece’s European partners make concrete commitments” during a coming review of the whether Greece was sticking to its promises and targets “to provide significant debt relief, well beyond what has been considered so far.” Only then would the “Fund’s Executive Board to consider further financial support for Greece,” said Ms. Lagarde.The I.M.F. was not directly represented at the meeting in Brussels on Friday but participated by conference call, eurozone officials said.In a sign of the mounting political turmoil that Mr. Tsipras faces, however, Zoe Konstantopoulou, a Syriza hard-liner and the speaker of Parliament, had resisted Mr. Tsipras’s entreaties to speed up a vote on the bill so that it could be completed before the finance ministers’ meeting in Brussels. Ms. Konstantopoulou sought to stall the vote with a series of grinding parliamentary procedures, which did not block the eventual outcome but did mean that lawmakers had to stay up all night.And before the vote, the former energy minister, Panagiotis Lafazanis, who heads Syriza’s radical Left Platform, took the first step toward breaking away. In a statement signed by a dozen other leftists, he said that his group would form a new antibailout movement, one opposed to the memorandum specifying the details of the new loan program. Of the signers, only Mr. Lafazanis is a member of Parliament.“The struggle against the new memorandum starts now,” Mr. Lafazanis said, “by mobilizing people in every corner of the country.”Speaking to reporters on Friday after the vote, a government spokeswoman, Olga Gerovasili, indicated that a vote of confidence, possibly followed by new elections, might be coming. “We will follow the regulations of Parliament and the Constitution,” she said.But first, she said, “the government will do all that is necessary to stabilize the country’s economic situation.”