https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/05/arts/television/twin-peaks-return-episode-5-recap.html
‘Twin Peaks’ Season 3, Episode 5 Recap: Vegas Baby - The New York Times
Twin Peaks (TV Program)
June 5, 2017
7124
It’s hard to say exactly why Showtime made four hours of “Twin Peaks” available online two weeks ago and then made us wait so long to see more, but the network’s strategy may have benefited the series’ fifth chapter, which is by far the most disconnected to date. By now, anyone who cares about “Twin Peaks” has had time to digest the mysteries, absurdities, and brain-busting oddities of parts one through four, which may make the “here’s a bunch of new scenes” approach of this week’s episode easier to process.As with Episode 4, what’s most immediately notable is the preponderance of guest stars and returning favorites. Tom Sizemore pops up as Anthony Sinclair, a Lucky 7 Insurance agent and colleague of Dougie Jones, who lies at a staff meeting about the company needing to pay off a claim (at least according to Agent Dale Cooper, who’s tipped by the green flame he sees while Tony’s talking). Robert Knepper and Jim Belushi also have one brief scene together, where they clobber the supervisor at the casino where Coop won over 30 jackpots in a row.Even the old “Twin Peaks” weirdo Nadine Hurley (still played by Wendie Robie) appears as one of the faithful fans of Dr. Lawrence Jacoby’s conspiracy theory webcast, during which he hawks his gold-painted shovels. (The other faithful viewer we see? That pot-dealing old hippie Jerry Horne, naturally.)The most notable new additions are Caleb Landry Jones and Amanda Seyfried, playing Steven and Becky Burnett, two coked-up young Twin Peaks residents whose libertine ways and difficulties with adult responsibilities recall one of the major themes of the original series. Steven and Becky may be related to Shelly Johnson through her marriage to the no-good drug-dealing wife-beater Leo Johnson. One of the major motifs of “Twin Peaks” has been the corruption of youth. Here we get a new batch of fresh faces to watch decay.Jane Levy of “Suburgatory” fame plays another of the Twin Peaks kids, who watches in horror at the Bang Bang Bar as a friend gets molested by a defiant, cigarette-smoking stranger. That scene’s so brief, though, that it’s hard to say yet what it means, aside from the inference that this thug is carrying on the town’s tradition of moving money and drugs through a network of seedy bartenders.A lot of scenes in this episode are brief and elliptical, and will (maybe) make more sense as David Lynch and Mark Frost fill in more details. That would explain the fleeting return of the Buckhorn, S.D., murder case, in which the local medical examiner has determined that the random body found with the librarian Ruth Davenport’s head had Maj. Garland Briggs’s fingerprints — and apparently contained Dougie Jones’s wedding ring inside his stomach.This episode catches us back up with the anonymous hit men assigned to take out Dougie at Rancho Rosa, as well as introducing an apparent rival band of thugs, who inadvertently trigger the explosive device attached to Dougie’s car. None of this has yet been explained, though the scene where the car explodes is still fairly haunting, mainly because the vehicle’s flames are seen over the image of a young neighbor kid’s face, as he watches from the window of his drugged-out mother’s house after observing it up close.Even with two weeks of practice, we’re still getting used to how to watch these new “Twin Peaks” episodes. Until the pieces come together (assuming they ever do), the best way to process this show may be one scene or even one image at a time. Appreciate the way Lynch uses silences and industrial hum rather than filling every minute with music or chatter. Dig the compelling strangeness of a black, rectangular communication device in Buenos Aires, which gets pinged by a bruised woman early in the episode and then at the end appears to shrink down a hundredfold after Mr. C calls it from prison.Mostly, enjoy Kyle MacLachlan’s distinctive dual performances as the evil Agent Cooper doppelgänger Mr. C and as the childlike amnesiac everyone assumes is Dougie Jones. Inasmuch as “Twin Peaks” is often about the duality of human behavior — the veneer of civility, and the savagery lurking beneath our nice clothes — then Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost couldn’t have come up with a better and more genuinely moving illustration than the dichotomy of these two characters.Mr. C is so darkly powerful and confident, as he looks into his prison cell mirror and sees his face warping into Bob’s (while saying, “You’re still with me. That’s good.”) And Cooper looks so lost and stricken, as he fumbles through his first day at Dougie’s office. He fails to follow Dougie’s wife Janey-E’s instruction to pay off the 50 grand he owes; and throughout the workday he’s nothing more than a nuisance to his co-workers. He starts his morning crying while looking at Sonny Jim Jones’s face, and ends his afternoon staring for hours at the foot of a cowboy statue outside Lucky 7.How much of Agent Dale Cooper is still in there? Can any of him be retrieved? That remains to be seen. But as Coop suckles at a coffee cup, and gets distracted by visions of innocence and chivalry, it seems that at least some of our hero is still buried deep within this blank slate of a human being.Extra Doughnuts:• One of the more bizarre — and funnier — scenes this week sees Sheriff Frank Truman talking to Harry on the phone about some bad medical test results, before getting yelled at by his wife, Doris, because a leaky pipe at their house is irritating her. As with the Wally Brando scene last episode, this exchange gives Robert Forster the chance to stare patiently and impassively ahead while someone spouts nonsense at him ... which, so far, has been comedy gold.• Two tidbits from the Mr. C scenes to carry into future weeks. When the Black Hills cops give him a chance to make a call, he makes a reference to phoning “Mr. Strawberry,” and then makes the lights in the building go haywire as he calls that freaky box in Buenos Aires and says, “The cow jumped over the moon.” What’s that all about? Who knows? But it’s probably worth remembering.• Our musical guest of the week: Trouble. This time though, the band appears when there’s still a few minutes left in the episode, defying the “when the music starts, the show’s over” structure of the previous three parts.• Image of the week: Amanda Seyfried as Becky Burnett, high on cocaine and staring at the sky, blissed-out as Steven zooms through Twin Peaks.