http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/politics/emphasizing-sense-of-place-shaheen-beats-brown-to-keep-senate-seat.html
In New Hampshire, Jeanne Shaheen Beats Scott Brown to Keep Senate Seat - The New York Times
Midterm Elections (2014),New Hampshire,Brown  Scott P,Shaheen  Jeanne,Elections  Senate
Nov. 4, 2014
7772
MANCHESTER, N.H. —  Senator Jeanne Shaheen barely fended off an aggressive challenge for her United States Senate seat Tuesday from Scott Brown, a Republican and former senator from Massachusetts.The Associated Press, television networks and The New York Times called the race for Ms. Shaheen, a Democrat, with only a third of the votes counted. The numbers seesawed late Tuesday night, but Ms. Shaheen pulled out a victory by a few thousand votes, and Mr. Brown called Ms. Shaheen shortly before midnight to concede. “Tonight, the people chose to put New Hampshire first,” Ms. Shaheen said in her victory speech, echoing the theme of her campaign.Mr. Brown, 55, has had a meteoric career in elective politics. As a state senator, he stunned the political world in 2010 when he beat Martha Coakley, a Democrat, to capture the Massachusetts Senate seat held for almost half a century by Edward M. Kennedy. But just as suddenly, he was eclipsed in 2012 by Elizabeth Warren, and his career seemed stalled.In April, he jumped into the Senate race in New Hampshire, attempting to become the third person ever, and the first in more than a century, to represent more than one state in the Senate.But Ms. Shaheen, 67, a former governor who was first elected to the New Hampshire state senate in 1990, had developed deep bonds with voters that proved a challenge for Mr. Brown to overcome. “It was an honor to carry the flag, and I thank you for the privilege of being the nominee,” Mr. Brown told his dispirited supporters, adding that he had called Ms. Shaheen to congratulate her.Ms. Shaheen, who is originally from Missouri, avoided using the word “carpetbagger” to describe Mr. Brown, but that was the subtext of her message. “The question is not where he’s from; the question is what he’s for,” she often said, supplying this answer: “He’s not for New Hampshire.”The two ran very different campaigns. She focused on local issues like jobs, utility bills and student loans and campaigned under the banner of “putting New Hampshire first.” Mr. Brown, like other Republicans across the country, sought to nationalize the election by stoking resentment toward President Obama, whose job approval ratings here are at a record low.Mr. Brown cast Ms. Shaheen as a lap dog to Mr. Obama and indicted her — repeatedly — for her record of voting with him “99 percent of the time.”He argued that Mr. Obama’s lax leadership, particularly with regard to the Mexican border, had left the United States vulnerable to diseases like Ebola and polio, and to terrorists who wanted to “plant their flag at the White House.” Ms. Shaheen, he said, was a “rubber stamp” for the president’s policies.“I think it’s naïve to think that people aren’t going to be walking through here who have those types of diseases and/or other types of intent, criminal or terrorist, and yet we do nothing to secure our border,” Mr. Brown said in a radio interview. “I voted to secure it; Senator Shaheen has not.”Ms. Shaheen dismissed Mr. Brown as fear mongering and said that finding solutions to complex problems required serious people to be thoughtful, suggesting that Mr. Brown was neither.She also borrowed from the playbook laid out by Ms. Warren in 2012, tarring Mr. Brown with having voted for tax breaks for oil companies and in return receiving hefty campaign donations from oil interests and Wall Street.While polls showed that Mr. Obama was indeed a drag on Ms. Shaheen, voters viewed Mr. Brown more negatively than they viewed her. And, like Ms. Warren, she benefited from a substantial gender gap.This fueled one of Ms. Shaheen’s rallying cries toward the end of the campaign, that Mr. Brown would in fact become a historic figure, if not the one he anticipated: “We will make him the only person to run for the Senate from two states to be defeated by two women.”