http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/28/us/politics/tea-party-favorite-beats-lieutenant-governor-in-texas.html
Lieutenant Governor Loses Texas Runoff as Tea Party Holds Sway  - The New York Times
Texas,Tea Party Movement,Dewhurst  David,Patrick  Dan (1950- ),Elections  State Legislature,Republican Party,Primaries and Caucuses
May 27, 2014
3513
HOUSTON —  Dan Patrick, a state senator who has taken outspoken stands against abortion, same-sex marriage and illegal immigration, won a Republican runoff for lieutenant governor on Tuesday, handily defeating David Dewhurst, the longtime incumbent, in a race that illustrated the continuing power of the Tea Party in Texas.Mr. Patrick, 64, a radio talk show host from Houston who received widespread Tea Party support, had been expected by many political strategists to defeat Mr. Dewhurst. He finished well ahead of Mr. Dewhurst in the March primary, though he failed to get enough votes to avoid a runoff.“The people of Texas have given us a mandate tonight,” Mr. Patrick told supporters at a hotel ballroom here, adding: “Tea Party folks love America. They love the Constitution. They love free markets. And they love the Second Amendment. And they love Texas. And they love the liberty that is granted to them by God and not government.”He now faces the Democratic nominee, State Senator Leticia Van de Putte, in November. Republicans control both chambers of the Legislature and all statewide elected offices, but a victory is not assured for Mr. Patrick. Even within his own party, detractors have described his tone as strident.Mr. Dewhurst, 68, had served as lieutenant governor since 2003 but had never fully recovered from his loss to Ted Cruz in a 2012 runoff for a United States Senate seat. Analysts said Mr. Dewhurst, an establishment and business-friendly Republican, struggled to find his footing as the political landscape shifted from the “compassionate conservative” style of former Gov. George W. Bush to the more ideological and uncompromising approach of Mr. Cruz.Mr. Dewhurst went from being viewed as a powerful figure who helped lead the state in an era of economic prosperity and party dominance, to a symbol of the establishment at a time when Tea Party outsiders turned incumbency into a liability.Mr. Patrick’s victory was one of several results on Tuesday that showed the Tea Party has remained a dominant force in Texas even if its influence may have waned in other parts of the country.State Senator Ken Paxton, a Tea Party favorite whose ads featured praise from Mr. Cruz, defeated State Representative Dan Branch to win the nomination for attorney general. In another Republican runoff, Representative Ralph M. Hall, who has been in office for more than three decades, lost to John Ratcliffe, a former United States attorney. Mr. Hall, 91, is the oldest member of Congress.In the lieutenant governor’s race, political strategists said there was little difference between Mr. Dewhurst and Mr. Patrick on policy, but a tremendous one in personality and tone. At a debate in Dallas, Mr. Dewhurst and Mr. Patrick were asked whether creationism should be taught in public schools. Mr. Dewhurst said that creationism, evolution and intelligent design should be taught. Mr. Patrick took the chance to appeal to Christian conservatives.“We as Christians have yielded to the secular left and let them rule the day in this country,” Mr. Patrick said. “When it comes to creationism, not only should it be taught, it should be triumphed. It should be heralded.”Last month, Mr. Patrick debated immigration with San Antonio’s Democratic mayor, Julián Castro. The rare event — neither was vying for the other’s job — heightened Mr. Patrick’s reputation among Democrats as a divisive figure. It was hard to imagine Mr. Dewhurst taking part in a similar event, analysts said. And even though Mr. Dewhurst had won the support of numerous Tea Party activists, he failed to overcome the perception that Mr. Patrick was the Tea Party candidate.“Asking people to make a hiring decision based on facts rather than emotion was the frustrating aspect to this race,” said Toby Marie Walker, president of the Waco Tea Party and a supporter of Mr. Dewhurst. “David Dewhurst’s conservative record and accomplishments speak for themselves. He isn’t as comfortable giving fiery speeches as he is around the dinner table talking policy and listening to others.”The race grew bitter in the final weeks.Jerry Patterson, the state land commissioner, who lost in the March primary for lieutenant governor and later endorsed Mr. Dewhurst, provided reporters with court documents in May that showed Mr. Patrick had been treated at Houston-area medical facilities for depression in the 1980s and had attempted suicide. The documents stemmed from a 1980s-era lawsuit Mr. Patrick filed against The Houston Post and one of its reporters. Mr. Dewhurst said Mr. Patterson operated independent of his campaign and chose to release the information over his objections.Mr. Patrick’s spokesman, Allen Blakemore, said Mr. Dewhurst had stooped “to a new low,” that Mr. Patrick had made no secret of his depression and that he had not needed additional treatment for nearly 30 years.