https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/realestate/the-business-downstairs-plus-or-minus.html
The Business Downstairs: Plus or Minus? - The New York Times
Cooperatives,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Real Estate (Commercial),Upper West Side (Manhattan  NY),East Village (Manhattan  NY)
June 23, 2017
8850
For two decades, Marie Sacco has run her psychology practice out of a shared office in a prewar co-op on the Upper West Side. Over the years, she’s made friends with residents, striking up conversations in the lobby and the courtyard. The community, she said, has always been warm and friendly.But then, the owner of her office started calling.He informed Dr. Sacco that the co-op board had sent him a letter stating that, to ensure building security, patients who did not sign in with the doorman would not be allowed into the building. The board also wanted patients to enter through a separate entrance when possible.There had never been an incident in the building involving a patient.“All of a sudden, they’re telling us that our patients are a security risk,” said Dr. Sacco, who moved into the office in 1996. “Some of the people who come to us are famous or wealthy. To have them be treated like they are dangerous is like, whoa, what a shock.”On June 1, the managing agent sent a letter to the owner of the office requesting that patients and therapists stop lingering in the courtyard. The therapists were taken aback.“We’re just boring, mild-mannered shrinks with boring, mild-mannered patients who talk about life’s troubles,” Dr. Sacco said. “We’re not threatening. We’re not scary people.”Many co-ops lease space to commercial tenants, an arrangement that can fill a building’s coffers, helping to keep maintenance costs low. But some residents resent the inconveniences that come with sharing space with a business. A private lobby may feel less private if patients stream in and out all day long. And a board must balance the needs of residents with those of the commercial tenant.In the case of Dr. Sacco, the managing agent for the co-op said the letters clarified and expanded longstanding security rules. “Things have not changed drastically,” said Michael Jay Wolfe, the president of Midboro Management, which requested that the building address be withheld.One rule, however, is new: Patients must now sign in with the doorman, using a number or pseudonym to protect their privacy if they wish. “It’s no different than a guest who wants to visit a resident or the Chinese-food delivery guy,” Mr. Wolfe said, adding later, “If you don’t get announced, you don’t get in. That should be true with any building in the city.”Sometimes a change in leadership can change the dynamics of a building. At Dr. Sacco’s building, a new board was elected in January, and it re-evaluated its policies. Such a shift can have a jarring impact on commercial tenants paying high Manhattan rents; to them, a co-op board’s demands may seem stifling and even baffling.“I run into a lot of these disputes,” said Phyllis H. Weisberg, a chairwoman of the cooperative and condominium law practice at Montgomery McCracken Walker and Rhoads. “Commercial tenants have different wants and needs than the residential occupants, and so there’s an inherent conflict there.”Dr. Sacco’s office is owned by a grandson of the original sponsor of the co-op. So the $12,000 a month that Dr. Sacco and her colleagues pay in rent goes to him, not the building, an arrangement that is not uncommon in co-ops. In such situations, “the co-op has really lost control of this space,” Ms. Weisberg said. While the sponsor/landlord reaps the financial benefits, the co-op is “stuck with all the burdens.”Psychologists frequently rent offices in residential buildings, and are generally viewed as good tenants. They tend to be quiet, do not need much space and unlike a doctor or a dentist, do not dispose of medical waste. Still, there are risks. In 2008, a schizophrenic patient murdered a psychologist, Kathryn Faughey, in her Upper East Side office in a residential building.“People say: ‘Look, you let people into the building, they have psychological problems, we are concerned about safety,’” Ms. Weisberg said. “Whether or not boards are overreacting, this is a concern.”Therapists are not the only commercial tenants ruffling feathers. In 2014, the School for the Dogs, animal trainers, moved into retail space in an income-restricted co-op at 155 East Second Street in the East Village.As part of the lease agreement, the school was allowed to use the 900-square-foot rear yard, used for storing trash and bikes, for two hours a day as a private dog run. Although the arrangement added another $200 a month to the rent, it did not go over well with some shareholders in the 20-unit tenement building.At a meeting shortly after the school moved in, residents complained that the dogs went outside too early in the morning. “You want to set up your own alarm clock and not have to be awakened by the dogs,” said Ori Flomin, the president of the co-op board. The board asked the school to set later hours for outdoor play, which it did.Then came the artificial turf. When the school received an offer of a donation of expensive turf and teak tiles, the owners jumped at the opportunity. “Having grass where the dogs can roll around is a major draw,” said Annie Grossman, who owns the school with Kate Senisi. “We went from offering our clients ginger ale to offering them Champagne.”The reaction from shareholders was less bubbly. Ms. Grossman set up the turf and tiles to demonstrate how it could transform the concrete yard. “It made this beautiful vista that you would not expect to see in the back of an East Village walk-up,” she said.The residents interpreted the new ground cover differently. “A lot of tenants said it smelled bad,” Mr. Flomin said. “They didn’t want it.”The school planted flowers in urns without permission, upsetting the board. Then the school put a removable gate in the hallway leading to the rear yard to keep the dogs in check. But residents saw it as a barrier meant to keep them out, not the dogs. The board told the school that the way the gate was set up made it a fire hazard, and the school repositioned the gate.Ultimately, the disagreements may not have been about gates and artificial turf, but about control of the yard. The original shareholders had bought the once-abandoned building in July 1990 from the city for $1 a share, or $250 per apartment, according to Gregory Baggett, the director of the New York Council for Housing Development Fund Companies, a research advocacy group dedicated to the preservation of such properties. About half of the current tenants are original shareholders.“These people saw these buildings not as commodities, but as their homes,” Mr. Baggett said. Gentrification “can appear in the form of an aesthetic, an art gallery, a planter box, all these things can signal displacement,” he said.Ms. Grossman worries that her actions have been misinterpreted. “Somehow we’ve been seen as unappreciative, entitled outsiders,” she said. “I’m from the neighborhood. I have two parents who are artists. We’ve built this business from the ground up. It’s not some kind of vanity operation.”Eventually, the two sides reached an accord. The school now rolls up the turf and folds the gate after each use. The arrangement has appeased humans and canines alike — for now.