https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/10/insider/an-fbi-director-is-terminated-and-a-front-page-is-too.html
An F.B.I. Director Is Terminated, and a Front Page Is Too - The New York Times
New York Times,Comey  James B,Federal Bureau of Investigation,News and News Media,Newspapers
May 10, 2017
8111
Two hours before news broke of James B. Comey’s firing — before the F.B.I. director was blindsided while addressing bureau employees in Los Angeles, before President Trump’s letter arrived at F.B.I. headquarters in Washington, before congressional Democrats led a renewed push for an independent special counsel to investigate Russian interference in the presidential election — the front page of Wednesday’s New York Times began its diurnal life as it always does: as a simple hand-drawn pencil sketch, made on lime green paper.At 3:30 p.m. on Tuesday, when Tom Bodkin, The Times’s creative director, commenced his ritual of drawing up the page at the A1 print meeting, the day’s top news had a different focus: President Trump, despite strong objections from Turkey, had approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds. As the would-be lead of Wednesday’s paper, the story was given prime placement (at the top right) in Mr. Bodkin’s layout of the front page; alongside it would run an accompanying four-column photograph. The rest of the page grew from there: Above the fold would be stories on the South Korean election, the effects of cyberattacks on the recent French election, and Attorney General Jeff Sessions’s plans to toughen rules on prosecuting drug crimes. There was no mention of the F.B.I. or its director.A few hours later, that plan was scrapped.The Times first learned of Mr. Comey’s firing at 5:41 p.m. (By luck, a Times correspondent was at the White House at the time, and he heard of Mr. Comey’s firing directly from Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary.) Seven minutes later, at 5:48 p.m., the developing story was posted to nytimes.com.Meanwhile, in New York, as the news rippled through the Times building, Mr. Bodkin made his way back to the newsroom and tore another sheet of green paper from his pad. It was time to redesign the front page.The original plan was to feature a large portrait of Comey — a “conventional treatment,” Mr. Bodkin said. “And we had a pretty nice portrait of him, too.”“But then I glanced over to Renee Murawski’s machine” — Ms. Murawski is the content editor for print — “and she showed me the actual letter from the president, which I hadn’t seen yet.”The letter was extraordinary, he thought, not least of all because of the second paragraph, which betrayed Mr. Trump’s concern over the F.B.I.’s inquiries into Russia.“I realized that including the letter itself was a much better solution than simply showing a photograph of Comey. It helped tell the story in a way that was much more explicit.”Underneath a redrawn banner headline emerged a page that was dominated by Mr. Comey’s dismissal. The rest of the news was pushed below the fold.By the end of the night, The Times would publish more than a dozen items on Mr. Comey’s firing, with contributions from the Washington bureau, the Express team, and the video, photo and social media desks. (Journalists from the Washington bureau alone filed nine stories, not to mention the additional dispatches they made via a live briefing.) Two of those stories ended up on the front page.And Mr. Bodkin’s distinctive treatment earned high praise from readers, many of whom took to Twitter to post photos of the page. (One such tweet, posted by James Corden, the host of “The Late Late Show,” earned several hundred retweets.)As for the tradition of drawing the page by hand, on green paper? That probably dates to the days of Allan M. Siegal, a former assistant managing editor who is much revered in the newsroom.“Al always used a green pen when he was marking up copy, so that people would recognize the source of his edits,” Mr. Bodkin explained. “I’m guessing that’s where the green pad came about — it was his signature color.”But, for Mr. Bodkin, who’s been at The Times since 1980, there are also practical reasons for doing it the old fashioned way.“I kind of know what this stuff is going to look like,” he said. “I don’t need to see the page in any higher fidelity in order to visualize it. I just need to work out the relative position of elements and scale — and that’s much faster with a pencil.”