https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/sports/football/ezekiel-elliott-jerry-jones-cowboys.html
Cowboys Looking Into Ezekiel Elliott’s Role in Bar Altercation - The New York Times
Football,Domestic Violence,Dallas Cowboys,Elliott  Ezekiel (1995- ),Jones  Jerry
July 18, 2017
3082
FRISCO, Tex. — Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys’ owner, said Tuesday that the team was still gathering details about Ezekiel Elliott’s involvement in an altercation at a Dallas bar in the latest off-field episode involving the star running back.Elliott, who was already facing a potential suspension in the N.F.L.’s investigation of a year-old domestic violence case, was reportedly involved in a dispute Sunday night that led to a man being punched in the nose and being taken to a hospital. The Dallas police said the 30-year-old man who was punched did not know who hit him, and the report does not mention Elliott.Jones said he did not want to speculate about a possible suspension. An N.F.L. spokesman said the league was looking into the latest episode “to understand the facts.” One of Elliott’s representatives did not return a message seeking comment.The authorities in Columbus, Ohio, declined to prosecute Elliott, a former Ohio State star, over a domestic dispute with his former girlfriend before Elliott’s first training camp with the Cowboys last year. But the N.F.L.’s investigation continued, and the league has not cleared Elliott.Elliott also drew some negative attention last season when he visited a legal marijuana shop before a preseason game in Seattle. In March, he pulled down a woman’s shirt during a St. Patrick’s Day parade.The 21-year-old Elliott, who led the N.F.L. in rushing as a rookie and helped the Cowboys to the top seed in the N.F.C. playoffs with a 13-3 record, can be suspended without any convictions, although the now-mandatory six-game ban without pay for a domestic encounter is unlikely without legal involvement.“Certainly Zeke is evolving,” Jones said, using Elliott’s nickname, “and being subject to needing to learn how to deal with the media and social media the way it is today.”Jones said he had discussed the latest controversy with Elliott but declined to provide details. Elliott had said during the team’s off-season program that he was socializing less while trying to better understand the scrutiny he faces.“Like all of us, we do good some days and don’t do good the others,” Jones said. “That’s not to be confused with tolerating bad behavior or illegal behavior. That’s not what I’m talking about. I’m talking about just learning that your every move will be scrutinized and how in this day and time it will be looked at from many vantage points.”Elliott was a star before the Cowboys drafted him fourth over all last year, having led Ohio State to the first championship in the four-team College Football Playoff.He ran for an Ohio State bowl-record 246 yards and four touchdowns in the title game on his future home field in the N.F.L.With 1,631 yards rushing last season, Elliott powered the Dallas offense alongside his fellow rookie sensation Dak Prescott, who took the now-retired Tony Romo’s job with the best debut season for a quarterback in franchise history.