https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/17/us/freddie-gray-baltimore-police-trial.html
Mistrial Declared in Case of Officer Charged in Freddie Gray’s Death - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Porter  William G (1989- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Decisions and Verdicts,Baltimore (Md)
Dec. 16, 2015
1336
BALTIMORE — The trial of the first Baltimore police officer in the death of Freddie Gray ended in a hung jury on Wednesday, an unexpected twist that complicates the cases against five other officers facing charges in a fatal police encounter that prompted violent unrest here last spring.Judge Barry G. Williams of the Baltimore City Circuit Court formally declared a mistrial shortly after 3 p.m., after a weary-looking jury of seven women and five men filed into his wood-paneled courtroom. They had sent him a note after 16 hours of deliberations to inform him they were deadlocked on all four charges, including manslaughter.The mistrial brought an irresolute end to proceedings that have gripped this city, where many legal experts expected an acquittal, at least on the manslaughter charge. Officials have for weeks been preparing for the possibility of more unrest.Instead, on Wednesday night, Baltimore was calm — though its downtown was heavily guarded by police officers, some in riot helmets — as residents, many disappointed by the lack of a verdict, absorbed the news. A decision on a new trial date could come Thursday; the judge has scheduled a private conference to discuss it with lawyers.Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake and Police Commissioner Kevin Davis, speaking at police headquarters, urged residents to peacefully accept the jury’s decision — even if it was unsatisfying — and they did. Protests were limited and scattered; people hugged during a “prayer line” at North and Pennsylvania Avenues, the center of the spring riots, while several dozen demonstrators converged downtown near City Hall.“Justice is not a verdict,” the mayor said. “Justice is a process that we have to protect.”A lawyer for the Gray family, Billy Murphy, called the outcome “a bump on the road to justice.”The trial of the officer, William G. Porter, was to be the opening to — and a critical building block for — a six-part legal proceeding on the fatal encounter between the police and Mr. Gray, a 25-year-old black man who died April 19 of a spinal cord injury that prosecutors say was sustained during a ride in a police van.The mistrial could complicate the other prosecutions; Officer Porter is considered a material witness in their case against the driver of the van, Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., who is scheduled to go on trial Jan. 6 with the other cases to follow.A big question now is whether the state will push back Officer Goodson’s trial, or decide to retry Officer Porter after the other five officers — or perhaps not retry him at all. Judge Williams has barred prosecutors and defense lawyers from publicly discussing the case.“There is no question now that the state can’t just proceed against Officer Goodson with Officer Porter unless they try Officer Porter first,” said David Jaros, an assistant professor of law at the University of Baltimore who has been following the case. Of a new trial, he said, “It’s a do-over — with a preview of the evidence.”Officer Porter, 26, who testified in his own defense, was charged with manslaughter, assault and reckless endangerment and misconduct in office. The state accused him of “callous indifference” to Mr. Gray’s life for failing to call a medic after Mr. Gray asked for one, and for not buckling Mr. Gray into a police transport van, where he sustained the fatal injury to his spinal cord.The Porter trial was closely watched by Black Lives Matter activists across the country, who viewed it as a barometer of whether it is possible to convict police officers. Yet its racial dynamics were complex. Officer Porter is black; so are Judge Williams, who made a career of prosecuting police officers as a lawyer with the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, and Marilyn J. Mosby, the tough-talking state’s attorney who brought charges against the six officers, three black and three white. Seven of the 12 jurors were black.As the drama played out in the courtroom on Wednesday, Officer Porter and Ms. Mosby stood on opposite sides of the courtroom, each staring straight ahead. Ms. Mosby looked grim. The officer’s mother, Helena, who had testified as a character witness for her son, was sitting in the back of the courtroom, and hung her head in her hands after the judge announced, “I do declare a mistrial.”Officer Porter spoke only briefly in court to answer “Yes” to a question from his lawyers. Walking silently out of the courtroom escorted by a sheriff’s deputy, he gave a nod to his mother to follow him. They left through a side door, ushered by deputies away from reporters, under strict instructions not to conduct interviews in the courthouse.Mr. Gray’s death opened a raw wound in Baltimore, a majority-black city with a long history of tension between African-Americans and the police. Its ripple effects here have been immense. Ms. Rawlings-Blake fired the former police commissioner, Anthony W. Batts, and decided not to run for re-election next year. The city paid a $6.4 million settlement to the Gray family. The Justice Department is investigating whether the police here systematically violate the civil rights of black residents.Outside the courtroom after Wednesday’s decision, a local activist, Kwame Rose, used a megaphone to announce the decision, shouting, “They just declared a mistrial!” He quickly added, “Justice has not been served,” and “The system has failed us once again.” Mr. Rose was arrested minutes later, after officials ordered the crowd to disperse because it was “an unlawful assembly.”In Mr. Gray’s neighborhood, Sandtown, the streets were quiet, with a few extra officers on patrol. But at City Hall, Tavon Haikns, 22, expressed disbelief. “Come on, they’re going to let him go. They don’t care about us,” he said, adding: “We break laws, they break laws, but we get locked up. You know why? Because they’re the police, and they’ve got a badge and a gun.”But DeRay Mckesson, a national leader in the Black Lives Matter movement who lives in Baltimore, said he was heartened by the outcome.“This is a hung jury, it’s not an acquittal,” he said. “That’s important. The prosecution resonated with the jury in some capacity — and that is undeniable.”The trial featured cellphone video of the first chaotic moments after Mr. Gray’s arrest, and conflicting medical testimony about precisely when Mr. Gray’s injury occurred and whether Officer Porter could have saved him. It centered on what happened inside the van as it made six stops through West Baltimore on the morning of April 12, when Mr. Gray was arrested by two officers patrolling on bicycles. Video showed him being dragged, screaming, into the van; Officer Porter arrived later as backup.The officer was calm and composed as he took the witness stand in his own defense, telling jurors that he thought Mr. Gray had been faking his injuries, and that he had no idea his life was in danger until the van arrived at the Western District police station with Mr. Gray, shackled and unresponsive, on the floor.“It was traumatic for me, also,” Officer Porter said on the stand. The jury began its deliberations shortly after 2:30 p.m. on Monday, and on Tuesday announced it was deadlocked; Judge Williams then sent jurors back for more deliberations. In instructing them, he had said that a manslaughter conviction required them to conclude that Officer Porter showed a “reckless or wanton disregard for human life,” and that his actions were a “gross departure” from those of a reasonable officer — a standard that also applied to the assault charge.The jurors also had to consider counts of reckless endangerment and misconduct in office; the misconduct charge required them to find that he acted “with an evil motive in bad faith.” When jurors sent a note to Judge Williams during their deliberations asking him to define those words, he declined to do so.Some legal experts attributed the outcome to the starkly different closing arguments delivered by the prosecutor Janice Bledsoe and the defense lawyer Joseph Murtha. Mr. Murtha’s argument was somewhat plodding, as he took the jury through the witnesses one by one.But Ms. Bledsoe delivered an impassioned appeal, dangling a blood-stained seatbelt from the van before jurors, and calling the wagon “a casket on wheels.” Mr. Jaros, who had predicted it would be difficult for the state to win convictions on the most serious charges of manslaughter and assault, said the state did “a better job than we appreciated.”But critics of Ms. Mosby — who has become a divisive figure here, especially among defenders of the police, who view her as an overzealous prosecutor — saw the mistrial as a big loss for her.That the judge called a mistrial after only 16 hours of deliberations should not raise any eyebrows, said Laurie Levenson, an expert in criminal law and judicial ethics at the Loyola Law School in Los Angeles. “The judge has to be careful — if he pushes the jury too hard, there may be grounds for an appeal down the road,” she said.Mr. Gray’s family attended much of the trial but was not in the courtroom Wednesday when the mistrial was announced. At one point during the trial, his mother, Gloria Darden, left in tears. Later Wednesday afternoon, in a short news conference outside the courthouse accompanied by Mr. Murphy, their lawyer, they said they hoped for a new trial as soon as possible.The jury “did the best that they could,” said Richard Shipley, Mr. Gray’s stepfather, as Ms. Darden looked on, wrapped in a warm black coat. “We are calm. You should be calm, too.”