https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/24/books/review/miss-jane-brad-watson.html
A Second Mississippi Novel by Brad Watson - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Watson  Brad (1955- ),Miss Jane (Book)
July 22, 2016
4196
MISS JANEBy Brad Watson284 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $25.95.The category and condition of the body at birth determines so much in any human story: matters of gender, ethnicity, comeliness or a lack of it, and crucial questions of health and wholeness — whether a body is complete in its parts or functions, its ability to thrive alone or with others.Brad Watson, white, male and already wise beyond his years when the near-­perfect story collection “Last Days of the Dog-Men” was published in 1996, has long explored how the peculiarities of our physical selves can be a benediction and a curse (in turns or all at once), how insistently they express nature’s beauty and brutality. He has written variously about adultery and rape, failed fathers and violently derailed romances, murder and hauntings, dead or dying dogs and talking cats, with and without humor, always without sentimentalizing. He is not a writer shocked or disappointed by carnality or by the fact that it often exists alongside virtue. And he has shown, as few writers have, how wildness, in us and in our environment, can be deliverance. In his newest novel, “Miss Jane,” Watson’s facility with upending expectations and upsetting the lines between all sorts of categories — good and bad, normal and abnormal, pride and shame, love and hate — is at its keenest and applied most carefully.In an essay about the book available on his website, Watson admits the writing of “Miss Jane” had many false starts and many more drafts — almost 30 in sum. Why? In part because he was raising the dead: His heroine is based on a great-aunt, Mary Ellis (Jane) Clay, who, owing to an ill-defined birth defect that caused incontinence, couldn’t have children and never married. He saw her in person when he was a boy and she an elegant antique, and later stumbled across a photo of her as a surprisingly coquet­tish girl. These ­glimpses only added to the inscrutability of her life. A fair amount of research went into properly diagnosing Jane’s condition, as well as into capturing the time and place in which the real and the fictional stories meet: rural Mississippi in the early 20th century. Watson is from Mississippi and, much as Faulkner did with his Yoknapatawpha County, has fashioned his own region there from the fictional town of Mercury and its surrounding territories. As the setting of his previous novel, the 2002 National Book Award finalist “The Heaven of Mercury,” the town can be a kinetic weather front or a dead end. It is also, enduringly, a dense maze of memories, dreams and ghosts conjuring a specific and timeless American South.In “Miss Jane,” Watson’s design is less elaborate and his intentions less gothic and more naturalistic, but no less ambitious. He sets out to create a whole life, and fittingly, he starts with Jane’s conception and birth — but not before a prologue lists what scares her and, importantly, what doesn’t. It’s a lovely, seductive bit of writing and a tone-setter. It gives notice that the book is about how character and strength are formed, and suggests that in putting our fears in perspective we stand a good chance of overcoming them.And Jane has a lot to overcome even before taking her first breath. Whatever love there was between her parents, Ida and Sylvester Chisolm, has been worn, like their bodies, by the work and worry of sustaining their farm, some miles outside Mercury, and by their both being “disposed to darkness of spirit.” Ida, at 39, has given birth to five children already (only three of whom survived) and does not want another. Given her age and the circumstances on the night of Jane’s conception, she imagines her pregnancy as “an evil joke”: Her husband, drunk on the whiskey from his celebrated still and too cheap to go to “a two-dollar whore,” took his wife while she too had achieved a share of oblivion; she was unconscious from a dose of laudanum, prescribed for her nerves. When the local doctor and family friend Eldred Thompson delivers Jane and discovers the evident anomaly in her makeup, shame and guilt, and often rage, show up as if they were flesh-and-blood creatures compelled to shadow her parents’ and Jane’s days.“Illness,” Susan Sontag famously said, “is the nightside of life, a more onerous citizenship.” Jane is not sick, exactly, but as Dr. Thompson later explains it to her: “Everything is kind of tucked up inside you. . . . And one thing you do not have is the little muscle that allows you to control yourself”; eventually he defines it as urogenital sinus anomaly and persistent cloaca. Impossible to treat then (and rare even now, though fixable with surgery), Jane’s condition precludes sex and childbearing, which in turn precludes marriage in that time and place. It does not, however, preclude love or romantic and sexual longings and all their attendant transcendence. As early as her sixth year, she’s struck hard by the embarrassment of her incontinence when a playmate tells her, “You stink.” She isolates herself, but because Jane, in defiance of her genes, is “not prone to melancholy or the miseries,” this isolation offers new ways of seeing and feeling while alone in the fields and woods. Watson conveys Jane’s relationship to nature as a lover’s, with tactile, achingly sensuous prose: A “torrential storm, . . . the soft skins of wild mushrooms, the quick and violent death of a chicken, the tight and unopened bud of a flower blossom, . . . the somehow palpable feel of fading light — were in some way sexual for Jane.” The mystery and strangeness of nature comfort and embolden her as she investigates these aspects in herself. (Indeed, there are few words in the novel relied on more than “strange,” because Watson is driving home all its applications, worldly and otherworldly, diminishing and expanding.) When Jane falls for a boy who also falls for her and she opts to attend the dances where she knows he will be, she lets herself see and be seen (as “a gaunt, dark-eyed beauty”) and measures just how far she can go before real harm is done.Critically, she is not alone when taking these risks: Her father haunts the doorways of the dances, ready to take her home. It’s he who teaches her about dangers to avoid in the woods and the names of trees, shrubs and flowers, and he, however flawed, who is prepared to sacrifice himself to protect Jane. Her sister, who’s as flinty as their parents and helps to raise Jane, shows her the allures and perils of willfulness and living outside convention. Her greatest teacher and ally, however, is Dr. Thompson, who from the first reframes Jane’s limitations as learning opportunities. He asks the questions the novel turns on: “Who can say what life will make of a body?” And can that body thrive without romantic connection? A widower whose marriage was not perfect, and himself infertile, he offers one answer: “In my opinion many I’ve known would’ve been better off following their solitary natures.” Through the doctor and Jane’s father, Watson expresses a tenderness that is one of the novel’s finest achievements and may derive from being a father himself, from the hard-won knowledge that we are each of us limited.Yet the complexity and drama of Watson’s gorgeous work here is life’s as well: Sometimes physical realities expand us, sometimes trap; sometimes heroism lies in combating our helplessness, sometimes in accepting it. A writer of profound emotional depths, Watson does not lie to his reader, so neither does his Jane. She never stops longing for a wholeness she may never know, but she is determined that her citizenship in the world, however onerous, be dragged into the light and there be lived without apology or perfection or pity.