https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/dining/burger-and-lobster-restaurant-opens-mr-donahues-closing.html
London-Based Burger & Lobster Opens 2nd Manhattan Outpost - The New York Times
Restaurants,Chefs,Brookfield Place (Manhattan  NY),Le Turtle (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Gramercy Tavern (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Mr Donahue's (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant)
July 18, 2017
1790
BURGER & LOBSTER This London-based chain is opening its second outpost in Manhattan, in the building housing the Stephen Sondheim Theater (formerly the Henry Miller Theater). Like its Flatiron district sibling and its locations elsewhere, the restaurant offers only burgers, lobsters or lobster rolls with salad and fries. The restaurant’s entrance, alongside the theater, is through a tunnel covered with lobster traps, a design element used throughout the space, which is on the theater’s second floor. “I don’t think there are any lobster traps left in New York,” said Vladimir Borodin, the managing partner. They’ve used 300 of them. The biggest challenge in creating the spacious restaurant, with 40 places in the bar and a dining room seating another 100, was soundproofing well enough to prevent noise from interfering with the theater downstairs, Mr. Borodin said. Theater-themed quotations are on walls and scrawled on the bar. (Opens Wednesday): 132 West 43rd Street, 917-565-9044, burgerandlobster.com.HUDSON JANE Casual fare — beef and noodles, chicken and dumplings, and sandwiches like a vegan B.L.T. — are served at this all-day cafe and wine bar from married partners, the chef Megan Johnson, who worked at Gramercy Tavern, among others, and Jen LaPorta. The restaurant also has a retail store for prepared food and goods: 360 Myrtle Avenue (Adelphi Street), Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 347-987-3881, hudsonjane.com.JING FONG The 20,000-square-foot dim sum palace seating 800 in Chinatown has opened an Upper West Side satellite one-tenth the size. Gone here are the roving carts, but many standard items, like barbecued pork buns and delicate har gow, are on the menu, as are dishes like Peking pork chop and beef chow fun. The décor is subdued, with geometric Chinese motifs, 10 seats at a counter facing the kitchen, and tables for 40 outside: 380 Amsterdam Avenue (78th Street), 646-678-5511, jingfongny.com.MIFUNE NEW YORK AND SUSHI AMANE This double-barreled theater district restaurant has Hiroki Yoshitake, whose specialty is a blend of French and Japanese cuisine and who received a Michelin star for it at Sola in Paris, cooking in the ground-floor dining room named for the actor Toshiro Mifune. There, go no further than dishes like soy milk vichyssoise dressed with sea urchin and caviar or smoked sautéed foie gras with mango chutney to understand Mr. Yoshitake’s food. On the lower level, Sushi Amane, an eight-seat counter, has Shion Uino from Tokyo, where he was awarded three Michelin stars, fashioning nigiri: 245 East 44th Street, 212-986-2800, mifune-restaurant.com; Sushi Amane, 212-986-5300, mifune-restaurant.com/sushi-amane.OLD MONK The former Babu Ji space is reopening as another Indian restaurant, this time with a new take on the food of the subcontinent. It’s named for a brand of Indian rum. Sushil Malhotra, an entrepreneur with a string of Indian restaurants in New York and Westchester County, and the chef Navjot Arora, his partner in some of them, are modernizing the standards, marinating tandoori lamb chops in the signature rum and stuffing naan breads with goat cheese. Decorations have an Indian accent: 175 Avenue B (11th Street), 646-559-2922, oldmonknyc.com.OYSTER BAR AT MEGU For three weeks, the private dining room at Megu, the Japanese restaurant, is becoming a stand-up oyster bar with Kevin Joseph of Empire Oyster, a wholesaler and distributor, shucking while you wait. Champagne and cocktails are served. (Wednesday through Aug. 5): 355 West 16th Street, 212-885-9400, meguworldwide.com.QUALITY EATS A branch of Michael Stillman’s West Village restaurant serving steak, especially uncommon cuts, takes root on Upper East Side: 1496 Second Avenue (78th Street), 212-256-9922, qualityeats.com.VIDA VERDE The chef Hugo Orozco hails from Mazatlán, Mexico, and he’s adding a personal touch to some Mexican staples at this vibrantly decorated two-story restaurant. His ceviche is a seafood medley with shrimp, fish, squid and scallops, and one of his salads features corn, squash and beans, a classic threesome. There’s an avocado-peanut pie for dessert: 248 West 55th Street, 646-590-2034, vidaverdeny.com.JOE CAMPANALE, who was with the Epicurean Group (L’Artusi, etc.), will be taking over the Franny’s space with the chef Erin Shambura, who was at L’Artusi, to open a wine-focused restaurant, as yet unnamed, before the year’s end: 348 Flatbush Avenue (Sterling Place).SANT AMBROEUS This Italian restaurant and cafe group is gradually expanding its presence in New York. A couple of weeks ago, it opened a coffee bar in the Hanley Building on the Upper East Side, and now it will start work on a 7,000-square-foot restaurant and cafe on two floors in the Brookfield Place development near the World Trade Center, to open next year: 200 Vesey Street (West Street). CHRIS CIPOLLONE, who left Piora for the West Coast about a month ago, will be the executive chef at Cotogna, the offshoot of the highly rated Quince in San Francisco. HAROLD VILLAROSA, who was the chef de cuisine at Maison Pickle on the Upper West Side, has become the executive chef at Freemans Restaurant on the Lower East Side.MAYAHUEL After eight years, Ravi deRossi is closing his Mexican bar featuring tequila and mezcal. An announcement from the restaurant said it had been unable to renew an expiring lease. Aug. 8 will be its last day.MR. DONAHUE’S Ann Redding and Matt Danzer have decided to close their tiny roast beef den on Aug. 5. “It was too small to support the price point,” Ms. Redding said. “We would have to do more volume, but we only had 12 seats.” The partners plan to convert it into a takeout shop for Uncle Boons, their Thai restaurant nearby. “The funny part is that Uncle Boons takeout was our original concept for the space,” she said: 203 Mott Street (Spring Street), 646-850-9480, mrdonahues.com.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.