https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/us/politics/bernie-sanders-narrows-fund-raising-gap-with-hillary-clinton.html
Bernie Sanders Narrows Fund-Raising Gap With Hillary Clinton - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Campaign Finance,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,Political Action Committees,Democratic Party
Oct. 1, 2015
9478
Hillary Rodham Clinton burned through nearly all of the money she raised during the last three months while raising far less than she did previously, according to fund-raising figures released by her campaign on Thursday, and she enters the fall campaign with a substantially smaller cash advantage over her closest rival, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Mrs. Clinton, a Democrat who has been able to tap into one of the most successful fund-raising networks in American politics, reported raising more than $28 million for her primary campaign since the beginning of July, and spent about 90 percent of it, ending with $32 million on hand.But during a summer when insurgent candidates in both parties rose to the forefront of the campaign, Mr. Sanders, a socialist who has held just a handful of formal fund-raisers, brought in more than $26 million and began October with about the same amount of cash on hand, according to his campaign.Ben Carson, a Republican and retired neurosurgeon who has emerged as a favorite of religious conservatives in states like Iowa and South Carolina, raised $20 million from 353,000 donors, according to his aides. Like Mr. Sanders, he increased the pace of his fund-raising from the spring, but he ended with far less money in the bank, about $12 million.The preliminary fund-raising numbers reflected a rapidly shifting political landscape in which well-financed candidates who are favored by their party’s establishment and big donors, like Mrs. Clinton and Jeb Bush, are being challenged aggressively by political outsiders.Mr. Bush and Senators Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas, leaders of Republican fund-raising last quarter, did not release numbers on Thursday. Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky raised just $2.5 million for his presidential campaign, an aide said, and spent almost twice as much, beginning October with about $2 million in his war chest.But the shrinking gap between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders — comparable to Mrs. Clinton’s lead over Barack Obama, then a senator, during the same period in the 2008 campaign — was particularly striking, indicating that Mr. Sanders may have the money and resources to campaign next year beyond Iowa and New Hampshire, where most of his resources have been devoted.“What it tells us is that Bernie has financial staying power,” Jeff Weaver, Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, said. “We have the financial wherewithal that will allow for a major campaign through Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Nevada and beyond in state-by-state, delegate-by-delegate contests for the Democratic Party nomination.”Aides to Mrs. Clinton said that her total was within their projections, and that aside from incumbent presidents, no candidate had raised as much during the comparable three months of a campaign.But the amount Mrs. Clinton raised reflected a sharp drop from her haul reported over her few months in the race, when she brought in a total of $47.5 million, almost all of it for the primary campaign. The decrease reflects not only the usual summer slowdown on the fund-raising circuit but also the growing possibility that another Democrat popular among the party’s major donors, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., might enter the race.The coming months will test whether Mrs. Clinton’s high rate of spending will pay dividends against Mr. Sanders and other competitors. A Clinton aide said the money had gone largely to early investments in field infrastructure, including gathering data on grass-roots supporters, the heart of a modern presidential campaign. Mr. Sanders’s $15 million in spending was devoted largely to online fund-raising and hiring staff, his aides said.Mr. Carson’s aides declined to share information on his spending, but in the first two months of his campaign, half of it went to direct mail or telephone solicitations, relatively costly ways to raise money.Precise information on the candidates’ spending won’t be made public until they file reports with the Federal Election Commission later this month. But there is little evidence that Mrs. Clinton or Mr. Sanders has invested significantly beyond the first four states on the Democratic calendar.And Mr. Sanders has spent virtually nothing on some traditional campaign expenses, such as television ads or polling, even as he ascended in some national and state polls. Mrs. Clinton, by contrast, spent about $4 million on television ads over the summer.Most important, Mr. Sanders is rapidly rewriting the rules for big-money fund-raising in a presidential campaign. He raised the money with only a small number of fund-raising events and appears to be relying overwhelmingly on donors’ making small contributions.Mr. Sanders has even outpaced Mr. Obama’s record-breaking campaign from 2008, reaching more than a million online contributions — a mark Mr. Obama did not pass until the Democratic primaries were underway in the winter of 2008, according to Obama fund-raising solicitations at the time. Mr. Sanders has also amassed 650,000 contributors, well more than Mr. Obama had at the comparable point in that campaign cycle.“Sanders is proving, at least for now, that presidential candidates can compete financially in the primary solely with contributions from everyday Americans,” said David Donnelly, the president of Every Voice, which advocates programs to encourage small-donor political giving. “That he’s doing it with a critique of the big-money system at the core of his message is an important part of his success.”Mrs. Clinton has relied on the full force and reach of one of the most prominent Democratic politicians in the world, rousing small donors but also investing far more time and energy than Mr. Sanders in courting those who can give the maximum $2,700 for her primary campaign.She attended at least 58 fund-raisers in the past three months, according to her campaign schedules, and sent her husband, former President Bill Clinton, or top aides to others.The question for the Democratic hopefuls is which candidate can sustain his or her pace. Mr. Sanders’s haul represents about 10 percent more a month in the third quarter than in the second, when he first entered the race, a relatively small increase. His aides said he had about $25 million on hand after spending about $15 million through the campaign, mostly on online fund-raising efforts and a growing staff in New Hampshire, Iowa and elsewhere.But Mrs. Clinton has at least one substantial edge: “Super PACs” supporting her candidacy and staffed by her allies have raised an additional tens of millions of dollars.Mr. Sanders’s surge may now force an uncomfortable choice for Mrs. Clinton’s allies: whether to open those floodgates against Mr. Sanders, who has told supporters he does not want a super PAC of his own.