https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/05/us/politics/republicans-congress-trump.html
Health Care? Taxes? Budget? G.O.P. Has Big To-Do List, but Little Time - The New York Times
Republican Party,House of Representatives,Senate,Law and Legislation,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government
July 5, 2017
271
WASHINGTON — An iffy health care vote. An unresolved budget resolution. A heavy debt ceiling lift. And, of course, there is that tax overhaul plan.Congress has a lot to do, and it doesn’t have much time. So much for a lazy July in Washington.When members of Congress return next week from their Fourth of July break, they will be greeted by a mammoth legislative logjam. Republicans are increasingly skeptical that they can get everything done. There are even calls from some to forgo their sacred August recess — a respite from the capital in its swampiest month.“Our current Senate calendar shows only 33 potential working days remaining before the end of the fiscal year,” a group of 10 Republican senators wrote on Friday in a letter to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, highlighting the deadline at the end of September. “This does not appear to give us enough time to adequately address the issues that demand immediate attention.”The Republican Party is under intense pressure to achieve something of consequence in that limited time in order to legitimately claim that the first year of the Trump administration has been a success. So far, the ambitious agenda has stagnated without a signature achievement. President Trump’s unpredictability has only made matters more complicated.“Everyone is coming to the realization that Republicans are going to need to sprint to the end of the year,” said Ken Spain, a former spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee who now lobbies for companies on tax issues. “A lot of the legislative maneuvering in July will lay the groundwork for them to do so.”The first order of business when lawmakers return remains reaching a swift conclusion to the debate over how to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, an ambition that has bedeviled Republicans since Mr. Trump entered the White House. The grappling over how to proceed has laid bare deep divisions within the party and stalled progress for the next items on the agenda, a federal budget deal and a tax overhaul. A vote on health care could drag on until mid-July or later depending on when Senate Republicans deliver a new bill to the Congressional Budget Office for scoring.The straggling health bill has backed up other major priorities, setting the stage for a government shutdown or even a default in the fall if the debt ceiling is not raised in time.The specter of a debt ceiling breach as lawmakers work to lift the statutory borrowing limit adds another twist to a complex set of problems.The Congressional Budget Office said last week that the Treasury could probably go until mid-October before it exhausts its “extraordinary powers” to keep paying the federal government’s bills. But Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, has been pressing Congress to lift the debt ceiling by the end of July to avoid disrupting the markets. With Republicans split over whether spending cuts or changes to the budget process should be tied to the raising of the debt limit, reaching a deal could go down to the wire.Perhaps equally complicated for a factionalized Republican caucus is the task of reaching an agreement on a budget resolution. This is necessary for unlocking the legislative tool, known as reconciliation, that will allow Republicans to embark on rewriting the tax code without the help of Democrats.But so far consensus has been elusive.House Republicans have been wrestling with a budget package that would increase military spending above what Mr. Trump requested in his budget and higher than the caps imposed by the Budget Control Act of 2011. However, they have been unable to agree on how to spread the pain of $200 billion in spending cuts. Passing a budget that lifts the caps will be an especially difficult challenge because it will require the support of Senate Democrats. The Democrats are loath to help without increases in spending for domestic programs.The timing of this makes the Republicans’ tasks especially tricky. More moderate Republican members of the House, known as the Tuesday Group, have urged Speaker Paul D. Ryan to delay the budget until health care legislation is passed — or abandoned — so that lawmakers have a clearer picture of the fiscal backdrop they face.“It will be extremely difficult to simultaneously negotiate a health care plan that can pass the Senate and the House while negotiating a bipartisan budget deal,” said Ed Lorenzen of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a nonpartisan research organization that preaches fiscal prudence. “There may be enough time legislatively to do both, but there isn’t enough bandwidth to negotiate two complex, controversial items.”That confluence of fiscal battles could end up putting Mr. Trump’s tax overhaul in retreat. Mr. Trump’s economic advisers and leaders in Congress have promised to unveil a unified tax plan soon after Labor Day, leaving them with little time to reach agreement on many contentious issues.Republicans have so far failed to agree on whether a border adjustment tax on imports will be part of a final plan. There is also no consensus on how to handle the deductibility of corporate interest expenses and how to prevent taxpayers from using a lower pass-through tax rate on small businesses as a loophole.The business world is growing increasingly impatient. Last week four of the biggest lobbying groups — the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Business Roundtable, the National Association of Manufacturers and the National Federation of Independent Business — urged congressional leaders to stay focused on their all-important goal of tax cuts. “Given the historic opportunity before Congress, no other reforms under consideration rise to the importance of pro-growth, comprehensive tax reform,” they said.Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, argues that Republicans are failing because they insist on working only with one another.“The Republicans’ partisan approach has been the thing that’s tripped them up this year,” Mr. Schumer said. “If they continue that approach in July, they’ll have a tough time. If they abandon it, they might be able to get some things done.”Of course, some of the pressure that Republicans are under is of their own making. The budget and debt ceiling can be addressed in the fall, and there will be little harm if the tax overhaul drifts into early 2018.“They have to separate the things they have to do from the things they would like to do,” said Rohit Kumar, a tax expert at the accounting firm PwC and former deputy chief of staff to Mr. McConnell. “If health care doesn’t happen before August recess, then health care is done.”The wild card continues to be Mr. Trump. Of late he has failed to live up to his declared reputation as a deal maker. Instead, he has been more of a distraction.“His tweets in general have discomfited many of his Republican allies,” said Steve Bell, a former Republican staff director of the Senate Budget Committee who now works at the Bipartisan Policy Center. “Here is the majority leader trying to get votes. Boom comes all of these tweets, and people say, ‘I’m done with dealing with this guy for a while.’”A veteran of the vicious fights over taxes and budgets in the 1980s, Mr. Bell said, “This is particularly messy.”