https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/19/garden/rosanne-somerson-named-risd-president.html
Rosanne Somerson Named RISD President - The New York Times
Rhode Island School of Design,Somerson  Rosanne (1954- )
Feb. 18, 2015
2944
When Rosanne Somerson became interim president of Rhode Island School of Design, the job came with a 21-room historic house in Providence, R.I., but not much furniture. Fortunately, Ms. Somerson was a founder and longtime head of the school’s furniture department with close ties to the academic community. As described in the “On Location” feature of Feb. 12, she filled the rooms with dozens of furniture and art pieces made by RISD faculty, students and alumni, creating not only a comfortable second home but also a public showcase of the school’s talent.That house will now become her permanent residence. After a nine-month search that involved more than 100 candidates, RISD announced today that Ms. Somerson has been named its 17th president. She replaces John Maeda, who led the institution for six years before leaving in January 2014 to become a design partner at the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers.“Now I can really begin fund-raising for long-term initiatives and invite the community to participate in the shaping of RISD,” Ms. Somerson said by phone from Providence. One mission is to continue implementing a master plan of the campus, with its more than 60 buildings. Another goal, she said, is to “project out to the world the importance of an art and design education” as a way to prepare for the future, because “a lot of students are being educated for jobs that no longer exist.”What she described as the “iterative, nimble, flexible, creative thinking” promoted by RISD’s curriculum is, she believes, a tool that will make students more adaptable when they graduate.While attending to school business in her interim role, she had been overnighting at the president’s house in a suite of second-floor rooms that are former servants’ quarters; now she is creating other private spaces in the residence for herself and her family.“I’m going to keep the community aspect of the house,” she said. “It’s part of the campus and should be shared with the campus.”