https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/15/us/louisiana-storm-floods-rescue.html
Thousands Displaced in Storm-Drenched Louisiana - The New York Times
Louisiana,Floods,Rain,Rescues,Evacuations and Evacuees
Aug. 14, 2016
4255
After days of ruinously heavy storms in southern Louisiana, rain-swollen rivers and creeks continued wreaking damage across the state, inundating neighborhoods and submerging roads and highways.More than 20,000 people have had to be rescued from the flooding this weekend, Louisiana officials said, in a waterlogged stretch from the parishes to the north and east of Baton Rouge west past the city of Lafayette. Thousands of homes have been flooded, forcing more than 10,000 people into shelters. Those stranded by the waters found themselves further marooned by a massive cellular network failure.Parts of major roadways became islands, including a stretch of interstate where hundreds of drivers had been stranded for over 24 hours, officials said. The governor’s office said that all the motorists had been rescued by Sunday evening.At least five deaths had been attributed to the flooding. Two of the victims were in vehicles that were swept off the road; one was a man who drowned after he slipped and fell in the waters during a rescue; and the fourth was a man who had been swept away on Friday night whose body had been found on Sunday morning, a reporter for WWL-TV, a local news station, said on Facebook. The Town Talk of Alexandria, La., reported that a fifth person died on Sunday when her car was swept into a ditch. Law enforcement officers in the worst-hit areas have told state officials they expect the death toll to climb.On Sunday evening, President Barack Obama spoke with the Governor John Bel Edwards, to say his request for an emergency declaration had been granted for the state’s flood response and recovery efforts, a spokeswoman for the administration said.While the drenching thunderstorms that led to the flooding have lessened in intensity and largely moved from the areas most severely affected, the disaster is hardly over. As the swollen rivers roll south and fill tributaries and backwaters, new places are expected to flood, highlighting the most difficult part of this event: that past experience has served as such a poor guide.“The simple fact of the matter here is we’re breaking records,” Mr. Edwards said to reporters on Sunday. “And any time you break a record, the National Weather Service cannot tell you what you can expect in the way of the floodwaters: how wide they’re going to be and how deep they’re going to be.”Even in a part of the country long used to living with high waters, this was, as Mr. Edwards said, a “historic, unprecedented flooding event.” Previous knowledge about which areas tend to go underwater and which stay dry was rendered useless.Neighborhoods that had never been flooded were submerged, forcing people onto the roofs of houses, trailers and cars. Four nursing homes and one parish jail had to be evacuated, and much of the campus of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge was underwater. Boats motored down main thoroughfares in small cities like Central, passing homes with water up past the windows.“What was going on last night especially around two and three o’clock in the morning sounded exactly like Katrina,” said Mike Steele, a spokesman for the Governor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness, talking of the chatter of emergency medical workers over the radio. “It got so bad that, as they were moving in buses and other vehicles to move people, there was concern about getting the people on board in time because the flooding was coming so fast.”Mr. Steele went through the damage estimates by parish — 1,000 homes in East Baton Rouge, 1,000 homes in Livingston, 500 in Tangipahoa and so on — but stressed that any tally was already out of date. “Guaranteed that number’s higher today than it was last night,” he said.The flooding in many places was worse than a seemingly exceptional statewide inundation a few months ago, and some of the state’s rivers were cresting at several feet above record levels set in a devastating flood event in 1983.Like many others in southern Louisiana, the hundreds who were forced to stay overnight in their cars on a stretch of Interstate 12 were surrounded by a dangerously confounding new topography. Deep pockets of water were broken up by areas of dry land, which gave way again to deep pockets of water.“You can get on a boat and you can get a little bit closer, but at some point, you run out of water and there’s land again,” said Trooper Bryan Lee of the Louisiana State Police. “So many places are cut off we can’t get resources to them.”With Sunday’s welcome but temporary break in the rain, helicopter crews performed rescues of those found stranded on the roofs of homes or trailers. Footage of daring rescue operations by emergency medical workers and volunteers flew around on social media.More than 1,700 National Guardsmen were involved in response and rescue efforts as of Sunday morning, with 2,000 expected to join the work.Areas around Baton Rouge saw some of the worst flooding, making a summer that had already been trying that much more difficult. But the emphasis on Sunday, made by the governor and others, was on the cooperation that has sprung up amid the disaster at hand.“I want to help as many people as I can get out,” Sandra Sterling, the aunt of Alton B. Sterling, whose death at the hands of the police led to weeks of protests, said to a reporter in Baton Rouge. She was getting on one of the rescue boats that firefighters were guiding through the streets, looking for those still stranded by the waters. She said it was only natural given what people had done for her in recent weeks.“This is my giving back,” she said. “And thank y’all for helping me.”