https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/world/americas/canada-recreational-marijuana-pot.html
Recreational Marijuana? Yes, but Tightly Regulated, Canadian Panel Suggests - The New York Times
Marijuana,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,Canada,Trudeau  Justin,Politics and Government
Dec. 13, 2016
9136
MONTREAL — Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has promised to legalize the recreational use of marijuana, but that doesn’t mean Canada will turn into a giant, smoke-filled set for a Cheech and Chong movie.If Mr. Trudeau adopts the recommendations of a panel he appointed, marijuana’s move from the black market to the open market will be highly bureaucratic, heavily taxed and tightly controlled, with advertising and promotion virtually banned.“The government doesn’t want to have a country consuming marijuana,” said Bruce Linton, the chairman and chief executive of Canopy Growth, which owns Tweed, one of 36 companies currently allowed to grow and sell medical marijuana. “They want a system for those who choose to consume it.”The recommendations of the panel, which was led by Anne McLellan, a former cabinet minister from Mr. Trudeau’s Liberal Party, were made public on Tuesday. They propose that the government create a tightly controlled system that would lift marijuana out of the black market, but perhaps without exposing it to full sunlight.“Now is the time to move away from a system that has, for decades, been focused on the prohibition of cannabis into a regulated legal market,” Ms. McLellan said at a news conference.Mr. Trudeau has promised to introduce new laws by the spring.Among other things, the panel suggested that the coming Canadian rules for cigarette packages, which are being contested by the tobacco industry, also be adopted for marijuana. They will require plain packages without logos or slogans, and with standardized designs and fonts. The panel also recommended mirroring current rules on tobacco advertising, which essentially ban it.Sales, the panel said, should be handled through special stores and not, as the province of Ontario had hoped, through government liquor stores. And the minimum buying age, it said, should be at least 18 or match provincial rules for alcohol.It noted that marijuana stores, which have been popping up in Canadian cities in anticipation of Mr. Trudeau’s efforts to fulfill his election promise, are clearly illegal, suggesting that they are unlikely to be part of a new system.Over all, the panel acknowledged that its system would be even tougher than current Canadian limits on alcohol and cigarettes, which are themselves severe by the standards of many other countries. But, the report said, that simply reflects the need to do more about alcohol and tobacco.“In designing a regulatory system for cannabis, we have an opportunity to avoid similar pitfalls,” the report said.Under the proposed system, householders could own up to four plants, none taller than one meter, or about 3.3 feet. While the panel suggested that the law should allow people to share their stash with friends, individuals would not be allowed to possess more than 30 grams. The panel also recommended maintaining stiff penalties against illegal sales.The report found that there was no agreement on how to define when motorists are impaired by marijuana, and it urged governments to fund further research on that question.The panel also said that taxes would have to be adjusted to reflect the concentration of active ingredients in different kinds of marijuana and to avoid prices that are so high as to drive buyers back to the black market.Several medical marijuana producers, including Canopy, have attracted additional investment in anticipation of a legal recreational market in Canada.For them, however, the recommendations were a mixed bag. The panel recommended keeping the current medical marijuana system and called for recreational production to adopt the same tight licensing and control.But it may be difficult for producers to distinguish themselves and establish brands in a market with plain packages and few marketing opportunities.Tweed, perhaps pushing the limits of the medical marijuana system’s rules, formed a marketing partnership with the rapper Snoop Dogg, who co-hosts a cooking show with Martha Stewart. At the time, the company described him as “one of the world’s most respected cannabis icons.”It is unclear what value that arrangement would have in a system that effectively bans advertising and other promotion. But Mr. Linton said he was confident that the partnership would still be an asset.“Brands have already begun and exist,” he said. “I don’t think you can extinguish what people already know.”