https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/01/business/media/christopher-nolans-film-stirs-everything-but-indifference.html
Christopher Nolan’s Film Stirs Everything but Indifference - The New York Times
Movies,Interstellar (Movie),Nolan  Christopher,Cieply  Michael
Oct. 31, 2014
468
LOS ANGELES —  “I feel wrung out.”As the credits rolled on Christopher Nolan’s sci-fi thriller “Interstellar” — all two hours and 49 minutes of it — at a gala premiere here on Sunday night, those words popped from a young woman about eight rows away from the Imax screen. By week’s end, many in Hollywood’s media corps were feeling much the same.To open on Wednesday (with some Tuesday evening screenings), Mr. Nolan’s apocalyptic space adventure has crashed into the awards circuit amid sharp disagreement about its prospects, merit and meaning.Less than two weeks ago, the film, which is being distributed in the United States by Paramount Pictures, and abroad by Warner Bros., finally surfaced with tastemaker and celebrity showings in California and New York. Until then, “Interstellar” had been tagged as a potential powerhouse in the Oscar race. Technically ambitious, loaded with stars — including Matthew McConaughey, Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain — and determined to resolve the fate of mankind, it seemed the stuff of which best pictures were made. Yet a wildly mixed reception now finds the awards crowd slipping from budding consensus to near chaos.“I don’t really want to write this review,” the film blogger David Poland began in his “Movie City News” column on Monday.Mr. Poland, a Nolan fan, called the film’s first act “insufferable.” He applauded the movie’s mysteriously cerebral conclusion but compared the first 110 minutes to “water torture.”And Mr. Poland’s Gurus O’ Gold survey had only shortly before ranked “Interstellar,” sight unseen, as No. 5 in the best picture race, behind “Boyhood,” “The Imitation Game,” “Birdman,” and “The Theory of Everything,” all of which had been knocking around festivals and commercial theaters for weeks.Over at the website The Wrap, by contrast, the reviewer Alonso Duralde loved the film’s beginning, which he found “challenging, provocative and gorgeous.” But that last hour — the part Mr. Poland admired — Mr. Duralde called “a third act of staggering wrongheadedness, along with female characters whose intellect takes a back seat to their exploding emotionalism and rage.”Wrongheadedness notwithstanding, Mr. Duralde’s Wrap colleague Steve Pond, also writing on Monday, added to the confusion by insisting that Ms. Chastain “stands out as a supporting actress contender” for her time-shifting turn as Mr. McConaughey’s scientist-daughter. But Mr. Pond, too, thought the film came up short. “It isn’t the one thing that this year’s race has been missing: a front runner,” he wrote.Variety gave a rave. “ ‘Interstellar’ reaffirms Nolan as the premier big-canvas storyteller of his generation, more than earning its place alongside ‘The Wizard of Oz,’ ‘2001’ ” and others, wrote its reviewer, Scott Foundas.Todd McCarthy, at The Hollywood Reporter, was of two minds.“ ‘Interstellar’ so bulges with ideas, ambitions, theories, melodrama, technical wizardry, wondrous imagery and core emotions,” he wrote, “that it was almost inevitable that some of it would stick while other stuff would fall to the floor.”Speaking on Wednesday, Mr. McCarthy said the general confusion around “Interstellar” probably stemmed from Mr. Nolan’s attempt to meld astrophysics with an almost quaint father-daughter film story.“It confronted me with the tension between creating an emotional realistic film and one that confronts infinity,” Mr. McCarthy said, adding, “I don’t think the whole quite meshed.”Usually something of a critics’ darling, Mr. Nolan has had, with his previous eight films, which include “Inception” and “Memento,” an average 86 percent positive score on the Rotten Tomatoes website, which monitors film reviews. As of Wednesday, “Interstellar” was holding at a respectable 72 percent, but that reflected scoring methods that put USA Today, for instance, in the plus column, with a review whose headline said the film “gets lost in space.”Executives from Paramount declined to discuss a screening strategy that seemed to inflate expectations around Mr. Nolan’s movie. While pictures like “Birdman” and “The Theory of Everything” were eased into public awareness at festivals and elsewhere, “Interstellar” screened nowhere until mid-October, when it was quietly shown to military families at Fort Hood, in Texas, in a bow toward its public-service-oriented themes.Beginning Oct. 19, it was then shown to film industry power players and other opinion leaders, including upper-level editors like Norman Pearlstine, the chief content officer of Time Inc., as well as to some street-level bloggers, in a screening blitz that culminated with the Oct. 26 premiere in Los Angeles.Apparently, the idea behind the targeted advance screenings, as opposed to showing the film at festivals, was to crystallize its aura of importance before mainstream critics and reporters weighed in. Somewhat unexpectedly, however, “a lot of the online guys kind of turned on it,” noted Kristopher Tapley of hitfix.com.“I think we still need to wait,” added Mr. Tapley, an editor at large, who has watched the film twice and has yet to decide whether it is a miss or a masterpiece “Remember, the major critics still need to review it.”