https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/15/world/asia/north-korea-executions-kim-jong-un.html
For North Koreans in Kim Jong-un’s Orbit, Falling From Favor Can Be Deadly - The New York Times
Kim Jong-un,North Korea,Jang Song-Thaek,Kim Won-hong,Kim Yong-jin
Feb. 15, 2017
3002
HONG KONG — After Kim Jong-un’s half brother, Kim Jong-nam, was killed in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, South Korean officials were quick to blame the North Korean leader. It would not be the first time that someone who has fallen out of favor with Kim Jong-un has been targeted in either a purge or an outright execution. A South Korean think tank, the Institute for National Security Strategy, released a report recently saying that Mr. Kim had ordered the executions of 340 people since coming to power in 2011. Some who fall out of favor are not killed but are abruptly stripped of power.As Mr. Kim consolidated his rule, he signaled that none of his top officials were safe by purging Mr. Ri, his army chief and trusted mentor, with the state news media saying Mr. Ri had left his posts because of “illness.”In late 2013, Mr. Jang, who was Mr. Kim’s uncle and the country’s second-most powerful official, was taken to witness the execution of his deputies, who were torn apart by antiaircraft machine guns before their bodies were incinerated with flamethrowers. He was said to have fainted during the ordeal. After he was convicted of treason, he was executed at the same place and in the same way as his deputies, South Korea’s intelligence agency said.The cruelties inside the police state, often reported by defectors, led to news reports speculating that the North Korean leader may have had his uncle torn apart by ravenous dogs. (We got to the bottom of that tale here.)General Hyon, who as minister of the armed forces was the second-highest officer in North Korea’s military, had apparently shown disrespect to Mr. Kim by dozing off during military events and second-guessing his orders. He is believed to have been executed with an antiaircraft gun.Mr. Choe, a vice premier who ran the construction and building materials industries, was executed after he “expressed discomfort against the young leader’s forestation policy,” according to Yonhap, a South Korean news agency.Mr. Kim, the deputy premier for education, had apparently annoyed Kim Jong-un for showing “disrespectful posture” during a meeting with the North Korean leader. An investigation later found that the 63-year-old deputy premier was an “anti-party reactionary” guilty of “modern-day factionalism.” He was executed by firing squad.General Kim, the head of North Korea’s secret police, was considered Kim Jong-un’s right hand man, but he was dismissed on charges of corruption and abuse of power. The general had been Mr. Kim’s chief henchman in purging potential enemies.