https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/briefing/emmanuel-macron-jerusalem-war-for-the-planet-of-the-apes.html
Emmanuel Macron, Jerusalem, ‘War for the Planet of the Apes’: Your Friday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 14, 2017
108
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• New health bill, old concerns.Senate Republican leaders say their latest proposal to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act would hold down insurance costs for consumers while allowing insurers to sell new low-cost policies.But two Republican senators said they were not swayed by the revised bill, which was unveiled on Thursday and which includes changes intended to bridge the gap between conservatives and moderates in the party. At least 50 of the 52 Republican senators must support the bill for it to pass.The measure tilts further to the right and offers fewer perks, our health care correspondent writes.• Trump defends Trump Jr.President Trump, discussing his son’s encounter with a Kremlin-linked lawyer in June 2016, said on Thursday that “most people would have taken that meeting,” and that nothing had come of it.Mr. Trump is in Paris today for Bastille Day celebrations with President Emmanuel Macron.Before arriving there, the American leader spoke with reporters aboard Air Force One about his recent meeting with President Vladimir Putin of Russia. Read excerpts from the conversation.• Grandparents exempt from ban, judge rules.A federal judge said on Thursday that the Trump administration’s temporary ban on travelers from six predominantly Muslim countries and on refugees should not prevent grandparents and other close relatives of residents from entering the U.S.• Deadly attack in Jerusalem.Two Israeli police officers died today after being attacked by three Arab citizens of Israel.The officers had been guarding an entrance to Jerusalem’s holiest site for both Jews and Muslims, a focal point of the Israeli-Arab conflict.• Remembering a Chinese dissident.The death on Thursday of China’s most prominent political prisoner, Liu Xiaobo, set off a frenzied effort by government censors to block online discussion of his legacy.The Nobel Peace Prize recipient died under guard at 61. His fate reflects how diplomacy with China has changed, our correspondent in Beijing writes.Separately, a court dealt a decisive blow today to Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement, removing four elected legislators after Beijing intervened in the legal system.• Man admits to killing four.A “person of interest” in the case of four missing young men has confessed after human remains were found on his family’s Pennsylvania farm.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we discuss the timeline of events last June surrounding Donald Trump Jr.’s emails.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• For all the influence of Ayn Rand’s Objectivist principles, some prominent followers have run into trouble, our columnist writes.• Prince’s estate will have to find a new buyer for the musician’s catalog after a judge rescinded a $31 million distribution deal.• U.S. stocks were up on Thursday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Who really needs to be gluten-free?• Tempted by takeout? Make moo shu pork at home instead.• Secrets of the sun.In today’s 360 video, step inside a simulation of the interior of the sun as its magnetic field reverses.• Through the outback.Traveling across Australia’s vast interior, our photojournalist found a land that defied easy explanations.• Emmy Award nominations.HBO got 111. Our TV critics hashed out the snubs, surprises and most worthy picks.• Ready for the weekend.At the movies, we review “War for the Planet of the Apes” and look at other great performances that transcend special effects.We also take a look at FilmStruck, the new streaming service for cinephiles. Here’s a refresher before “Game of Thrones” returns on Sunday. We’re also starting a weekly email newsletter devoted to the HBO hit. Sign up here.We also reviewed Oscar Isaac’s take on “Hamlet” and the opening of a U.S. tour by the rap superstar Kendrick Lamar.And we recommend 10 new books, and celebrate Jane Austen before the 200th anniversary next week of her death. (How much do you know about the English novelist?)• In memoriam.Keith Conners established the first standards for diagnosing and treating what is now known as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or A.D.H.D. He later expressed misgivings about how loosely the label was applied. He was 84.Meechy Monroe achieved YouTube fame with hairstyle tutorials that urged black women to embrace natural hair and forgo harsh chemicals. She was 32.• Best of late-night TV.President Trump’s comments about the appearance of France’s first lady drew groans from the comedy hosts.• Quotation of the day.“You start worrying about everything, you’ll go crazy and you won’t enjoy life.”— Jim Gorski, a former Navy pilot who lives in Alaska, on the likelihood of the state being hit by a North Korean missile.Withdrawing high-value bank notes from circulation, as India did last year, is nothing new. Many nations have done the same.On this day in 1969, the U.S. said its $500, $1,000, $5,000 and $10,000 bills would be discontinued. The bills had not been printed since 1945, and the Federal Reserve even burned them, citing lack of use.The Times’s archives attest to the bills’ rarity. In 1910, we reported on the furor after a Wall Street errand boy lost a $10,000 bill, which featured Salmon Chase, a Treasury secretary and Supreme Court chief justice. (The reporter wryly noted that entire fortunes had been lost in that neighborhood with less fuss. The errand boy was eventually convicted of larceny.)In 1942, a girl found a $500 bill (bearing President William McKinley’s portrait) in a Bloomingdale’s mailroom. (Given a $250 reward, she bought war bonds and roller skates.)Two years later, The Times reported on Lt. Gen. George S. Patton Jr.’s denial to his superiors that he had landed in Europe waving a $1,000 bill (which has pictured Alexander Hamilton and President Grover Cleveland) and making bets on reaching Berlin.Patton offered a simple defense: “I have never seen a $1,000 bill.”Charles McDermid contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.