http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/23/world/asia/search-resumes-for-survivors-after-boat-capsizes-off-java.html
Search Resumes for Survivors After Boat Capsizes Off Java - The New York Times
Maritime Accidents and Safety,Boats and Boating,Indonesia,Christmas Island
June 22, 2012
4781
SYDNEY, Australia — An international search effort was under way on Friday to locate possible survivors from a fishing vessel carrying some 200 people believed to be seeking asylum in Australia after the boat capsized in rough seas south of the main Indonesian island of Java.Australian and Indonesian warships joined Australian merchant and government vessels in their search for some 90 people still missing after the steel-hull fishing boat overturned in 7-foot swells about 140 miles south of Java on Thursday evening. The ship was halfway to the remote Australian territory of Christmas Island, which is a popular port of call for boats carrying asylum seekers, who often brave the journey in overcrowded and rickety boats.An Australian Navy patrol boat and three cargo ships have rescued 110 survivors — including a 13-year-old boy — and taken them to Christmas Island, the Australian Maritime Safety Authority said. Three bodies have also been found, the agency said.Australia has not confirmed the passengers’ nationalities, but the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported that they are thought to be from Sri Lanka. Search planes have been dispatched to the site, inside Indonesia’s territorial waters, but hope that more survivors would be found was dwindling as weather conditions were said to be deteriorating. The Australian home affairs minister, Jason Clare, said that the planes had seen more bodies, but had not yet found any more survivors.“They’ve also seen life jackets in the water, some floating on their own and some with people with life jackets, and unfortunately seen more bodies in the water this morning,” he said in an interview broadcast on Sky News. “So no good news — I can’t report any information that they’ve seen people alive in the water at this time.”The episode is the latest boat disaster involving asylum seekers desperate to reach Australia’s shores, where they are able to seek refugee status. In December 2010, an estimated 48 people died when their boat broke apart against Christmas Island’s rocky coast in front of horrified onlookers. In December of last year roughly 200 asylum seekers are believed to have died after their overcrowded ship sank off Java.Australia has struggled for years to construct a framework to deter asylum seekers risking their lives in this manner. Under Prime Minister John Howard of the Liberal Party, they were sent to nearby island nations for lengthy processing, but that so-called Pacific solution was abandoned when Kevin Rudd of Labor became prime minister in 2007. The current prime minister Julia Gillard, also of Labor, succeeded Mr. Rudd and inherited from him a significant uptick in the number of boat arrivals. Her plan to ship them to Malaysia for processing was rejected by the High Court last year, leaving the issue in political limbo.