http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/30/nyregion/30noise.html
Ready or Not (for Many, It’s ‘Not’), New Noise Code Is Taking Effect - The New York Times
Noise,Bloomberg  Michael R,Dogs,Nightclubs and Cabarets,New York City
June 30, 2007
7669
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has called it “the first comprehensive overhaul of the New York City Noise Code in 30 years.” But for all the fanfare, it is sneaking up quietly, on a city largely unprepared.At 12:01 a.m. tomorrow, three years and three weeks after it was first proposed by Mr. Bloomberg to provide “well-deserved peace and quiet” in the nation’s largest and probably its noisiest city, a new noise code takes effect. The city will impose limits on everything from the number of minutes a barking dog can disrupt the neighborhood to the highest allowable decibel level of nightclub music as it throbs into neighboring homes.Yet those most likely to be affected, like nightclub owners, say they have not really prepared for it, and the New York City Police Department has only about 80 meters to monitor noise — a number that seems low in a city of more than eight million people prone to making a racket. The Department of Environmental Protection has 26 and said it is ordering more.When the code goes into effect, contractors must produce “noise mitigation plans,” and post them at their job sites, informing the public how they intend to minimize the sounds of exploding rock, yammering jackhammers and other outbursts. Garbage trucks must stay at least 50 feet away from residential buildings between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.; ice cream trucks must turn off their cheery jingles when parked at the curb; and poorly muffled motorcycles and trucks will be barred.The new noise code was signed by the mayor at the end of 2005 with the provision that it take effect 18 months later. Emily Lloyd, commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, which will have chief enforcement responsibility, said the time was necessary to work out details with the real estate industry, nightclubs, construction unions and others whose livelihood will be affected.“Individual businesses might be surprised, but industry groups will not,” Ms. Lloyd said. She said the public, including those inclined to apply the new noise standards to the rock club next door, or to the work crew down the block, “will learn from word of mouth, and if they call 311, they will certainly find out.”Still, even some of those who have followed the long evolution of the new noise law say it will catch the city off guard.“I haven’t gotten a sense in the last year that a lot of our members have been installing soundproofing,” said Robert S. Bookman, a lawyer for the New York Nightlife Association, which represents nightclub owners. The law will reduce the allowable noise level that is emitted into neighboring buildings and outside on the street, and is to be enforced by the police and agents on Ms. Lloyd’s staff armed with electronic noise meters.“Over the years, very few people have gotten violations,” Mr. Bookman said. “Now, I guess, they are taking a wait-and-see attitude.”Since handheld electronic noise meters are a crucial enforcement tool, it was unclear whether the city would have enough to respond if there is a surge of complaints. Peter Martin, a spokesman for the police, said it had about 80 of the meters, enough for one in each of the 76 police precincts, with more distributed in the most densely populated Manhattan precincts. The Department of Environmental Protection has assigned 45 people as full-time noise code enforcers, Ms. Lloyd said.Christopher O. Ward, who headed the Department of Environmental Protection in June 2004, when he joined Mr. Bloomberg in proposing a draft version of the new limits, has since become the managing director of the General Contractors Association of New York, a trade group whose members are affected. He said they were aware that enforcement was imminent, and worried about the outcome.“This won’t eliminate construction noise, and what people have to work through is how far the contractor has to go,” he said. “Calling 311 has become a form of psychiatry in New York,” he said, adding that the new noise limits would lead to “more complaints.”City officials said the large number of complaints to 311 about noise was one of the things that led Mr. Bloomberg to make passage of a new noise code a priority of his first term in office, which ended days after he signed the code into law. It had overcome 18 months of lobbying by the construction and restaurant industries and officials of Mister Softee and other ice cream truck concerns.Noise continues to be the biggest source of 311 complaints, the officials said, with about 275,000 noise complaints recorded by 311 operators in each of the last two years.The noise code that was ultimately adopted includes concessions to industry. The ice cream trucks, which must turn off their jingles at the curb, would have been required to silence them entirely under the original language the mayor supported.Nightclub owners won a concession that may prove more sweeping, since the new code eliminates the authority of the police to issue summonses simply on the basis of what they believe to be “unreasonable noise.” Instead, the police and environmental agents must record the decibel levels with their handheld meters. The law does not limit volume levels inside nightclubs but does place limits on the noise as it passes into neighboring homes and out to the street. In neighboring homes, the limit is 42 decibels, down from 45 decibels. Ms. Lloyd said her department found the new threshold more reasonable.Some of the other noise limits call for simpler forms of enforcement. The new code bars playing a personal stereo in public at a level that can be heard 25 feet away, and for those wearing earphones on a subway or bus, the volume must be lowered so that no one five feet away can hear.Dogs that are left outside can bark, but only for short periods. The rules say barking, or other pet noises, can be audible to neighbors only for ten minutes at a time from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m., and for five minutes at a time from 10 p.m. until 7 a.m.Ms. Lloyd said that the city did not intend to aggressively issue summonses and would in most cases simply advise first-time offenders on how to correct their noise violations. But the law stipulates a wide range of fines that could be assessed, from $70 for a barking dog to $8,000 for a noisy nightclub, and even higher amounts for repeat offenders.Sandra DeFeo, a co-executive director of the Humane Society of New York, said the noise code had not been a subject of discussion among her staff or clients. But she said the rules about barking could benefit dogs and their annoyed neighbors alike. “A dog that is well taken care of will not bark incessantly,” she said, adding that enforcement could lead the authorities to people who abuse their pets.