http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/11/books/11masl.html
Glory in a Line - Phyllis Birnbaum - Books - Review - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Birnbaum  Phyllis,Art,Glory in a Line (Book)
Dec. 11, 2006
2839
Paris in the 1920s, Montparnasse in particular, evokes visions of exuberant talent and bohemian cachet. Picasso and Modigliani were there, and so was one artist who most assuredly was not starving: Foujita, the attention-getting Japanese painter whose images of cats and women were all the rage.With unflagging commercial instincts, Foujita parlayed the French fascination with Japanese art into a thriving career that brought him fame and prosperity. A carefully cultivated flamboyant personal style heightened his celebrity, as did the spectacular arrogance with which he appraised his own talents.“Monotonously, with an ego as big as a chateau,” writes Foujita’s new biographer, Phyllis Birnbaum, “he insisted over and over that he was going to explore everything, that he was going to succeed, going to create something original.”It can be argued that Foujita — who was born Fujita Tsuguharu but later adopted a single name and vowel-enhanced French spelling — indeed reached that level of originality. Expert draftsmanship allowed him to draw uncommonly strong, sinuous lines. And he concocted a white paint so dazzling that he kept its exact ingredients a closely guarded secret.But Foujita wound up with more public visibility than he had bargained for. He became a polarizing figure in France and Japan, to a degree that kept him from feeling entirely at home anywhere. In marketing a Japanese sensibility in France, he was later hailed as an exotic original but also denounced as “a money-grubbing fabricator of Japanese knickknacks.” And after he returned to Japan in 1933, his devastating paintings of Japanese military subjects, so different from his decorative earlier work, became regarded as propaganda commissioned by the Japanese government. These wartime images would make him a pariah elsewhere in the world.No matter where he was or on which side his loyalties fell, Foujita had a way of sounding positively Trump-like when it came to self-promotion. “I take pride in believing I am the world’s number one artist,” he declared in 1936, only to have the prominent Japanese art collector Hirano Masakichi challenge this claim. “I’d like you to prove it by creating the world’s number one painting,” Mr. Masakichi countered. It says a lot about Foujita’s life to note that this incident was part  of the public personality he maintained.As an artist whose life has received relatively scant attention from biographers outside Japan and France, Foujita presents Ms. Birnbaum with an uncommonly rich opportunity. His story is colorful, dramatic, controversial and even mysterious, which would seem to make it foolproof. And her own close familiarity with Japanese subjects should make her ideally suited to this task, although her previous emphasis has been on women’s lives. There are moments in “Glory in a Line” when Ms. Birnbaum pauses to imagine how she would feel if she were telling Foujita’s story from the viewpoint of one of his many wives.Ms. Birnbaum inserts herself awkwardly into the narrative at such moments. She writes with a stiffness ill suited to Foujita’s playful side. And there seem to be  important parts of his nature that elude her.Though Foujita had a fashion sense that made him look like the Elton John of Montparnasse (he favored earrings, bangs and show-stopping homemade costumes), and though he is seen here hand in hand with a male Japanese friend during their shared tunic-wearing phase, he is viewed by Ms. Birnbaum  strictly as a lady-killer. He seems to have been a vigorous flirt in all situations. But when questioned about his androgynous look, Foujita once replied, “Unfortunately, I am a man.”Foujita’s story would have been well served by a less prim biographer and a better-illustrated volume: in the case of an artist whose once-famous work is now relatively obscure, the paucity of reprints here (and that they have been reproduced in black and white) seems a crime. Still, “Glory in a Line” is an intriguing book on the basis of its odd story, its resurrection of Foujita’s reputation and its exploration of the many contradictions he embodied.To her credit Ms. Birnbaum is quite knowledgeable about the cultural underpinnings and Japanese traditions that shaped Foujita. She is well equipped to analyze the way his family background, as the son of a Japanese general, would determine his subsequent ideas of patriotism and loyalty, and the  anguish he must have felt in trying to determine where he stood in these matters. If Foujita had one defining trait, though, it was the ability to rationalize and even boast about any course of action he chose.Ms. Birnbaum also empathizes with the rootlessness he must have experienced in Paris, his constant search for cross-cultural identity, his canny pursuit of novelty at the expense of serious art, and the boundless self-interest that may have blinded him to the larger implications of his behavior. Substantial ethical issues swirl around his story.At times Ms. Birnbaum’s experience is as much a part of “Glory in a Line” as Foujita’s is. As someone who has spent much time in Japan, she is jarred by the way Foujita is understood in France. “Mention his name over a beer in Tokyo, and Foujita’s defenders and detractors rush forward, speaking not only of Foujita but of twentieth-century Japanese history,” she writes. Meanwhile, in Paris, he remains a bon vivant known for sparkle and charm.When she admiringly meets the French writer Dominique Desanti to discuss Foujita, Ms. Birnbaum’s own attitudes are very much on display. “Since an American like me also considers engagé behavior de rigueur in a Frenchwoman of Desanti’s accomplishments,” she writes, “I was pleased to hear that she was going to a rally for a Socialist candidate after our coffee.” Foujita’s own politics were more convoluted than that.