http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/01/arts/television/lifetimes-unreal-traces-the-cracks-in-reality-tvs-fourth-wall.html
Lifetime’s ‘UnREAL’ Traces the Cracks in Reality TV’s Fourth Wall - The New York Times
Television,Reality Television,Lifetime Television,Appleby  Shiri,Stroma  Freddie,Bierko  Craig,UnREAL (TV Program)
May 31, 2015
4702
Imagine everything on “The Bachelorette” is nonfiction. The kisses and the heavy petting. The warp-speed growth of love-like feeling. The letdowns and the meltdowns. The belief in a happy ending. The current season of the show — the 11th, or 30th if you include its partner show, “The Bachelor” — is only two weeks in, and already, all of those things have erupted.And while we’re here, let’s imagine everything on “UnREAL” is fiction. This new Lifetime drama takes place on a “Bachelor”-like program called “Everlasting” but trains its lens on the people who make the show happen: the show-runners, directors and, crucially, the producers whose job it is to coach the contestants into intriguing situations while making sure everything that happens appears on camera to be utterly real.Of course, it airs on Mondays, at 10, just after “The Bachelorette” finishes on ABC. In concept, “UnREAL” is TV-show as remora, hoping to capitalize on lurid fascination with, and skepticism about, reality programming.Reality television has been used as a milieu on comedies like “The Comeback” or “Barely Famous,” and it has become its own subject on plenty of shows that have chosen to break the fourth wall to heighten drama.But the acerbic and unrelentingly sad “UnREAL” doesn’t exist just to send up reality television, or to pick at its scabs. Nor is it primarily a tell-all about the behind-the-scenes hands that shape reality-TV narrative. (Their existence has been well documented.)Rather, “UnREAL” uses that access as a tool to ask questions about these sorts of programs: not just about how they operate — savagely, if its stories are to be believed — but also why participants on both sides of the camera subject themselves to them.The first time Rachel (Shiri Appleby) appears on screen, she’s wearing a T-shirt that announces “This is what a feminist looks like.” It’s the funniest this show gets. Rachel’s job is to goad people into confrontational television moments. She gets the show’s suitor, Adam (Freddie Stroma), a hollow jawline with a nascent conscience, to sign his contract and not sleep with the contestants prematurely. She nudges contestants like the farm girl Faith (Breeda Wool) and the responsible lawyer Anna (Johanna Braddy) into conflagrations by playing on their insecurities.Through all this, Rachel derives no apparent pleasure, no thrill. She has airless sexual tension with a co-worker but saves most of her vulnerability for her vitriolic boss Quinn (Constance Zimmer, with extra splashes of the acid she deployed on “The Newsroom”). Together, they are architects of destruction — ostensibly of the people on camera, but really of themselves.“UnREAL” is a close and sometimes frustrating study of women tearing other women down, for reasons that defy articulation. Rachel has herself become part of the “Everlasting” narrative: In that show’s previous season she interrupted the finale with a drunken rant that, when aired, boosted the show’s ratings. The contestants shame one another and sometimes start fights. The producers (mostly female) lick their chops when this happens. There’s even a female staff shrink who has files prepared on each contestant’s history of trauma, to be used for manipulation.Men here are loathsome, too, but they are not the main story. The show-runner, the grotesque and vacant and decaying Chet (Craig Bierko), is male, of course, but “UnREAL” is content to paint him as a blank monster. And one male producer, who is black, tells the two black contestants they need to amp up the conflict to stay on the show. One does; the other calls him an Uncle Tom.What’s not made clear is why working on “Everlasting” is so important that Rachel would drop everything — including, perhaps, her feminism — for it. Even when Rachel conspires with Adam to upend the show’s predictable arcs of villainy and tenderness, it’s only at the expense of someone vulnerable.Visually, too, “UnREAL” emphasizes the gap between those making the television and those on it. The contestants are dressed like pageant dreamers, doused in makeup and bathed in klieg lights. The producers, for their part, wear blacks and grays and spend much of their time in dusky rooms. At one point Rachel sleeps in a trailer on the set. The show’s cynicism leaves no room for light.One of the creators of “UnREAL,” Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, formerly worked as a producer on “The Bachelor.” One would assume a tower of nondisclosure agreements prevent employees from revealing backstage gossip and procedural tricks. But at this point, that might be irrelevant.As the “Bachelor”-”Bachelorette” feedback loop grew in popularity in the mid-2000s, tabloid interest in participants increased, and online spoilers became routine. Show producers came to understand that this parallel narrative — the public meta-commentary — was just as compelling as the show. Now stars of the show are also regulars in US Weekly, which serves as a sort of CliffsNotes, like the recent cover featuring the current Bachelorette, Kaitlyn, with the quote “I’m not ashamed!” (referring to a sex scandal on the show).That’s made “The Bachelor” and its spinoffs self-referential and, at times, self-parodic. (And possibly superfluous: This season’s twist was that there were two bachelorettes on opening night. Britt, who was not chosen, was crying in her hotel room when Brady, one of the men who fancied her, showed up, having abandoned the show, though still trailed by cameras. They’re apparently still dating — so who are the real winners?)And so the pretense of a fourth wall on these shows has been slowly eroding. In the current season, it’s barely there at all. You don’t see producers pushing contestants into confrontations, as you do in “UnREAL,” but you do see handlers at work. Cameramen rush through a scene to capture Kaitlyn as she stomps off to talk to someone. When Ryan got kicked off for drunken, loutish behavior, he was escorted into a van, where you could see someone putting a reassuring hand on his shoulder. Josh, a law student and stripper, took off his clothes on first meeting the women, and was quickly eliminated. Later he protested, saying producers urged him to do that.At the end of last week’s episode, Kupah opted to talk to Kaitlyn about their lack of connection (or perhaps producers suggested he do so). It went poorly. Eventually, she asked him to leave. In his farewell interview he was mostly talking to the producer about his depiction, not Kaitlyn. As she was being interviewed about what happened, through the window behind her, you could see him arguing with a shaggy-haired handler. In moments like this, it’s clear that “The Bachelorette” has come to the same conclusion as “UnREAL”: The pretty picture is far less interesting than the frayed seams trying to hold it together.