http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/24/nyregion/jury-hears-closing-arguments-in-sheldon-silver-corruption-trial.html
Silver’s Corruption Trial Closes With Competing Views of His Actions - The New York Times
Silver  Sheldon,New York State,Bribery and Kickbacks,Jury System,Glenwood Management,Taub  Robert N (1936- ),State Legislatures
Nov. 23, 2015
6848
Dysfunction can explain many things in Albany, in various meanings and ways. It cannot, however, be an excuse for illegal behavior.That idea was at the center of the government’s closing argument on Monday in the three-week corruption trial of Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, the former speaker who was once one of the most powerful politicians in New York State.Mr. Silver’s lawyers have argued vigorously that his actions over the years were perfectly legal, and that conflicts of interest were unavoidable for lawmakers.But Andrew D. Goldstein, an assistant United States attorney, told jurors in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Monday that they must reject that argument.“To taint your fellow legislators and the democratic process with your own corruption, and say that that’s politics as usual, it is not even close,” Mr. Goldstein said. “Not by a mile.”“This, ladies and gentlemen, was bribery. This was extortion. This was corruption — the real deal,” he continued. “Do not let it stand.”In his summation, which lasted about three hours and took up the court’s morning session, Mr. Goldstein methodically reviewed the government’s evidence that Mr. Silver had obtained nearly $4 million in illegal payments in exchange for taking official actions that benefited a cancer researcher, Dr. Robert N. Taub, at Columbia University, and two real estate developers, Glenwood Management and the Witkoff Group.Mr. Goldstein, using slides with titles like Nine Reasons You Know Sheldon Silver is Guilty, said it was clear that Mr. Silver had set up the quid pro quo schemes and had been “motivated by the money.”“It’s totally obvious,” he continued.Steven F. Molo, a lawyer for Mr. Silver, began his own three-hour summation after lunch, declaring: “Sheldon Silver did not sell his office. There was no quid pro quo. He is not guilty.”Mr. Molo said that in New York, where lawmakers serve part time and are allowed to have other jobs, “it’s virtually impossible for someone to serve in this citizen-legislator model and not have some form of conflict.” Mr. Molo added that witness after witness had said they did not have explicit quid pro quo agreements with Mr. Silver.“Did he engage in a quid pro quo, this for that?” he said to the jury. “The answer is no.”The trial of Mr. Silver, who has been charged with honest services fraud, extortion and money laundering, has been seen as the most significant prosecution of a New York politician in years. It is part of a broad push against corruption in Albany, the state capital, by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.When Mr. Silver was charged in January, Mr. Bharara said the case made it clear that “the show-me-the-money culture of Albany has been perpetuated and promoted at the very top of the political food chain.”Mr. Silver, 71, a Democrat from the Lower East Side, remains a member of the Assembly but was forced to resign as speaker after his arrest in January. His Republican counterpart in the Senate, Dean G. Skelos, stepped down from his position as the majority leader of that chamber after his arrest in May; his corruption trial, across the street in another federal courthouse, entered its second week on Monday.Judge Valerie E. Caproni is expected to instruct the jury on Tuesday, after which it is to begin its deliberations. The importance of the case was apparent on Monday: The crowd included Mr. Bharara and some familiar Albany faces, including James A. Yates, Mr. Silver’s counsel when he was speaker, and Eric Soufer, a spokesman for the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman.In his closing argument, Mr. Goldstein took jurors through each of the seven counts against Mr. Silver, and said that the testimony made it clear that Dr. Taub had a quid pro quo arrangement with the former speaker. Dr. Taub said “again and again” that he had sent patients to Mr. Silver because he wanted state money to help finance his research, Mr. Goldstein said.As for Glenwood, the real estate firm that was a focus of the alleged real estate scheme, state funding was its lifeblood, Mr. Goldstein said. “They needed Sheldon Silver to get what they wanted,” he told the jurors.“What you heard during this trial is what Sheldon Silver secretly has been doing for years — cheating, lying and getting away with it,” Mr. Goldstein said.Mr. Molo, in his summation, said his client had consistently been on the side of tenants for decades and that suggesting he was beholden to a major developer like Glenwood did not make sense.Denying that there had been a quid pro quo relationship with Dr. Taub or the developers, Mr. Molo said, “It takes two to tango, and there certainly was no dance of corruption going on with Dr. Taub.”He asked the jury to consider his client’s “good work” in the Assembly, and said the charges against Mr. Silver had been “a tremendous — as you would imagine — tremendous blow.”“He has paid a tremendous price,” Mr. Molo added. He said Mr. Silver was “a fighter,” and that he had “fought for the people of New York for a long time, and thank God he is a fighter who is taking on these prosecutors.“A lesser person would have folded,” Mr. Molo said. “He knows he did not commit a crime.”In a rebuttal summation, another prosecutor, Howard S. Master, cited comments by Mr. Molo that suggested New York’s legislative system was being run the way the founding fathers had envisioned.Mr. Master said that America had been founded on a core principle, but that it was not what the jury had heard in Mr. Silver’s trial.“It wasn’t by the people or for the people,” Mr. Master said. “It was by Sheldon Silver for Sheldon Silver.”