https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/01/us/politics/video-trump-deposition-washington-chefs.html
In Deposition, Donald Trump Says Illegal Immigration Led to Nomination - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Illegal Immigration,Zakarian  Geoffrey,Andres  Jose (1969- )
Sept. 30, 2016
2201
Donald J. Trump is often seen at rallies or on reality television or across from a journalist. But on Friday, a Washington judge made public video showing Mr. Trump in a far more subdued setting: the deposition room.The video shows Mr. Trump, in a black suit and blue tie, sitting in an nondescript law office in June answering questions in his suit against Geoffrey Zakarian, a celebrity chef who backed out of Mr. Trump’s new hotel development at the Old Post Office Pavilion in Washington. Mr. Trump is also suing another chef, José Andrés, who backed out of another restaurant.The  chefs pulled out after Mr. Trump made incendiary comments last year about Mexican immigrants as he announced his presidential campaign. Mr. Trump said Mexico was sending people with “problems” — “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.”He is suing the companies associated with Mr. Zakarian and Mr. Andrés for breach of contract.In the deposition, Mr. Trump sat for about 100 minutes, often with his arms folded and sometimes swaying in his chair. He answered questions about the contracts with the chefs and about his remarks on Mexicans, telling Mr. Zakarian’s lawyer, Deborah Baum, that he had been misinterpreted by the news media, which he called “very dishonest.”“All I’m doing is bringing up a situation which is very real, about illegal immigration,” he said during the deposition. “And I think, you know, most people think I’m right.”He explained that his raising the topic of illegal immigration “led to my nomination in a major party in the country.”“I’ve tapped into illegal immigration,” he said. “I’ve tapped into other things, also. But, you know, when you get more votes than anybody in the history of the party, history of the party by far — more than Ronald Reagan, more than Richard Nixon, more than Dwight D. Eisenhower who won the Second World War — you know, that’s pretty mainstream, when you think about it.”The judge in the Zakarian case ordered the release of the deposition video, as well as those of two of Mr. Trump’s children, in response to requests from news organizations, including BuzzFeed News, which posted the footage online.A federal court judge hearing a separate fraud case pertaining to Trump University recently decided not to make public the video of Mr. Trump’s deposition in the case.