http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/22/us/politics/first-batch-of-hillary-clinton-emails-captures-concerns-over-libya.html
First Batch of Hillary Clinton Emails Captures Concerns Over Libya - The New York Times
Clinton  Hillary Rodham,State Department,E-Mail,Libya,Benghazi Attack (2012),Presidential Election of 2016,New York Times,Obama  Barack,Benghazi (Libya)
May 21, 2015
8614
WASHINGTON —  The State Department is expected to release the first batch of emails from Hillary Rodham Clinton’s private email address in the coming days.The emails set for release, drawn from some 55,000 pages and focused on Libya, have already been turned over to the special House committee investigating the 2012 attacks on the United States outposts in Benghazi. The New York Times has obtained about a third of the 850 pages of emails.They capture the correspondence and concerns expressed among Mrs. Clinton, who was secretary of state at the time, and her advisers following the attacks, which claimed the lives of the American ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans.The emails also offer occasional glimpses into the private side of Mrs. Clinton’s life, such as her public-radio listening habits and the fact that she was complimented for how she looked in a photo that appeared on the front page of The Times.In response to requests from the news media and Mrs. Clinton, who has said she wants the emails to be made public, the State Department has drawn up plans to release them.The emails appear to back up Mrs. Clinton’s previous assertions that she did not receive classified information at her private email address.But some of the emails contain what the government calls “sensitive” information or “SBU” — sensitive but unclassified. This includes details of the whereabouts of State Department officials in Libya when security there was deteriorating during the 2011 revolution. One email from a year and a half before the attacks that was marked sensitive but unclassified contained the whereabouts of Mr. Stevens as he considered leaving Benghazi during the uprising against the Qaddafi regime because of the deteriorating security.“The envoy’s delegation is currently doing a phased checkout (paying the hotel bills, moving some comms to the boat, etc.),” said the email that was forwarded to Mrs. Clinton from a close aide, Huma Abedin. “He will monitor the situation to see if it deteriorates further, but no decision has been made on departure. He will wait 2-3 more hours, then revisit the decision on departure.”The emails also show that Mrs. Clinton was circulating information about the attacks in Benghazi that contradicted the Obama administration’s initial narrative of what occurred, and that she was concerned about how Republicans could use the incidents to undermine President Obama.The emails show that even those at the highest levels of government engage in occasional flattering of those above them. In March 2011, Mrs. Clinton received an email from Ann-Marie Slaughter, the director of policy planning for the State Department, who was leaving her position.“Gorgeous pic on the front page of the NYT!” Ms. Slaughter said, referring to a photo of Mrs. Clinton. “One for the wall...” Ms. Slaughter then moved on to more serious matters, including her opposition to arming the rebels in Libya.It is not clear when the vast majority of Mrs. Clinton’s emails will be made public. The State Department has described the process of vetting and releasing them as time-consuming and had proposed to release them by January 2016. But a federal judge this week rejected that plan, suggesting that the department come up with a plan for a “rolling” release of the emails.The intense interest in the emails stems in part from the revelation this year that Mrs. Clinton exclusively used a private email address to conduct her government work as secretary of state.