http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/24/us/fort-hood-lacked-system-to-spot-threat-of-2014-rampage-army-says.html
Fort Hood Could Not Have Foreseen 2014 Gun Attack, Army Says - The New York Times
United States Defense and Military Forces,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Lopez  Ivan Antonio,Fort Hood (Tex),Fort Hood Shooting (2014),United States Army
Jan. 23, 2015
7894
HOUSTON —  Officials at the Fort Hood Army base in central Texas could not have prevented a shooting rampage last year in part because the troubled soldier behind the attack gave no clear warning that he posed a threat, according to an Army report released Friday.The gunman, Specialist Ivan A. Lopez, killed three soldiers and wounded 12 others before taking his own life last April after a confrontation about the handling of his request for leave. In the span of a little more than eight minutes, Specialist Lopez, 34, fired at least 35 rounds at soldiers in a two-block area within Fort Hood in Killeen, shooting at them with a .45-caliber handgun as he walked or drove by.The investigation effectively cleared the soldier’s superiors and other Fort Hood leaders of any wrongdoing or negligence, recommending specifically that Specialist Lopez’s leaders not receive any adverse action. In the days after the shooting, Army officials had said the primary trigger behind the rampage appeared to have been a dispute over a leave request, and they also said Specialist Lopez was being evaluated for post-traumatic stress disorder. But Friday’s report found that no single event led to the shooting, and that Fort Hood officials were not aware of many of the personal issues that Specialist Lopez was facing, including financial troubles, medical treatments and the deaths of his grandfather and mother.Specialist Lopez had been undergoing what the report described as a spiritual crisis, which caused him to change his religious preference to atheist and was perhaps aggravated by the deaths of his grandfather and mother. And he was frustrated by the difficulties he faced moving his family from Fort Bliss in El Paso to Fort Hood, where he had arrived just eight weeks before the shooting.Those issues overwhelmed Specialist Lopez’s ability “to effectively cope with them, and led to his irrational, violent outburst,” wrote the report’s author, Lt. Gen. Joseph E. Martz, who led a military review of the shooting that interviewed and obtained statements from nearly 200 witnesses. General Martz concluded that Specialist Lopez’s military career and medical history “offer no ready explanations or clear indicators of future violent behavior,” noting that the Army lacked a system capable of identifying such soldiers as a threat.Days before the shooting, Specialist Lopez had been granted a four-day pass, during which he picked up his wife and daughter in Odessa, Tex., retrieved his belongings in El Paso and moved into his apartment in Killeen. When he returned to Fort Hood, he pressed his superiors to approve a 10-day leave as part of his relocation, although, as one superior told him a few hours before the shooting on April 2, he was technically not entitled to leave, the report stated.General Martz found that Specialist Lopez’s request could have been handled more efficiently, but that personnel in his unit’s headquarters were correct in maintaining that he did not qualify for leave — known as Permissive Temporary Duty, or P.T.D.Y. — because he had already moved into his apartment in Killeen.“No other soldier could reasonably have foreseen that he would react as he did to the denial of his P.T.D.Y. request, and none of them had the opportunity to stop him,” the report stated.General Martz’s report recommended that the Army improve the training and time available for leaders to identify and manage high-risk soldiers. In response to the earlier attack at Fort Hood in 2009, Army and Pentagon officials made several recommendations for improvements, including how to respond to emergencies. General Martz found that the Army has put in place 57 of 77 recommendations, and that none of those outstanding would have affected the shooting last year or the response to it.In a statement, a Fort Hood spokesman said officials at the base were evaluating and implementing the report’s recommendations. “Fort Hood officials remain committed to doing what’s necessary to ensure the safety and security of all personnel on Fort Hood,” said the spokesman, Col. Christopher Garver.The Army released a redacted version of the report, with descriptions of Specialist Lopez’s medical conditions and evaluations blacked out. The report contained no mention of post-traumatic stress disorder. But it noted instances in which Specialist Lopez, who had served in Iraq in 2011, had been “misleading or deceptive.”In December 2011, a convoy he was part of suffered a blast from a roadside bomb. Specialist Lopez had claimed to be near the explosion, but the report found there was no evidence he was within the blast radius.