https://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/10/realestate/10Living.html
Where People Stay, and ‘Play Musical Houses’ - The New York Times
Housing and Real Estate,Queens (NYC)
Jan. 7, 2010
8870
IF you’re contemplating buying a home in Douglas Manor, a peninsula on Little Neck Bay in northeast Queens, be advised: your neighbors may not think of your house as yours right away. On paper it belongs to you, but in their minds it may take years until you truly succeed its old owners.“We get that all the time,” said Robert Cangemi, a lighting designer who moved to Douglas Manor  — a subsection of Douglaston — with his wife, Sonia, a social worker, in 2007. Elliot G. Sander, the former chief executive of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, used to live in their black-and-white four-bedroom colonial on Warwick Avenue, which they still hear referred to as the Sander house. When it will become the Cangemi house is anybody’s guess.But the custom does reflect one important fact about this little-known part of the city: it is a close-knit place, bound by water on three sides, and with an active neighborhood association that each homeowner joins.It has been this way since 1906, when the Rickert-Finlay Realty Company bought land from  George Douglas, a Scottish ship builder, for a community north of the Douglaston station on what is now the Long Island Rail Road.“It’s unbelievable,” said Lee Fiorino, who serves on the local historical association’s visioning committee. “We moved here to be anonymous,” she said of herself and her husband, Don, “but the ironic thing is, we’re very involved.”The family-heavy area of roughly 2,000 is home to young couples like the Cangemis, who are in their 30s, as well as empty nesters looking to downsize.It is also becoming more ethnically diverse — having morphed from the kind of place where “some people wouldn’t deign to consider playing tennis with an Italian,” said Al Kelly, a former president of the Douglas Manor Association. Census data for the ZIP code that includes Douglas Manor, and also parts of Douglaston and Little Neck, indicate an area 73.4 percent white, 21.6 percent Asian, 7.7 percent Hispanic or Latino and 0.4 percent black.Then there’s the expanding population of returnees.  “I came back here to raise my kids, and that happens all the time,” said Jamie Sutherland, the secretary of the association. “People come back here and play musical houses.”One thing that the Manor Association says people can’t do, at least without approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission, is exterior renovation: the area is a city historic district.Taking bike trips to the Manor from Fresh Meadows, his childhood home, Mr. Cangemi recalled, he always aspired to live there. More recently, he bided his time in a rental and then a co-op just south, taking walks with his future wife among its houses and cobblestone curbs, making believe.“We’d see this house that was falling apart, and we would say, ‘Would you take that one to live here?’ ” he said. “And we’d say, ‘Of course,’ because the neighborhood was so special.”The couple got their chance in 2007, when they sold their co-op and bought the house on Warwick Avenue for just over $1 million. They added their own touches — a new driveway and landscaping, two redone bathrooms, an approved bit of color within the black-and-white scheme — and it finally began to feel like their own. They’ve made friends, taking boat rides on Little Neck Bay and thinking about filling the house’s four bedrooms with children.The only issue they’ve had thus far, Mr. Cangemi said, is that no one he meets in other parts of the city knows where Douglas Manor is.WHAT YOU’LL FINDThere is just one type of housing stock, and it’s the standalone single-family. In fact, the Manor Association, which collects $500 a year in dues from each homeowner, allows nothing else, declaring that “no building of the character known as a ‘two-family house’ or ‘flat’ shall be erected.” (Other old-time restrictions seem less onerous these days, like the rule that houses can’t cost less than $5,000 to build.)The 600 or so houses in the neighborhood, which is 188 acres in area, offer an impressive stylistic diversity: from ranches to colonials; from McKim, Mead & White to Sears & Roebuck. And, said Kevin Wolfe, an architect who co-founded the Douglaston/Little Neck Historical Society, “there are probably more Arts and Craft-style houses here than in any area of New York City.”Along Shore Road, snaking up the peninsula’s western flank, sit some grand houses. Larger lots (hence, houses) tend to be on the west side, smaller lots and homes to the east.“The reason for that was they wanted to attract all different people of different socioeconomic levels,” said Arlene Angelilli, a 33-year resident who is on her third home in the Manor.The waterfront is owned and maintained by the Douglas Manor Association for its members. In warmer weather, people amble up and down Shore Road in the car lanes as autos play second fiddle, Mr. Wolfe said.The peninsula’s east side is marked by Marinette Street and Douglas Road, where the feel is  more secluded, with views not of the open bay but of woods and wetlands. A private waterside park called Memorial Field is there, with playing fields and basketball courts. Nearby, houses toward the peninsula’s southern end rest on a large hill.Douglas Manor has no sewers. Instead, each house has a cesspool, which its owners must maintain in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency regulations. Families hire a service to haul away waste;  it costs about $150 and is needed every one or two years for a properly functioning system.Just south of Cherry Street, the Manor’s border, is a small commercial area on 235th Street, on either side of the Long Island Rail Road stop. There are a few restaurants and other businesses —  though an effort is afoot to revitalize the strip. (Just last month, New York state approved the creation of a chamber of commerce for the area.)WHAT YOU’LL PAYThere are never very many houses for sale at any given time. Current inventory is 10. But those who have looked before may be pleasantly surprised by today’s values.“They have continued to sell, but at a lower price,” said Rod O’Connell, who owns Bryce Rea Associates Real Estate.In general, prices are down about 10 percent from a year and a half ago, said Peter Orisses, a Douglas Manor resident who is also a broker at United Realty Associates in Bayside.Smaller houses sell in the $800,000-to-$900,000 range, Mr. Orisses said, explaining that larger houses start around $1.2 million. The biggest sale ever, in 2007, was $5.3 million, for a very large brick house on Shore Road. Last July, Mr. O’Connell sold a six-bedroom, 5,000-square-foot Tudor on Hollywood Avenue for $1.725 million.On average, he says, houses are on the market about three months, whereas it used to be anywhere from one day to one month. “The chaos is out of it, which was awful,” he said.THE COMMUTEFrom Douglaston station, travel time to Pennsylvania Station is 25 to 30 minutes; the station is on 235th Street. A one-way peak hour ticket costs $8.WHAT TO DOMany residents belong to the Douglaston Club, which is housed in a grand 1819 mansion on West Drive that in the 19th century was home to the merchant and city alderman Wynant Van Zandt. The club has a pool, tennis courts and a yacht fleet that utilizes the pier off Beverly Road. Over the summer, children 7 and up can take part in the Junior Sailing Program, competing in regattas all over the region. There are also waterfront concerts. In the fall, there is an aquathlon (swimming and running) called the Splash and Dash.THE SCHOOLSDouglas Manor falls within the city school system’s 26th District, which  is highly regarded by parents. The closest elementary is Public School 98, or the Douglaston School, on 235th Street. In 2009, 95.5 percent of third-, fourth- and fifth-graders met standards in English, 100 percent in math.Junior High School 67, the Louis Pasteur School, is south of the neighborhood on Marathon Parkway. In 2009, 98.4 percent of its students met standards in math, 95.4 percent in English.One nearby high school is Benjamin N. Cardozo on 223rd Street in Bayside. In 2009, SAT averages were 546 in math, 484 in reading and 493 in writing, versus 500, 480 and 470 statewide. THE HISTORYThe Douglas family’s land, like other parts of Long Island, was originally occupied by Native Americans of the Matinecock tribe. Dutch settlers like the Van Wyck and Van Zandt families eventually arrived; the Douglases bought the land after Mr. Van Zandt died. According to Mr. Wolfe, the historian and architect, the Rickert-Finlay company developed the area about the time that the commuter railroad connecting directly with Manhattan. By giving residents universal access to the waterfront, Rickert-Finlay was able to sell less desirable lots for more than they would otherwise have been worth.