https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/us/justine-damond-minneapolis-shooting-australian.html
Officer Heard Loud Noise Before Partner Shot Minneapolis Woman, Officials Say - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Damond  Justine (d 2017),Minneapolis (Minn),Minnesota,Sydney (Australia)
July 18, 2017
9
The state agency investigating the fatal police shooting of an Australian woman in Minneapolis last weekend said on Tuesday that one of the officers in a police car had been startled by a noise outside the car moments before his partner shot the woman through the open driver’s-side window.The statement from the agency, which came three days after the shooting, gave a glimpse into an episode that has baffled the public and infuriated the family of the woman, Justine Damond, in both Australia and Minneapolis.But it did not include information from Mohamed Noor, the 31-year-old officer who fired the shot that killed Ms. Damond. Officer Noor declined to be interviewed by investigators. “Officer Noor’s attorney did not provide clarification on when, if ever, an interview would be possible,” the statement said.Investigators interviewed Officer Matthew Harrity, who has been with the Minneapolis Police Department for a year and was behind the wheel when the shooting happened.A lawyer for Officer Noor did not answer an email seeking comment on Tuesday evening.Until now, state and city officials have been tight-lipped about what happened on the night of the shooting.Just before 11:30 p.m. Saturday, officers responded to a 911 call made by Ms. Damond, a 40-year-old yoga and meditation teacher, who reported a possible assault near her home.According to the account by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, which is investigating the shooting, the officers were driving through an alley, the lights on their squad car off, looking for an assault suspect.“Officer Harrity indicated that he was startled by a loud sound near the squad,” the statement said. Immediately afterward, Ms. Damond “approached the driver’s side window of the squad. Harrity indicated that Officer Noor discharged his weapon,” striking her through the open driver’s-side window.The statement from the agency added that both officers immediately left their car and “provided medical attention until medical personnel arrived.” A cellphone was recovered near Ms. Damond. No weapons were found at the scene.Ms. Damond died of a single gunshot wound to the abdomen, according to the medical examiner’s office.Neither officer had activated a body camera during the shooting, and the dashboard camera was off. Investigators said they were unaware of any audio or video recording of the shooting. Officer Noor joined the department in 2015.He and Officer Harrity have both been placed on administrative leave while the investigation continues.Betsy Hodges, the mayor of Minneapolis, said in a statement that she was “heartsick and deeply disturbed” by the shooting.Ms. Damond had moved to Minnesota from Sydney, Australia, a few years ago. The shooting took place in a quiet, low-crime neighborhood on the southwest side of Minneapolis, near streets lined with coffee shops, well-tended Craftsmans and churches.It is likely to take weeks or months before there is a decision on whether charges will be brought.