http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/17/international/asia/china-releases-political-prisoner-ahead-of-visit-by-rice.html
China Releases Political Prisoner Ahead of Visit by Rice - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
March 17, 2005
6621
>BEIJING, March 17 - China released its most prominent Muslim political prisoner today  as an apparent goodwill gesture that comes days before Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice arrives for a visit in Beijing.The release of Rebiya Kadeer, 58, came as the United States  announced today that it would not seek to censure Beijing at the current session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva after noting that China has made "some improvements."The twinned gestures come as the two countries still have not officially resumed a human rights dialogue that broke off last year. Last month, the State Department criticized Beijing in its annual review of human rights around the world, while China responded with a critical report about human rights in the United States.Ms. Kadeer was released on a medical parole and scheduled to arrive in the United States later this afternoon, according to the Dui Hua Foundation, the San Francisco-based human rights organization involved in the release."Yes, absolutely," answered John Kamm, Dui Hua's executive director, when asked if the release was tied to the coming visit by Secretary Rice. "They wanted this to be completed by her arrival."The United States has treated Ms. Kadeer's case as a high priority ever since she was sentenced to eight years in prison in March 2000 for "illegally providing state intelligence abroad." She is a member of the predominantly Muslin Uygher ethnic group in western Xinjiang Province, and her crime was sending newspaper clippings about the treatment of Uyghers to her husband in the United States.For years, many Uyghers have sought greater political autonomy from Beijing while some have pushed for outright independence, and that activity  has led to harsh crackdowns by Beijing.Ms. Kadeer is a women's rights advocate and a businesswoman who served on the top advisory board to China's parliament. In 1997, she founded the "Thousand Mothers Movement" to promote job training for Uygher women.But Chinese security officials soon focused on her because of the political activism of her husband, who lives in the United States and advocates for greater freedoms for Uyghers, according to Amnesty International. In August 1999, Ms. Kadeer was arrested as she was traveling to meet a group of American Congressional staff members.Ms. Rice is scheduled to arrive in Beijing on Sunday, but the timing of Ms. Kadeer's release also comes as talks are scheduled to begin in Brussels about whether the European Union will lift a 15-year-old arms embargo against China. The European Union has called on China to improve its human rights record as a condition of lifting the ban. The United States strongly opposes removing the ban.The human rights group Amnesty International welcomed Ms. Kadeer's release but noted that she "should never have been in prison in the first place" and expressed skepticism about the timing."We are extremely concerned that the release of Rebiya Kadeer will be cited as evidence of improvements in human rights as the European Union debates lifting its arms embargo on China," Catherine Baber, the group's deputy Asia director, said in a statement.Ms. Baber noted that many other political prisoners remain jailed in China.