https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/briefing/republican-party-vladimir-putin-dunkirk.html
Republican Party, Vladimir Putin, ‘Dunkirk’: Your Wednesday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 19, 2017
19
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• “Let Obamacare fail,” Trump says.With the collapse of the Republican effort in Congress to replace the Affordable Care Act, President Trump suggested a new plan on Tuesday: manage the health law badly. He has considerable leverage to do so, and could cut off subsidy payments to insurers or stop enforcing the mandate that most Americans have health insurance.We looked at how divisions in the Republican Party led to the failure of the Senate bill, and examined the language in the president’s tweets, which shows that his talent for distilling arguments into compact slogans didn’t work for the health proposal.Mr. Trump also faces the prospect that the most prominent legacy of his predecessor, Barack Obama, could remain intact, our chief White House correspondent writes.Last, those seeking a new approach to health care might want to look to Rwanda, our business columnist suggests.• A second, undisclosed talk with Putin.President Trump had a private discussion with President Vladimir Putin of Russia during a dinner at the recent Group of 20 summit meeting, the White House confirmed on Tuesday.There is no official U.S. record of the conversation, as a Kremlin interpreter was the only other person involved. Mr. Trump derided news reports about the meeting as “sick.”Separately on Tuesday, a name was added to the list of people who attended last year’s meeting between Donald Trump Jr. and a Russian lawyer: that of a U.S.-based employee of Russian property developers. Here’s what we know about the meeting.• Saudi prince plotted effort to oust rival.Mohammed bin Salman became Saudi Arabia’s heir to the throne last month after pressuring the crown prince to step aside, U.S. officials and associates of the royal family told us.• New details in Minneapolis police shooting.A woman who called 911 last weekend to report a possible assault was fatally shot by a police officer.The officer has declined to be interviewed by investigators in the case, which has shocked people in the victim’s native Australia.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we talk to a Republican congressman about the challenges of governing in President Trump’s Washington.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• From its roots as a small airline, the HNA Group has evolved into one of the few Chinese conglomerates with a worldwide reach.But for nearly 25 years, it has regularly funneled business to a small group of relatives and associates of its senior executives, The Times found.• A former employee of Martin Shkreli, a onetime hedge fund manager on trial on fraud charges, testified on Tuesday that Mr. Shkreli had threatened him and his family.“I hope to see you and your four children homeless,” the defendant said in a letter to the employee’s wife.• Too many ads objectify women’s bodies or reinforce traditional gender roles, Britain’s advertising regulator said.• U.S. stocks were mixed on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• One thing to watch for when cycling: air quality.• Eggs aren’t just for breakfast. Explore the many ways to cook them.• Great granola sometimes means making it yourself.• At summer camp, learning to fight.In today’s 360 video, visit a Ukrainian military program that prepares children to defend their country during its conflict with Russian-backed separatists.• Afghan girls steal the spotlight.Six girls who were initially denied visas to the U.S. for a robotics competition ended up being the stars of the show.• Baking: a love story.Meet a couple with three ovens and a house full of ribbons for their precision-made cakes and pies.• A hero with motives unknown.A golden retriever in New York became a social media star after saving a drowning baby deer off Long Island. Its actions may, however, have been just instinctual.• Best of late-night TV.On “The Tonight Show,” Jimmy Fallon summed up the highs and lows of President Trump’s six months in office.• Quotation of the day.“You can talk all you like about women’s liberation, but houses are still designed so women have to spend half their time on their knees or hanging their head in a hole.”— Frances Gabe, whose death was announced in January, speaking in a 1981 interview about the self-cleaning house she invented.The World War II evacuation of troops from the French port city of Dunkirk remains a symbol of solidarity in Europe but is perhaps less known elsewhere. That is likely to change this month with the release of Christopher Nolan’s film “Dunkirk.”German forces had surrounded more than 300,000 Allied troops in the city in the spring of 1940. The troops were trapped on beaches north of its port, with the English Channel at their backs.Shallow water prevented large navy vessels from coming to shore, but smaller private boats, affectionately called “the little ships of England,” came to the rescue.“I wanted to do something that frightened me a bit,” Mr. Nolan told The Times about telling a moment of history.Days after the evacuation, Winston Churchill, the British prime minister, warned Parliament that “wars are not won by evacuations.” But he ended his address with one of his most recognizable and inspiring quotes:“We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender.”Palko Karasz contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.