https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/world/europe/uk-london-fires-timeline-history.html
5 Fires That Shaped Modern London - The New York Times
London (England),Fires and Firefighters,Deaths (Fatalities),Accidents and Safety
June 14, 2017
9065
The fire that engulfed an apartment tower in London on Wednesday joins a list of disasters that have marked the city’s history. Few were more prominent than the Great Fire of 1666, which wiped out 80 percent of the city and led to a rebuilding that laid the groundwork for London as we know it today. Although modern Londoners live a life relatively sheltered from such destruction, some fires in recent history have shaped it. Here are five examples from the last 100 years.The Crystal Palace, built originally in Hyde Park for an industrial exhibition in 1851, was transferred to what was then the rural outskirts in southeast London a year later. There, the iron and glass structure stood as a Victorian-era leisure center, with a palm house and fountains. In 1936, it burned to the ground in a spectacular blaze that attracted a crowd of spectators. Among them, Winston Churchill, who later became prime minister, remarked that it was “the end of an age.” The names of a neighborhood and a soccer club recall the landmark, and park and some dinosaur displays remain on the site.In the final days of 1940, the Germans dropped incendiary bombs on London that started fires across the city. The night of Dec. 29 is remembered as “the Second Great Fire of London,” one of the worst of the Blitz, a series of air attacks against British cities during World War II.Two days later, The Times carried a first-person account of the bombing from William W. White, an Associated Press reporter. “We put in three calls to the Fire Department, but they were too busy to help us, for other bigger fires were raging in the neighborhood,” Mr. White wrote. “‘The building can’t be saved,’ somebody yelled and we ‘ran for it.’”Firefighters managed to save the iconic St. Paul’s Cathedral from the flames, reportedly on direct orders from the prime minister, Mr. Churchill.Denmark Street, on the edges of the Soho neighborhood, has been home to guitar shops and venues for emerging musicians for decades. But before commercial development in the area, it was the site of scruffy night life, including clubs that patrons entered by yelling up for a key. In 1980, a fire in two clubs killed 37 people when a disgruntled customer set fire to one of them. Both venues were friendly escapes for club-goers of many nationalities, including Colombians who worked nearby and came off shifts to dance salsa. Accounts of the blaze said it was devastating, but according to an investigation in the Independent newspaper, few remember it today.A fire that started on a wooden escalator in the King’s Cross London Underground station killed 31 people and injured many. Many commuters at the time had ignored a smoking ban in place in the subway system since 1984, and an inquest found that the fire was caused by a dropped match. Witnesses speaking to The New York Times described a scene of panic, with commuters clawing desperately toward the exits, their clothing and hair aflame. The fire led to the gradual replacement of wooden escalators and a stricter enforcement of the smoking ban.Six people, including three children, died after they were trapped in a fire in an apartment building in South London. The local council took the blame for failing to address fire hazards in the building.