http://www.nytimes.com/2005/07/03/politics/politicsspecial1/03specter.html
Confirmation Battle in Senate Could Define Specter's Career - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 3, 2005
5105
WASHINGTON, July 2 - In nearly 25 years on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, has sat through nine Supreme Court confirmation hearings, some short and polite, some ugly and drawn out. Now that he is the chairman, he is prepared for the next one to go either way."I'm not going to anticipate a bruising battle," Mr. Specter said in an interview on Friday after Justice Sandra Day O'Connor announced her resignation, "but I'm not going to run from one either."Although Mr. Specter may not anticipate a bruising battle, just about everyone else in Washington does, and the inevitable confirmation fight could be the defining moment in his long career. It comes as he faces a battle of a more personal sort, against Hodgkin's disease.Perhaps more than any other senator, Mr. Specter will be the pivotal figure as he tries to manage his bitterly divided committee, his own uneasy relationship with the White House and the intense pressure that is already bearing down on him from both the left and right at a time when both sides are deeply suspicious of him.Within hours of Justice O'Connor's announcement on Friday, Mr. Specter said he would probably hold confirmation hearings in September, a move that could upset conservatives, who would like to move a nominee along as quickly as possible in the hope of outflanking liberal groups that plan to use the summer months to prepare for a confirmation battle. Mr. Specter, though, says only that the Senate has "an obligation to confirm the justice by the 1st of October" and that he intends to meet that deadline.Sharp-tongued and cagey, with an uncanny knack for parsing his words to wiggle his way out of tight spots, Mr. Specter is widely regarded as the Senate's brightest legal mind. A rare centrist in a Senate that has shifted increasingly to the right, he is reviled by conservatives for dooming the nomination of Robert H. Bork, and by liberals for assuring the confirmation of Justice Clarence Thomas with his aggressive questioning of Anita Hill, the law professor who had accused Justice Thomas of sexual harassment.Now the vacancy created by the retirement of Justice O'Connor gives Mr. Specter a chance to rewrite his Judiciary Committee history, but it comes at a delicate time for him. He nearly lost his chairmanship last year amid an uproar from conservatives, who were furious when Mr. Specter, an unabashed supporter of abortion rights, suggested that the Senate would have difficulty confirming judges who would overturn Roe v. Wade.He won the job after an all-out campaign that culminated with a carefully worded four-paragraph statement in which he pledged to "use my best efforts to stop any future filibusters," the tactic Democrats had been using to block President Bush's judicial nominees. The filibuster fight could re-emerge during a Supreme Court confirmation, and a big question is how Mr. Specter would handle it."I'll jump off that bridge when I come to it," he said.So far, Mr. Specter has not been forced to jump. Last month, when Senator Bill Frist, the majority leader, brought the Senate to the brink of a vote to bar judicial filibusters, Mr. Specter kept the chamber on tenterhooks, refusing to say how he would vote even as he urged party leaders to "liberate their caucuses to vote without party straitjackets." When 14 senators - 7 Democrats and 7 Republicans - struck a deal to avert the so-called nuclear option, Mr. Specter was not part of it. His critics were exasperated."Arlen Specter is as predictable as the sun rising in the east," Richard Viguerie, the conservative direct mail consultant, complained in an interview at the time. "He's not going to keep a deal he makes with anybody."But Mr. Specter, whose brusque manner has earned him the nickname Snarlin' Arlen on Capitol Hill,  said he was keeping his own counsel, a move he considers wise and one that will probably continue to confound Specter-watchers as the nomination process moves forward. "I've made people mad saying very little, so I'm not going to say very much," he said.He added: "I think a senator, whether or not he is the chairman, ought to be circumspect in what he says."That may be especially so for the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, whose members include some of the most powerful lawmakers in the Senate, including fellow Republicans Charles E. Grassley of Iowa and Orrin G. Hatch of Utah and Democrats Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and Charles E. Schumer of New York.But Mr. Specter was not circumspect on Friday about criticizing Democrats who were already vowing to use the filibuster against a nominee they find objectionable."I'm a little bit concerned about what I heard Senator Kennedy say on television tonight, that if the president does not nominate someone who meets Senator Kennedy's specifications, as he articulates it, the American people will expect a battle and they're prepared to do it," he said."I would hope that we would tone down the rhetoric," he added.Democrats have been pressing Mr. Bush to seek their advice on possible nominees, and Mr. Specter said he had urged the president to consult with him and three other senior senators - Dr. Frist, Harry Reid, who is the Democratic leader, and Mr. Leahy, the senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee. The president apparently took Mr. Specter's advice and has invited the four men to the White House on July 11, after the Senate returns from recess.Mr. Specter said that he and Mr. Bush had not named names in any of their conversations. He said he had thought "long and hard" about suggesting possible candidates but decided not to, believing that "the wiser course" would be to remain uncommitted to anyone in particular. As to whether he would advise Mr. Bush against nominating judges who might be perceived as likely to overturn Roe v. Wade, Mr. Specter was noncommittal."I'm going to listen to the president," he said, "and see how it goes."Mr. Specter is not one to shun the limelight - he is scheduled to appear on three morning talk shows on Sunday - and he has never masked his moderate views. Last year, he survived a bitter primary challenge from the right, winning re-election with considerable help from Mr. Bush. In 1995, he made a brief ill-fated bid for the White House, running on the unusual platform of attacking Christian conservatives as an extremist "fringe."The Supreme Court hearings come at a time of great personal challenge for Mr. Specter. His chemotherapy treatments have left him tired, he said, although he pushes himself to get up in the morning and play his regular squash game."Frankly," he said, "it's hard to get out of bed, hard to do the exercises and hard to get going, but once I'm on the squash court, I'm fine."He has been very public about his illness - "I decided a long time ago: no toupee, no baseball hat, no shaved head," he said, referring to the baldness resulting from his treatment - and has become a symbol for cancer patients, who have been sending him cards and letters. He advises them to keep a busy schedule.Perhaps for that reason, Mr. Specter may have been the only politician in Washington to publicly speculate that Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, who has thyroid cancer, would not retire."I think I have special insights into how he feels," Mr. Specter said, although he said they have not talked about it. "I think the chief likes to get up every day knowing he has important work to do, and I like to get up every day thinking I have important work to do."A former prosecutor, Mr. Specter entered public life four decades ago as an ambitious young lawyer on the Warren Commission, which conducted the inquiry into the killing of President John F. Kennedy. He takes credit for producing the so-called single-bullet theory to explain how Kennedy was killed.Mr. Specter was elected to the Senate in 1980 and immediately sought a seat on the Judiciary Committee, much to the chagrin of the chairman, Senator Strom Thurmond, the conservative Republican from South Carolina. Mr. Thurmond, concerned that Mr. Specter was too liberal, tried to keep him off the committee, but when no one else wanted the last remaining seat, Mr. Specter got it.Although he will rely heavily on his aides - his chief counsel Michael E. O'Neill, a former clerk of Justice Thomas, is on leave from his job as an associate  law professor at George Mason University - Mr. Specter has more experience than any of them. He has participated in the confirmation of every one of the current Supreme Court justices except John Paul Stevens, and he says he views himself as "a fact-finder" rather than a prosecutor.He pledged to run the hearings "straight down the center, professionally," and added that he was eager to delve into a detailed examination of the nominee. But at 75, he says he is not looking at the coming hearings as any measure of his legacy."It's too early," he said, "to think about my legacy."