https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/11/nyregion/bridge-scandal-creates-unexpected-upheaval.html
Inquiry’s Trail: From George Washington Bridge to United’s Executive Offices - The New York Times
George Washington Bridge,Christie  Christopher J,Smisek  Jeffery A,Samson  David (1939- ),Fox  James P,Bribery and Kickbacks,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,United Airlines,New Jersey,Airlines and Airplanes
Sept. 10, 2015
6380
It was a traffic jam that, in the end, rerouted the career of the chief executive of the world’s fourth-largest airline, and how one led to the other is a tale of power, politics and New Jersey wheeling-dealing.Until Tuesday, Jeff Smisek was the chief executive of United Airlines. Mark Sokolich is the mayor of the borough of Fort Lee, N.J., which was gridlocked two years ago this week after allies of Gov. Chris Christie ordered lanes to the George Washington Bridge closed.As improbable as it may seem — as improbable as they were to begin with — the lane closings that were intended to punish Mayor Sokolich set off a chain of events that eventually led to Mr. Smisek’s surprise resignation, and those of two top lieutenants.Like a never-ending thread, the federal investigation into the lane closings led prosecutors to look into the dealings of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the bridge, and its chairman at the time, David Samson. This revealed his close relationship with officials at United, the largest carrier at Newark Liberty International Airport, which the authority runs.They discovered money-losing United flights that left Newark on Thursdays for South Carolina and returned on Mondays. Mr. Samson had a vacation home in South Carolina. At the same time, United wanted the Port Authority to make improvements at the airport.Whether a bribe or a legitimate business deal, it was the investigation of those dealings that United said forced those resignations.Now the question: Where will this bridge lead next?People close to the case said those same prosecutors had been asking questions about the role played by Jamie Fox, a longtime friend of Mr. Samson’s and United’s onetime lobbyist whom Mr. Christie, a Republican, appointed state transportation commissioner last year.Prosecutors are still trying to determine whether there was a crime, and if so, whether the airline and its senior officials were victims of extortion or willing participants in a bribery scheme.“Samson got what he wanted in the flights, and United got what they wanted at the airport,” a person with knowledge of the investigation said. “Was it negotiation or was it bribery?”A lawyer for Mr. Fox, Robert J. Fettweis, would not answer questions about his client’s work on behalf of the airline. But he said in a statement that Mr. Fox “conducted himself with the highest possible professional and ethical standards,” adding that “his conduct was always appropriate, and if prosecutors do have any questions for him, he will be happy to answer them.”United said on Tuesday that it was continuing its own investigation, which could be in the hopes of avoiding prosecution. The airline said it would have no further comment on the investigations.Mr. Samson’s lawyers have declined to comment, with a spokeswoman calling the news this week “a United matter.”The path to Mr. Smisek’s resignation started in September 2013. That is when Mr. Sokolich, a Democrat whose borough had been turned into a parking lot by the lane closings, complained that he was being punished for not endorsing Mr. Christie’s re-election. His accusation set off inquiries by New Jersey legislators and the authority; the case was ultimately referred to the office of Paul J. Fishman, the United States attorney for New Jersey.The inquiries pulled back the curtain on the once inscrutable and patronage-ridden operations of the authority.A first batch of records obtained under subpoena by the Legislature in January 2014 revealed the now-famous email from Bridget Anne Kelly, a deputy chief of staff to the governor, to a Christie ally at the authority: “Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee.”They also showed Mr. Samson — such an éminence grise in New Jersey politics that Christie administration officials addressed him as General in reverent reference to his tenure as the state’s attorney general — angrily pushing back on New York officials at the authority, who he believed were trying to embarrass the governor.While Mr. Christie fired Ms. Kelly and forced the resignations of his other allies at the agency, he remained loyal to the General. When Mr. Samson resigned several months later, Mr. Christie said it was because he was “74 years old” and “tired.”But people familiar with the workings of the Port Authority — including some employees prompted by resentments toward Mr. Christie and his allies at the agency, or longtime tensions between New York and New Jersey factions there — were already talking to federal investigators.They complained about how New Jersey officials had used Port Authority funds to fill holes in the state budget, and accused Mr. Samson, appointed by Mr. Christie as chairman in 2010, of using his position to benefit clients of his law firm.These accusations brought more scrutiny of the Port Authority and Mr. Samson. And then early this year, investigators heard a crazy story.Mr. Samson had dinner at an Italian restaurant in Manhattan in September 2011 with Mr. Smisek, Mr. Fox — whom United had brought on several years before as a lobbyist — a top aide and the two United officials who also resigned on Tuesday. The United officials were renegotiating its lease at Newark and pushing for lower fees. Mr. Samson almost jokingly suggested that in return, the airline could reinstate flights from Newark to Columbia, S.C., near where he had a home.United had also been pushing the agency to make improvements to its terminals, to approve and help pay for a new wide-bodied maintenance hangar and to expand PATH service to allow its passengers a one-seat ride from Lower Manhattan to the airport.The Port Authority board, with Mr. Samson at its helm, approved the hangar, and $10 million toward its construction, at its board meeting three months after the dinner.By the next month, United approached Columbia airport officials about resuming the direct flights. Those flights began in September 2012. The Port Authority board approved the PATH expansion weeks later.In May this year, when Mr. Fishman announced the indictments of Ms. Kelly and others in the lane closings, lawyers who have followed the investigation said there was so much information regarding Mr. Samson that prosecutors had not been able to get their arms around it yet. (Mr. Fishman told reporters only that it was like the television show “Downton Abbey”; you had to wait for a “whole ’nother season.”)Prosecutors were also moving on United: They had subpoenaed records of communications between the Port Authority and the airline officials regarding the Columbia flight, the PATH extension, improvements to terminals, and the maintenance hangar.They also sought communications on negotiations in which Mr. Christie himself had been deeply involved: his desire to have United begin flights at the money-losing airport in Atlantic City. The Port Authority had taken over the airport, over the objections of the authority’s professional staff, in a move that benefited one of Mr. Samson’s legal clients.United had hired the law firm of Jenner & Block to conduct its internal investigation. Some lawyers close to the case said at the time that federal prosecutors would wait for that investigation to be completed before bringing charges, and that the airline might hand over the results as part of a cooperation agreement.They also predicted that Mr. Smisek and other officials would have to step down.A separation agreement with United, reported by the airline on Tuesday, will pay him nearly $4.9 million in cash, plus stock worth about $3.4 million. But the airline could terminate the deal and require him to repay some of that severance if he is convicted or pleads guilty to any crime stemming from the investigation.In retrospect, even the initial records from the bridge scandal hinted at the twining of the lane closings and the United troubles.As the governor’s allies discussed the traffic jam in texts and emails, they also vented about negotiations between the governor’s office, the Port Authority and the airline over the PATH train, and discussed meetings and plans around the Atlantic City flights, which Mr. Smisek and Mr. Christie announced in November 2013. (The airline ended the flights last year.)Later records unearthed by the investigation show United persistently pressing the authority for lower fees at Newark Airport. A key reason those fees were so high was that the Christie administration had agreed to an unusual plan for a new firefighting force at the airport, which was costing United $25 million.That plan had benefited a police union that endorsed Mr. Christie and in particular, its president, who was helping Port Authority officials secure other endorsements. Those endorsements, like that of Mr. Sokolich, were intended to build a case that the governor was the Republican who could win the broad coalition needed to take the White House.The revelations in the time between Mr. Sokolich’s first complaints in 2013 and Mr. Smisek’s resignation this week have damaged Mr. Christie’s presidential aspirations. And the continuing investigation threatens to bring the governor more grief, by refreshing concerns among Republicans who have long worried that there would be another painful chapter in the scandal.His strategy has been to distance himself from the alleged co-conspirators on the lane closings, isolating them as rogue operators who deceived him.In his monthly radio call-in show on Wednesday night, Mr. Christie reserved judgment on the United resignations — saying you could not believe everything you read — and also on Mr. Samson.“I have to be held accountable for what happens on my watch,” the governor said. But he added, “I wasn’t directly supervising every day.”“The standard you need to hold to is when mistakes are made, how do you react?” Mr. Christie said. “Do you cover them up? Do you make excuses for them? Or do you act?”“I’m very comfortable with how I reacted,” he added. “It was very difficult stuff for me to deal with a couple years ago, but as far as I’m concerned, it’s behind me now. I’ve made those decisions. I’ve moved on.”