http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/05/realestate/sea-bright-nj-living-in-where-the-beach-is-always-a-block-away.html
Sea Bright, N.J./Living In – Where the Beach Is Always a Block Away - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Sea Bright (NJ)
Aug. 2, 2012
8816
SINCE 1994, Frank Bain has owned a hardware store on Ocean Avenue that he says has been serving the residents of Sea Bright for 100 years. Traffic jams Ocean Avenue on summer weekends, he says, but Sea Bright is not just a town to flock into and out of.Sea Bright, a borough of about 1,400 full-time and 1,000 part-time residents south of Sandy Hook in Monmouth County, is a slice of small-town America, very low-key and family-oriented, he says. Mr. Bain knows most customers, and they know him as Frank. He wears shorts to work.“So many people think of ‘Jersey Shore’ as Snooki and The Situation,” Mr. Bain said, referring to the MTV series, set in Seaside Heights, to the south.He laughed, then added, “To me, the Jersey Shore is more of an inspiration.”From the beaches in Sea Bright, sunbathers can spot the Manhattan skyline 22 miles away — if they really want to. Mostly, people buy property in Sea Bright, an hour’s drive from the city, so that they can chill out.About 60 percent of the population lives in Sea Bright year-round, said Dina Long, who became the town’s volunteer mayor in January. Of the 40 percent who own second homes, many use them year-round.“I call it the Jersey Shore’s best-kept secret,” said J. D. Taylor, who owns a chain of carwashes in Metuchen, “because no matter where you are in town, you’re a one-block walk to the beach.” Mr. Taylor renovated and recently sold a three-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath beach house for $700,000, about five years after he bought it for $375,000.Mr. Taylor says he and various family members have over the years owned four houses in Sea Bright; he and his wife, Alyson, have bought another piece of land in Sea Bright on which they intend to build a house that may become their full-time residence, he said.Mayor Long, who teaches at Brookdale Community College, moved here in 2001 with her husband, Rob, who had been hired as the pastor of Sea Bright First United Methodist Church. He changed jobs, but the Longs have decided to stay. They have a 9-year-old son, Sam, and they like it in Sea Bright because, as she put it, “It’s kind of like Mayberry-by-the-Sea.”The town, on a sandy three-mile-long peninsula, occasionally floods; the beach is protected by a 15-foot-tall stone-and-concrete sea wall running parallel to Ocean Avenue and punctuated by a series of wooden staircases. With sea levels having fluctuated in recent years, several residents said they were comforted by the presence of the wall, built a century ago to protect old railroad tracks. Mayor Long says the borough, short of cash, makes repairs on an as-needed basis. On the river side, she said, federal funding is being provided for six new bulkheads — which she described as a central part of a plan to improve the streetscape.Joan and Brett Glenn’s first home is in Westfield, 45 minutes away, but they, too, spend a lot of time in Sea Bright. The Glenns, who have two teenagers, paid $745,000 two years ago for a duplex on Ocean Avenue with four bedrooms and three and a half baths.Mr. Glenn went to high school on Long Beach Island, so he is familiar with the characteristics of shore towns. “I didn’t want to go to a place where it was all McMansions,” Mrs. Glenn said. “I wanted to feel comfortable.”So the Glenns ended up in Sea Bright. They ride bicycles into town for dinner. They are members of one of Sea Bright’s seven beach clubs, the Driftwood, and their children often use a Jet Ski on the Shrewsbury River, on the western edge of the town peninsula.Sea Bright has an eclectic housing stock, and colorful residents from all over the map, Mayor Long says. There are traditions, as when Santa rides through town on a fire truck at Christmas. And, of course, there is the beach, offering magnificent sunrises.“In town,” she said, “we say we get sand in our shoes and don’t leave.”WHAT YOU’LL FINDState Route 36, Ocean Avenue, links Sea Bright to Highlands to the west and Monmouth Beach to the south. Traffic tends to inch along on summer weekends, from Exit 117 of the Garden State Parkway south for 15 miles into town.Sea Bright is also accessible from a Shrewsbury River bridge that replaced an 80-year-old drawbridge about a year ago. The bridge offers a way to avoid the traffic that tends to stack up almost immediately south of Exit 117. “You miss it every time,” Mr. Taylor said.Take a right at the end of the bridge and head into Sandy Hook. Go straight to head into Sea Bright on Ocean Avenue, the only drag through town. Immediately, you’ll see the sea wall looming between the roadway and the beach. Many of the wooden access staircases are privately owned, but five are clearly marked as open to the public. Public parking, however, is not plentiful.“You essentially have a private beach,” said Joe Clabbers, a vacation homeowner who works as a contractor in Langhorne, Pa. “Most times, the only people you’ll see at the beach are your neighbors.” Mr. Clabbers and his wife, Dawn, bought their three-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath custom home across Ocean Avenue for $885,000 in 2009.The couple also own a cabin in the Poconos, which he said they might sell because it takes more than two hours to get there from Langhorne, a Philadelphia suburb. Getting to Sea Bright takes about an hour and 15 minutes.Downtown Sea Bright offers basics like a grocery and Bain’s Hardware, at the intersection of Ocean Avenue and River Street, across the street from one of the stairways leading to the public beach. Flanking it on both sides, to the north and south, are the beach clubs.“You definitely have a mix of all ages in Sea Bright,” said Karin Busichio, an agent for Gloria Nilson Realtors who has sold houses in Sea Bright for 20 years. “You see everyone from babies to 80-year-olds going to the beach.”WHAT YOU’LL PAYA recent look at momls.com, the Monmouth County Association of Realtors Web site, revealed 33 condominiums and 21 single-family homes for sale. Prices ranged from $125,000, for a one-bedroom one-bath condo built in 1975, to $3.39 million for a five-bedroom five-bath house built in 2005. Eight of the 21 houses were offered for less than $500,000. A three-bedroom Island View condo listed at $499,000, reduced from $510,000, had an annual tax bill of $6,337.The pace of sales has picked up this year, Ms. Busichio said. And according to figures compiled by the Realtors’ association, the average sale price of a single-family house in Sea Bright in the first half of 2012 was $631,889, versus $603,500 in the first half of 2011.The average for a condo was $352,745 for the first six months of 2012, versus $371,278 in 2011. Single-family homes in Highlands sold for an average of $255,983 in 2012, versus $278,891 in 2011.THE COMMUTEThree SeaStreak ferries depart on weekday mornings from the Conner’s Ferry Landing, in Highlands. The trip to Pier 11 in Manhattan, near Wall Street, takes 40 minutes. The ferry continues to East 35th Street, an additional 15 minutes. Five ferries depart from Pier 11 between 4 and 8 p.m. The round-trip peak fare is $45; a ticket for 40 one-way trips costs $655. Parking at the Conner’s Ferry Landing is free.Academy Bus provides regular weekday and weekend service from Sea Bright to the Port Authority Bus Terminal. The trip takes about 100 minutes one way. Ten-trip tickets are $113; a monthly pass is $350.WHAT TO DODaily beach badges are $8; seasonal ones are $100. Ms. Busichio says annual family membership in one of the beach clubs, which have private parking, can run $2,500 to $10,000 and more. Parking at the public beach is free, if limited.Bike and jogging paths link Sea Bright to Sandy Hook and are used year-round. Bird-watching is big, too.The downtown has a handful of restaurants — some down-home, some fancier — and Rumson and Red Bank, via another bridge over the Shrewsbury, offer places to dine and shop.There are theaters in Atlantic Highlands and Red Bank, and the Monmouth Mall on Route 35 in Eatontown is about 20 minutes away.THE SCHOOLSStudents from kindergarten through Grade 4 attend Wolf Hill Elementary School in the neighboring borough of Oceanport, which is a 15-minute bus ride from Sea Bright, said Ms. Long, whose son is a student there. Enrollment is about 350. Average class size is 18; the state average is 19.Maple Place Middle School, also in Oceanport, has about 300 students in Grades 5 through 8. Shore Regional High School, which is in West Long Branch and also serves Oceanport, West Long Branch and Monmouth Beach, has about 700 enrolled. SAT averages in 2011 were 510 in math, 503 in reading and 505 in writing, versus 517, 493 and 496 statewide.The graduation rate for the class of 2011 exceeded 97 percent, versus 83.2 percent statewide.THE HISTORYIn the early 1840s, a fishing village called Nauvoo occupied the land that became Sea Bright. In his 1868 “Book of Summer Resorts,” the journalist Charles H. Sweetser wrote that “the return scene on this beach, of the men and boats, is sometimes highly romantic.”