http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/02/garden/02catskills.html
A Second Home on a Starter Budget - The New York Times
Restoration and Renovation,Home Furnishings,Housing and Real Estate,Furniture,Home Appliances,Tag Sales,Craigslist
July 1, 2009
2945
THE minute they pulled into the driveway, Christina Salway and John Moskowitz knew they had found their house.“It was perfect for us, with all its imperfections,” said Ms. Salway, a 26-year-old interior designer. “The place had been abandoned for two years and had literally gone to seed. But we could see the little house had great bones.” The structure was basically sound, and the plumbing and heating worked.Priced out of the New York City real estate market, the couple rent an apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. They decided to make their first home purchase a weekend house in the Catskills.They had looked at about 30 houses during a four-month hunt for a country home last summer, and finally closed on the two-bedroom, one-bath home for $95,000 last September. Along with the house, a 700-square-foot 1920s cottage, the property in Sparrow Bush, a village in Orange County, N.Y., includes eight and a half wooded acres and a detached garage/barn 800 feet from the house.Every weekend, starting in October, the couple drove two hours from their home in Brooklyn to the house, undertaking all of the necessary reconstruction themselves, except the re-roofing, which was done by a contractor. Both urbanites, neither had ever tackled a renovation before, but the project was thrilling to them.“That’s the luxury of being a young, first-time home buyer,” Ms. Salway said. “It was empowering to see what we could do.”They very much wanted to “build” a home together and during their search realized all they could afford was a wreck. “We knew we were really capable people,” Ms. Salway said. “Even using power tools did not intimidate us.”With a budget of $10,000, the couple worked on the house from October to May, insulating the attached garage to convert it into a living room. There they created a wall of mismatched windows that Ms. Salway found on the streets of various cities. Other projects included spackling, painting the interior and installing kitchen appliances.They had a firm deadline to finish the work: May 23, their wedding day. They were determined to host the event on the property, with a large tent to accommodate their 150 guests.“It was a labor of love,” Ms. Salway said. “We were in love with the house. We were in love with the process of fixing it up, and we were in love with each other.”Agreeing with his wife, Mr. Moskowitz, 27, a former television scriptcoordinator, said, “When you’re drywalling until 2 a.m., you have to really want the house and you have to really love the person you’re standing next to.”They decorated the home on a tight budget — spending $2,352 in total — acquiring pieces through Craigslist, thrift shops and yard sales, receiving free items from family and friends and finding things on the street. “You need a good eye,” Ms. Salway said, noting that treasures are often found in recycling bins and Dumpsters.“Using Craigslist successfully means scrolling through the listings every day, not once a month,” she said. “Then there’s elbow grease and the desire to fix things up.”The wedding was a great motivator. “It was exciting to have our family and friends on the property,” Ms. Salway said.Mr. Moskowitz added: “It’s still a work in progress. It will never be without room for improvement. There’s always a better kitchen floor to install. In fact, I’ll be sad if it’s ever finished.”