http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/us/politics/momentum-for-pacific-trade-deal-sapped-in-election-year.html
Momentum for Pacific Trade Deal Sapped in Election Year - The New York Times
Trans-Pacific Partnership,Presidential Election of 2016,Obama  Barack,United States Economy
April 5, 2016
3478
For the most part, the 2016 campaign spectacle has benefited President Obama.The Democratic incumbent, no longer the center of conflict, has seen his approval ratings edge up toward 50 percent and beyond. The unruly Republican brawl flatters Mr. Obama’s temperate demeanor by comparison, while increasing the odds that his party can hold on to the White House in November and safeguard his legacy.Yet there’s an important exception. The Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, a linchpin of Mr. Obama’s “pivot” toward Asia for American economic and foreign policy, represents his top remaining priority before Congress. And the accord has taken a serious political beating.One by one, mainstream Republican candidates reflecting the party establishment’s modern pro-trade consensus have fallen. Donald J. Trump, who calls the accord a “terrible deal,” vanquished them in part by rallying blue-collar Republicans behind his message that international trade was to blame for economic problems.Mr. Trump’s top challenger, Ted Cruz, reversed course to oppose the “trade promotion authority” that let the Obama administration complete negotiations.The only remaining Republican who backs the deal, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, has been mathematically eliminated from a first-ballot nomination at the Republican convention.The blows have also come from fellow Democrats, cheered on by union allies.As Mr. Obama’s secretary of state, Hillary Clinton praised the trade agreement as “the gold standard” for lowering tariffs and other trade barriers while protecting workers and the environment.After leaving that job, she watched former colleagues — many of them allies from her husband’s administration — complete the negotiations.In the meantime, however, she ran into unexpectedly tough primary opposition. Bernie Sanders, a relentless critic of income inequality and stagnant wages, condemned the final  deal as a victory for “Wall Street and big corporations” when it was concluded on Oct. 5. Two days later, Mrs. Clinton declared her opposition.In theory, those attacks shouldn’t matter. A Congress led by pro-trade Republicans can approve the trade deal before Mr. Obama leaves office. The Republican-heavy majorities that passed trade promotion authority, with 218 votes in the House and 60 in the Senate, provide a road map.But trade advocates always struggle to reassure voters that overall economic benefits, in the form of lower consumer prices and increased exports, outweigh lost jobs, shuttered factories and businesses buffeted by imports. Anxieties inflamed by the campaign have made that even harder.The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, fighting to preserve Republican control this fall, doesn’t want to make vulnerable members take a stand in the populist storm. One of them, Senator Rob Portman of Ohio, now opposes the accord despite his own background as United States trade representative under President George W. Bush.The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, remains committed to trade expansion. “America should be at the table, writing the rules of the global economy instead of China,” he said in a recent interview, echoing Mr. Obama’s defense of the trade deal.But Mr. Ryan’s caucus also fears a vote to liberalize trade rules during the campaign. Members whose districts include locally important industries, like tobacco and pharmaceuticals, have seized upon their disappointment with the deal’s final terms.Advocates, who include the United States Conference of Mayors as well as financially powerful business lobbies, still see a window for victory.John Engler, the president of the Business Roundtable, which represents executives at some of America’s largest companies, points toward May — after the big Rust Belt primaries have concluded but before the summer political conventions — as the point when legislative preparations for the trade deal’s approval can accelerate.Final approval could occur in a postelection session of Congress, before the new president takes office. That’s when political risk for lawmakers reaches low tide.“The news would be if they maintain their hostility to trade after the election,” said Mr. Engler, a former Republican governor of Michigan. “I do believe it will pass — I’m quite certain of that.”That’s also when another asset, currently obscured by gloomy campaign rhetoric, might kick in for Mr. Obama. Like his approval ratings, the economy itself keeps getting healthier.