http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/16/nyregion/retail-operator-at-trade-center-is-pulling-out-of-the-deal.html
Retail Operator At Trade Center Is Pulling Out Of the Deal - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,PORT AUTHORITY OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY,WESTFIELD AMERICA INC,WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC),RENTING AND LEASING,FINANCES,AREA PLANNING AND RENEWAL,TERRORISM,RETAIL STORES AND TRADE
Sept. 16, 2003
9041
Correction AppendedWestfield America, the mall operator that owns the lease for retail space at the World Trade Center, said yesterday that it was negotiating a cash settlement to pull out of its deal on the downtown complex.While the move could clear the way for significant design changes sought by rebuilding officials, it raises questions about how much money will be available for the downtown project if there are other buyouts.Westfield, the operator of the underground mall that was destroyed at the trade center, has resisted efforts to create more retailing at street level. Yesterday, the company said that it had signed a nonbinding letter of intent with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to give up its contract for $140 million.''We are selling our interests to the Port to help simplify the overall rebuilding process and expedite the rebuilding of the World Trade Center,'' said Peter Lowey, the company's chief executive, in a statement.The Port Authority, the owner of the 16-acre site, said that it was pleased to ''enter into discussions'' with Westfield. It said that an agreement would ''allow the best interests of the public to take precedence in the development of appropriate retail space.''Officials involved in the negotiations said that Westfield recognized that it would take 10 to 15 years to rebuild the complex, which was once one of the highest-grossing malls in the country, with hundreds of stores. Westfield, a publicly traded company based in Australia, was not confident that the current proposals for retail space would ever generate average sales of $900 a square foot, as the trade center did in 2000, according to executives who have talked with the mall operator. So the company would rather get out.The announcement illuminates a shift in the discussions over the trade center site, from the design of the site and its memorial to more bottom-line financial concerns.Westfield's announcement comes 12 days after GMAC Commercial Mortgage Corporation sued the Port Authority and the developer Larry Silverstein over the $563 million loan it provided Mr. Silverstein and his partners when they acquired the trade center lease. GMAC, which says its loan is secured only by the insurance money, has asked a judge to freeze payments to Mr. Silverstein. Over the last nine months, it has refused to release any insurance proceeds to Mr. Silverstein that would allow him to pay for architects involved in rebuilding.The insurance companies have put $1.9 billion into an escrow account controlled by GMAC. About $600 million of that total has been spent on ground rent, loan payments and items covered by business interruption insurance.Last Wednesday, Port Authority commissioners quietly decided to begin discussions to buy out GMAC's mortgage so that the lender would not become an impediment.Mr. Silverstein and the Port Authority are also awaiting a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in their battle against the insurance companies that provided coverage for the trade center. Mr. Silverstein contends that he is entitled to a double payment of nearly $7 billion because two planes hit two towers in what he describes as two separate ''occurrences'' on Sept. 11.The insurance companies contend that the developer is due only the policy limit, about $3.5 billion, a sum that Mr. Silverstein has said is not enough to rebuild the trade center.Charles A. Gargano, vice chairman of the Port Authority, said the agency was in fundamental agreement with having Mr. Silverstein pay off the GMAC loan, as long as the authority was protected against a lower-than-expected insurance payout.The elimination of GMAC and Westfield would presumably reduce some of the squabbling over the designs. Westfield, for one, put up $127 million in July 2001 for its retail leases based on estimates of 150,000 office workers and visitors a day. The company opposed efforts to move stores from below ground to create a more energetic street life.But buyouts could also reduce the money available for rebuilding, an especially critical issue if Mr. Silverstein loses his legal battle and the insurers pay out only $3.2 billion. That figure would drop to about $2.2 billion after taking into account the buyouts and money already spent. The first office building, which is in the design stage, will cost as much as $1.5 billion, and the overall rebuilding project is expected to cost more than $7 billion.''I've long been concerned that no one is keeping an eye on the finances,'' said Elliott Sclar, a professor of urban planning at Columbia University. ''Despite the city's current fiscal crisis, they say we can do anything downtown and it'll be successful. But there's a complex set of interests at work here and only so much money.''''Somebody's got to foot the bill at the end of the day,'' said one executive involved in buyout negotiations. ''I don't think everyone's worked out the economics yet.''Correction: September 19, 2003, Friday  An article on Tuesday about negotiations by Westfield America to end its contract to manage the retail space at the World Trade Center site misstated the number of stores in the original underground mall. It was about 75 -- specialty stores, restaurants and service retailers -- not hundreds.