http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/12/world/europe/recep-tayyip-erdogan-turkey.html
As Erdogan Sculpts New Turkish Identity, Turks Look at His Work With Unease - The New York Times
Terrorism,Muslims and Islam,Ramadan,Justice and Development Party (Turkey),Twitter,Ataturk  Kemal,Beckett  Samuel,Erdogan  Recep Tayyip,Istanbul (Turkey),Portugal,Syria,Iraq,Waiting for Godot (Play),The Lord of the Rings (Book),Turkey
July 11, 2016
6414
ISTANBUL — Umit Engin, the owner of a small bookstore in the tangle of back streets in this city’s ancient Beyoglu district, sat in his tidy shop reading on a quiet afternoon recently.Business has fallen sharply over the past year, since the bomb attacks started and the flow of tourists slowed, and Mr. Engin, 42, who is deeply worried about Turkey’s future, spends his days glancing up at the street, hoping for customers.“We feel lost,” he said. “There’s no energy now. Where it will go from here, we do not know. We are waiting for something, but we don’t know what it is.”He paused, adding wryly, “it’s like ‘Waiting for Godot,’ ” referring to the existentialist play by Samuel Beckett. “Waiting for Turkey.”Turkey is living through strange days. Bombings are now regular events in its large cities. Its society is so polarized that some people speak darkly of armed civil conflict. An old war with Kurdish separatists has been reignited, inflaming the country’s southeastern border region at a time when countries just south of it, Syria and Iraq, are convulsing with violence and existential questions.But the most profound changes have been in the shape of society itself. And for that, the country has its bombastic president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, to thank.Mr. Erdogan is tearing up the rigid secularist system imposed by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk in the 1920s, empowering the long-oppressed Islamic underclass and making Turkish society far more equal by carrying out economic policies that lifted poorer areas. But along the way, Mr. Erdogan has grown increasingly autocratic and his inner circle increasingly rich, and many Turks, including some from his own base, are worried about what he is erecting in place of the old system he is dismantling.“It’s like ‘The Lord of the Rings’: We have the ring now, but we have become slaves to it,” said one young Islamic activist, referring to money and power, who shut down her Twitter account after being attacked by pro-government bloggers for criticizing the crackdown on street demonstrations in 2013 that grew into a major protest movement against Mr. Erdogan. “It’s not about Kemalists, it’s not about secular protesters — it’s our own test. And mostly, we are not passing.”Liberals like Mr. Engin say they feel hopeless. Mr. Erdogan crushed the 2013 street protests. Opposition swelled again after his party lost its majority in Parliament in an election in June 2015, but he outmaneuvered everybody by calling a snap election.In the protests, “we tried everything, but we got nothing,” Mr. Engin said. “In fact, we lost many things. We lost friends. Now it’s impossible to organize such protests. People think the result will be the same.”As Turkey drifts further into uncharted waters, some Turks are wondering where their country is going — and what it will look like when it arrives.The changes have been so profound that some argue that the nation — founded by the elite as a project that papered over ethnicity and religion to create the concept of a modern Turk — will have to pass through a period of uncertainty and possibly chaos to find itself again.“Who are we, and what are we doing here together?” said Cengiz Candar, a Turkish intellectual, explaining his country’s predicament. “We used to be the secular republic. Now, we don’t know what we are. What project brings us together? What social contract?”Mr. Erdogan is offering a narrative. He speaks with swagger and soaring statements about the glory of Turkey’s Ottoman past, playing down the eight-decade secular interlude called Kemalism. He talks in rapid-fire speeches about what he plans to achieve by 2023 — Turkey’s centennial — and sometimes seems to want to replace Ataturk himself.In some ways, a search for a new Turkish identity was inevitable. Kemalism is a rigid, early 20th-century revolutionary ideology that forged a modern state. But it also repressed pious peasants from the heartland, along with ethnic minorities like Kurds. The fact that the Turkish identity is evolving is natural.So far, Turkish society looks about the same. Women have not been required to wear head scarves, and while an order to do so seems unlikely, some liberals like Mr. Engin worry that it could happen, particularly in light of Mr. Erdogan’s recent exhortation for Turkish women to have more children. Pious Turks like his vision, perhaps more for the combative stance he takes against the West than for his references to the Ottoman past.“Europe is cracking, but Turkey is still on its feet,” said Mahmoud Atlas, a 47-year-old cleaning company owner from Mersin who attended a large Ramadan dinner in Istanbul where Mr. Erdogan spoke last month. “Sorry, but the U.S. and Europe can’t break him,” he said of the president.Mr. Erdogan’s working-class roots also have broad appeal. “He’s coming from below, like us,” Emre Bozkurt, 22, said. “He can sit and have tea with poor people. These things make us love him. When people look at him, they see themselves.”Mr. Erdogan and his party reliably have received between 40 percent and 50 percent of the vote for most of his nearly 15-year tenure. A chunk of that support comes from pragmatic voters who are more interested in their pocketbooks than politics.“They fear an economic crisis more than anything else,” Hakan Altinay, the director of the European School of Politics at Bogazici University in Istanbul, said of the government. “The deal is: You don’t mess with how I govern you, and I deliver you the goods. But if I don’t deliver, you send me an overdue bill with compounded interest.”There were signs of discontent at a Ramadan dinner late last month in Basaksehir (pronounced ba-SHAK-shehir), a suburb far from Istanbul’s ancient center that has long been a bastion of support for Mr. Erdogan and his Justice and Development party.Emine Akarsu, 48, an architect, praised the party for helping to transform the district from a trash-strewn field into rows of pastel high-rises and landscaped parks, complete with artificial streams, a lake and a nearby subway stop. But as the party has become visibly wealthier and corruption allegations have surfaced, Ms. Akarsu said she had stopped voting for it.“They have changed, and so has my view of them,” she said, packing up her thermos of tea. “I don’t believe they are telling us the truth about things anymore.”Kurtulus Turan, a textiles businessman, said he used to like Mr. Erdogan’s party for its pro-business stance. But now the president seems to speak exclusively for Sunni Turks, Mr. Turan said, adding that as a member of Turkey’s Shiite minority, he feels discrimination. “It wasn’t like this at the beginning,” he said.So where is Turkey headed? Its intellectuals are not sticking around to find out. Mr. Candar, who was formally charged with insulting the president in articles he wrote on the conflict with the Kurds, is now a visiting fellow in Stockholm. Even some upper-middle-class Turks are looking at property abroad. Portugal is a popular choice.Those who cannot leave keep waiting. Mr. Engin compared these days to a storm that is buffeting Turkish people. He said there would be damage, but how much remained to be seen.“We have to wait for it to finish, for the air to clear,” he said. He said he did not know if that would take a month or a decade, but he believed change would come because “things can’t go on like this.”