https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/t-magazine/poetic-and-lifelike-botanical-sculptures.html
Poetic and Lifelike Botanical Sculptures - The New York Times
Art,Flowers and Plants,Almon  Carmen (1950- ),Almon  Carmen
Oct. 23, 2015
3842
‘‘EVERY PLANT NEEDS a system to grow, but there is also that X factor, something wonderful and wild that messes with the symmetry and balance,’’ says the 65-year-old American artist Carmen Almon. ‘‘That little bit of mystery is what’s real to me.’’ It is Almon’s ability to capture organic quirks that makes her botanical sculptures so remarkably lifelike and at the same time uncanny, existing just beyond the borders of the natural. Delicately rendered from the least delicate of materials (copper sheeting, brass tubing) and colored with enamel paint — they’re an adaptation of the tole style traditionally used to decorate metal lamps and trays. Almon’s wildflowers, weeds and vegetable plants are inspired by the abundant greenery that surrounds her country home in southwestern France and by her collection of detailed 17th- and 18th-century botanical drawings, as well as her own imaginings. Her unique creations have captivated a small but discerning set of collectors including Deeda Blair, Carolina Herrera and interior designer Howard Slatkin, for whom Almon worked as an art director in the 1980s, painting everything from silk fabrics to furniture. It was during this era that Blair, a client of Slatkin’s, asked Almon to restore a metal flower sculpture by the late Chicago artist Mary Munnecke — and so introduced her to the world of tole.Almon’s third exhibition — the fruits of two years of labor — signals a new direction for the artist, in the form of an elegant collaboration with her husband, the French sculptor Thierry Job, who has made earthen brass stands for her plants, the spindly roots of which appear to hover just above the raw metal bases. The effect is visceral and subversive: A spiky, deep blue artichoke bud with wide, silvery leaves seems to defy gravity and time, while a white dahlia, its petals stretching towards an imaginary sun, looks as if it’s been ripped from the ground at its most perfect. ‘‘Thierry has his feet firmly on the ground, and I’m up there in the air with the flowers, so it was a good balance,’’ Almon says. ‘‘The pieces are very heavy and very strong,’’ she adds. ‘‘They don’t look it, but they are.’’