https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/health/a-mosquito-killer-unwelcome-to-many.html
A Mosquito Killer, Unwelcome to Many - The New York Times
Zika Virus,Pesticides,Mosquitoes,Miami (Fla),Puerto Rico,Naled
Sept. 17, 2016
5089
A controversial pesticide, naled, was sprayed over Miami this month in an effort to eradicate Aedes aegypti, the mosquitoes spreading the Zika virus in southern Florida. The spraying has prompted protests from environmentalists and residents worried about naled’s toxicity. Here are some facts about the pesticide.Sold as Dibrom, naled is an organophosphate, a category of chemicals that also includes malathion; both are widely used to control mosquitoes. Organophosphates are the most common type of insecticide, but they have been removed from most home products.Naled is very lethal to insects, and toxic to some birds and freshwater fish. It is meant to be used at very low doses; it is released as an “ultra-low-volume” spray, and the amount distributed over a given area is supposed to be minute — about two tablespoons per acre.Naled breaks down rapidly in sunlight and water, and does not persist in the environment, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.Researchers do not believe Aedes aegypti mosquitoes have developed resistance to naled as they have to other chemicals used to control their populations.Officials in the United States and Europe disagree over naled’s safety. It affects the enzymes that control muscle contraction.. Overdoses can cause vomiting, seizures and loss of consciousness. At extreme doses, from a spill for example, victims lose their ability to breathe, and die.It has been banned in the European Union since 2012 as a “potential and unacceptable risk” to humans and the environment, and because officials felt there was insufficient evidence that it worked well enough to justify that risk.Naled has been used in the United States since 1959, and the E.P.A. considers it safe for humans, including children, at the concentrations used in aerial spraying. Agricultural workers must wear protective equipment when the pesticide is used.People are exposed to naled largely by eating foods on which there is residue. Naled is not permitted in some products, including flea treatments — for fear that children might receive large doses by stroking pets.Naled is released at low altitudes in a superfine mist that floats into gardens, garages and houses to kill mosquitoes hiding indoors. It should be sprayed on windless nights, so that breezes or rising warm air do not blow it away from the target area.The pesticide is also sprayed at night so that bees, which are necessary to pollinate flowers and crops, are not endangered. Bees rest in their hives at night; however, a failure to protect hives from naled spraying recently killed millions of bees in South Carolina.No one guarantees that naled will stop Zika transmission. It is considered a last resort, but worthwhile because the viral threat to babies is so great and because other mosquito control measures are failing.Even before Zika appeared in South Florida, naled was widely used for mosquito control. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, six million acres in the state were sprayed with naled last year, including Miami and Tampa, apparently with no ill effects. In 2015, the pesticide cut A. aegypti populations by 99 percent in Florida’s Manatee County and by over 90 percent in New Orleans.In 1987, however, naled failed to stop an outbreak of dengue, also carried by mosquitoes, in Puerto Rico. Mosquito populations did drop, but not enough to prevent transmission of the virus. The C.D.C. argues that spraying technologies are now much better.Distrust of federal measures runs high in the territory. The United States has a long history of “experiments” in Puerto Rico: Agent Orange was tested in jungles there before it was used in Vietnam, and compulsory sterilization of thousands of Puerto Rican women was supported with federal funds until the 1970s. Also, Washington imposed a financial control board on the bankrupt island this summer, feeding local resentment.In July, a C.D.C. contractor imported naled for use without informing the local government. Following organized protests, Puerto Rico’s governor rejected aerial spraying of the pesticide. The territory now has more than 17,000 confirmed cases of Zika infection, but federal officials believe more than 800,000 residents will be infected by the end of the year.