http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/26/sports/soccer/robbie-rogers-signs-with-galaxy-welcoming-pioneers-role.html
Robbie Rogers Signs With Galaxy, Welcoming Pioneer’s Role - The New York Times
Soccer,Rogers  Robbie,Los Angeles Galaxy (Soccer Team),Homosexuality
May 25, 2013
3619
CARSON, Calif. — Robbie Rogers thought he had stepped away from his career as a professional soccer player the moment he pressed the button publishing a blog post announcing that he was gay. At the time, in February, he said, he could not imagine that he could be himself on and off the field.But a month later, after Rogers spoke to a group of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender teenagers in Portland, Ore., he began to realize that playing soccer not only fulfilled him but also offered him an opportunity to do something more.“That Nike camp made me feel a little soft,” Rogers, 26, said Saturday, after he signed a contract with the Los Angeles Galaxy of Major League Soccer. “It taught me I needed to man up a little bit. It’s easy to play a sport that you love and be a role model for people. It’s a perfect situation for me.”A torrent of attention greeted the barrier-breaking announcement last month by the N.B.A. player Jason Collins that he was gay. But it is Rogers who is poised to become the first openly gay male athlete in North America to compete in a professional sport. That could happen Sunday night: Coach Bruce Arena said Rogers would be on the Galaxy’s 18-player active roster for their home game against Seattle. Arena expects to receive Rogers’s release from his English team, Leeds United, on Sunday.If Rogers’s path back to professional soccer became clearer in Oregon, he was pushed further by his agent, who sent him clips of Rogers having fun with a ball at his feet, and by friends and former teammates who encouraged him to return. The positive reaction to Collins’s coming out also nudged him, as did the release of “42,” a movie about Jackie Robinson. When Rogers was granted permission to work out with the Galaxy, his hometown team, he began to seriously consider the possibility of a return.When Rogers, a talented wing who was on the cusp of making the 2010 World Cup team, asked Arena about the possibility of joining the Galaxy, the team initiated discussions with the Chicago Fire, who held Rogers’s rights. After several weeks of negotiations, at times involving the league office, Arena on Tuesday approached Mike Magee, the Galaxy’s leading goal scorer and a Chicago native, about returning home. Arena said he would not have made the trade against Magee’s wishes.Rogers, who played previously with the Columbus Crew, said he would return to M.L.S. only if he could play for the Galaxy, near his family’s home in Huntington Beach, Calif. He said his being out “probably” made the trade happen, exerting pressure on Chicago to complete the deal.Arena, who has coached the Galaxy to the last two league titles, acknowledged the greater social implications of giving Rogers a platform to play, but he added, “Let’s be fair: my job is to win games, and we’ll be judged by that.”The Galaxy star Landon Donovan disagreed.“Everybody wants it to go a certain way on the field, but in my opinion it’s already a success whether he plays 1 minute or 1,000 minutes or 10,000 minutes,” Donovan said. “It’s already a big step in the right direction for our society as a whole. I’m proud to be a part of it.”While M.L.S. continues to gain traction in the American sports marketplace — the announcement last week that new owners will pay $100 million for an expansion club in New York is a recent example — its standing as a less-than-top-tier league reduces the ripple effect of Rogers’s breaking a barrier, said Jim Buzinski, a founder of Outsports.com, which tracks gay sports issues.“His gay legacy will be significant — he’ll go down in history as the first to play in a game,” Buzinski said. “But if this were the Spanish league, the English Premier League or the Bundesliga, there would be more impact. That’s where the best players in his sport are, not in M.L.S.”When Rogers steps on the field, it will be a moment decades in the making. He is following others, like the football player Dave Kopay and the basketball player John Amaechi, who came out after their careers ended. He is also following prominent women, including the retired tennis star Martina Navratilova and the basketball player Brittney Griner, who came out during their careers.Collins’s decision to raise his hand, as he put it, and Rogers’s decision to return to the field are the most recent steps in the progression.The sports culture in the United States should be more forgiving than in Europe, where racial taunts remain a stain on soccer in some countries, said Galaxy forward Robbie Keane, an Irishman who played for more than a decade in the Premier League.“I’m sure there are a lot of players over the years that have played in England, or wherever, that are too frightened to come out,” Keane said. “Maybe the fans are a bit more brutal in England than they would be here, but that shouldn’t be the case.”While several Galaxy players said Rogers would have no problems on the field from other players, the league has suspended and fined players for using homophobic slurs twice in the last six months.If there is a sports franchise that is well equipped to cope with auxiliary attention, it is the Galaxy, who were overwhelmed six years ago by the arrival of David Beckham. This will be tame by comparison.“We’re no stranger to scrutiny,” said the Galaxy’s president, Chris Klein, a teammate of Beckham’s when he arrived.After Saturday’s news conference, Rogers stood on the Home Depot Center field with a white Galaxy jersey on his back and a blue team scarf draped over his left shoulder. He did not look out of place.He smiled. He spoke with ease.It was clear that he had given thought to a variety of issues that other soccer players had not — like the conversation he would like to have with Sheik Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan, a member of the royal family of Abu Dhabi and the new owner of the New York City franchise. Sheik Mansour’s country, the United Arab Emirates, has been discriminatory toward gay people.All the trepidation, the angst, the fear and the seeming impossibility of being an openly gay male athlete in a professional sports league had vanished.“Oh, my gosh, so much easier,” Rogers said, balancing the reality with the expectations that had churned inside him. “That’s the No. 1 lesson of all this. I don’t know what I was so worried about.”