http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/04/movies/04other.html
‘The Other Woman’ - Review - The New York Times
Movies,Portman  Natalie,Roos  Don,Kudrow  Lisa,Other Woman  The (Movie)
Feb. 3, 2011
5342
“The Other Woman” is a not-bad movie (written and directed by Don Roos) based on a pretty good book (“Love and Other Impossible Pursuits” by Ayelet Waldman).A signal virtue of both the film and the novel is the refusal to make the main character, a young New Yorker named Emilia, immediately or easily likable. Even though she is marked, from the beginning, by serious grief — reeling from the recent death of her infant daughter — Emilia does not seem like a candidate for unconditional sympathy.It is not just that she is, in her own defensive words, “a second wife,” who took up with her husband, a partner at the law firm where she was a junior associate, while he was still married to her predecessor. (The affair, like the pregnancy and the baby’s death, are looped into the story by means of flashbacks). Emilia’s manner is sulky, self-absorbed and generally off-putting, even though she inhabits the usually sweet and appealing person of Natalie Portman.“There’s no such thing as a home wrecker,” Emilia blithely tells a new acquaintance (who begs to differ), and she seems to float through her life in a cloud of entitlement and self-pity, sure that she is being judged and too eager to prove the unfairness of the judgments. She addresses her 8-year-old stepson, William (Charlie Tahan), with the reflexive sarcasm that insecure people think is a sign of being “good with kids,” and she seems more eager to let herself off the hook than to apologize when something she says or does causes pain.Later it will turn out that this habit of self-exculpation masks a deeper tendency toward self-blame, but in any case Emilia is an interestingly complicated person. On screen she is less abrasive and less brassily sexual than in print, but unlike a lot of movie characters, whether they live in comedy or melodrama, she is not simple or predictable or conventional. Unfortunately she is virtually the only person in the movie of whom this is true.Her husband, Jack (Scott Cohen), is handsome and seems like a nice enough guy, in part because his role in the destruction of his first marriage is not examined very thoroughly. And in any case his first wife, Carolyn, a super-successful obstetrician played by Lisa Kudrow, is a cold, competitive, imperious monster, obsessed with status and control. Carolyn is presented in such an extreme way that by the time she shows a glimmer of human feeling, you no longer believe such a thing is possible. Ms. Kudrow, ordinarily so deft at puncturing her characters’ vanity with her own wit, does not lift this one out of the realm of spiteful caricature.And Mr. Roos, while clearly invested in the story and attuned to the tough-tender, self-consciously Manhattanite sensibility of Ms. Waldman’s book, struggles to find the right pace and tone for Emilia’s adventures in self-discovery. As a director he is known for sharp, surprising comedies of modern sexual manners, like “The Opposite of Sex” and “Happy Endings” (both featuring Ms. Kudrow), and his work as a screenwriter ranges across genres and styles, from indie-ish thrillers like  “Diabolique” to the sentimental bubble bath of “Marley and Me” (for which he shared writing credit with Scott Frank). And yet in spite of its air of seriousness and sophistication, “The Other Woman” feels oddly shapeless and pokey, proceeding through a series of emotionally emphatic scenes without establishing the context of feelings and relationships that would give them meaning and impact.Emilia moves from one tearful, pouty, defiant confrontation to the next. Each one provides a piece of narrative information, but not really a sense of the patterns and disruptions of actual life. She has a peanut gallery of two friends, one of them a young wife like her (Lauren Ambrose), the other a gay man (Anthony Rapp), and also a mom (Debra Monk) and dad (Michael Cristofer) whose difficult relationship casts its shadow on her own marriage. Emilia is angry at her father, a judge with two ex-wives and a long history of philandering, but her resentment is more a topic of conversation and a pretext for emoting than anything else.“The Other Woman” is absorbing — at times moving — but also frustrating, relying as it does on slackly staged, overacted, two-person scenes punctuated by uninspired New York montages. Everything seems to take much too long and also to happen much too quickly, as the novel’s leisurely chronology is telescoped into a flurry of life-altering events that seem to happen in the course of a few months. There is no sense of time passing, no chance for the story to breathe.The liveliest moments in the movie are devoted to Emilia and William, whose developing, ambivalent connection to each other is the only relationship in the movie that seems genuinely alive to the possibility of change or surprise. Mr. Tahan,  who has the sharp, quizzical features of a very young Crispin Glover, does not do the usual cute, precocious movie-kid thing, but rather a skeptical, mercurial real-kid thing. Ms. Portman gracefully conveys the awkwardness that an adult who is at once rival, usurper and substitute parent would bring to encounters with such a child. It makes sense that Emilia and William should be the heart of the film, but it is too bad they are the only thing in it that works.“The Other Woman” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Sex — though more discussion of facts than depiction of acts. THE OTHER WOMANOpens on Friday  nationwide. Written and directed by Don Roos, based on the book “Love and Other Impossible Pursuits” by Ayelet Waldman; director of photography, Steve Yedlin; edited by David Codron; music by  John Swihart; production design by Michael Shaw; costumes by Peggy  Schnitzer; produced by Marc Platt and Carol Cuddy; released by IFC  Films. Running time: 1 hour 42 minutes.WITH: Natalie Portman (Emilia), Scott Cohen (Jack), Lisa Kudrow (Carolyn), Charlie Tahan (William), Lauren Ambrose (Mindy), Anthony Rapp (Simon), Elizabeth Marvel (Pia), Michael Cristofer (Sheldon) and Debra Monk (Laura).