https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/23/travel/36-hours-in-vancouver-british-columbia.html
36 Hours in Vancouver, British Columbia - The New York Times
36 Hours,Travel and Vacations,Vancouver (British Columbia)
June 20, 2013
3469
Between the jaw-dropping confluence of mountains and sea, some of the best ethnic food in North America and public transit bliss courtesy of the Canada Line and SkyTrain, Vancouver is much more than an erstwhile Olympic site, or a place to stop over on your way to some other destination. Where else can you find an international brand of exoticism that rivals Hong Kong, Nordic-style order and a limitless array of shops, restaurants and top-notch accommodations? An abundance of outdoor options — whether it is hiking or biking in Stanley Park, kayaking in False Creek or skiing on nearby Grouse Mountain — only adds to the appeal. The city doesn’t take its natural gifts for granted; in recent years it has become so eco-friendly that some stores don’t even offer plastic bags. With its multitude of immigrant communities and northwest Canadian culture of extreme friendliness, Vancouver feels just different enough to be intriguingly foreign but familiar enough to be easily conquered in a weekend.FRIDAY4:30 p.m.1. Two Views Vancouver is a movie-star-gorgeous city that should be admired from as many vantage points as possible. Start with a glass elevator ride 553 feet up to the Vancouver Lookout at the Harbor Center (555 West Hastings Street; vancouverlookout.com; 15.75 Canadian dollars, about the same in U.S. dollars). The circular viewing platform offers 360-degree panoramic views of the downtown skyline, Mount Seymour, Grouse Mountain, Lions Gate Bridge and seaplanes taking off from the harborfront. Then make like a local commuter and head for the SeaBus at Waterfront Station (601 West Cordova Street; bus information at 604-953-3333) less than a five-minute walk away. Board the ferry (4 dollars each way) to North Vancouver, a 15-minute boat ride that has to be one of the most stunning commutes in the world. Find seats at the front of the boat for the best views of North Vancouver and the snowcapped peaks of Olympic fame. Once you dock in North Vancouver, walk right next door to Lonsdale Quay Market (123 Carrie Cates; lonsdalequay.com) where you can find everything from curry to souvlaki in the international food section. Then head up to the Cheshire Cheese pub, sit out on the deck and order a pitcher of sangria and nachos. Enjoy the view — now of downtown, the industrial port and Burrard Inlet. 8 p.m.2. Japanese Tapas Like many cities, Vancouver has seen an explosion of farm-to-table restaurants pop up, but go for a Vancouver classic instead: Guu, the first of a style of traditional izakaya (offering small-plate Japanese cooking). This is no sushi joint, but the tuna tataki, kimchi fried rice, kabocha croquette and yaki udon will make you forget about California rolls. Sit at the bar and watch meticulous chefs flip, slice and arrange plates with the precision of a martial arts performance. Food arrives fast and at a quarter of the price of a trendy restaurant. Dinner for two, including drinks, is about 50 dollars. Guu has five locations in Vancouver, but Guu Original on Thurlow Street (838 Thurlow Street; guu-izakaya.com) has the reputation of being the most authentic. Enjoy the spirited Japanese welcome and goodbye from the servers and chefs as each guest arrives and departs.10:30 p.m.3. Nightcap Time to glam it up at the Yew Seafood and Bar in the Four Seasons Hotel (791 West Georgia Street; yewrestaurant.com), a dramatic space with 26-foot ceilings and a plush lounge area. The ambience is relaxed with a dash of ritzy, but it’s really about the cocktails. The head mixologist, Justin Taylor, has created over two dozen drinks. Try the Moscow Mule (vodka, lime and ginger beer), served in an elegant bronze cup, or the 20th Century (gin, crème de cacao and lemon). Fair warning: these cocktails go down easy; from 11 to 16 dollars.SATURDAY 10 a.m.4. Pastries and Greenery Start the morning at Thierry (1059 Alberni Street; thierrychocolates.com), on Alberni Street, a traditional French bakery where you can grab an almond croissant and a cappuccino. Pocket some of the macarons in flavors like chocolate pistachio, maple pecan and coffee for later. Then hop on the Canada Line southbound to the VanDusen Botanical Garden (5251 Oak Street; vancouver.ca/vandusen). Regardless of the blossoms du jour, it’s all sublime, so meander your way through this 55-acre eco-cocoon of 255,000 individual plants from around the world. Don’t miss the hedge maze. See if you can get to the monkey puzzle tree in the middle.1 p.m.5. Dim Sum For one of the most genuine Asian cultural and culinary experiences in North America, go to the Aberdeen Center for dim sum at Fisherman’s Terrace (3580-4151 Hazelbridge Way, Richmond; 604-303-9739). This sprawling Asian shopping center has an entire store dedicated to Hello Kitty merchandise, a Korean barbecue and a pan-Asian supermarket, among other treasures. Fisherman’s Terrace, as evinced by the crowds mingling outside, is a favorite institution among the thousands of Chinese residents of Richmond, a suburb 20 minutes south of Vancouver. Make a reservation or bring your own reading material if you don’t (all the newspapers are in Chinese). Then sift through the 76 options on the dim sum menu. A cheat sheet: deep-fried chicken knee with spicy salt, mini sticky rice in bamboo leaves, steamed pork dumplings, triple mushrooms in rice noodle wrap, and chilled coconut cake with diced taro. Go with an adventurous eater to try some of the dishes you’d be unlikely to find at most Westernized Chinese restaurants, like steamed duck tongue. Items range from 3.65 to 8.80 dollars.3 p.m.6. Shopping in Yaletown Gastown may be one of Vancouver’s most visited neighborhoods, but Yaletown, a former industrial area in downtown that is now dotted with restaurants and high-price lofts, should not be overlooked as a shopping destination. This upscale neighborhood has a neat collection of boutiques. Chintz & Company (950 Homer Street; chintz.com/t-vancouver.aspx), which has locations only in Canada, is a great place to buy jewelry, pillows and luscious TokyoMilk hand cream. Revolucion (1062 Mainland Street; revolucionstyle.com) is a men’s store with an entire wall of high-end shaving products and grooming kits (there is also a wine caddy in the shape of a woman’s foot). A few doors down is Global Atomic Designs (1144 Mainland Street; globalatomic.com), which sells an array of international designer clothes.4:30 p.m.7. First NationsBefore Vancouver became a mecca for immigrants, there were the First Nations — Canadian aboriginals, whose culture and art is very much a presence in the city. To get a sense of the craftsmanship and art that is still being produced, head to Inuit Gallery in Gastown (206 Cambie Street, inuit.com). “The Inuit art market is big in the Northwest, from Portland to Southern Alaska,” said Phil McComiskey, who works at the gallery. Check out the paintings and prints of Kenojuak Ashevak, an Inuit artist from Canada’s Arctic regions; her work, which is known for its geometric shapes and nature imagery, has been used on Canadian stamps. To find some First Nations arts and crafts at more affordable prices, go across the street to Hill’s Native Art (165 Water Street, hillsnativeart.com), which carries a nice selection of jewelry, woodcarvings, sculpture and prints.8 p.m.8. 4-Layered Seafood Cake When in Vancouver, eat lots of seafood, the unrivaled local specialty. One of the most talked about, albeit not inexpensive, places to do this is Blue Water Cafe (1095 Hamilton Street; bluewatercafe.net) on Hamilton Street. Stick to the raw bar and entrees (this is not the place for sushi). Start off with an oyster platter and the BC tasting for two, which resembles a four-tiered seafood wedding cake of Dungeness crab salad, scallop ceviche, albacore tuna tartar and smoked sockeye salmon terrine. For cooked seafood, order the arctic char with trout caviar, beurre blanc and pearl couscous. Save room for the passion fruit semifreddo. Dinner for two, about 250 dollars.10:30 p.m.9. Night out in Chinatown Until recently, Chinatown was not known as a place to go have drinks on a Saturday night. Not anymore, thanks to the Keefer Bar (135 Keefer Street; thekeeferbar.com), a place where the young and hip show up to drink cocktails in this dark, sultry lounge that has odd Chinese sayings framed on the walls. The cocktails, which the menu calls “prescriptions” (homage to the apothecary theme), are worth waiting at the crowded bar to order, particularly the intriguingly spicy Chinatown Sour (10 dollars) and the Dragon Fly (11 dollars.)SUNDAY9:30 a.m.10. Teahouse BrunchSpend the morning in Stanley Park, the sprawling urban oasis of greenery and water that is the West Coast’s rival to Central Park. Begin at the Teahouse in Stanley Park, a well-known brunch spot, both for its location and Canadian Northwest twists on some classic breakfast items. Ask for a table by the window to look out over English Bay and West Vancouver. Don’t miss the smoked salmon Benedict, which comes with local sockeye salmon. (7501 Stanley Park Drive; vancouverdine.com/teahouse. Brunch, about 45 dollars, is served weekends.)11 a.m.11. Walk and Ride Walk off your meal with a stroll along the Lost Lagoon path on the park’s south side. Admire the stately evergreens and wildlife, which includes spotted geese, ducks, swans, turtles and raccoons all within a golf-swing of downtown skyscrapers. If it’s sunny, soak up some rays at Second Beach at the southwest corner of the park. At Spokes Bicycle Rental (1798 West Georgia Street; spokesbicyclerentals.com), you can rent bikes, starting at around 8 dollars per hour. Take the six-mile loop around the sea wall. Be careful as you contend with rollerbladers on this one-way bike path, but mostly just soak up the fresh sea air and marvel at all the natural wonders of Vancouver.WHERE TO STAYThe Hotel Le Soleil (567 Hornby Street) in the financial district is a 119-room boutique hotel with a South Asian feel. Every room is a suite with its own sitting area. The hotel also has an excellent contemporary Indian restaurant, Copper Chimney. Rooms range from 139 to 249 Canadian dollars.For those looking for luxury, stay at the Four Seasons (791 West Georgia Street). In addition to the top-notch service and airy rooms, the hotel is attached to the Pacific Center, a shopping mall that is a stop on the Canada Line and SkyTrain. Rooms start at 265 Canadian dollars.