http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/12/nyregion/12attorney.html
Schumer Asks Obama to Name a Top Aide as U.S. Attorney in New York - The New York Times
United States Attorneys,Manhattan (NYC),Schumer  Charles E,Bharara  Preet
Feb. 11, 2009
8074
Senator Charles E. Schumer has recommended that the White House select his chief counsel, Preet Bharara, as the next United States attorney in Manhattan, the senator’s office said on Wednesday.Although Mr. Schumer’s backing does not guarantee that Mr. Bharara will get the post, it makes him the clear front-runner.Presidents traditionally consult with their party’s senior political leaders in a state, in this case Mr. Schumer, before filling a United States attorney post in that state.The job is considered perhaps the most prestigious federal prosecutor’s post outside Washington, with a traditional focus on securities fraud and white-collar crime, public corruption and terrorism.The post has been held by some of the city’s most prominent figures, including Robert M. Morgenthau and Rudolph W. Giuliani.Mr. Bharara, 40, was a federal prosecutor in New York from 2000 to 2005, handling organized crime and narcotics cases, among others. But he emerged more prominently in Washington after he became Mr. Schumer’s top aide on the Senate Judiciary Committee in 2005.There, he played a key role in investigating the scandal over the dismissals of United States attorneys in 2006, including some who were removed for political reasons.The committee’s investigation ultimately led to the resignation of Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales in 2007.Mr. Schumer said in a statement on Wednesday: “Preet Bharara is just the right person for this job. He has the intelligence, experience and integrity to follow in the fine tradition of outstanding United States attorneys from the Southern District of New York.”If nominated by President Obama, Mr. Bharara must be confirmed by the Senate.The United States attorney for the Southern District of New York handles federal cases in Manhattan, the Bronx and six counties north of the city.Mr. Bharara was born in India, came to the United States in 1970 as an infant with his parents and became a naturalized citizen. He grew up in Monmouth County, in New Jersey, and graduated from Harvard in 1990 and Columbia Law School in 1993.He then was in private practice, handling white-collar and other defense work, before becoming an assistant United States attorney in 2000 under Mary Jo White.Mr. Bharara was first mentioned last fall by people in the legal community as a likely candidate for the post.  Two others mentioned were Mark F. Pomerantz, a former prosecutor who ran the office’s criminal division under Ms. White and is now a partner at the Manhattan law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, and Lev L. Dassin, who has filled the post temporarily since Michael J. Garcia resigned in December. Mr. Dassin had been Mr. Garcia’s deputy.The next United States attorney will confront a full docket, particularly in the area of white-collar crime, where the office’s most prominent case involves Bernard L. Madoff.Other prior United States attorneys in the Southern District include Robert B. Fiske Jr., Henry L. Stimson and Elihu Root, and more recently, James B. Comey, who later became deputy attorney general under George W. Bush.