https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/23/theater/charlie-and-the-chocolate-factory-review-broadway.html
Review: Some Sugar but Not Enough Spice in This ‘Chocolate Factory’ - The New York Times
Theater,Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (Play),O'Brien  Jack (1939- ),Borle  Christian,Dahl  Roald,Greig  David,Shaiman  Marc,Wittman  Scott
April 23, 2017
8802
Don’t expect a sugar rush from “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” the new musical that opened at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater on Sunday. This latest adaptation of Roald Dahl’s winningly sinister children’s story from 1964 is — thank heaven — no sweeter than the two film adaptations it inspired, starring Gene Wilder (1971) and Johnny Depp (2005).Then again, this big but tentative show — which features a book by David Greig and songs by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman — doesn’t burst with flavor of any kind, at least not during its exposition-crammed first act. Only in its second half does the show acquire a distinct taste, and it definitely isn’t confectionary.That no one goes to Dahl for the blandly picturesque was made clear a few years ago by the success of the darkness-shrouded musical adaptation of his “Matilda.” The appeal of this writer, for both children and grown-ups, has always been his nasty streak.After more than an hour of chipper throat clearing, that’s the streak that finally emerges, like a stinging ripple of rum in vanilla fudge, in this retooled adaptation out of London, directed by Jack O’Brien. It is also the moment when the show’s star, Christian Borle, at last comes into his own as the violently eccentric Willy Wonka, who owns and runs the enchanted factory of the musical’s title.The Broadway “Charlie” is an improvement on its London incarnation, which I saw four years ago. That version was staged by Sam Mendes, then basking in commercial glory as a director of James Bond films. As frantic and gadget-driven as any 007 movie, it was a mega-musical that left you feeling glazed and overstuffed.Mr. O’Brien’s production dials down the spectacle. It also gives its Willy more stage time. (Douglas Hodge originated the part in London, but was absent for much of the first act.)Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman (Tony winners for “Hairspray”) have created an assortment of new satirical and sentimental songs, which are still largely forgettable but now have a more topically American frame of reference. (Squint and you’ll discern jabs at the current residents of the White House.) And the show now begins with Leslie Bricusse and Anthony Newley’s best-known number from the 1971 movie “Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory.”That’s “The Candy Man,” which became a swinging pop hit for Sammy Davis Jr. Swinging is not the adjective for Mr. Borle’s interpretation, which exudes a quiet, baffled detachment, as if his thoughts were elsewhere.A similar lack of conviction pervades much of what follows, though not for want of enthusiasm by the talented child actor I saw in the title role, Ryan Foust, playing the penurious but resourceful Charlie Bucket. (Mr. Foust alternates in the part with Jake Ryan Flynn and Ryan Sell.)Young Charlie lives hand-to-mouth with his mother (Emily Padgett) and his four grandparents (Kristy Cates, Madeleine Doherty, Paul Slade Smith and John Rubinstein), in a trash heap of a house that suggests Samuel Beckett being whimsical. (The appropriately fanciful sets and costumes are by Mark Thompson.)The chocolate-obsessed Charlie’s idol is the elusive Willy Wonka, whose candy has fallen out of fashion but whose factory still operates nearby. Voilà! Charlie receives the chance to visit Wonka’s world, with his twinkly old Grandpa Joe (Mr. Rubinstein), to contend for a mysterious prize. His competition: a deadly sins quartet of repellent young creatures, here embodied by adult performers. They include Augustus Gloop (F. Michael Haynie), a porcine Bavarian lad with a love of sausages; and Veruca Salt (Emma Pfaeffle), a Russian material girl of imperial whims.The other contestants are Violet Beauregarde (Trista Dollison), a champion bubble-gum chewer who behaves like a teen star from the Disney Channel; and Mike Teavee (Michael Wartella), a bratty genius for whom life exists entirely on the screens of entertainment devices. (Among their very indulgent parents, Jackie Hoffman is a hoot as Mrs. Teavee, whom she portrays as a pill-popping June Cleaver.)And so we see the wistful but determined Charlie — who, like Wonka, embodies the virtues of pure imagination — showing his inventive mettle with his beloved Grandpa and with a local sweet shop owner, who is Willy in disguise. By contrast, each of his gold-ticket-holding competitors misbehaves in a shrill solo that speaks to how a child can go bad in a consumerist, celebrity-ruled, technology-dominated culture.In the second act, these spoiled young things get their just deserts, through a variety of fantastically fiendish means. The idea of macabre punishment seems to have acted as a stimulant on the creative faculties of everyone involved, as the show turns increasingly surreal.For one thing, we get to meet Wonka’s assembly line workers, the tiny Oompa Loompas, a crayon-color breed who have been brought to strange and delightful life via Basil Twist’s puppetry and Joshua Bergasse’s choreography. (Mr. Bergasse also does well by Veruca’s dance of self-destruction, a ballet with giant squirrels.)Most gratifying, though, is the transformation of Mr. Borle. Up to that point, he’s been hanging around like a stray uncle at a kiddie party who isn’t even sure he’s been invited.But as the Nero-like emperor of his own fantastical realm, this Willy switches into dissing diva mode, with a skip in his step and a fork in his tongue. (In this sense, Mr. Borle is closer to Mr. Wilder than to Mr. Depp, whose Willy was an affectless hybrid of Michael Jackson and Anna Wintour.) Theatergoers who admired Mr. Borle’s baroque comic turns in “Peter and the Starcatcher” and “Something Rotten!” will feel they have their gloriously demented Christian back.Be warned, though. By the show’s end, wild Willy will have turned back into gentle Willy, swapping madcap high jinks for sentimental uplift. For listless theatergoers who require a real sugar fix after the show, there are M&M and Hershey theme-park-style candy stores, conveniently just two blocks north.