https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/us/politics/steve-scalise-congress-shot-annual-baseball-game-history-alexandria-virginia.html
Shooting Shines Light on an Annual Baseball Game and a Bipartisan Pastime - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Baseball,Congressional Baseball Team Shooting (June  2017),Scalise  Steve
June 14, 2017
8559
WASHINGTON — It was an attack on politicians in the least political of venues: a baseball field.The shooting Wednesday that shattered the humid peace of an early-morning practice and wounded several people, including a Republican leader in the House of Representatives, shined a national spotlight on a local tradition more than a century old, the Congressional Baseball Game.Founded in 1909, the annual game between Republican and Democratic members of Congress has offered lawmakers a quintessentially American outlet for their partisan frustrations.But in recent years, as political tensions have taken on the tone of personal vendettas, it has become one of the last bastions of bipartisanship. And on Wednesday, it became a rallying cry for rattled lawmakers, some still in dusty jerseys as they reluctantly displayed elbows skinned in the scramble to escape a shower of bullets.“We’re 50-year-old men playing a game that we grew up on,” said Representative Joseph Crowley of New York, who plays on the Democrats’ team. “It’s the American pastime. It’s so connected to who we are as a country.”In late April, 60 members of Congress reported for their version of spring training: a stretch of 6:30 a.m. practices, scheduled early to avoid most conflicts with votes, hearings and fund-raisers. Consisting of 26 Democrats and 34 Republicans, all but two of them men, the teams have been focused on breaking a series tie, with each side boasting 39 wins (and one tie).They practiced on the same Little League fields a few mornings each week, becoming a familiar, though perhaps inconspicuous, sight in those neighborhoods. Only congressional leaders are assigned security details; were it not for the fact that the Republican team includes Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the House majority whip who was shot in the attack, there would have been no security present at the ball field on Wednesday at all.Baseball and softball provide common ground in political Washington. Glance off the Capitol balcony of the House speaker’s office on a warm evening, and one can hardly see the grass for the ballplayers dotting the National Mall. At Nationals Park, where the Congressional Baseball Game will be played Thursday evening, spectators wear their Washington Nationals jerseys with dogged pride for a team that returned to the capital just a dozen years ago.It also reflects an almost childlike embrace of something in short supply on Capitol Hill: fun. After all, on every Little League team, there are at least some kids who dream of playing professional baseball. A few of them, often with some measure of regret, might be elected to Congress instead.“I played high school football and have, at least between my ears, considered myself an athlete all these years,” said Representative Mike Conaway of Texas, who plays first base on the Republican team. “This is an opportunity to disprove that.”Started by a former professional baseball player, the congressional game has weathered more than 100 years of challenges. It was put on hold for the Great Depression; World War II; and the concerns of Speaker Sam Rayburn of Texas in the late 1950s that it had become too “physical.” Repurposed as a fund-raiser to benefit a handful of Washington charities, the Congressional Baseball Game has become a chance to trash-talk across the aisle for a good cause.Some moments have been more fraught than others. Last year, members donned their jerseys — not a single uniform but a rainbow of hometown colors from professional, college and local teams — mere hours after Democrats concluded a 25-hour sit-in on the House floor, demanding Republicans hold a vote on gun control legislation. Democrats lost the game, 8-to-7.The game inspired the Congressional Women’s Softball Game, a sister contest that began in 2009 and more recently added a twist: Democrats and Republicans play on the same team against another opponent, the women of the congressional press corps. (Four journalists at The New York Times, including this reporter, participate in the softball game.)The goal was to unite women in raising money to fight breast cancer, said Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the Florida Democrat and former head of the Democratic National Committee who co-founded the charity softball game after battling the disease herself. But the 7 a.m. practices also had a nice side effect.“I have sponsored and passed laws with colleagues who I likely wouldn’t have spoken to, let alone gotten to know, without this team,” she said.That camaraderie was on display after the shooting as the managers of each baseball team — Representatives Joe Barton, Republican of Texas, and Mike Doyle, Democrat of Pennsylvania — announced the game would be played on Thursday as scheduled.Mr. Barton, whose 10-year-old son was at practice during the shooting and was unharmed, noted the emotional toll of the current political environment.“Members are not looked at as people anymore,” he said, adding, “I can assure, every member of Congress is a person. He has family.”Standing outside the House chamber, recounting the horror of coming under fire just hours before, Representative Chuck Fleischmann of Tennessee learned the game was still on. He was still dressed in a practice jersey, the word “Republican” in a flourish across his chest.“Wow,” he said, pausing for a moment. “I’m going to play.”