https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/trump-isis-isil-name.html
Trump’s Plan to Fight ISIS Includes Calling It by That Name - The New York Times
Executive Orders and Memorandums,Terrorism,United States Politics and Government,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Trump  Donald J,Obama  Barack,Names  Organizational
Jan. 29, 2017
5181
WASHINGTON — Donald J. Trump said during the campaign that he had a secret plan for the fight against the Islamic State. Eight days into his presidency, he seems to have revealed a small part of it.ISIL is out. ISIS is in.An executive memorandum that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday afternoon in the Oval Office repeatedly referred to the Islamic State as ISIS — not ISIL, as President Barack Obama and the rest of the federal government had called the terrorist group since 2014.“This is the plan to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, in other words, ISIS,” Mr. Trump said as he signed the memorandum, which called on the Pentagon to devise a “comprehensive plan” within 30 days.The White House also used the name ISIS in summaries of the calls Mr. Trump had on Saturday with the Russian and French presidents.As the terrorist group rose to prominence during Mr. Obama’s second term, American intelligence agencies began referring to it as ISIL — for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, a translation from Arabic — and Mr. Obama began using the term.Like Mr. Obama, most senior officials pronounced it Eye-sul. Some just said the letters. And occasionally, a government official would refer to it as Iss-ull.The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria, including Lebanon, Jordan and Israel. Although the news media has widely used the term ISIS — with its sinister sibilance — the federal government stayed with ISIL.Conspiracy theories have been floated in the conservative media about why Mr. Obama used the term. Rush Limbaugh said in 2015 that Mr. Obama had employed the acronym as a way of delegitimizing Israel.“Oh, and, by the way, just to reiterate something: ISIS versus ISIL,” he said. “The Levant includes Israel, includes much of the eastern Mediterranean shoreline. By using the term ISIL, it is meant to delegitimize Israel. It is meant to include Israel in the Levant, which would make it Palestine. I’m telling you, there’s a reason Obama does this, and his audience is not us.”A day before Mr. Limbaugh’s comments, Mr. Trump complained about Mr. Obama’s use of ISIL as he attacked Mr. Obama’s efforts to defeat the group. As Mr. Trump offered a running commentary on Twitter of Mr. Obama’s address after the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., Mr. Trump harped on Mr. Obama’s use of the term.As recently as last May, Mr. Trump again brought up the issue, saying in an interview with Bloomberg Politics: “The president of the United States always says ‘ISIL.’ Everyone else says ‘ISIS.’ And I actually think he does it to bother people.”Mr. Trump’s Pentagon and State Department apparently have not gotten the memo that there is a new acronym in town.In a statement released on Friday by the State Department that included a travel warning about Libya, the department said that “ISIL claimed responsibility for two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices in Tripoli in September 2016.”And in a statement released on Thursday by the Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, that summarized a call between Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the French defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, Captain Davis said that “the secretary discussed the importance of the NATO alliance and counter-ISIL operations, and thanked Minister Le Drian for his country’s continued commitment to both.”