http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/08/dining/sipping-on-a-sunset-italy-in-mind.html
Sipping on a Sunset, Italy in Mind - The New York Times
Alcoholic Beverages,Cocktails
Aug. 7, 2012
6140
JUST as the culinary cognoscenti press us into embracing certain food trends (“You will eat pork belly! Love cupcakes now! Hate cupcakes now!”) so, too, do they dictate our drinks.First, several years ago, there was St.-Germain, the delicate elderflower liqueur. Early on, it entered a long-term relationship with prosecco: if you wanted to date the sparkling Italian refreshment, you were stuck with its French chaperon. Next up was Domaine de Canton, and every lounge drink began to taste vaguely of gingersnaps.Coming around the corner is Cynar; get ready to explain to your dinner guests why you are making them a martini that tastes of artichoke.But for the time being, we live in the world of Aperol, a slightly bitter, go-down-easy Italian aperitif that has found its way into bartenders’ flutes and highball glasses from Los Angeles to London.The popularity of the century-old mixer stems from the marketing juggernaut that pumps up many spirits these days, as well as Aperol’s versatility. Then there is its uncommon hue: on ice, a vermilion sunset over the ocean.“People look at someone at the bar drinking one and they say, ‘Wow, what is that?’ ” said Kara Lavoie, the California and Nevada spirits-sales manager for Palm Bay International, which imports Aperol into the United States.The company has done its best to promote the brand, holding parties at food festivals, pressing the drink into the hands of influential bartenders and papering city bus stops with ads. Sales of Aperol in this country have increased 1,250 percent over the last five years, according to the importer.“In the last 30 days I have sold 184 bottles,” said Steven Bowles, the assistant spirits buyer at Astor Wines and Spirits, in New York.Paul’s Wines and Spirits, in Washington, D.C., has found it hard to keep the drink in stock this summer. “It has grown in popularity for some reason in the last several months,” said Rick Bellman, a co-owner. “People started asking for it.”Aperol, which got its start in 1919 in Padua, Italy, tastes of orange rind and spice, with a bit of rhubarb in there somewhere. It has half the alcohol content of its closest sibling, Campari, and is a bit less bitter, too — even slightly sweet — with tiny hints of the 30 different herbs and spices that it advertises. (Both are produced by Gruppo Campari, a conglomerate that also makes Cynar and several other spirits.)Distribution became more widespread in the United States about five years ago, when Palm Bay began an aggressive push by promoting the Spritz (three parts prosecco, two parts Aperol and a splash of soda water topped with an orange slice), which had already been popularized in Italy.“Any Italian restaurant that has done their homework knows that the Spritz is what they are drinking over there,” said Jim Meehan, a managing partner of the East Village speakeasy PDT.Bartenders have now moved well beyond it. At the Standard New York, they often make Negronis now with Aperol rather than Campari. At Peels downtown, the mixologist Yana Volfson makes a cocktail with the aperitif, grapefruit juice and St.-Germain, drawing on Aperol’s vibrant mandarin flavor, which pairs well with other citrus notes.In Los Angeles, at Terroni, they’re mixing up the Il Sorpasso, which involves Aperol, Maker’s Mark bourbon, honey and lemon juice syrup. (I’ve been making a cheap home version, tossing Aperol with San Pellegrino Limonata soda and a dash of honey. If my supervisor yelled at me that day, I add gin.)“I like how it is this very approachable ingredient,” Ms. Volfson said. “It can play the part of bitterness, and it can play the role of the sweetener. If you are working with a Negroni with a more viscous vermouth, then Aperol works as a softener. In a martini it can act as the bitterness.”While Aperol seems unlikely to win a spot in the pastry chef’s larder next to Grand Marnier, it is getting a workout in some kitchens. Bottega, in Birmingham, Ala., serves a sorbet with grapefruit and Aperol; Balena, in Chicago, has an Aperol granita that a home cook can easily replicate.The ease of Aperol is part of its appeal, a mild antidote to the mixology movement that brought us complicated cocktails involving obscure spirits, herb-infused sugars and bacon. “Things are cooling down with fundamentalism in cocktails right now,” Mr. Meehan said. “This is a light, refreshing drink that especially in the summer is kind of what the doctor ordered.”For the home bartender, Aperol is fairly easy to use, perfect for mixing with a splash of gin and vodka or something sparkling, just for color and tang. It is so low in alcohol (11 percent) that measuring and mulling are not really necessary. Just pour it over ice, maybe squeeze some fresh orange over it all, give the drink a stir with a takeout chopstick and stare out the window as you sip, thinking vague thoughts about whether or not you should change your air-conditioner filter.“Aperol is a little easier to get into” than some more challenging spirits like Maraschino Luxardo, the sour-cherry liquor, said Mr. Bowles, of Astor Wines. “It’s more flexible. People are definitely playing around with it.”Aperol’s moment may pass, and the sipping world move on. But for now, the world tastes a bit more like orange peel. “Everyone is always looking for something new to work,” said Jack Shute, who represents Palm Bay International in New York.Cynar, the artichoke aperitif, might not quite catch up. “In my opinion it is difficult to explain to the consumer what an artichoke brings to the spirit,” he said. “Orange is easy.”