https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/arts/design/if-these-walls-could-talk-they-do.html
If These Walls Could Talk? They Do - The New York Times
Art,Nottage  Lynn,Blacks,Theater,Writing and Writers,Pulitzer Prizes,Collectors and Collections,Boerum Hill (Brooklyn  NY),Sweat (Play),Tony Awards (Theater Awards)
June 22, 2017
9334
Staring at the wall might seem like the worst thing that could happen to a writer. But for the playwright Lynn Nottage, the walls of the Brooklyn house where she lives with her husband, Tony Gerber, their two children and her father are her muse.They are also a who’s who of 20th-century African-American art, with a floor-to-ceiling display that includes Norman Lewis and Romare Bearden. The collection continues into the 21st century with Helen Evans Ramsaran and others.Her walls are her windows on the world.“You collect it because it holds some form of mystery, and you bring it home, and you begin a conversation with it,” she said of each object. “‘Why am I so drawn to you? What is it that you’re trying to tell me?’”This year, Ms. Nottage won the Pulitzer Prize for drama (her second) and was nominated for a Tony Award for best play for “Sweat,” which closes on Sunday. She sits in a leather armchair in a corner to write, looking across the tall parlor of her Boerum Hill brownstone.The walls before her hang heavily with inspiration. Ms. Nottage pointed to an Ernest Crichlow painting of a young girl resting shyly at a window. “I can imagine her story,” she said. “Is she peering out at the world? Is she hiding? Each time I sit here, I come up with a different story.”Here are edited excerpts from a conversation last week.The piece on the steps behind your chair is “A Man Was Lynched Yesterday,” a redrafting of the flag the N.A.A.C.P. flew over Fifth Avenue in the 1920s and ’30s when a lynching took place. What about it spoke to you? That one is Terry Adkins, which I really responded to, given what’s happening in America to African-American men — it resonates, and when I sit there, I think, “Yeah, it is happening, and still happening, and we have to remind ourselves.”You grew up in this house? I moved back in when my mother got very ill. She had Lou Gehrig’s disease. I was pregnant, and so, literally, I had my baby, my mother died, and we stayed. [Her father, Wally, lives on the ground floor.] I remember standing on these steps — my brother and I used to put on plays when we were little, for guests.Your parents were collectors of, and friends of, artists who form the historical core of midcentury African-American art. Your father sat on the board of Cinque Gallery in Harlem; your mother, Ruby, bought art in Africa in the ’60s. Was that unusual?I think it was very unusual for African-Americans at the time to be collecting art, but they were deeply invested in supporting the work of African-American artists. [Ms. Nottage, who sits on the board of BRIC, a nonprofit that initiates arts programs in Brooklyn, said in an email, “They were not artists, but I continue their legacy through the work that I do and my support of other artists, as a collector and collaborator.”]As a writer, why plays? It’s a communal, collective art form. Theater’s the most effective tool in building empathy.You might be describing the potential of a collection: It can foster a conversation among sometimes aggressively disparate points of view. Can its dialogues be a mirror of the “national conversation”?Just about every single piece that’s in this space is about an African-American artist in conversation with the culture. I think that if I lived a hundred years ago in a village in Africa, I would be the griot who’s collecting all the tales of the village — that I have this real need, at least as an African-American woman, to go on record, to collect our stories, to ensure our stories are heard.