http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/04/us/among-fort-hood-victims-a-sergeant-is-killed-and-a-major-is-wounded.html
Among Fort Hood Victims, a Sergeant Is Killed, and a Major Is Wounded - The New York Times
Fort Hood Shooting (2014),Fort Hood (Tex),Murders and Attempted Murders,United States Army,United States Defense and Military Forces,Lopez  Ivan Antonio,Miller  Patrick,Owens  Timothy Wayne
April 3, 2014
7878
The names of the victims of the shooting in Fort Hood began to come out on Thursday, released by relatives and by officials offering their condolences.In Effingham, Ill., family members told The Associated Press that Army Sgt. Timothy Owens was one of the three soldiers killed Wednesday in a mass shooting by Specialist Ivan Antonio Lopez. Sixteen others were wounded in the shooting. The Army has not released a list of the victims, pending notification of relatives.The mother of Sergeant Owens, Mary Muntean, 77, of Effingham, told The Associated Press that she had learned of her son’s death in a telephone call with her daughter-in-law.Unable to reach her son, she called his wife, Billie Owens, who first said he was in the hospital. Before long, Sergeant Owens’s wife called back, and Mrs. Muntean had her worst fears confirmed. “She said, ‘Mom, I want to tell you how sorry I am. Tim’s gone,' ” Mrs. Muntean said, according to The A.P. “I broke down.”Sergeant Owens dropped out of high school in 1995. But his mother said he earned his high school equivalency after joining the Army in 2004.A friend and former roommate, Paul Eatherton, said Sergeant Owens, whose family moved back to Effingham from Missouri in the mid-1990s, worked at Pizza Hut and studied tae kwon do at a local gym. Mr. Eatherton, a martial arts instructor at the time, said Sergeant Owens got his black belt and started teaching at a gym in Effingham.“He was the best student I’d ever seen or known,” Mr. Eatherton said. “We’d go to tournaments, and he’d bring first places home every time.”He said Sergeant Owens, who was in his mid-30s, had recently signed up for another six years in the Army. “I think he was going to be a lifer,” he said. He said he had not talked to Sergeant Owens for several months, but when he heard news of the shooting, he texted him immediately. He got no reply. “That really worried me,” he said.The commander of Fort Hood, Lt. Gen. Mark A. Milley, said in an afternoon news conference, that nine of the 16 people wounded in the attack were taken to Scott & White Memorial Hospital in nearby Temple, Tex., for treatment. Three were upgraded to serious condition on Thursday. Hospital officials said doctors had operated on two patients, a man and a woman, who had been shot in the abdomen and neck. The third person had an abdominal wound. The other victims taken there were discharged.The others were treated at the hospital on the base.In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo identified one of the wounded as Maj. Patrick Miller, an Iraq War veteran from Allegany, N.Y. in western New York. Mr. Cuomo said that Major Miller joined the Army after graduating in 2003 from St. Bonaventure, where he was enrolled in the Reserve Officers Training Corps.Major Miller was deployed to Iraq for the first time in March 2004 for a year. He was then a second lieutenant and the commander of a platoon of medics that included Specialist Jude Uchendu. “He worked hard,” said Specialist Uchendu, who left the military in 2009. “He was always out there for his soldiers, and a good leader, too.”Major Miller earned master’s degrees in business and public administration from Syracuse University in 2009, according to his Facebook page. The chancellor of Syracuse, Kent Syverud, said that Major Miller had attended the university as “part of the defense comptrollership program, a unique graduate education program designed to meet the Army’s comptrollership needs.” Major Miller had been stationed in Fort Hood since 2004, and lived in Austin with his wife, Ashley, according to his Facebook page.“It’s not a surprise that he is a leader in the military, as he was a captain of the track team and known for stepping up when he was needed,” said Mike Wilber, who coached Major Miller at Allegany-Limestone Central School, where he played football and ran track.In New Orleans, Renee Powell Westbrook identified another of the wounded as her husband, Sgt. Jonathan Westbrook.Ms. Westbrook told The A.P. that her husband’s injuries do not appear to be life threatening and that the Army will fly her to Texas on Friday.“He’s assured me he’s O.K. but until I get a visual and say ‘O.K., you’re O.K.,’ he’s not O.K.,” said. “They train them to downplay things.”