http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/22/arts/music/drake-future-tour-review.html
Review: Drake Opens Tour in Austin, Rapping, Singing and Sneering - The New York Times
Rap and Hip-Hop,Drake (Rapper),Views (Album),Music,Frank Erwin Center,Austin (Tex),Drake
July 21, 2016
6768
AUSTIN, Tex. — As Drake began his show on Wednesday night at the Frank Erwin Center here, the word “revenge” was splashed across the huge screen at the back of the stage, with virtual flames shooting off the edges of the letters. The stage was mostly dark, and he stepped out to perform “Summer Sixteen,” one of his surliest songs.It’s a storm of jabs and uppercuts, part of the long tail of his beef with Meek Mill, and also takes sidelong shots at younger artists from Toronto, his hometown, who haven’t paid proper respect.Most importantly, the song set a tone for this concert, the opening night of Drake’s “Summer Sixteen” tour: pugnacity, provocation, sneering. (The tour stops in New York at Madison Square Garden on Aug. 4, 5, 6 and 8.)The schism that Drake made his career by bridging used to be simple: He was a rapper, and also a singer, and moved so easily between the poles that they ceased being poles. Initially, purists were dismissive, but he trumped them with persistence and quality. The seamless whole he helped build became something of the new normal in the past few years, to the point where he’s the standard-bearer, not the disrupter.If he’s tenser now, it’s because punching upward is easier than taking punches, but also because the tightrope he is choosing to walk is even trickier than the one he initially set out on. Just as he established his sound as the new genre standard, he made an about-face and doubled down on his rapping bona fides with last year’s muscular album “If You’re Reading This It’s Too Late,” followed by “What a Time to Be Alive,” a rowdy collaborative album with Future.Once Drake remade rap in his image, he wanted to show that he could do it the old-fashioned way, too. But on his new album, “Views,” which was released in April and has spent 10 of the past 11 weeks atop the Billboard album chart, he pushed himself to the other extreme: Not only is he leaning more heavily into singing but he is also refashioning his sing-rap hybrid as global pop music. His song “One Dance” is in its 10th week atop the Billboard Hot 100 — it’s a collaboration with WizKid, the young star of Nigeria’s Afrobeats scene, and Kyla, a soul singer from the world of UK funky.This sort of transnational pop — American, Caribbean, African — is new turf for Drake, and given that he’s one of pop music’s great sponges, it’s proving to be fertile. The breezy and accessible “Controlla,” the rising lite-dancehall hit from “Views,” is becoming as ubiquitous as “One Dance,” partly because of imitators.This is where Drake the global pop titan and Drake the throne-defending rapper overlap. When he performed “Summer Sixteen” at this concert, he changed one lyric to adjust the song’s target slightly, rapping, “All you boys doing fake ‘Controlla’ wanna be me a little.”Maybe Drake was referring to Tory Lanez, one of those Toronto upstarts, who recorded a worthy remake. Maybe he meant Tyga, whom Drake has spanked in the past, and whose new song “1 of 1” is “Controlla” for dummies. Whatever the case, Drake is becoming a pop star with rap-star anxieties, another novel fusion.Accordingly, this show was bookended by tough talk, but oscillated between that and smoother, more tender sections. He put his most ferocious rapping into clusters — the triumphant (“Headlines,” “Trophies,” “0 to 100/The Catch Up”), the indignant (“Started From the Bottom,” “9”), the jubilant (“The Motto,” “For Free”). Midway through his set, he was joined by Future for a relatively subdued run of songs from their pumped-up album, including a woozy “Diamonds Dancing” and a surprisingly murky “Scholarships.”Future also had his own hourlong set just before Drake’s, full of rat-tat-tat energy and zigzagging from one catchphrase to the next. Over the last three years, he’s brought craft and rigor to Atlanta strip-club anthems, and built a worldview out of a narcotic haze. He isn’t a particularly joyful rapper, but he’s infectious, and here he found a way to have fun, working the stage with boundless energy and, when surrounded by a troupe of four male dancers, busting out a few concise moves of his own as his squad chanted “Go Future! Go Future!”Near the end of Future’s set, he played “March Madness,” an ecstatic song that has a recurring jolt of melancholy when he laments “all these cops shooting” black men. As he performed it, video screens behind him showed scenes of tense policing and an image of a motorcycle jacket covered in what appeared to be a logo of the early-1980s punk band Millions of Dead Cops.Politics aren’t at the forefront of Drake’s or Future’s art, but Drake, too, made glancing reference to recent incidents of violence. This month he wrote a moving public letter in response to the police killing of Alton Sterling in Baton Rouge, La., but he was more vague here, encouraging the crowd to “touch these streets and love each other” before saying he was working on another album, would return to Austin and, “I don’t wanna lose nobody in this building.”It was a half-cooked gesture for someone who ordinarily has a deft touch in making big spaces feel small. Here, he instead accomplished that through an innovation in arena-show stagecraft. Hanging from the ceiling were a few hundred spherical bulbs that suggested a fertile garden. Throughout the second half of the show, they became part of the storytelling: Sometimes they dropped at random intervals and to different lengths; sometimes they rose and fell in oceanic rhythm, suggesting waves or sine curves; sometimes a few dropped in a pattern, forming a “6” or a “?.”These were, more often than not, the show’s softer moments, soothing hits like “Hotline Bling” and “Hold On, We’re Going Home,” or in his global-pop mini-set near the end of the show: “Controlla” and “One Dance,” along with his sinuous Rihanna collaborations “Work” and “Too Good,” songs that paint Drake as an attentive lover preoccupied with rhythm.That version of Drake is the most currently popular, and it seemed logical that he would end the night there. But after noting that he was running over time, and would have to pay extra to the venue to extend the show, he did just that, returning to the aggressive and acidic tone that opened the night. After the caress, this was the pummeling, a series of spiteful songs like “Back to Back,” “Energy” and “Hype,” on which he rapped, “I don’t know what else is left for me/ After this no one a threat to me.”Are those the words of a defiant rapper fending off his rivals? A pop star pushing his forward-thinking sound so relentlessly that others can only follow? For Drake — and maybe only Drake — those are one and the same, another old gap now closed.