http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/14/world/asia/australian-premier-backs-plan-to-accept-more-refugees.html
Australian Prime Minister Supports New Plan on Refugees - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Australia,Gillard  Julia
Aug. 13, 2012
1380
SYDNEY, Australia — Prime Minister Julia Gillard of Australia endorsed a set of sweeping changes to immigration policy on Monday that would increase the number of refugees the country accepts by nearly half while reopening remote offshore detention centers that have been criticized by human rights groups as inhumane and ineffective.Ms. Gillard made the announcement after an expert panel convened by the government reported on ways to stem the influx of refugees to Australia. Thousands of people try to reach the country each year on rickety, overcrowded vessels, leading to a growing number of accidents at sea that have killed more than 600 people since late 2009. Around 90 asylum seekers are believed to have died in June when their boat capsized south of Java, Indonesia, prompting renewed calls for government intervention.The panel’s report called for immediately increasing the number of refugees allowed to take up residence in Australia to 20,000 from 13,700, and for reopening detention centers in Nauru and Papua New Guinea to hold refugees awaiting entry, a practice that was largely abandoned in 2007 when Ms. Gillard’s Labor Party came to power.Though Ms. Gillard was quick to endorse the panel’s proposals, it was not clear whether her minority government could enact them.The Green Party, which usually votes with Labor, opposes offshore detention.“I’m not going to play politics, or look at political scoreboards, when too many lives have been lost,” Ms. Gillard said. “The government today has determined to endorse in principle all of the recommendations.”Australia has tried for years to find a policy that will deter would-be immigrants from trying to reach Christmas Island, a remote territory in the Indian Ocean that is Australia’s closest point to Indonesia.Ms. Gillard had proposed sending asylum seekers to Malaysia for processing, but the plan was rejected by Australia’s highest court and negotiations over a replacement plan broke down.Along with other human rights advocacy groups, Amnesty International denounced the proposals, saying that “sending asylum seekers to places like Malaysia, Nauru and Papua New Guinea is unacceptable and a complete outsourcing of Australia’s human rights obligations.”