https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/sports/football/jets-owner-says-player-protest-would-prompt-conversation.html
Jets Owner Says Player Protest Would Prompt ‘Conversation’ - The New York Times
Johnson  Woody,Football,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,National Anthems,New York Jets
Sept. 8, 2016
3644
FLORHAM PARK, N.J. — Woody Johnson, the owner of the Jets, said Wednesday that it would not be his “first choice” if one of the team’s players chose not to stand for the national anthem Sunday afternoon when the Jets open their season against the Cincinnati Bengals at MetLife Stadium.“I think I would have a conversation at that point with him and try to find out what’s motivating that person to do that — that type of protest,” Johnson said.Colin Kaepernick, a quarterback with the San Francisco 49ers, started a national debate in the preseason when he protested what he described as racial injustice and police brutality by declining to stand for “The Star-Spangled Banner.” On Sept. 1, before the team’s final preseason game, Kaepernick knelt for the anthem next to Eric Reid, a teammate.Johnson, a top Republican fund-raiser who has endorsed Donald Trump in his campaign for president, was asked how he would feel if one of his players were to make a similar statement.“I think I would just go so far as saying — I don’t really answer hypotheticals,” Johnson said. “But I think I would have a conversation with him.”The Jets’ opener happens to coincide with the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, an unusual backdrop for potential social protest. The Jets, Johnson said, are planning to hold a pregame ceremony to remember victims of the attacks and honor emergency personnel.“I think it’s going to be just an unbelievably moving ceremony in honor of those people,” Johnson said.As for the on-field product, Johnson said he was optimistic about the season but stopped short of making any bold predictions. The Jets have not advanced to the playoffs since 2010. They fell just short last season with a 10-6 record under Todd Bowles in his first year as head coach.“They’ve had a chance now to start to put their stamp on the team,” said Johnson, referring to Bowles and General Manager Mike Maccagnan, who is also in his second season with the team. “Just watching the decision process and the players and how they approach the draft and their team gives me room for hope and optimism.”Johnson sounded more reserved about the future of Geno Smith, a onetime starter who will begin the season as the backup quarterback behind Ryan Fitzpatrick.“He’s on the team right now,” Johnson said. “I think he’s matured in the last year, as you do. The maturity process in football is very fast. So what I’m seeing is very good. I’m hopeful.”