https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/18/us/politics/bernie-sanders-presses-hillary-clinton-on-her-views-on-banks.html
Bernie Sanders Presses Hillary Clinton on Her Views on Banks - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Sanders  Bernard,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Banking and Financial Institutions,Democratic Party,Iowa
July 17, 2015
2365
CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa —  Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont edged closer on Friday to directly attacking Hillary Rodham Clinton, pointedly asking whether the Democratic presidential front-runner would support measures to break up the country’s largest financial institutions and reinstate a firewall between commercial and investment banking.Mr. Sanders, whose campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination has galvanized liberal activists driven by questions of economic fairness, highlighted his efforts to cut down the so-called too big to fail banks and restore Glass-Steagall, the Depression-era banking law repealed under President Bill Clinton. “You’ll have to ask Hillary Clinton about her views on whether she thinks we should break up these large financial institutions. I do,” Mr. Sanders, an independent, said at a news conference here. “You will have to ask her views on whether we should re-establish Glass-Steagall.”He boasted that he had not received financial contributions from Goldman Sachs, which he said sought “undue influence” in American politics, but stopped short of calling on Mrs. Clinton to reject the nearly $50,000 in donations she has received from employees of the Wall Street firm. “That’s her decision,” Mr. Sanders said, after pausing for a moment to consider the question.Mr. Sanders spoke the afternoon before the Iowa Democratic Party’s annual fund-raising dinner, the first event this year at which all of the party’s five presidential candidates appeared together. Mrs. Clinton addressed her supporters at an early evening rally before the banquet, but trained her fire entirely on Republicans, making no mention, direct or implied, of Mr. Sanders.The banquet illustrated the populist fervor coursing through the Democratic base, offering an explanation for Mr. Sanders’ early success. Mrs. Clinton received ovations for her attacks on some of the Republican presidential hopefuls and gender-oriented appeals, but Mr. Sanders and Martin O’Malley, a former Maryland governor, found booming applause for their full-throated attacks on Wall Street and free-trade deals.Asked whether Mrs. Clinton would seek to break up the country’s largest banks or reinstate Glass-Steagall, an aide to Mrs. Clinton said she would speak in more detail about both issues in the coming weeks. (Alan Blinder, an economist who is advising Mrs. Clinton, said this week that she would not attempt to revive Glass-Steagall.)While some leading Iowa Democrats believe that Mr. Sanders’s rise will ultimately help Mrs. Clinton restrain expectations here, where she was defeated by Barack Obama in the 2008 caucuses, Mr. Sanders’s growing support in the polls, vast base of small-dollar contributors and sizable crowds have prompted some of Mrs. Clinton’s backers to make not-so-subtle comments about the importance of nominating a candidate who can capture the White House.“We’ve got to nominate somebody that can win and Hillary is a winner,” Michael Fitzgerald, Iowa’s state treasurer, said at the Clinton rally.“I don’t have a lot of time to mess around like I used to, I want to win,” said Dale Todd, a Democratic activist from Cedar Rapids, who also spoke before Mrs. Clinton took the stage.Privately, Mrs. Clinton’s backers are blunter, dismissing the possibility that Mr. Sanders, a 73-year-old self-declared socialist, would be a viable general election candidate. Yet the sheer size of his crowds, in Iowa and beyond, is creating awkwardness for Mrs. Clinton.She added the rally to her schedule, her campaign said, to give local supporters who had not purchased a ticket for the dinner a chance to see the former secretary of state. She has been doing more such large-scale events in part because they are crucial to organizing. To that end, every attendee was asked to sign a caucus commitment card upon entering the basement hall, one side of which was lined with a surefire crowd builder: boxes of free pizza.These gatherings also, though, represent an effort to show that Mrs. Clinton is herself capable of luring big audiences. But the rally served to highlight her inability for now to attract crowds on the same scale as Mr. Sanders, whose Iowa events have drawn more people than any other presidential candidate has in either party. Mrs. Clinton drew a few hundred people to her event here — her campaign pegged it at 500 — while Mr. Sanders was met by about 2,500 at an event in Council Bluffs this month. The Vermont senator did not seek to compete with a head-to-head rally, but he joined a group of veterans Friday afternoon upstairs in the same building where Mrs. Clinton spoke.Standing beneath a giant, Grant Wood-designed stained glass window honoring three centuries of American soldiers, Mr. Sanders recounted his work as chairman of the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee, solemnly recounting “the cost of war.” But he turned notably more energetic when he took questions about his campaign.“I think that there is a growing frustration all over this country for establishment politics, for establishment economics,” he said before inveighing against what he called “a corrupt system.”