https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/sports/basketball/8-reasons-the-big3-might-succeed-and-6-reasons-it-might-fail.html
8 Reasons the Big3 Might Succeed, and 6 Reasons It Might Fail - The New York Times
Basketball,Big3,Iverson  Allen
June 26, 2017
3566
When a new league starts up, it’s natural for the first question to be: How long will it last? Retired N.B.A. greats in their late 30s and 40s squared off in Brooklyn on Sunday in three-on-three basketball in the first of 10 events in the new Big3. There were good signs, and ominous ones.Here are some reasons the league might hang around and some reasons it might not.Attendance The crowd for the four-game program was announced at 15,000, and the figure did not seem to be inflated. The lower bowl at Barclays Center was virtually full, and many people were sitting in the upper deck as well.Innovations An animated version of Ice Cube, one of the league’s founders, explained the rules to the fans, and many of the twists were a hit.A 4-point shot could be taken from three designated spots well beyond the arc. It was shot infrequently (20 times in the four games played), and hit even less often (four), but always got the crowd going.Less heralded but equally intriguing was the free-throw rule. When fouled, players took one shot, worth 2 points (foul shots after a basket are still worth 1 point). This cut down on dead time and put extra zing on every free throw. It also created strange box score lines like 5-3, indicating 5 points on three free throws.Each game was played to 60 points, rather than timed. So no parade of fouling at the end. And every game ended with a walk-off basket.The game Three-on-three on half a court was more than just a stripped-down version of the big game.“It’s tough to hide defensively,” Rasual Butler of the Ball Hogs said. “It’s kind of tough to help. If a bigger guy has a mismatch, it could hurt us.”“You can’t play defense, you’re in trouble because the court’s so wide open,” Allen Iverson of 3’s Company said.With eight teams in action, several styles were on display. Some teams relied on big men to score inside, while others hoisted endless 3s (and occasional 4s).The game’s rapid transitions, and a 14-second shot clock, kept the action fast. There was no slow dribble up the court after a change of possessions. Indeed, after a steal, teams could fire a shot right up.Physical style Nearly every player commented on how physical the game was. “It was definitely more physical than we thought,” Kwame Brown of the 3 Headed Monsters said.Hand-checking was legal, at the behest of Ice Cube. “Lot of hand checks,” said Rashard Lewis of the 3 Headed Monsters, the top scorer on the day with 27. “You’re going to get bumped around on rebounds.”“Reminded me of back in my day when they would put their hands on you,” Coach George Gervin of the Ghost Ballers said. (Hand-checking was barred from the N.B.A. in the 1970s.)“There’s a lot more than hand checks out there, and the refs are letting it go,” DerMarr Johnson of 3’s Company said.Stars A good old-timers’ competition is like a time machine, giving fans a chance to see their favorites do their thing again. There was good response to the likes of Mike Bibby, Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf, Jason Williams and Jermaine O’Neal back on the hardwood.At times it was less of a time machine than a transporter to an alternate reality. How else to explain Kwame Brown, a disappointment as a No. 1 overall pick in 2001, dominating for 17 points and 13 rebounds?Bigger star coaches The men on the sideline were even more dazzling: Julius Erving, Rick Barry, Gary Payton, Clyde Drexler.And most of all the player-coach Iverson. The crowd cheered his every move, groaned when he missed his first three shots, then roared for his bucket. “We want A.I.,” the fans chanted whenever he was not in the game.How is Iverson as a coach? According to Andre Owens of 3’s Company: “All he says is, ‘He can’t guard you, go past him.’”Nicknames Probably the most remembered feature of the old X.F.L. football league was the nicknames on the uniforms, like He Hate Me. Big3 fans were able to see White Chocolate, Street Lew, the Answer, Junk Yard Dog and W Mamba lace them up.Logos The teams’ names, with their frequent puns on the word “three,” divided fans. But no one could deny the strong logo work, notably the snarling warthog of the Ball Hogs.Lesser stars A wish list of players in the right age range might have included Kobe Bryant, Steve Nash, Tim Duncan and Shaquille O’Neal. But the lineups were more a collection of journeymen.Tape delay Inexplicably for a 21st-century league, games won’t be televised live. Instead, Sunday afternoon contests will be shown on Fox Sports 1 on Monday night.Rooting interest It’s hard to root for a logo. Perhaps teams could have been assembled regionally, with players connected to a particular city under its banner.Injuries The physical play and the age of the players raised the risk of injury. Players gathered around a fallen teammate seemed to be almost as common a sight as a pick-and-roll. Jason Williams and Cuttino Mobley left the court injured. An old-timers’ game at the N.B.A. All-Star Game was scrapped in the 1990s because of frequent player injuries.At the Big3, Mobley, Abdul-Rauf and Moochie Norris were all showing a fair amount of gray in their beard.“Your body don’t recover like when you were 19,” Coach Gary Payton said.Length After Week 1, the league might want to consider cutting the games to 50 points from 60. With eight teams, four games, four halftimes and a concert by the rapper Fabolous, the event went over five and a half hours. That could be seen as a tremendous value for the money, or too much of a good thing. The crowd definitely thinned after Game 3, which featured their favorite, Iverson.History The X.F.L., the W.F.L. and the U.S.F.L. Roller hockey, indoor soccer and women’s soccer leagues. New leagues almost always fail. Finances, ownership, television deals and waning interest are all potential dangers. The Big3 is off to a solid start, but there are dozens of obstacles ahead.