http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/27/nyregion/in-queens-police-officers-remember-the-25th-anniversary-of-an-officers-killing.html
In Queens, Police Officers Remember the 25th Anniversary of an Officer’s Killing - The New York Times
Byrne  Edward,Murders and Attempted Murders,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Police Department (NYC),Patrolmen's Benevolent Assn,Lynch  Patrick J,Queens (NYC),Attacks on Police,New York City
Feb. 26, 2013
7154
The old police cruiser sat at the corner of 107th Avenue and Inwood Street in Queens, just as it did 25 years ago. On Tuesday afternoon, this throwback — a refurbished Caprice Classic — served not only as a powerful reminder of Edward Byrne, the 22-year-old rookie officer who was shot and killed inside it while on patrol one morning in 1988, but of the pervasive violence that defined the era.Nearby, more than a hundred officers — many of whom were in their dress blues — had gathered at the intersection on the anniversary of Officer Byrne’s killing. Under a tent, the officer’s relatives sat in folding chairs; a framed photo of him was affixed to a chain-link fence that surrounded a nearby home.“Twenty-five years ago, the world changed,” said Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association. The killing of Officer Byrne, Mr. Lynch said, “was the catalyst that helped us take back this city, corner by corner, door by door, street by street.”Officer Byrne joined the Police Department only months before that February morning in 1988. He had been assigned to guard the home of a resident who had agreed to testify against a local drug lord. At 3:03 a.m., four men surrounded the vehicle. “Without uttering a word, they fired into the car, striking Officer Byrne in the head,” Officer George Dumont recalled at the ceremony.Darin Hamilton, a retired detective who was a rookie at the same time as Officer Byrne — and who had been guarding the same home the night before the killing — recalled in an interview how, at the time of the murder, this section of Queens seemed like the epicenter of the drug war.“If they weren’t selling, they were lookouts,” Mr. Hamilton said. “It seemed to be surrounded and saturated in this area.”Mr. Hamilton added: “You didn’t have the walking up and telling people to put their hands behind their back sort of thing. Everybody fought or ran.”The four men who killed Officer Byrne were eventually convicted, as was the gang leader who ordered the murder. The killing led to a crackdown on drug gangs, including the creation of a tactical narcotics team.“They were very, very aggressive in cleaning the drugs out of the neighborhood,” Mr. Hamilton said.On this block, those efforts seem to have stuck. In a two-story home adjacent to where Officer Byrne’s cruiser was parked, Chris Ramlagan recalled how when he first moved to the house in 1993, gunshots were common at night. Crack paraphernalia littered the street every morning.“It changed,” Mr. Ramlagan said. “And it’s still changing.”A couple of miles away, at a park named after Officer Byrne, Anthony Williams, 16, lobbed a ball at a basketball hoop. Mr. Williams did not know who Officer Byrne was or what had happened to him. Still, the officer’s legacy endured.“There aren’t a lot of drugs that come through here anymore,” Mr. Williams said. “It’s safe.”