https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/18/us/politics/donald-trumps-complicated-charisma-fills-void-in-republican-politics.html
Donald Trump’s Appeal? G.O.P. Is Puzzled, but His Fans Aren’t   - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Immigration and Emigration,Republican Party,United States Politics and Government
July 17, 2015
8413
LACONIA, N.H. —  There are many, many things Donald Trump would like you to know about how he would run the country. As he told a standing-room-only crowd here the other night, turning America around would be a lot like running the Trump National Doral golf club in Miami, which he bought when it was in bankruptcy in 2012.He is really smart. “I’m really smart,” he boasted in Phoenix last weekend before rattling off his résumé highlights. “Went to the Wharton School of Finance. Even then, a long time ago, like the hardest, or one of the hardest, schools to get into.”People like him, clamor for him, must see him. Describing for an audience in Las Vegas how demand to see him at a recent event was so high, he said the venue managers had panicked and called, “begging us not to be there.”He is not wrong on this last point — even if he does sometimes embellish the size of his following, as he did here in New Hampshire. He declared that of the 300 or so people who packed a suffocatingly hot banquet hall, there must have been three times as many outside. There were not. And by the end of his speech, that estimate had ballooned to “thousands of people outside.”But the question that is giving so many Republicans heartburn today is how a man so few took seriously is suddenly a leading presidential contender. Listening to Mr. Trump as he campaigned across the country over the past week, and talking to the people shouting “U.S.A! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!” who crammed into halls and ballrooms by the hundreds and sometimes thousands, shed some perspective on his appeal, and on the void he is filling in Republican politics.Mr. Trump is not, as many Republicans have suggested, merely a renegade agitator who sneaked up on the party establishment and threatens to spoil its plans for a tidy, civil primary. Rather, he has become the new starring attraction for the restless, conservative-minded voters who think the political process is in need of disruption.Some align themselves with the Tea Party movement. Others call themselves independents or Republicans who are just fed up. The praise they heap on Mr. Trump — “He speaks the truth,” “He’s fearless,” “He’s not politically correct” — echoes the words conservatives have used to describe others, like Sarah Palin and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who have stirred their passions before.“I think he means what he says,” said Kristi Eglody, 63, a retired school counselor from Manchester. “He loves America, and he wants it to be better. And that’s what I love about him.”Jerry DeLemus, 60, of Rochester, N.H., said he liked the idea of voting for a candidate who had not been in politics very long and found Mr. Trump’s swagger inspiring. “You won’t leave confused about where he stands,” he said. “And how fun would it be to watch him debate Hillary Clinton?”“We need the truth,” Mr. DeLemus went on. “We don’t have to like the truth. But we need it.”The adulation that Mr. Trump is enjoying now can be a complicated, paradoxical gift. Voters like Mr. DeLemus, who said he tended to vote Republican and identified with the Tea Party movement, often draw motivation from outsize personalities like Mr. Trump. But they have also generally rejected any singular figure as a leader. And in that sense, Mr. Trump could find his moment fleeting, the latest showman to lead a movement that has so far refused to be led.Mr. Trump has found success by putting a sharper edge on a popular conservative message: that the United States is an exceptional nation run by unexceptional people who are fundamentally altering what it means to be American.In Las Vegas, he lamented: “We don’t have victories anymore. We used to have victories. We used to be great.”In Phoenix, he said: “We have stupid leaders. The American dream is dead. But I’m going to make it bigger, better and stronger.” To chants of “U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!” he vowed: “Don’t worry, we’ll take our country back. Very soon.”The implication is that he will take the country back from incompetent leaders and undocumented immigrants. And this is where there is a darker side to his promises to make America great again, one that many critics, including Republicans, say feeds on xenophobia and racist caricatures of immigrants.To reinforce his claims that Mexico is sending rapists and murderers across the border in droves, he has been traveling the country with people whose relatives were killed by immigrants who entered the United States illegally. He has them share their stories.“The illegals come in, and the illegals killed their children,” he said at a news conference in California recently as he introduced the victims’ family members. One man talked about how his son had been crushed to death under the car of an undocumented immigrant. A woman accused the news media of hiding the nationalities of the people committing crimes like these. “They never tell you what nationality they are,” she said. “Most of them are Mexican.”Mr. Trump’s attacks on Mexicans seems politically shortsighted, many Republicans say. Every month for the next two decades, 50,000 Hispanics turn 18 and will be eligible to vote.And some of his supporters acknowledge that he has gone too far with some of his comments, though they still believe that he makes valid points about illegal immigration. “He probably didn’t really think about how that was going to come out,” said Paula Borbotsina, 69, of Manchester, who said she liked Mr. Trump mostly because she believes he would not feel beholden to anyone. “But a lot of bad people are coming over.”But many of Mr. Trump’s followers acknowledged in interviews deep suspicions about Mexico. Some said they doubted whether President Obama was a citizen, a misrepresentation Mr. Trump has reinforced repeatedly.“Finally here’s somebody who has some common sense and is not just pandering to people,” said Tom Mosier, 77, of Bisbee, Ariz., which is near the Mexican border. Both he and his wife, Ginger, drove up to hear Mr. Trump in Phoenix and said they believed that the president was a Muslim and was not born in the United States.Mr. Trump brushes off the charges that he is race-baiting and swears he has nothing but respect for Mexico — mostly because, he often says, their leaders are “much sharper, smarter and more cunning” than ours.“I love Mexico!” he insists. Same for the Chinese. “I love China! I sell apartments for $10 million, $15 million, $25 million to people from China,” he said in Las Vegas.Mr. Trump’s events are drawing the committed and the curious. And the large crowds he attracts seem to be a mix of people who want to do more homework for voting, and others who just want proximity to a celebrity and a picture. While many say they are attracted to Mr. Trump’s candor and his success, there are also many others who are not quite sure they can see themselves voting for him.Bill Davies, 53, was on vacation in New Hampshire this week and decided to drive with his wife to Laconia because they were both intrigued by Mr. Trump. Mr. Davies, from Boston, said he was impressed but not quite sold.“No one else is that direct,” he said. “No one else is going to speak their mind like that. But he’s a bit of a cartoon character, you have to admit.”