https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/02/nyregion/christie-ally-expected-to-plead-guilty-in-george-washington-bridge-lane-closing-case.html
2 Indicted in George Washington Bridge Case; Ally of Christie Pleads Guilty - The New York Times
New Jersey,George Washington Bridge,Baroni  Bill,Kelly  Bridget Anne,Wildstein  David,Fishman  Paul J,Christie  Christopher J,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Fort Lee (NJ),Presidential Election of 2016
May 1, 2015
8682
After a 16-month federal investigation into the George Washington Bridge lane closings scandal, a judge in New Jersey unsealed indictments against two people close to Gov. Chris Christie, outlining a conspiracy made with a third confidant to exact political vengeance against a mayor for not endorsing the governor’s re-election.The United States attorney for New Jersey, Paul J. Fishman, announced the indictments at a news conference on Friday, breaking his long silence about a scandal that started as an inquiry into the cause of a traffic jam and has since led to a host of other investigations into the Christie administration, threatening the political future of one of the nation’s leading Republicans.Mr. Fishman said that the conspirators “callously victimized” the citizens of Fort Lee, N.J., purposely scheduling the lane-closing plan to coincide with the first day of school. Then, he said, they sought to cover up the scheme with a “sham” story of a traffic study on the bridge to Manhattan. He said that there was evidence to suggest that using a traffic jam to exact revenge was discussed as far back as 2011.Bill Baroni, the former deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and Bridget Anne Kelly, a former deputy chief of staff to Mr. Christie, were charged with nine counts, including conspiracy to commit fraud by “knowingly converting and intentionally misapplying property of an organization receiving federal benefits.”David Wildstein, another former Port Authority official and a high school friend of Mr. Christie, pleaded guilty at the United States District Court in Newark to conspiracy to commit fraud and conspiracy against civil rights.Mr. Fishman said that Mr. Wildstein corroborated the allegations in the indictment.“Based on the evidence that is currently available to us, we’re not going to charge anyone else in this scheme,” Mr. Fishman said.But he added that “there may come a time” when other, unindicted co-conspirators are identified.Mr. Christie was not implicated in the indictment. He wrote several messages on Twitter shortly after the news conference ended.“Today’s charges make clear that what I’ve said from day one is true,” he wrote. “I had no knowledge or involvement in the planning or execution of this act. The moment I first learned of this unacceptable behavior, I took action, firing staff believed to be accountable, calling for an outside investigation and agreeing to fully cooperate with all appropriate investigations, which I have done.”Still, Mr. Wildstein’s lawyer, Alan Zegas, reiterated on Friday his client’s contention that “evidence exists” that Mr. Christie knew about the lane closings as they occurred.Later, Ms. Kelly and lawyers for Mr. Baroni took aim at Mr. Wildstein’s credibility.“David Wildstein is a liar,” Ms. Kelly said at a news conference. “I will fight relentlessly to clear myself from these charges.”“It has been a very long and painful year,” she said, noting that she was “embarrassed” by the tone and context of her emails.But she said that the suggestion that she was the “only one in the governor’s office” aware of the decision to shut down the lanes was “ludicrous.” Ms. Kelly and her lawyer said others in the governor’s office were involved in the lane closings but declined to identify them.Mr. Wildstein was hired by Mr. Baroni. For years, the two were considered the closest of friends, working on campaigns together and taking pleasure in the rough-and-tumble world of New Jersey politics.On Friday, a lawyer for Mr. Baroni also called Mr. Wildstein a liar.“No one should be surprised at his eagerness to concoct any story that he thinks will help him stay out of federal prison,” the lawyer, Michael Baldassare, told reporters outside the federal courthouse in Newark.Mr. Baroni was led to believe the lane closings were part of a traffic study, according to his lawyers.In the indictment, Mr. Baroni is quoted as saying the lane closings were “important to Trenton”; it also details efforts “to conceal the conspirators’ true punitive purpose.”“The conspirators concocted and promoted a sham story that reducing the number of lanes and tollbooths accessible to the local approach was for a traffic study,” according to the indictment. Earlier Friday morning, Judge Susan D. Wigenton, who presided over the case, laid out in detail the conspiracy involving the three Christie confidants. For more than 10 minutes, she went point by point over the case with Mr. Wildstein. “Did you agree with Mr. Baroni and Ms. Kelly to punish Mayor Sokolich by causing significant lane access problems,” the judge asked, referring to the mayor of Fort Lee, Mark Sokolich, a Democrat.“Yes,” Mr. Wildstein answered.“Did you, Mr. Baroni and Ms. Kelly decide that no prior notice be given to Mayor Sokolich, the chief of police or the residents of Fort Lee?” Judge Wigenton asked.“Yes,” he said.Mr. Wildstein’s lawyer said his client “deeply regrets” what occurred. He said that Mr. Wildstein could not undo what had been done, but that he could “shed truth on what occurred during the course of that week, what led to the events and what ensued thereafter.”Each count that Mr. Wildstein pleaded guilty to carries a maximum penalty of 15 years in prison. But Mr. Fishman said he was very cooperative with investigators and would almost certainly not face a punishment that severe. If convicted, Mr. Baroni and Ms. Kelly face higher maximum penalties but would likely not be sentenced to them.For three months, officials said the lane closings had been part of a traffic study. That story was discredited by bridge workers in testimony before the State Legislature in December 2013. Mr. Wildstein resigned as the director of interstate capital projects at the Port Authority.The scandal blew open a month later after documents that had been subpoenaed by the Legislature were leaked, including the now-infamous email from Ms. Kelly.