https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/03/realestate/getting-rid-of-tree-roots-from-next-door.html
Getting Rid of Tree Roots From Next Door - The New York Times
Trees and Shrubs,Trees New York,Gardens and Gardening
June 3, 2017
8861
Q. Roots from my  neighbor’s tree have grown under the driveway of my house in Astoria, Queens, causing the asphalt to heave, buckle and crack. Who is responsible for repairing this damage, my neighbor or me?A. The roots of a tree grow toward the things that sustain it: oxygen, moisture and nutrients. And sometimes that means they collide with your driveway or sidewalk, causing asphalt to bend in unsightly, and hazardous, ways. But as disruptive as roots can be, they are also critical to a tree’s survival. Cut the wrong ones and you could create a situation that would be bad for the tree and possibly for you or your neighbor.“You wouldn’t want to cut or damage the tree roots, only to have the tree die or even fall on your house or your neighbor’s house,” said John Bandler, a board member of Trees New York, a nonprofit organization that, among other things, trains New Yorkers to prune city trees. “You might even bear liability for that.”But a buckling driveway is not safe either — someone could trip and fall. Since the roots are on your property, you are responsible for maintaining them and for the cost of repairs to your driveway.First, make sure the tree does not belong to the city; it’s illegal to prune a city tree without authorization or the proper permits. If the tree belongs to your neighbor, you should still proceed with caution. You can prune any branches or roots that cross onto your property, but your actions must not result in the tree’s injury or death, nor can you trespass onto the neighbor’s property to do the work, said Bruce F. Bronster, a Manhattan real estate lawyer.Consult a certified arborist who can tell you if and how repairing the driveway could damage the tree, Mr. Bandler said. The tree may not be appropriate for the location. If that is the case, you will need to consult your neighbor, as you cannot unilaterally decide to move or kill his tree.Even if the work will not harm the tree, you should talk to your neighbor before pulling out the loppers. “I would recommend bringing over a pitcher of iced tea, or a beer if you are so inclined, and work it out,” Mr. Bronster said. “You do have to live next to your neighbors.”