http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/08/upshot/student-debt-is-worse-than-you-think.html
Student Debt Is Worse Than You Think - The New York Times
Student Loans,Colleges and Universities,For-Profit Schools,Education Department (US),Financial Aid (Education)
Oct. 7, 2015
6701
After a series of blockbuster hearings held 25 years ago on abuses in the higher education industry, Congress created a system to protect undergraduates from risky student loans.But two weeks ago, the Education Department released a trove of new data suggesting that the system is failing and that, at some colleges, the saddling of students with loans they cannot afford to pay down is far more dire than anyone knew.The loan crisis hits hardest at colleges enrolling large numbers of students from low-income backgrounds. These undergraduates have to borrow for college, then often have difficulty finding well-paying jobs after graduation — if they graduate at all.As a result, they struggle to repay their loans. The colleges with the lowest student-loan repayment rates include many for-profit colleges, but also some public and private nonprofit colleges, including a substantial number of historically black institutions. Even some wealthier, more selective colleges turn out to have a bigger student loan problem than previously realized.Along with recent research finding that student loan defaults are heavily concentrated among the most economically marginalized students, the new data suggests that debt is a major financial obstacle for people who already face barriers to opportunity.When Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia led the investigation in the early 1990s, Congress found widespread fraud by for-profit colleges. Some trade schools had gone so far as to grab people from welfare lines to sign them up for loans without their consent. The loans were never repaid, and the colleges kept the money.In response, Congress created a rule called the cohort default rate. Every year, the Education Department calculates the percentage of borrowers who have recently left a given college and have defaulted on their federal-government-backed loans. If the default rate is too high, the college is kicked out of the federal financial aid system. The rule was an immediate success — more than 1,500 for-profit colleges were pushed out. A number of public and nonprofit colleges were also forced to bring their default rates down.But the system has limitations. Only colleges with a default rate above 30 percent for three consecutive years, or above 40 percent in any single year, are expelled from the financial aid system. And students who default more than two to three years after leaving college don’t count as defaulters. Nor do students who manage to avoid default, but struggle to repay their loans.In September, the department made a different calculation. Instead of default rates, the department calculated nonrepayment rates, which include both defaulters and borrowers who have never paid a single dollar of principal on their loans.The nonrepayment category includes people who are only paying interest, have delayed making payments by enrolling in graduate school or are getting loan extensions. The nonrepayment rates were calculated over a longer time period: at one, three, five and seven years after students leave college.Some of the numbers are startling. American National University — a for-profit chain offering degrees in business, health care and information technology, both online and at 30 campuses in six Midwestern states — has an official default rate of 8.5 percent, well below the national average of 11.8 percent. But its five-year nonrepayment rate is 71 percent. Even after seven years, most of the university’s students, the large majority of whom borrow, have failed to pay back a penny of their loans.How is this possible? Because, as American National’s Department of Repayment Success web page helpfully explains, students are legally allowed to defer or otherwise delay making their loan payments based on economic hardship, continuing education and other factors.Of course, interest accumulates in the meantime. This is “repayment success” only in the sense that it successfully helps students postpone paying their loans long enough to push the moment of debt crisis beyond the federal default-rate window and keep American National eligible for more federal aid. Proving economic hardship is likely to be easy, since the typical former student earns only $22,400 a year 10 years after entering college.Some more mainstream colleges also have significant nonrepayment rates. Georgia State and the Universities of Cincinnati, Houston, Louisville, South Florida and Alabama all have single-digit default rates but have five-year nonrepayment rates of over 20 percent. At the University of Memphis, 35 percent of students have not paid down principal after five years. More than half of the students who borrowed to attend the for-profit University of Phoenix, which enrolls hundreds of thousands of students, have been unable to pay back a dollar of their loan principal after five years.All told, over 700 colleges and branch campuses, many of them small proprietary schools, but also some public and private nonprofit institutions, have over half of their borrowers fail to pay down any debt after seven years. Nearly all of those colleges remain eligible for federal financial aid.Among both public and private nonprofit institutions, the debt problem is most acute when students with very little money attend colleges with very little money. All 25 of the public universities with the highest five-year nonrepayment rates are historically black institutions. Of the 25 private colleges with the worst nonrepayment rates, 22 are historically black. One example, Lane College in Jackson, Tenn., has a 12.9 percent default rate but a 78.2 percent nonrepayment rate.Historically black colleges are neither unusually expensive nor profligate institutions. Most have served their communities for decades or longer, enduring racism and inadequate funding while enrolling young people who are often low-income, first-generation college students. As a result, despite the fact that tuition at historically black colleges is often much lower than at well-heeled private colleges, a vast majority of their students borrow.That so many graduates of black colleges struggle to repay their loans may exacerbate racial wealth disparities. These nonrepayment rates, moreover, do not include the private loans that many students take out once their federal aid is exhausted, or the debt that parents are increasingly carrying to pay for their children’s college educations.The new data may prompt Congress to revisit its system for ensuring that students who take on debt have a fighting chance to pay it back.