https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/realestate/compare-homes-in-canaan-new-hampshire-seattle-washington-and-philadelphia-pennsylvania.html
$800,000 Homes in New Hampshire, Washington and Pennsylvania - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),New Hampshire,Philadelphia (Pa),Seattle (Wash)
June 7, 2017
8822
WHAT An 1844 house with four bedrooms and three bathrooms, and a connected apartment with two bedrooms and one bathroomHOW MUCH $799,000SIZE 4,800 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $166SETTING This former church is in the historic district of Canaan, a quiet rural town with many early buildings situated around Canaan Street Lake. It is about 14 miles from stores in Lebanon and 18 miles from Dartmouth College, in Hanover.INDOORS The Greek Revival-style building has had many purposes, including having served as a school and as an art studio and gallery. The owners, who bought the building about 25 years ago, converted it to a house, while retaining many early details, including large mullioned windows, exposed beams, pine floors and pressed-tin ceilings and walls.The front door opens on a large entrance hall that leads to the main living space and a separate downstairs apartment. The living area has soaring ceilings and abundant natural light. The back of the house is a single open space with a large kitchen, casual dining area and a living area with a wood stove. The kitchen has two islands, cherry cabinets, granite counters and premium appliances, including a paneled Sub-Zero refrigerator. There is a separate formal dining room and a media room, both with built-in bookcases, as well as an office.Upstairs, three of the four bedrooms, including the master, have glass-paned doors that open onto a balcony overlooking the kitchen and living room. The master bathroom has a colorful tile floor, a marble double vanity, a double glass-enclosed shower and a separate soaking tub. The downstairs apartment has a full kitchen, a wood stove and its own entrance from the backyard.OUTDOOR SPACE The property includes two lots totaling two acres — one with the house, the other providing access to the lake, with a private dock and screened pavilion. There is a large deck that connects to a barn with a four-car garage downstairs and an expansive open space with cathedral ceiling upstairs, currently used as a basketball court.TAXES $17,838 a yearCONTACT Shelley Gilbert, Coldwell Banker Lifestyles, 603-643-6406; coldwellbanker.com•WHAT A 1965 house with four bedrooms and three bathroomsHOW MUCH $799,950SIZE 2,490 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $321SETTING This two-story house sits at the end of a secluded street in Broadview, a residential neighborhood north of the city center with many midcentury modern homes. Carkeek Park, with more than 200 acres of forest, wetlands and beach, is about half a mile away, and downtown Seattle is about 10 miles.INDOORS The front door opens into a center hall with a stone floor that leads straight to the back of the house where a living room with a glass wall overlooks a verdant ravine, evoking the feeling of a treehouse. The carpeted living room has high ceilings with exposed beams and a wood-burning fireplace in a white brick wall. The kitchen, updated a number of years ago, connects to a dining area open to the living room, as well as a casual family room, where there is a pass-through and bar.Three bedrooms are on the other side of the entrance hall, including a master with an en-suite bathroom and sliding glass doors that open to a deck. Downstairs, a living room, bedroom, bathroom, kitchen and laundry room could serve as a separate apartment. This level also has a sliding-glass door opening to the backyard.OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.2-acre lot. There is a patio, a covered dining area at the back of the house, and gardens and mature trees, before the property descends to the ravine. There is also a large connected two-car garage with room for storage and a workshop.TAXES $6,420 a yearCONTACT Gordon Stephenson, Real Property Associates, 206-317-5715; seattlehouses.com •WHAT A 1747 townhouse with three bedrooms and two and a half bathroomsHOW MUCH $795,000SIZE 2,210 square feetPRICE PER SQUARE FOOT $360SETTING This three-story townhouse is on a charming tree-lined street in Queen Village, a neighborhood in the southern part of Philadelphia’s Center City. A wide range of stores and restaurants are within a few blocks, clustered around South Street and South Fourth Street, in addition to the Headhouse Farmers Market on South Second Street.INDOORS This home, which is listed in the Philadelphia Register of Historic Places, has been updated but retains much of its original character. There are five fireplaces — two wood-burning, one gas and two decorative. The ground floor is open, with exposed brick walls and a beamed ceiling, and has a living area, a dining area and a kitchen centered on a large island with a five-burner Thermador cooktop and range hood, and space for stools. There is also a half-bathroom and an area for laundry.The second and third floors have early random-width wide-plank pine floors. There are two bedrooms and one bathroom on the second floor, including the master suite, which has a beamed ceiling, built-in shelves and two brick fireplaces, as well as a walk-in closet. There is a large full-floor bedroom on the third floor with a dormer window and an en-suite bathroom.OUTDOOR SPACE Despite its small 0.03-acre lot, the townhouse has a good-size brick patio enclosed by fences and walls. There is a curved retaining wall with raised gardens and a pergola above a sitting area. There is no garage or parking space on site, but the seller is including one year of paid parking at a nearby garage.TAXES $6,292 a yearCONTACT Jeff Block, Berkshire Hathaway Fox & Roach Realtors, 215-790-5662; realtor.com