https://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/20/realestate/20livi.html
Living In Mahopac, New York - Nature Has Protectors Here - The New York Times
Housing,Putnam County (NY),Real Estate
Jan. 20, 2008
8873
MAHOPAC, a hamlet just north of the Westchester County border, is richly laced with lakes and streams and densely wooded hillsides. All that beauty is natural, of course, yet it owes its abundance to decades of human planning and effort.The air quality index in these five square miles is so high (the mid-90-percent range) that last year Mahopac was rated by CNNMoney.com as one of America’s best places to live. But things have not always been so pristine, either in the hamlet or in Carmel, the 40-square-mile town in southern Putnam County of which it is a part.Much of Mahopac and sections of Carmel sit on New York City watershed land, said David Klotzle, Carmel’s wetland inspector. When New York created its wetlands law in the mid-1970s, every municipality was encouraged to adopt its own, and in 1976 the town became the first in Putnam County to develop a wetlands ordinance. “We made ours stricter” than the state law, Mr. Klotzle said.Then, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, dry-cleaning fluids and gasoline were found to have contaminated wells in Mahopac’s business district. Although the pollutants were eventually removed by the state, “we’ve had to stay on top of things,” said Richard Franzetti, the chairman of Carmel’s environmental conservation board and an environmental engineer for Malcolm Pirnie, a consulting firm in White Plains. “It’s been a challenge,” he said.Now, Mr. Klotzle said, “anything that goes past the zoning or building departments must also go past my desk.”He added: “With so many hillsides, and lakes, rivers, streams and wetlands at the bottom of them, we’re very vulnerable to pollution. We have to make sure no more damage is done.”Tammy and Robert Varasano say the chance to breathe clean air and drink pure water is the primary reason they bought their three-bedroom raised ranch here, even though it means an hour commute each way for Mr. Varasano, who works for a pharmaceutical company in Montvale, N.J. Mrs. Varasano, a stay-at-home mother, called Mahopac “a healthy place to raise a family.”Joseph Massaro, who owns a home on the shores of Lake Mahopac, the shimmering centerpiece of the hamlet, and is finishing another on Petre Island in the middle of the lake, also has a deep passion for the area’s natural beauty — one he shares with his grandchildren. In season, Mr. Massaro ferries the youngsters — 2, 6 and 7 years old — across the 683-acre lake in one of his three boats to explore Petre Island, so they can harvest the blueberries that grow in profusion. There, his new 5,000-square-foot house, built according to plans by  Frank Lloyd Wright, also stands.What You’ll FindThroughout the heavily treed winter countryside, clusters of single- and multifamily houses, condominium complexes and strip malls alternate with broad stretches of open space.An area that in the late 1800s was primarily a summer resort of small cottages and some grand estates built around the main lake, Mahopac has evolved during the last 50 years into an affordable year-round alternative to Westchester. In fact, by the standards of today’s commutes to New York City, the 60-mile trip from Mahopac is fairly manageable. The area also remains a convenient weekend getaway.The shoreline around Lake Mahopac, where Mr. Massaro lives, is built up with houses — century-old mansions and former cottages upgraded and expanded over the years. The lake is the only body of water in Mahopac where motorboats and Jet Skis are allowed.Fanning out from it, and sometimes clustering around the smaller lakes,  are a variety of ranches, split levels, Cape Cods and colonials built in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s.Several developments are also under construction, including Stone Pond Terrace, which will offer 5,000-square-foot colonials with five bedrooms and six baths.According to Paul Jonke, Carmel’s assessor, there are 8,289 single-family homes in the town (the assessor’s office does not keep separate numbers for Mahopac), 727 two-family homes, 824 condominiums, and 38 multifamily dwellings.Most of the retail activity takes place along Route 6, the main thoroughfare, which has strip malls and big-box retailers like HomeGoods interspersed with smaller outlets.What You’ll PayThe median price for a single-family home in the area served by the Mahopac Central School District was $432,500 in 2007. By comparison, the median price of a single-family house in Yorktown, in northern Westchester, was $452,250. “Just by coming over the county border,” said Maria Makaj, a sales agent with Houlihan Lawrence Real Estate, “you can get a bit more for your money.”Currently on the market in the Mahopac school district area, a two-bedroom, two-bath ranch built in 1942 is going for $294,900; a 1930s Cape with three bedrooms and two baths is selling for $599,900; and an 11-year-old colonial with four bedrooms and three and a half baths is on the market for $832,500.The housing market is slow, Ms. Makaj said. Pointing out that when a house is priced right, it sells, she said many sellers had not yet accepted the need to lower prices. The average number of days on the market for a single-family house in 2007 was 174, up from 154 in 2006 and from 149 in 2002.The median price of a single-family house in 2007 was down from $462,500 in 2006;  five years ago it was $350,000, according to the Westchester-Putnam Multiple Listing Service.The median price of a condo in 2007 was $340,000, versus $368,500 in 2006.Mr. and Mrs. Varasano are among those feeling the effects of the real estate downturn. Their 10-year-old three-bedroom raised ranch has been on the market since May, listed at $479,000. “We’ll probably have to come down in price,” said Mrs. Varasano, who explained that the family was seeking a larger house in Mahopac.The SchoolsMahopac Central School District, with its kindergarten center, three elementary schools, middle school and high school, is the largest in Putnam County, with more than 5,000 students.Mahopac High School, which has an enrollment of 1,805, is divided into four smaller schools, with students randomly assigned among them — not on the basis of academic performance or grade level, explained Aaron J. Trummer, the principal. Each subschool, or house, is run by an assistant principal and has its own counseling staff.Of the 365 graduates of the high school last year, 78 percent went on to four-year colleges or universities, about 16 percent enrolled in two-year colleges, and the rest entered either the work force or the military, Mr. Trummer said.SAT averages last year were 502 for critical reading, 524 for math and 484 for writing. Statewide, they were 502, 515 and 494.What to DoCheryl and Robert Genovese, who have lived in Mahopac for 12 years, enjoy the convenience of shopping and dining on Route 6, minutes from their four-bedroom colonial on two-plus acres. Their favorite local haunt is Fratelli II, where they share seafood with linguine for two and meet up with neighbors. The Trademark Cinemas Movies in Yorktown Heights and the Carmel Movieplex 8 are about 15 minutes by car.But the main show for many residents is the outdoors. For his Petre Island voyages, Mr. Massaro has three craft to choose from: a small pontoon boat that he uses to carry out supplies; a high-performance personal watercraft and a 24-foot pontoon boat, his primary vessel. “All in all,” he said, “I spend 90 percent of my time on the lake.”In the summer, Mr. and Mrs. Genovese and their 13-year-old daughter, Alyssa, head just beyond Mahopac to Sycamore Park, where they can swim, play tennis and, on balmy evenings, attend concerts. The 32-acre park, on Long Pond, has four tennis courts, a baseball/football field, and beach, picnic and playground areas, all operated by the Carmel Recreation and Parks Department.The Jimmy McDonough Memorial Park complex, near Sycamore, has three football/soccer fields, two baseball diamonds and a skate park. Other options include Red Mills Park, which has watercourses running through it with walking bridges over them, and Volz Park, with breathtaking views of Lake Mahopac.Throughout the year, hikers and bikers like Mr. and Mrs. Varasano and their children — Danielle, 9; Robert, 7; and Christina, 5 — follow the North County Trailway, a 22-mile paved trail that follows the former New York and Putnam Railroad right of way and becomes the Putnam County Trailway when it heads north into Putnam.The CommuteMetro-North Railroad service on the Harlem Line from Croton Falls to Grand Central Terminal takes about 75 minutes during peak hours. Tickets bought online cost $25.18 for a rush-hour round trip and $283.22 for a monthly.The closest highways are Route 6 and the Taconic State Parkway.The HistoryLake Mahopac was originally settled by the Wappingers, one of the Algonquin Indian tribes. During the French and Indian War, the tribe traveled north to Massachusetts to fight for the British. When they returned, they found their territory had been taken over by colonists.