https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/us/politics/steve-israel-house-democrat-new-york.html
Steve Israel of New York, a Top House Democrat, Won’t Seek Re-election - The New York Times
Israel  Steve J,New York State,United States,United States Politics and Government,Elections,Elections  House of Representatives,Long Island (NY)
Jan. 5, 2016
4719
WASHINGTON —  Representative Steve Israel, a New York Democrat who led political messaging for his party in the House, said Tuesday that he would not run for re-election, citing the unrelenting demands of fund-raising among the reasons behind his decision to retire.“I don’t think I can spend another day in another call room making another call begging for money,” Mr. Israel said in an interview in his congressional office. “I always knew the system was dysfunctional. Now it is beyond broken.”Mr. Israel, 57, who in 2014 published a well-received satirical novel on politics, also said that he wanted more time to devote to writing and that he was planning a new humorous book on the gun lobby.An eight-term congressman from Long Island with centrist leanings, Mr. Israel led the campaign effort for House Democrats in the 2012 and 2014 election cycles and was seen as one of his party’s top strategists. He is a close political adviser to Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democrats’ leader in the House, and will continue to develop the party message during his remaining time in office.Under his stewardship, House Democrats gained eight seats in 2012 but struggled in 2014 and lost 13 as Republicans built a formidable majority in the midterm election of President Obama’s second term.“Steve is a tremendous resource in articulating Democrats’ work on behalf of hard-working families,” Ms. Pelosi said in a statement. “He will be a critical resource for our caucus in the remainder of his term and into the future.”Mr. Israel was elected in 2000 to a Republican-held seat and said he did not expect to be re-elected. His ability to win repeatedly in a difficult district was considered a major advantage when Ms. Pelosi picked him to head the campaign committee, where he proved to be a strong fund-raiser.His House district remains competitive, and the congressman said that by retiring in this election cycle, he will give a leg up to the eventual Democratic candidate since the district favors Democrats in a presidential election year. Waiting until 2018 could have made it more difficult for Democrats, he said.“For me and my party, sooner is better than later,” said Mr. Israel, who formerly owned his own public-relations firm. “It is the absolutely right decision at the absolutely right time.”He becomes the sixth veteran Democrat to announce his retirement from the House; an additional nine are leaving to pursue other offices. Lawmakers generally begin to make their decisions on whether to stay or not early in the year as candidate filing deadlines approach, and to give potential successors an opportunity to assess their chances.He said his decision had been aided by the recent retirement announcement of Representative Richard Hanna of New York, a rare moderate Republican, whose departure drove home to Mr. Israel the rapidly shrinking ranks of centrist lawmakers from either party.“There are so few moderates left to work with,” Mr. Israel said.Democrats expect a crowded field of candidates in Mr. Israel’s district, which stretches from Queens across suburban Nassau County and into more conservative Suffolk County.Party leaders were caught off guard by Mr. Israel’s announcement, but early speculation turned to a handful of well-known Long Island Democrats, including Thomas R. Suozzi, the former Nassau County executive, and Assemblyman Charles D. Lavine.On the Republican side, State Senator Jack M. Martins is believed to be interested in the race and would be a favorite to win the party’s nomination.Mr. Israel said he intended to remain active in politics as a Democratic sounding board but would devote significant time to completing his second book.“I may not have a seat in the House, but I will be able to observe Washington with my tongue planted firmly in cheek as a satirist,” he said.