https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/09/fashion/mens-style/architect-reinaldo-leandro-manhattan-living-room.html
A Tour of the Architect Reinaldo Leandro’s Manhattan Living Room - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Leandro  Reinaldo,Architecture,Manhattan (NYC)
Sept. 7, 2016
3806
Age 36Occupation Architect, partner in the design firm Ashe & Leandro.Location Lower Manhattan.Favorite Room Mr. Leandro, born in Venezuela, and his boyfriend, Patrick McGrath, an interior designer, rent a one-bedroom apartment with a living room that has been carefully done to reflect their individual styles. “I’m more contemporary midcentury, and he appreciates antiquities,” Mr. Leandro said. “I love his taste and, hopefully, he loves mine.”As an architect, you must have exacting requirements. What drew you to this apartment?“For me, to have a place that has no light like a cave, which a lot of apartments can be like, would be a nightmare. This apartment in particular has a lot of light, tall windows, high ceilings. We took our time. We saw a lot of stuff. It’s really about that first instinct. Like, oh this is a good vibe.”Do you always look at spaces, including your own, with a critical eye?“Oh, yeah. The moldings here are different heights, which drives me insane. They installed the kitchen counter before we moved in, and I thought: ‘I wish you would’ve asked me. I would’ve never chosen that soapy blue.’“But you know what? We’re not living in a constantly perfectly curated home. That would be horrible. The most charismatic homes are not only the most stylish ones, but the ones that have a lot of history behind them. You see two people or a family that really loves each other.”Can you pass along a trade secret for easily improving a space?“Consistent hardware is really important for me, and it changes the space so quickly. That’s a small investment people don’t realize: accessories. Hardware in the kitchen and on the doors can change an apartment completely.”What are these flowers on the coffee table?“Black lilies. I don’t love getting flowers, especially if I’m getting photographed. Just because I think it’s a little bit, ‘Ooh, precious architect.’ But I think these are a nice color for the space. They’re very architectural.”This brown couch is very groovy.“It was in my parents’ apartment on the Upper East Side. It was tufted and in gold silk. The first change was no tuft and gray linen. When we moved to this space, I wanted a really green, deep olive velvet. Patrick was like, ‘No, let’s make it brown mohair.’ I choose my fights, and that is not one that I wanted to have. The look of it is great, but it itches me. Maybe I’m allergic to mohair.”