http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/26/us/26atkins.html
Susan Atkins, Manson Follower, Dies at 61 - The New York Times
Tate  Sharon,Manson  Charles,Atkins  Susan,Deaths (Obituaries)
Sept. 25, 2009
3845
Susan Atkins, a member of Charles Manson’s murderous “family” who spent the last four decades in prison for her role in one of the most sensational crimes of the 20th century — the killings of the actress Sharon Tate and seven others in 1969 — died Thursday at a women’s prison in Chowchilla, Calif. She was 61.She died of natural causes, said Gordon Hinkle, a spokesman for the California Department of Corrections. A year ago, Ms. Atkins received a diagnosis of brain cancer and had a leg amputated.Before being moved to a medical clinic at the California Central Women’s Facility in Chowchilla last year, Ms. Atkins was incarcerated at the California Institution for Women, in Corona. At her death, she was the longest-serving woman in the California penal system, Mr. Hinkle said.Ms. Atkins, 21 years old at the time of the killings, was the best known of the three young women convicted with Mr. Manson. Her grand jury testimony helped secure an indictment against Mr. Manson and several adherents — among them Ms. Atkins herself — in what became known as the Tate-LaBianca murders, a killing spree over two nights.On Aug. 8, 1969, acting on Mr. Manson’s orders, Ms. Atkins and several “family” members broke into Ms. Tate’s home near Beverly Hills, Calif. In the early hours of Aug. 9, they killed five people: Ms. Tate, who was eight and a half months pregnant; Abigail Folger, an heiress to the Folger coffee fortune; Jay Sebring, a celebrity hairstylist; Voytek Frykowski; and Steven Parent. Ms. Tate’s husband, the director Roman Polanski, was abroad at the time.The next night, also at Mr. Manson’s direction, several of his associates murdered Leno LaBianca, a wealthy supermarket owner, and his wife, Rosemary, in their Los Angeles home.The motive for the killings was not immediately apparent. Several of Mr. Manson’s followers later testified that he had ordered them in the hope of starting an apocalyptic race war, which he called Helter Skelter, after the Beatles song.The murders and the ensuing 22-week  trial drew the fevered attention of the news media. They were the subject of a best-selling nonfiction book, “Helter Skelter” (Norton, 1974), by the prosecutor in the case, Vincent Bugliosi, with Curt Gentry, and also engendered a spate of movies, songs and even an opera.Susan Denise Atkins was born on May 7, 1948, in San Gabriel, Calif., and reared mainly in Northern California. The middle of three children, Ms. Atkins said that her parents were alcoholics and that she was sexually abused by a male relative when she was a girl.A quiet, middle-class girl, Ms. Atkins sang in her school glee club and church choir. When she was a teenager, her mother died of cancer. Afterward, Ms. Atkins’s father, financially depleted by his wife’s illness, moved the family frequently, often leaving Ms. Atkins and her younger brother with relatives as he looked for work.At 18, Ms. Atkins quit high school and left home, winding up in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco. She supported herself through odd jobs like secretarial work and topless dancing. Soon, she met Mr. Manson and joined his band of adherents, who settled for a time at the Spahn Ranch, a dilapidated former film set north of Los Angeles. As a member of the “family,” Ms. Atkins was given a new name, Sadie Mae Glutz.In 1968, Ms. Atkins gave birth to a son. Mr. Manson — who by all accounts was not the father — had her name the child Zezozose Zadfrack Glutz. While he was still a baby, the child was removed from Ms. Atkins’s care and later adopted.The first murder in which Ms. Atkins was involved was that of Gary Hinman, a friend of Mr. Manson’s. On July 25, 1969, according to news accounts, Mr. Manson dispatched Ms. Atkins and other followers to Mr. Hinman’s home to demand money. After torturing Mr. Hinman for several days, one of the group, Bobby Beausoleil, killed him. The Tate-LaBianca murders took place two weeks later.In October 1969, Ms. Atkins was arrested for the Hinman murder. In jail, according to Mr. Bugliosi’s book and other accounts, she boasted to cellmates of having stabbed Ms. Tate, tasting her blood and using it to write “Pig” on the front door of the house.Ms. Atkins, Mr. Manson and other “family” members were charged with the seven Tate-LaBianca murders. Ms. Atkins testified before a grand jury that she had stabbed Ms. Tate repeatedly as she begged for the life of her unborn child. Ms. Atkins later recanted the confession.The trial began in the summer of 1970. On Jan. 25, 1971, after deliberating for nine days, the jury found Ms. Atkins, Mr. Manson and Patricia Krenwinkel guilty of the five Tate murders. It also found the three of them and Leslie Van Houten guilty of the two LaBianca murders. (Another “family” member, Charles Watson, was convicted separately of all seven murders.) In other trials, Ms. Atkins, Mr. Manson, Mr. Beausoleil and Bruce Davis were convicted of Mr. Hinman’s murder.Mr. Manson and the three women were sentenced to death. In 1972, after the death penalty was temporarily abolished in California, their sentences were reduced to life imprisonment.In 1974, Ms. Atkins became a born-again Christian, according to her memoir, “Child of Satan, Child of God” (Logos International, 1977; with Bob Slosser). She denounced Mr. Manson, formed a prison ministry and did charitable work of all kinds. She was routinely denied parole, most recently  this month.In 1981, Ms. Atkins was married in a prison chapel to a flamboyant Texan named Donald Lee Laisure. Mr. Laisure, who said he first met Ms. Atkins in the mid-1960s, described himself in interviews as a multimillionaire; he spelled his surname with a dollar sign in place of the “s.”Mr. Laisure also told reporters that Ms. Atkins was his 29th wife, in other accounts, his 36th. The marriage was dissolved after a few months. In 1987, Ms. Atkins married James W. Whitehouse, who is now a lawyer.Ms. Atkins had two brothers, Michael and Steven.  The whereabouts of her son are unknown.