https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/nyregion/how-miles-chamley-watson-fencer-and-model-spends-his-sundays.html
How Miles Chamley-Watson, Fencer and Model, Spends His Sundays - The New York Times
Men's Fashion Week,Chamley-Watson  Miles (1989- ),Models (Professional),Fencing (Sport),Chelsea (Manhattan  NY),Olympic Games (2016)
July 7, 2017
8790
Instead of hitting the gym for three hours as he does every other day of the week, the fencer and model Miles Chamley-Watson, 27, who helped Team U.S.A. win a bronze medal in the 2016 Summer Olympics, limits his Sunday sessions to an hour. “The day is about relaxing, socializing and enjoying New York City,” he said. As a model, he regularly walks the runways for designers like Ralph Lauren during Men’s Fashion Week, which will take place starting on Monday. Mr. Chamley-Watson, who was born in London, has an apartment in Chelsea. SHIVANI VORASLEEP TRAINING Usually I’m up by 6, but on Sundays, I don’t get out of bed before 9. I’ve likely been out until at least 1 or 2 a.m. the night before, and since Saturday is the only night I stay out late, I get my sleep on Sunday morning. As an athlete, sleep is important for me to do well.SUDS, SOUL I take a long, steamy shower. My muscles are always sore from the gym, and there’s nothing like hot water to help them heal. I play music while I’m showering — normally, it’s something soulful by Ed Sheeran or James Bay.POWER BREAKFAST  I make a protein shake in my Vitamix with chocolate whey protein powder, a ripe banana, a tablespoon of almond butter, chia seeds, cocoa powder and unsweetened coconut almond milk. I also have an egg-white omelet mixed with turkey sausage, jalapeños and feta cheese and a nonfat Greek yogurt. I’ve done the math and think that all this adds up to 1,500 or 1,600 calories.POWER WALK Right after eating, I walk over to my gym, the Dogpound, which is in SoHo. On the way, I always drink a can of Red Bull because it gives me the caffeine push I need to go hard in the gym. Red Bull is my main sponsor, but I drank it for years before the brand started supporting me.POWER BURN Once I’m at the gym, I have a really high-intensity session with my two trainers, Kirk Myers and Reinhard Nel. I usually start with Kirk. He has me jump rope and then do the VersaClimber and rower and also ab work. Then Reinhard takes over. With him, I focus on plyometric jumping and explosive weight lifting. By the end of the hour, I am on a high but also exhausted. I’ve just burned an insane amount of calories.LUNCH DATE  I meet up with friends for a Korean barbecue lunch. Our go-to restaurant is Jongro BBQ, where we eat family-style and get several orders of the group beef platter and bowls of soft tofu soup. The meat melts in your mouth, and I think I eat at least two pounds of it.SHOP We’re done eating around 1 and walk the couple of miles to SoHo. Once I’m there, I love to shop. Rick Owens, Saint Laurent, Nike and Prada are my favorite stores, and I inevitably end up buying some clothes.STEAM I love steam rooms because they’re like hot showers; being in them is good for my muscles. My friends and I go to the steam rooms at Chelsea Piers or Aire Ancients Baths so the whole experience is very social.ENTERTAINMENT On Sunday afternoons, we’ll usually catch the latest blockbuster at iPic Theaters at South Street Seaport. The theaters there have great seats where you can stretch out.IT’S THAT TIME AGAIN Of course, I’m starved by now. My buddies and I usually eat Sunday dinner at Chalk Point Kitchen in SoHo. The food is farm-to-table and super clean and healthy. We pretty much order everything on the menu and share it all. Tops for me are the blood orange salad, the roasted carrots with arugula pesto, the short ribs, the scallops and the wild salmon. To drink, it’s always only water. I rarely drink alcohol and don’t eat much dessert. If I splurge, it’s on red licorice.BED I’m back home by 10 and get into bed. I may put on Netflix. I’m into British series, and right now that means “Peaky Blinders,” a thrilling gangster drama. I try to go to sleep by midnight. I have a three-hour workout to get through in the morning.