https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/12/us/rights-law-deepens-political-rifts-in-north-carolina.html
Rights Law Deepens Political Rifts in North Carolina - The New York Times
North Carolina,Transgender and Transsexuals,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Bathrooms and Toilets,Discrimination,McCrory  Pat,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,State Legislatures,Republican Party
April 11, 2016
987
RALEIGH, N.C. — North Carolina has been pummeled with boycotts, criticism and cancellations in the wake of its new law on gay and transgender rights. Now liberals and conservatives in the state have turned to pummeling one another.For North Carolina, a state that has long been considered one of the South’s most moderate, the intense reaction to the law, especially from business interests, has provided an ego-bruising moment.But beyond ego and self-image, the legislation is exacerbating the political divisions in a state almost evenly divided between conservative and liberal forces. The acrimony is certain to play out not just in one of the nation’s most closely contested races for governor but also in the rare Southern state that can be up for grabs in presidential politics.And while the state has been pilloried from the left, it is not at all clear who will be the ultimate winner in the battle set in motion by the law, which restricts transgender bathroom use and pre-empts local governments from creating their own anti-discrimination policies.Democrats inside and outside North Carolina have been supported by a number of corporations, and the opposition looms large in a state with a long pro-business tradition.Over the weekend, the Rev. Dr. William J. Barber II, president of the North Carolina N.A.A.C.P., vowed that the Moral Mondays movement, which flooded the State Capitol with liberal activists in the past to protest the policies of the Republican-controlled legislature, would begin “a campaign of mass sit-ins at the General Assembly.” The protesters plan to take the action if the General Assembly does not repeal the bill before it meets again in regular session on April 25.But Republicans have been sweepingly dismissive of the fallout. When PayPal said it would cancel its plan to open a global operations center in Charlotte and employ more than 400 people there, Lt. Gov. Dan Forest said, “If our action in keeping men out of women’s bathrooms and showers protected the life of just one child or one woman from being molested or assaulted, it was worth it.”Republicans have relied on the public safety argument in North Carolina, as they did in other places, such as Houston, where transgender bathroom access erupted as a political issue. The law’s supporters also insist that local and national news outlets have misconstrued the measure.Companies, travelers and performers have backed out or steered clear of business investments since the law was passed. Four conventions have decided not to meet in Charlotte. Asheville’s chamber of commerce announced last week that a firm that could have brought 500 technology jobs to the area had pulled out of talks. Bruce Springsteen canceled a concert in Greensboro. Entertainment companies, including 21st Century Fox, Turner Broadcasting and the A&E Network, have warned that the law puts future projects in the state at risk.Some lawmakers have suggested that they would be open to modifying parts of the law. Gov. Pat McCrory, when he signed the legislation, said it included provisions that “should have waited until regular session.” And there is some precedent for a course correction: Last year, faced with pressure from activists and major corporations, elected officials in Arkansas and Indiana softened proposals that were promoted as religious freedom measures but were criticized from the left as anti-gay.But in North Carolina these days, neither liberals nor conservatives seem to be in much of a mood to compromise.“This, what we’re seeing going on now, is the old Southern strategy, where ‘gay,’ ‘trans’ and ‘homosexuality’ is the new bad word,” Mr. Barber said Saturday morning at a news conference at Pullen Memorial Baptist Church in Raleigh.In Guilford County on Saturday, members of the local Democratic Party voted to temporarily appoint one of the state’s most prominent gay-rights activists to an open State House seat.The appointee, Chris Sgro, executive director of the group Equality North Carolina — one of the plaintiffs in a federal lawsuit challenging the law — will take over the seat of Representative Ralph Johnson, who died last month. Mr. Sgro will serve the remainder of Mr. Johnson’s term, through January, and join the Democratic minority.Mr. Sgro said that as the only person in the legislature who is openly gay, bisexual or transgender, he would be a vocal advocate of repealing the law. And he said that he would consider nothing short of a full repeal to be an acceptable fix.“It may sound entrenched,” Mr. Sgro said in an interview Sunday. “But the bill is terrible.”Mr. Sgro and others note that the law goes beyond the issue of transgender people and bathrooms. Even though the law created a statewide anti-discrimination policy, critics say it left gay, bisexual and transgender people worse off because it does not include specific protections based on sexual orientation or gender identity, and precludes towns and cities from passing their own anti-discrimination ordinances.The law also prohibits workers from bringing certain discrimination cases in state court. Such claims, based on factors like race, age or religion, may be filed only in a federal court or with the state’s Human Relations Commission, a change that Mr. Barber contended might be more costly or inconvenient for plaintiffs.Republicans are also digging in. Mr. Forest, in an email on Monday, said: “Either we in North Carolina capitulate or we stand and fight back. We have chosen to fight back.”Representative Paul Stam, a Republican from Wake County who is the speaker pro tempore, said that he was receiving supportive messages concerning the legislation at a ratio of about 100 to one and that there was virtually no chance the General Assembly would repeal the law.“There is no appetite for any significant changes,” said Mr. Stam, who wondered aloud whether Democrats would embrace Mr. Sgro’s plans to push for a repeal.Some people suggested that the Democrats in the General Assembly who voted for the bill — nearly a dozen in the House — could suffer politically if they changed their minds.Republicans have said the security and privacy arguments will prove to be powerful when Mr. McCrory, who is seeking re-election, squares off in November against his Democratic opponent, Attorney General Roy Cooper. The race is expected to be a close one in a state where registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans, but where Republicans have recently dominated the state government.This year, the Democrats are hoping to portray Mr. McCrory, a former mayor of Charlotte who ran in 2012 as a practical-minded politician, as a tool of a more conservative legislature.Mr. Cooper has declined to defend a federal lawsuit challenging the law’s constitutionality. At an event in Asheville on Saturday, he called for a repeal of the bill and emphasized the connections between social policy and the business climate.“I want leaders who will be inclusive — who will tell everyone that North Carolina is open for business,” he said.On Monday afternoon, Mr. McCrory appeared outside the governor’s mansion to lay out some new health care policies but said he would not address the new law until Tuesday. “I’m not going to divert from my priorities,” he said.Moments earlier, hundreds of supporters of the bill had gathered on the Capitol lawn. A number of evangelical and conservative speakers exhorted them to collectively shout, “Thank you, Governor McCrory.”State Senator Buck Newton, a Republican candidate for attorney general, urged them to “wake up” to a cultural battle being waged by liberals. “They insist on forcing us to bow and kiss the ring of their political correctness theology,” he said.A few dozen opponents of the bill had gathered across the street. Among them was Carla Merritt, a transgender woman in her 50s who has undergone sex reassignment surgery.“It feels like we’ve taken a step back; it really does,” she said, and nodded to the crowd across the street. “They feel that God is on their side now.”