https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/23/us/questions-after-unarmed-ohio-man-is-killed-in-traffic-stop.html
Questions After Unarmed Ohio Man Is Killed in Traffic Stop - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Ohio
July 22, 2015
1324
Officials in Ohio are investigating how a confrontation with a University of Cincinnati police officer on Sunday led to the shooting death of an unarmed black man.A statement by the Hamilton County prosecutor, Joe Deters, said that his office was “rapidly investigating” what happened between Samuel Dubose and a white police officer, Ray Tensing, during a traffic stop.The officer was near the campus when he spotted a car with a missing front license plate. Mr. Dubose, 43, apparently declined to provide a driver’s license, produced an alcohol bottle instead, then refused to leave the vehicle, according to The Associated Press.A struggle ensued. Officer Tensing fired one shot and was knocked to the ground, said the university’s police chief, Jason Goodrich. Mr. Dubose, who was shot in the head, died at the scene.Officer Tensing’s legs were bruised and his uniform was torn, the police said. He was treated and released at a hospital on Sunday night, and is on paid administrative leave while the investigation continues.On Wednesday, Tiffaney Hardy, a public information officer with the Cincinnati Police Department, confirmed in a phone interview that police said Mr. Dubose was unarmed during the encounter. She said that video footage from the officer’s body camera had been turned over to the prosecutor’s office as part of the investigation.Mr. Dubose's family members, who described him as a joker with a big heart, told Cincinnati.com that he had struggled to clean up a drug problem, and that he was not a violent person. Mr. Dubose had been charged more than 75 times with various drug and traffic violations in Hamilton County, and he had his license suspended indefinitely in January by the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the paper reported.“He got stopped a lot, but he never tried to fight,” said his mother, Audrey Dubose.In the days following the shooting, friends and family have gathered around a makeshift memorial at the intersection where Mr. Dubose was shot, and have taken to Twitter to mourn.The county prosecutor’s office said that it expects to have its assessment complete before the end of next week.