https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/15/nyregion/after-newtown-shooting-running-and-hoping-to-find-a-child-safe.html
After Newtown Shooting, Running and Hoping to Find a Child Safe - The New York Times
Newtown  Conn  Shooting (2012),Newtown (Conn),Urbina  Curtis,Urbina  Michelle,Sandy Hook Elementary School (Newtown  Conn)
Dec. 14, 2012
7907
NEWTOWN, Conn. — A few minutes before 10 Friday morning, Michelle Urbina was speaking with a customer at the small bank branch that she manages in Bethel, Conn., when her assistant broke in.“What school does your daughter go to?”“Sandy Hook,” Ms. Urbina replied.“There’s been a shooting there,” her assistant said.As Ms. Urbina headed for the door, her phone began buzzing with text messages from friends and other parents. It is a 20-minute drive from Bethel to the school. The landscape rolled by unseen; a friend from the other end of town spoke to her on her cellphone, relaying news from someone who was monitoring a police scanner. None of it told her what she wanted to know: What about Lenie, her 9-year-old daughter?From another direction, Ms. Urbina’s husband, Curtis, drove their sport utility vehicle along winding roads toward the school. In the back seat, their 3-year-old son, Harry, was buckled into his car seat, wearing only his pajamas and a coat.Just about five years ago, the Urbinas moved to Sandy Hook. He had grown up in the Bronx near Yankee Stadium. She was raised on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. They fell in love with the peace of their friendly small town.“We wanted the big backyard,” Ms. Urbina said. “The fresh air. The country. The good schools. It’s an idyllic small town — not materialistic flashy people, just people who smile and say hello to you.”They knew everyone at Lenie’s school, or so it seemed. Mr. Urbina, a stay-at-home-father, coaches youth wrestling in town, and was in the gym or cafeteria several times a week for practice. Just the night before, the Urbinas had gone to the fourth-grade holiday chorale celebration, overseen by the principal, Dawn Hochsprung.Even using back roads on Friday morning, Mr. Urbina still had to park a quarter-mile away. He scooped his son under his arm and began running, little Harry giggling at the game of it. “It’s utter fear,” he said. “Your heart stops. Your chest doesn’t move. I’m a dad. What can I do? I’m helpless.”But running.Ms. Urbina landed in a knot of traffic that forms on even the best of days in the little downtown. She peeled out of it and pulled into a restaurant lot, parking so fast that she hit a concrete bumper. The school was a good quarter-mile away, and up a hill. She ran, the heels of her work shoes drilling into her feet.Near the school, Mr. Urbina saw the volunteer firefighters, who pointed him toward their firehouse. The students at Sandy Hook “are always doing fire drills,” Mr. Urbina said. “And incident drill. The fire station is their gathering point. The kids know it.”It was packed; the little ones, many in tears, were being soothed by their teachers. Parents were already there, scouring the room for their children. Across the room, Mr. Urbina saw his daughter’s fourth-grade teacher.There was Lenie. They ran into each other’s arms, each sobbing. “I had to put her down because other parents who weren’t so nearby needed to know about their kids, and I wanted to get word to them,” he said.First, though, he sent a text to his wife.“I have Lenie,” it read.Ms. Urbina chugged into the firehouse to reunite with her daughter. She let four friends know their children were safe. In the firehouse, friends were looking for their sons and daughters, so many getting the terrifying news that their children were “unaccounted for.”The Urbinas drove home together, and for a time, Ms. Urbina kept the television off, but then decided it was futile. Her bosses at JPMorgan Chase called to offer to drive her anywhere to help. She was grateful, but her tasks were intensely local. Lenie, who was in gym class when the trouble started, told her parents that over the public address system, she had heard someone say, “Put your hands up,” and then bang after bang.Late in the afternoon, Mr. Urbina drove home a boy he was taking care of while his parents awaited word on a brother who was unaccounted for. Walking back to his own house, he glanced at his wife, shook his head, and said, “It’s confirmed.”Ms. Urbina turned away. “I’m sleeping,” she said. “I’m speaking to you, but I am surely asleep.”She called a friend on the other side of town, who lived near the restaurant where she had jumped from her car to sprint to the school. “I thought the car might still be running,” she reported. “It wasn’t. But the keys were still in it.”