https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/julie-garwood-wired-interview-bestseller.html
Imagining the Love Between a Master Hacker and a Fed - The New York Times
Books and Literature
July 14, 2017
3116
HACK ATTACK: The romance novelist Julie Garwood is emphatically not a member of the digital generation. A grandmother born in 1944, who made her name writing steamy tales of medieval Scotland and other historical domains, Garwood uses her social media accounts mostly for publicity and the occasional tweet cheering on her hometown Kansas City Chiefs or Royals. (She also demonstrates a fondness for silly jokes: “I hate those people who knock on your door and tell you how you need to be ‘saved’ or you’ll ‘burn,’” she posted a couple of years ago. “Stupid firemen.”) So when Garwood decided to feature a brilliant hacker as the heroine of her latest book, “Wired” — which hits the hardcover fiction list at No. 7 and traces the relationship between the hacker, Allison, and a raffish F.B.I. agent — she turned to more computer-savvy acquaintances. “To say I’m not an expert on hacking is an understatement,” she told me via email. “The more I read, the more I discovered there is no such thing as a little research. The subject is so vast and fascinating. I definitely wanted Allison’s skills to be in the realm of possibility, and so, when I was unsure about something, I checked with people who are knowledgeable about programming and the workings of the web.” But the goal was still to write a novel, not a users’ manual. “While hacking was the backdrop for the book,” she said, “I didn’t want it to be the primary focus. Too much technical information would bog down the story, which is about two people who, despite coming from very different worlds, are drawn to each other. Essentially, it’s a love story.”STRONG WOMEN: In its second week on the middle grade hardcover list, “Good Night Stories for Rebel Girls,” by Elena Favilli and Francesca Cavallo, moves up one spot to No. 4. The book compiles fairy-tale-like biographies of 100 real-life women including Amelia Earhart, the Brontë sisters and Cleopatra; the authors published it themselves (through their company, Timbuktu Labs) with money they raised from Kickstarter last year. And how: After setting an original target of $40,000, they ended up receiving $675,614. “In storytelling or Hollywood movies, the feeling is more or less we know all the stories … and that is simply not true,” Cavallo told Mashable last month. “By changing the lens and the people who create the stories behind and in front of the camera, and giving the opportunity to more female writers, we are discovering new stories.” A second volume is in the works.