https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/dining/what-to-cook-this-week.html
What to Cook This Week - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Recipes
July 16, 2017
6070
Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.Good morning. Political debate continues to rage in our divided nation, the arguments falling on the deaf ears of each opposing side. Flags flutter in the breeze. They signify differently, for where they fly. It’s frustrating, wherever you stand. So you might spend today looking for a bridge. Or you might build one, straight out of your kitchen. Good food has the power to unite even the most fractured of families, as Thanksgiving occasionally shows.It’s chanterelle season, in some parts of the country. What if you could organize a brigade of people to search for some today, in the woods or at the market, and fry the fruits of that labor in butter to serve on rustic toast, or tossed in spaghetti, or scattered around a golden roast chicken served to neighbors you’ve invited into your home precisely because the bumper stickers on their vehicles are abhorrent to you, or because you suspect they suspect you of being Them, and not Us? Wouldn’t that be interesting, at the end of a midsummer weekend?It would certainly be brave. Bravery, in the history of the United States, is never a bad bet.Of course, not to be glib, neither is pizza. Pizza unites all. Making a big batch of pizza dough, for use tonight or later in the week when it’s rested and powerful, will pay flavorful dividends, whomever you serve. (You might get similar results making a sheet pan full of granola, come to think of it. Good breakfasts make for great days.)Then, on Monday night, how about turning out Mark Bittman’s smart, flavorful recipe for avocado vichysoisse? It’s a lovely summer soup, a light and meatless start to the week.For Tuesday, how about that pizza dough? You could make our cheeses pizza with it, or some pizza with peppers, or pizza with caramelized onions, ricotta and chard, or just a plain pie to serve with cold beer and a hope that Wednesday goes well, despite all.It will at the end, regardless, if you make shrimp in yellow curry as your midweek repast, and serve it with fragrant jasmine rice.Thursday, maybe you could make a meal of some charred tomatoes with egg, anchovies and bread crumbs? Or make it as a side dish for deviled chicken thighs? If time is tight, you can always backpedal, make a fast dinner of Melissa’s recipe for quick-steamed flounder with ginger, garlic and mustard greens.And then you can round out the week at the grill, either with Mark’s recipe for pork chops with cherry sauce, or Jeff Gordinier’s mom’s recipe for backyard flank steak teriyaki.Thousands and thousands more recipes to cook this weekend are on Cooking, and available to you once you’ve taken out a subscription to the site. I sure hope you’ll do so, as it will allow us to continue to do the very thing that we hope brought you here in the first place, which is to discover, report on and deliver to our readers the very best recipes in the world. (If anything goes wrong with the process, please reach out to us at cookingcare@nytimes.com. And you can always send apples and worms to me: foodeditor@nytimes.com.)In the meantime, come visit us on Facebook and Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest. Join the conversation by using the hashtag #NYTCooking. (You can find me out there on the internet as well: @samsifton on Twitter and Instagram. I’m O.K. on Facebook. And Pinterest, too.)Now, how about some Sunday reading? Not that you cook boxed mac and cheese, but have you seen this Times article about the chemicals that reside in the powdered cheese mixture that comprises the sauce? (Who am I kidding? Rare is the Cooking household that doesn’t have a few boxes squirreled away in the back of a cupboard, for use on desperate nights. The report is sobering.)I like this report on the last champions of Cherokee cuisine, in Garden and Gun.And nothing to do with food, but Outside magazine continues its string of stories about how difficult it is to live in places where people like to ski and hike and bike and fish, with an examination of Crested Butte, Colo.: “Did Airbnb Kill the Mountain Town?” Grass is always greener on the other side of the hill. Everybody hates everybody. The least we can do is cook for one another. See you tomorrow.