https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/books/review/whistlestop-john-dickerson.html
John Dickerson Tracks Winners and Losers on Campaign Trails Past - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Presidents and Presidency (US),Whistlestop: My Favorite Stories From Presidential Campaign History (Book),Dickerson  John,Whistlestop (Book)
Sept. 16, 2016
4195
WHISTLESTOPMy Favorite Stories From Presidential Campaign HistoryBy John DickersonIllustrated. 439 pp. Twelve. $30.It is the dirty little secret of the 2016 campaign that most political reporters are having the time of their lives. Yes, one candidate insults the press while the other avoids it; yes, a major party is in the process of shattering to pieces at the hands of a possibly unstable demagogue. And yes, the consequences of voters’ seeming masochism in nominating two historically dislikable individuals are, if not dire for democracy, at least a bit weird. But there’s nothing better than a good story, and 2016 is, as political stories go, one for the ages.The stories that make up “Whistlestop” are of the historical kind, but running under the surface is a sense of relish for the unexpected, the unusual, the novel and exciting. “If there is a constant to the American campaign story, it is that elites can’t predict the future very well,” John Dickerson, the political director of CBS News and the host of “Face the Nation,” writes. “News is what surprises us, which is why the political press always has news: Voters are always undoing our ­certainties.”It is true this year, of course. But it was also true in 1980, when Ronald Reagan — “a B-list actor with simple views” — was counted out; in 1948, when Harry Truman was “a gone goose”; and in 1824, when Andrew Jackson “was not a serious contender.” Even in the Republic’s early days, the powers that be were sure that “there was a pattern to how these things went,” but the voters scotched their theories.Dickerson delights in stories like these, when the pundits’ dismay was the newsman’s joy. Many of the tales retold here are familiar: Reagan grabbing the microphone in New Hampshire in 1980, Howard Dean screaming himself hoarse in Iowa in 2004. (One man’s burst of emotion was rewarded, the other’s punished.) But while these stories may have hardened into lore, they are enlivened here by Dickerson’s range of reference and eye for texture.“Whistlestop” unfolds as a series of good yarns, told in plain language with wisecracking asides here and there. These incidents may not be among democracy’s finest hours, but they are the most fun. They are the stories reporters rehash at the bar of the Des Moines ­Marriott, savoring a memorable gaffe or a juicy quote, as when Bob Dole addressed the voters of New Hampshire after a humiliating loss in the previous contest: “I’ve just been campaigning in Iowa,” he said, “for no apparent reason.”Even as he vividly sketches these episodes, Dickerson is properly skeptical of the real power of a single moment to change a campaign. Most supposed turning points were merely capstones for a trajectory that had already begun: By the time Dean unleashed the “scream” that supposedly led to his downfall, he had already lost Iowa. Some were less spontaneous than they seemed: Reagan’s team had taken control of the public-address system in advance of his microphone stunt. And others were misunderstood by the press: The editorial attacking Ed Muskie’s wife in 1972, which prompted him to get emotional and possibly cry, was only later discovered to be part of a Nixon dirty-tricks campaign. (As for the controversial allegation of crying, Dickerson reviews the tape and decrees the evidence mixed.)No bold new ground is broken here, no unknown moments rescued from obscurity or history reinterpreted in trenchant ways. Grand theoretical claims are not advanced; this is a work of storytelling. The book is organized by theme, not chronology, which sometimes makes it a jumble, particularly when events that led to one another are presented out of order: The battle inside the Republican Party between Barry Goldwater and Nelson Rockefeller in 1964, for example, comes before the ­conservative-versus-establishment showdown between Robert Taft and Dwight Eisenhower in 1952.But Dickerson knows what he is doing: “Whistlestop,” he writes at one point, is a book “to luxuriate in on the couch while you watch the sun move across the living room.” This is precisely the lyrical, laid-back rhythm the book achieves. It should be kept on the night stand and dipped into when you crave a good tale. Like Dickerson as an interviewer, it has sturdy charm; it is inquisitive, generous, probing and thoughtful. You read “Whistlestop” to put the chaos of today’s campaign into perspective — or, perhaps, to escape from it.