http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/18/fashion/stacey-bendet-eisner-suited-for-friends-staff-and-daughters.html
Stacey Bendet Eisner: Suited for Friends, Staff and Daughters - The New York Times
Bendet  Stacey,Fashion and Apparel,Eisner  Stacey Bendet
Aug. 16, 2013
912
Raised in Manhattan and Chappaqua, N.Y., Stacey Bendet Eisner, 34, is the founder of the clothing line Alice & Olivia. She lives in the West Village with her husband Eric Eisner, 39, a producer, and their two daughters, Eloise, 4, and Scarlet, 2. Wednesday Aug. 7An hour of Ashtanga yoga before my daughters wake up. My go-to outfit is a bodysuit. I love the lace ones from American Apparel. After, we all have breakfast. Then I usually have less than 10 minutes to pick out what to wear before I hear, “Mommy, she pulled my hair!” My look for a morning meeting with Andrew Rosen, my partner: a red and black blazer with a matching windowpane pleated skirt and T-shirt with a black leather collar.For dinner at Perla with Eric and two friends. I went with a romantic lace full-length skirt and a black Alternative Apparel T-shirt, plus Edie Parker clutch and leopard-print Prada heels.Thursday, Aug. 8Rainy. I wore black dot shorts with a matching jacket from the line and a Comme des Garçons eyes T-shirt.  I walk to work, so boots are a staple for me. I decided on Robert Clergerie suede platforms, about knee-high with Pretty Polly thigh-high tights. We had a meeting to discuss the set of our fashion week presentation.Then in between fittings, we had a mini-bachelorette party in the office for my assistant of eight years, with ring pops and a stripper. After work, trampoline class with Eloise. Black sweat pants.Friday, Aug. 9Fridays feel romantic to me. So I chose a 19th-century cotton lace dressing gown that I got from The Way We Wore in Los Angeles, over a pair of bell-bottom jeans. Eric kind of likes that hippie look, or he likes boyish, which is funny because it’s opposite.Saturday, Aug. 10A car ride out to our Southampton store. I was co-hosting a mini carnival for the Lung Cancer Research Foundation. I wore a sort of edgy bohemian crinkled silk maxi with lace godets along with a nude hat from Selima by Anda and Masha and a vintage locket Eric gave me for our first anniversary. The look was sort of French girl does the Hamptons.After the event, we drove to Montauk. En route, we stopped to look at the Rob Pruitt exhibition at Karma. I love sparkly pandas.Sunday, Aug. 11My morning look was kid-friendly: black Guidi boots with black cargo shorts and an ocher-colored cashmere sweater. I took Scarlet to Le Petit Puppy to visit all of the dogs. Then we met Eric and Eloise for brunch at Cafe Cluny. While the girls napped, I ran to Geminola for a little inspiration shopping. I picked up an amazing knit skirt with a ruffled bottom.Monday, Aug. 12Started the day in a flowy dark green maxi skirt, crochet collar T-shirt and a long embroidered vest with black Miu Miu boots. In the afternoon, I had fittings to oversee before my hair stylist came to get me ready for the “Austenland” screening I was hosting with the Cinema Society. I chose a parrot-print ball gown skirt and a J. Crew kids T-shirt with a vintage YSL necklace and Prada silver shoes. The parrot print is from this antique chair we ordered for a store: so dilapidated, we couldn’t use it, but I thought the print would make great wallpaper. Then I thought, why not a skirt, too?Tuesday, Aug. 13I wore a dress that’s leather on top and long washed silk on bottom with crochet lace gloves. The headband was stolen from the kids’ drawer. Had a meeting with the artist Langley Fox to discuss the 3-D printed jewelry we’re doing for our show. And then lady night with Eloise: Nobu in TriBeCa because she’s been obsessed with shrimp tempura, 16 Handles for sundaes, went home and watched “Matilda.” If Scarlet is up, we might have an ’80s dance party. She’s a wild one.