https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/29/us/uncertainty-over-whether-states-will-choose-to-expand-medicaid.html
Uncertainty Over States and Medicaid Expansion - The New York Times
States (US),Medicaid,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court,Health Insurance and Managed Care
June 28, 2012
8456
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court said on Thursday that a huge expansion of Medicaid envisioned in the 2010 health care law was an option, not a mandate, for states. Experts disagreed on whether states would take the option, one of the most important questions created by the court’s decision.Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee and a former governor, said: “Many states, maybe most, will decide that they simply cannot afford to choose to expand Medicaid. If I were governor of Tennessee, I would not expand Medicaid as the program is currently run.”Matt D. Salo, executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors, representing state officials, said his initial sense was that many states would expand the program, though he said the expansion “is now technically optional.”And Sara Rosenbaum, a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University, predicted that “only a small number of states” would pass up the opportunity to expand Medicaid, given the generous terms of the deal authorized by Congress.The Medicaid expansion is a central part of the law, accounting for roughly half of all the uninsured people expected to gain coverage, according to the Congressional Budget Office. It estimates that 17 million uninsured people will gain coverage through Medicaid, at a cost to the federal government of $930 billion from 2014 to 2022.While upholding the expansion of Medicaid, the Supreme Court limited the power of the federal government to secure compliance by penalizing states that refuse to go along.Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said the federal government could not compel states to comply by cutting off all the federal money they receive for existing Medicaid programs. The threatened loss of so much federal money — more than 10 percent of state budgets — “is economic dragooning that leaves the states with no real option but to acquiesce in the Medicaid expansion,” the chief justice said. “A state could hardly anticipate that Congress’s reservation of the right to ‘alter’ or ‘amend’ the Medicaid program included the power to transform it so dramatically.”The chief justice said Congress had put “a gun to the head” of states by requiring them to expand Medicaid or risk the loss of all federal Medicaid money. “States,” he said, “must have a genuine choice.”Senior administration officials said Thursday that they were confident states would expand Medicaid when it was offered to them as an option. However, Republican governors like Mitch Daniels in Indiana and Bob McDonnell in Virginia refused to make commitments.Mr. Daniels said the “Medicaid expansion would put one in four Hoosiers — approximately 500,000 new enrollees — in Medicaid at a cost of approximately $2 billion” to the state over 10 years. Officials in other states, like Georgia and Nevada, said they had not decided what to do.Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana and a principal author of the new law, said the federal government was offering states “a big juicy carrot” as an incentive to expand Medicaid. But he said he was unsure whether his own state would go along.Normally, the federal government and the states share Medicaid costs, with the federal government paying an average of 57 percent of the total.Under the new law, the federal government will pay the full cost of covering those newly eligible for Medicaid for three years, from 2014 to 2016. The federal share will then gradually decline; it will be 90 percent, starting in 2020.But many state officials worry that Congress will reduce the federal share and shift more costs to the states as it seeks ways to reduce the federal budget deficit.It is a common misconception that Medicaid covers all poor people. In fact, many low-income people, including millions of childless adults and parents, cannot obtain coverage.Medicaid eligibility rules are notoriously complicated. To qualify, a person must fit into one of several dozen categories. The new law will simplify eligibility, sweeping away many of those categories in favor of a single standard: People under the age of 65 would generally qualify for Medicaid if their income was less than or equal to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (up to $25,390 for a family of three).If a state chooses not to expand Medicaid, it may be in a peculiar position. People with incomes from 133 percent to 400 percent of the poverty level could obtain federal subsidies to buy private insurance, through online markets known as insurance exchanges, but many people with incomes below that level could not obtain assistance.Senator John D. Rockefeller IV, Democrat of West Virginia and a champion of Medicaid, said he was deeply concerned that the Supreme Court had “seriously undermined” health care options for low-income people by giving states a choice.Chief Justice Roberts said Congress could offer money to states to expand Medicaid and could attach conditions to such grants. But he said, “what Congress is not free to do is to penalize states that choose not to participate in that new program by taking away their existing Medicaid funding.”The federal government has long asserted that it could cut off all Medicaid money to a state that flouted requirements for the program. It has never used this sledgehammer, but the existence of the power has often induced states to comply.