http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/25/us/politics/25debate.html
Clinton and Obama Campaigns Spar Over Debate - The New York Times
Clinton  Hillary Rodham,United States International Relations,Obama  Barack,Presidential Election of 2008,Elections,Presidents and Presidency (US),Leaders and Leadership,Debating,International Relations,Democratic Party,YouTube.com,Albright  Madeleine K,Iran,North Korea
July 25, 2007
7645
Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton sharply criticized Senator Barack Obama for the first time yesterday as inexperienced on national security, calling him “irresponsible and frankly naïve” for saying he would be willing to meet without preconditions with leaders of Iran, North Korea and three other nations during his first year as president.Mr. Obama responded swiftly, saying the Clinton campaign was concocting a “fabricated controversy.” He also contended that Mrs. Clinton’s skeptical view of such meetings was similar to that of President Bush.Mrs. Clinton’s remark was a rare instance of her personally intensifying the months-old effort by her campaign to portray her, a two-term senator and former first lady, as the most prepared Democrat to become commander in chief in 2009, and Mr. Obama, a senator since 2005, as not ready for the job. Mr. Obama, meanwhile, has for months questioned Mrs. Clinton’s judgment on national security, particularly her vote in 2002 to authorize the war in Iraq.The candidates’ back-and-forth was the continuation of a disagreement that began Monday night as a flash point in the YouTube debate of the eight Democratic presidential candidates.Mrs. Clinton’s criticism of Mr. Obama yesterday came in response to a reporter’s question about an Obama campaign memorandum that was released earlier in the day. The memorandum, from Mr. Obama’s communications staff, accused her of flip-flopping on whether she would talk directly with leaders of those countries as well as of Cuba, Syria and Venezuela.Mrs. Clinton has never publicly promised to talk directly to those leaders. But on the campaign trail this spring she has repeatedly criticized the Bush administration for not dealing directly with Iranian leaders, and she has chided President Bush for saying “he will not talk with bad people.”The candidates were asked at the debate if they would be willing to meet unconditionally with those five leaders,  people the Bush administration regards as hostile at best. Mr. Obama said he would, citing a history of American diplomacy with enemies.“It is a disgrace that we have not spoken to them,” he said.He also recalled President Ronald Reagan as excoriating Soviet leaders publicly while negotiating with them privately, an example that Mrs. Clinton has also used, almost word-for-word, in criticizing current White House diplomatic strategy.Mrs. Clinton replied next, and chose not to reach for the Soviet example. Instead she gave a toughly worded answer about the complexities of diplomacy, an answer that was not inconsistent with her past remarks, yet that conveyed sharpened skepticism about the leaders of nations like Iran and North Korea.While pledging a “very vigorous diplomatic effort” including presidential envoys “to test the waters,” she said she would not “promise a meeting at that high a level before you know what the intentions are.”“I don’t want to be used for propaganda purposes,” Mrs. Clinton said.“We’re not going to just have our president meet with Fidel Castro and Hugo Chávez and, you know, the president of North Korea, Iran and Syria until we know better what the way forward would be,” she added to applause.Within hours, Clinton advisers were arguing that Mr. Obama’s response was too soft, while Obama advisers were making two points: That their candidate was not promising meetings but said only that he was willing to consider them, and that Mrs. Clinton’s response mirrored the president’s pattern of not meeting with leaders of “rogue nations,” as he calls them.By yesterday morning, both the Obama and Clinton campaigns had prepared memorandums to showcase these talking points.The Obama campaign released its memorandum first, arguing that Mr. Obama would pursue “tough diplomacy” but also use carrots like leader-to-leader talks; Mrs. Clinton, the document asserted, disagreed with using “every tool at the president’s disposal to address problems before they become threats.”A half-hour later, a reporter from The Quad-City Times, in Iowa, asked Mrs. Clinton about the Obama campaign memorandum. According to the newspaper, Mrs. Clinton said that she had not reversed herself on leader-to-leader talks — and that she would not rule them out. But she also asserted, according the paper, that Mr. Obama was regretting his answer at Monday’s debate, an answer, she said, “that was irresponsible and frankly naïve.”Obama advisers said yesterday that they had struck a nerve, prompting Mrs. Clinton to attack. While the Obama memorandum came first, it is another thing for the candidate, in this case, Mrs. Clinton, to go on the offensive herself.The Clinton campaign, meanwhile, arranged for reporters to interview Madeleine K. Albright, a secretary of state under President Bill Clinton. Ms. Albright, who supports Mrs. Clinton, said her answer in the debate was “very sophisticated” and showed her “understanding of how the diplomatic tool needs to be used.”While Ms. Albright declined to comment on Mr. Obama’s response, the Clinton campaign released its own memorandum doing so yesterday afternoon.“Senator Obama has committed to presidential-level meetings with some of the world’s worst dictators without precondition during his first year in office,” it argued. “Senator Clinton is committed to vigorous diplomacy but understands that it is a mistake to commit the power and prestige of America’s presidency years ahead of time by making such a blanket commitment.”Mr. Obama chose to respond by doing his own interview with The Quad-City Times. “I didn’t say these guys were going to come over for a cup of coffee some afternoon,” the newspaper quoted him as saying.“From what I heard, the point was, well, I wouldn’t do that because it might allow leaders like Hugo Chávez to score propaganda points,” he said, referring to the Venezuelan president. “I think that is absolutely wrong.”According to the newspaper, Mr. Obama also said that, in terms of national security, an example of “irresponsible and naïve” action was voting to authorize the Iraq war, as Mrs. Clinton had.Both campaigns declined requests to interview the candidates yesterday.