https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/business/media/shattered-hillary-clinton-campaign-book-tv-series.html
‘Shattered,’ Book About Clinton Campaign, May Become TV Series - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sony Pictures Television,Davis Entertainment,Books and Literature,Shattered: Inside Hillary Clinton's Doomed Campaign (Book),Allen  Jonathan,Parnes  Amie
May 4, 2017
2190
A new book about Hillary Clinton’s loss to Donald J. Trump in the presidential election could be heading to the small screen.“Shattered,” by the journalists Jonathan Allen and Amie Parnes, has been optioned by TriStar Television, a division of Sony Pictures Television, and Davis Entertainment for a limited series. The deal was confirmed by Bridget Matzie, a literary agent for the authors. A network is not yet attached to the project.Among the first post-mortems of the election, “Shattered” has been a mainstay in dinner-party chatter in political circles since its publication. The continued interest in the election has brought talk of other book-to-TV series as well. The political journalists and analysts Mark Halperin and John Heilemann are currently working on a book about the 2016 election that has also been acquired for a mini-series by HBO.Mrs. Clinton’s camp took to Twitter in an attempt to bat down some of the book’s depictions of campaign dysfunction.In a post on Medium, Christina Reynolds, a deputy communications director for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, expressed dissatisfaction with the book’s portrait of the campaign.“It’s hard to read a depiction of the campaign that paints a dedicated, cohesive team as mercenaries with questionable motives who lacked a loyalty to a candidate described as ‘imperial’ and removed from the campaign,” Ms. Reynolds wrote.The book’s assertions of campaign infighting and dysfunction — and the notion that Mrs. Clinton was at times befuddled by the frustration and resentment expressed by voters — cast an unflattering light just as Mrs. Clinton has re-emerged in a series of public appearances.Besides talk about the campaign, a TV series could set off a popular Washington parlor game: Which actors and actresses might portray some of the more prominent players?No writers have been chosen for the project yet.