https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/28/us/a-governors-long-legacy-of-brashness-and-brawls.html
A Governor’s Long Legacy of Brashness and Brawls - The New York Times
Texas,Perry  Rick,Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  Governors,Bush  George W
Dec. 27, 2014
3519
AUSTIN, Tex. —  When Gov. Rick Perry leaves office next month, he will wrap up a three-decade stretch in state elective office that has concluded with a stint as the longest-serving governor in Texas history.Mr. Perry’s 14-year tenure as governor coincided with the ever-tightening grip of Republican rule, sweeping conservative reforms and more than a few controversies.It was also marked by unprecedented population growth and enviable economic expansion in Texas. The state led the nation in job creation under Governor Perry. Texas also added more people than any other state from 2000-10 and has continued to grow.From his first legislative session as governor in 2001, when Mr. Perry shocked the political establishment with a record 83 vetoes, to his final days in office, when he used rare emergency powers to send National Guard troops to the border with Mexico, the ruggedly handsome farm boy from West Texas signaled early and often that he would cut a unique and flashy trail through the state’s political countryside.Boiling down Mr. Perry’s legacy into a few bullet points is not easy and will undoubtedly leave supporters and detractors alike unsatisfied.But memories fade, and not every event that seems newsworthy today will stand out in the history books or become part of the state’s collective political memory. (And there could be a new set of mileposts on a future legacy tour if Mr. Perry runs for president again — a move he is considering.)With those caveats, here are six things — actually, make it five and a half — Texans will probably remember long after Mr. Perry has left the governor’s mansion.1. LONGEVITY: When Mr. Perry hands power to Greg Abbott on Jan. 20, he will have served 5,144 days in office, making the previous records seem puny and insignificant. Gov. Allan Shivers, who took over after Gov. Beauford Jester died in 1949, previously held the distinction with a mere seven and a half years, back when the terms lasted only two years.Bill Clements, elected in 1978 as the first Republican governor since Reconstruction, was the first to serve two full four-year terms, but they were not consecutive. In 1998, George W. Bush became the first governor to win two consecutive four-year terms, but he left for Washington halfway through the second one.Mr. Perry, who had been elected lieutenant governor when Mr. Bush won his second term, was sworn into office as the 47th Texas governor on Dec. 21, 2000, and he went on to win three consecutive four-year terms. He has used the longevity to wield power with an increasingly tight fist.At last count, Mr. Perry had made more than 8,000 appointments, allowing him to put his conservative stamp on every corner of state government — all from a perch that the state’s founding fathers, suspicious of centralized authority, intentionally weakened.Mr. Perry championed sweeping curbs on lawsuits, some of the most stringent abortion limits in the nation, the strictest voter ID statute in the country, a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage and steep cuts to programs once seen as sacrosanct, including public education and women’s health programs.People crossed Mr. Perry at their peril, whether they were appointees who dared support a political challenger or lawmakers who opposed his legislative program. Jim Henson, a Texas Tribune pollster and director of the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas at Austin, said Mr. Perry expanded the powers of the governor’s office “in a way that is certainly not contemplated in the Texas Constitution nor really in the political culture of the state.”“I think Perry really learned how to use the office,” he said. (The university is a corporate sponsor of The Texas Tribune.)2. THE TEXAS MIRACLE: The appropriate use of the word “miracle” in relation to Texas is in the eyes of the beholder.Critics find plenty wrong with a state that has the highest rate of uninsured residents in the nation, produces more greenhouse-gas emissions than any other state and has led the nation in workplace fatalities for 10 of the last 14 years.But any governor in America would be happy to boast, as Mr. Perry has, about the economic expansion Texas has experienced.From 2003-13, Texas produced a third of the net new jobs in the United States. It has been the top exporting state for the last 12 years, and Texas surpassed California in 2014 as the top exporter of technology, according to the TechAmerica Foundation.Under Mr. Perry, Texas has been rated as the state with the best business climate five times by Site Selection magazine, and the governor credits the state’s pro-business policies, including millions in tax subsidies used to entice companies such as Toyota, as a major factor driving the boom.Detractors note that corporate relocations account for a tiny percentage of new jobs and that the state, brimming with shale oil, would rank as a major employment center no matter who was governor.3. THE MARGINS TAX: Texas was in trouble in 2005 when the state Supreme Court declared the state’s school finance system unconstitutional. The chief concern was that too many districts were charging the maximum rate for local property taxes, prompting the court to declare that Texas had effectively adopted a prohibited statewide property tax.At the same time, the state’s loophole-ridden business tax had become all but voluntary. It applied only to corporations and limited liability companies, so many businesses reformed as nontaxable limited partnerships to avoid paying it.The solution Mr. Perry advocated: Craft a business tax that applied to most companies regardless of structure; raise the cigarette tax by $1 a pack; and use all that money to reduce property taxes while giving teachers a $2,000 raise.The plan drew plenty of foes. Democrats said it still left schools badly underfunded. And Republican activists complained (and still do) that the revamped business levy was an unconstitutional income tax.But Mr. Perry got the plan passed with bipartisan support; the schools stayed open; and businesses that used to pay nothing became taxpayers for the first time.“Folks may not have liked the end result, but the margins tax, when you look how it came about, it was really Perry’s finest hour,” said Dale Craymer, president of the business-backed Texas Taxpayers and Research Association. “It was a crisis averted.”The tax is still unpopular, and some Republican leaders want to modify or even get rid of it, but they are likely to find that easier said than done.4. THE OOPS MOMENT: For 53 cringe-inducing seconds during a nationally televised Republican presidential primary debate on Nov. 9, 2011, Mr. Perry desperately searched his frozen brain for the name of the third federal department he wanted to shut down if elected president.“I would do away with the Education, the, uh, Commerce and let’s see,” he said, looking down at his notes for clues. “I can’t. The third one I can’t. Sorry. Oops.” (It was Energy.)Commentators pronounced Mr. Perry’s presidential effort dead, and in the ensuing weeks, late-night comedians made the Texas governor the butt of endless jokes.After his withdrawal from the race weeks later, Mr. Perry blamed health problems and a lack of preparation. Now, with a bespectacled new look, more time to study up and the benefit of hindsight, he is promising a better performance should he run for president again in 2016.The significance of the “oops” moment is often overstated in recaps of Mr. Perry’s first presidential bid. According to polling data, his popularity had already declined significantly following fumbles in a previous debate and a strongly worded defense of a Texas policy allowing the children of undocumented immigrants to pay in-state tuition for public colleges and universities.But like Vice President Dan Quayle’s misspelling of potato (with an “e”) in a school classroom in 1992, or the Democrat Howard Dean’s primal scream as his presidential campaign was going down the toilet in 2004, Mr. Perry’s 2011 debate meltdown has earned a permanent spot in the political blooper hall of fame.5. THE INDICTMENT: Political forecasts called for smooth sailing as Mr. Perry prepared for the final victory lap at the end of his long tenure. A felony indictment changed all that.Now, just like the governor’s often messy battles with political rivals and his no-holds-barred approach to legislative negotiation, Mr. Perry is spending his remaining days in office at the center of a swirling controversy he helped create.On Aug. 15, a grand jury indicted Mr. Perry on two felony counts — abuse of official capacity and coercion of a public servant — stemming from his 2013 veto of funds for a special public corruption investigative unit in the Travis County district attorney’s office. Mr. Perry blasted the prosecution as a politically motivated “farce,” and has trotted out legal scholars from both sides of the spectrum to criticize it.No matter what happens, Mr. Perry’s 11th-hour ride through the criminal justice system guarantees a mention in the history books. He is the first Texas governor since James Ferguson, known as Pa, in 1917 to be indicted, and the uncommonly brash way he has confronted the allegations provided a unique twist to the way potential presidential contenders handle criminal justice challenges.5 1/2. SWAGGER: Granted, swagger is not an event, a policy accomplishment or a political milestone. It is a style — a cocky way of walking, talking and conducting business. And Mr. Perry has made it his calling card.When a coyote threatened his Labrador puppy in 2010, Mr. Perry did not grab the pooch and run. He pulled out his pistol and shot the coyote.When Mr. Perry was courting the Tea Party in 2009, he did not just promise to get the federal government off the people’s backs. He flirted with secession.And when Mr. Perry was booked on felony charges at the Travis County Courthouse this year, he did not slip in quietly through the back door. He held a news conference in the courthouse square. After smiling for his mug shot, he went out for ice cream near downtown Austin and posted a picture online to show he was keeping his cool.Later, through his political action committee, he sold T-shirts with the mug shot plastered on the front.Love Mr. Perry or hate him, that is swagger.