http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/22/arts/television/22lebowitz.html
Fran Lebowitz in HBO’s ‘Public Speaking’ - Review - The New York Times
Writing and Writers,Television,Lebowitz  Fran,Documentary Films and Programs,Scorsese  Martin,Public Speaking (TV Program)
Nov. 21, 2010
8914
To many Americans — millions, really — the name Fran Lebowitz doesn’t mean much. But in certain precincts, vital to the cultural functioning of both coasts, she is famously a friend, a crank, a climber, a cautionary tale, an iconoclast and a mouth. In “Public Speaking,” Martin Scorsese’s enormously enjoyable  and perceptive documentary about her, Ms. Lebowitz’s endearing narcissism is a study in the notion that arrogance and insecurity are largely two sides of the same cocktail coaster.The film, to be shown  Monday on HBO, has its subject delivering her opinions for 85 minutes, mostly from a booth at the Waverly Inn, the West Village restaurant co-owned by Graydon Carter, one of the film’s producers and the editor of Vanity Fair. Known for a writer’s block that has continued almost unimpeded for three decades, Ms. Lebowitz occupies a shaky career category: professional wit. She has made a living out of talking, primarily lecturing on college campuses, where she presents herself as an emissary from the world of urbanity, telling the young how it is now, and how much better it was then.Presumably some percentage of her audience is put in danger of aspiring to her path. One can only imagine the horrified reaction of parents receiving the call: “I’m not going to go to grad school at Caltech.  I’m just going to be funny.”At 60 Ms. Lebowitz is at once a type and unclassifiable. Worshipful of Manhattan; nostalgic for what the city once was, socially and intellectually; and intensely risk averse, she is, in a certain dimension of her sensibility, only one or two micromillimeters from Woody Allen. (Talking about her childhood anxieties she sounds just like him: “Climbing a tree makes sense to me only if behind you there are Nazis.”)Having published two collections of essays and a children’s book during the past 32 years, she stands several continents away from him — and arguably most sentient adults — in any measure of productivity. But through some magic of genetic temperament, or will, or just plain laziness, she has not turned into the predictable cliché: the writer in paralysis who reclusively subsists on embitterment and Maker’s Mark. Ms. Lebowitz may be the only writer of her kind who doesn’t appear to be suffering. She hasn’t had a drink since she was 19 and never seems to stay home.“Public Speaking” perfectly captures the pleasure she takes in observing the world while subtly revealing the crippling dimensions of perfectionism, the outsize ego it requires to achieve a certain kind of creative failure. Nothing, Ms. Lebowitz says in the film, leaves her as fearful as writing. But the certainty with which she declaims (on gender, on connoisseurship, on Times Square and, all too reductively and even nonsensically, on race and politics) suggests that she isn’t afraid of writing because she worries she won’t be good enough. She is afraid of writing because she worries that she won’t be Alex de Tocqueville enough.In the film even her turns of self-deprecation are aggrandizing. A riff on her ineptitude around technology — forget Twitter, she doesn’t even use a computer — ultimately leads her to declare that she is such an astute witness to street life because she is the only one among us, in our bleak BlackBerry civilization, really paying attention.The diatribe romanticizes the unplugged life, having the effect of conveniently positioning her closer to the world of Melville than to TMZ. But the trouble with tuning out is that it keeps you from realizing that many people have already said what you think. Ms. Lebowitz is brilliant on the subject of strollers, in vitro babies, her car (“it’s such a subtle shade of pearl gray, straight men think it’s white”), but she is hardly immune from the trite. (“Here’s what news used to be: information.”)As a writer Ms. Lebowitz had early and great success with two books, “Metropolitan Life” and “Social Studies,” which have been collected into the recently rereleased volume, “The Fran Lebowitz Reader.” It is in itself a wonderful means of procrastination for anyone inspired by its author’s tendencies. (How do you know if your child is a writer? she says, “Your obstetrician holds his stethoscope to your abdomen and only hears excuses.”)Like the film, which intersperses clips of William F. Buckley Jr. catfighting with Gore Vidal and Serge Gainsbourg singing an ingeniously lunatic tribute to Manhattan buildings, the book is a paean to a more sophisticated and exciting city, one you can only be grateful Ms. Lebowitz is still living in.PUBLIC SPEAKINGHBO, Monday night at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Presented by HBO Documentary Films and American Express Portraits in association with Consolidated Documentaries and Sikelia Productions. Directed by Martin Scorsese; Ted Griffin and John Hayes, executive producers; Graydon Carter,  Fran Lebowitz, Mr. Scorsese and Margaret Bodde, producers; Jenny  Carchman, supervising producer; Erin Edeiken and Chris Garrett,  associate producers; Damian Rodriguez and David Tedeschi, editors; Ellen  Kuras, director of photography.