https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/10/business/dealbook/reckitt-mead-johnson-durex.html
Reckitt Benckiser, Maker of Durex, to Acquire Mead Johnson for $16.6 Billion - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Mead Johnson Nutrition,Reckitt Benckiser
Feb. 10, 2017
880
LONDON — The British consumer goods company Reckitt Benckiser, which makes Durex condoms and Air Wick fresheners, said on Friday that it had agreed to buy Mead Johnson Nutrition, the maker of Enfamil baby formula, in a $16.6 billion deal that would significantly expand its sales in developing countries.The combined company would have about 40 percent of its sales in developing markets, and China would be its second-largest market after the United States, Reckitt Benckiser said. The British company derives about 80 percent of its revenue from its so-called power brands, and the deal would add the well-known Enfamil label to its stable of products.“The acquisition of Mead Johnson is a significant step forward in R.B.’s journey as a leader in consumer health,” Rakesh Kapoor, the chief executive of Reckitt Benckiser, said in a news release. “This is a natural extension to R.B.’s consumer health portfolio of power brands, which are already trusted by millions of mothers, reinforcing the importance of health and hygiene for their families.”Under the terms of the deal, Reckitt Benckiser would pay $90 a share for Mead Johnson, a 24 percent premium to its closing price on Feb. 1, the day before reports emerged that the companies were in discussions. Mead Johnson shares closed at $83.05 on Thursday.The transaction valued Mead Johnson at $17.9 billion, including debt.The deal is subject to the approval of the boards of directors of both companies, as well as regulatory and shareholder approval. It is expected to be completed in the third quarter.On a conference call with journalists, Mr. Kapoor said that Reckitt Benckiser had been looking into a possible acquisition of Mead Johnson, among other companies, for several years.Mead Johnson, based in Glenview, Ill., reported sales of $3.7 billion in 2016. More than half of its sales come from China, Mexico and the United States. It was spun off from Bristol-Myers Squibb in 2009.“As part of Reckitt Benckiser, a bigger health care-focused business recognized for its marketing capabilities, we will derive benefits from both increased scale and diversification,” Kasper Jakobsen, the chief executive of Mead Johnson, said in a news release.Reckitt Benckiser said it expected to achieve 200 million pounds, or about $250 million, in annual cost savings three years after the completion of the deal.There is a $480 million termination fee.Separately, Reckitt Benckiser reported on Friday a full-year profit increase of 5 percent, to £1.83 billion, on revenue of £9.9 billion.Robey Warshaw, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Deutsche Bank, HSBC and the law firms Davis Polk & Wardwell and Linklaters advised Reckitt Benckiser. Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and the law firm Kirkland & Ellis advised Mead Johnson.