http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/04/world/americas/04brazil.html
Dancing Into the Evening, Brazil Celebrates Arrival on World Stage - The New York Times
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil),Olympic Games (2008)
Oct. 3, 2009
6954
RIO DE JANEIRO — Carnaval came four months early to Brazil this year.Tens of thousands of Rio’s samba-loving residents poured out onto Copacabana Beach where they danced into the evening in flip-flops and green-and-yellow bikinis to celebrate their city’s selection as the site of the 2016 Olympics.There was pride and the feeling that something powerful had just happened to the country. The International Olympic Committee’s decision to entrust the games to Brazil — the first in South America — confirmed this country’s arrival onto the world stage with a defining moment that to many here promised even greater prosperity in the decade to come.“My Brazil is solid,” said Celso de Nascimento, an electrical technician, who danced shirtless with his wife in the hot afternoon sun. “We have it all.”Noting that Rio beat out Chicago for the honor, he said, “We aren’t the United States, but we are getting there, and we will get there.”The decision was also a seminal achievement for President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a former auto plant worker with a fourth-grade education who has helped make Brazil the economic and political leader of South America.“Brazil went from a second-class country to a first-class country, and today we began to receive the respect we deserve,” Mr. da Silva said from Copenhagen after the vote on Friday, pulling out a handkerchief several times during the ceremony to dab cheeks wet with tears. “I could die now and it already would have been worth it.”The Olympic glow seemed to reinforce the perception that Mr. da Silva was born under the luckiest of stars. Brazil rode a commodity and consumer-spending boom the past half-decade as the government tamed inflation, expanded the economy and narrowed a wide inequality gap. In just the past two years Brazil has discovered huge troves of deep-sea oil.With the soccer World Cup coming to Brazil in 2014 — the final match is to be played at Rio’s Maracanã Stadium — the country is set to be a showcase for two of the world’s greatest sporting events.When he was elected in 2002, Mr. da Silva’s background as a union leader and a leftist unnerved international financial markets and the Bush administration. But he adopted a pragmatic approach that calmed foreign investors and solidified Brazil’s economy. His charisma and popularity, both in and out of his country, helped him eclipse Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez as the region’s most influential leader.While Mr. Chávez has been largely shunned by the United States, Mr. da Silva has rubbed shoulders with an admiring President Obama, negotiated military deals with President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and become an important player in global climate discussions. Two weeks ago he was feted in New York at a dinner attended by American Congress members and the chief executive of Exxon.“The Olympics are a crowning achievement in the efforts that Brazil has made to participate actively in world affairs,” said Amaury de Souza, a political analyst in Rio. For Mr. da Silva, the Olympics have been part of an “obsession” with being remembered as a great president, Mr. de Souza said, of Mr. da Silva’s overcoming his humble beginnings.Mr. da Silva, a sports fan, threw himself into the Olympic bid process, traveling to London and Beijing to visit Olympic facilities and meet with committee delegates, and ensuring that Rio’s bid had financial guarantees at the federal level. Since 2003, he has increased spending on sports programs in the country to $773 million from $209 million, the Sports Ministry said.In Denmark on Friday Mr. da Silva’s speech in support of the bid seemed to win votes abroad and at home.“I had hoped that we could win, but after the speech by Lula I had no doubt whatsoever,” said Daniel Martins, 46, a lawyer who ambled by on his bicycle to take in the party in Copacabana. “We are so moved, so proud to be Brazilians today, to be Cariocas,” he said, using the name for Rio residents.Still, amid the celebration, the realization began to dawn that the hard work was just beginning. Rio’s $11 billion budget for urban infrastructure projects for the Olympics was three times larger than the bid of any other finalist, and its history of overpromising projects for the 2007 Pan-American Games left a bad taste in the mouths of many here.Organizers will have to build more hotel rooms and complete a ring road to relieve congestion to the airport. A high-speed train from Rio to São Paulo is expected to be completed in time for the World Cup.Some argued that Brazil was not ready to host the Games, and that the money could be better spent relieving poverty and further developing sports programs in a country where most professional athletes earn very little.“Having an Olympics here now is an insult to Brazil’s underprivileged, including to the athletes,” said Alberto Murray Neto, a lawyer in São Paulo and former Brazilian Olympic committee member who opposed Rio’s bid.There is also a palpable dread that many Brazilians express privately that Rio will embarrass the country, that it will not be able to improve the choking traffic and that the city’s urban blight and rampant drug-fueled violence will be laid bare for all the world to see.“They are going to make the city pretty” for the event, said Helen Andrade, who works the front counter at a luncheonette here. “But just like they did with the Pan-Am games, they will throw a lot of spiffy-looking policemen at the situation and when it’s over, one day later there won’t be anything.”Still, “the Olympics gives us the perfect pretext to push ahead, in reforming the cities, in making more and more decisive efforts in reducing poverty,” said Mr. de Souza, the political analyst. “This is an ongoing battle. But what we won today will be an essential driver in our efforts to improve the country.”On Copacabana Beach, the Cariocas bouncing a giant green beach ball emblazoned with the words “this is Rio’s time” harbored no doubts or reservations. Couples kissed passionately between sips of beer. The drum corps Salgueiro, the samba school champion of the 2009 Carnaval, whipped the crowd into a frenzy.“This is the moment for Rio, for South America,” said Paulo Cesar, 30, as three tipsy friends chanted “Bra-zil!” behind him.“The moment is now.”