https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/nyregion/in-sheepshead-bay-a-taste-of-the-turkish-coast.html
In Sheepshead Bay, a Taste of the Turkish Coast - The New York Times
Restaurants,Sheepshead Bay (Brooklyn  NY)
July 6, 2017
7691
Was every table at Liman, a Turkish seafood restaurant in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, celebrating a special occasion? If that wasn’t the case on a recent Saturday night, it sure seemed that way. Groups of 10, 16 and even 20 people filled its two dining rooms with laughter, smiles and liveliness.Customers in the back had views of the water. Some had red blankets, supplied by the restaurant, draped over their shoulders to warm them from the cool breeze streaming in from the balcony.Eric Lazar, who lives in the financial district and owns an air-conditioning company, was surrounded by relatives, and everyone at the table was digging into large platters of thick grilled octopus chunks and bowls of eggplant purée and hummus accompanied by pide, a thick Turkish bread. Mr. Lazar’s grandfather, Joseph Abramowicz, had just turned 95 and had requested Liman for his birthday party.“I’ve never been before, but my grandfather has told me about how he likes coming here, and I understand the appeal,” Mr. Lazar said. “The food is good, and there’s a get-away-from-it-all vibe.”Vladimir and Jane Shukhman, seated nearby, were far more seasoned patrons. The couple, who live in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, have come practically every Saturday night since 2000. “We walked by here for a year without going in, and once we tried it, we were hooked,” said Mr. Shukhman. “When we’re here, we’re transported to another place and always have fun.”Just then, Liman’s owner, Yusuf Basusta, wearing a blue plaid suit, appeared and sat down with the couple to chat. “It’s unfair to call them customers because they’re so much more than that,” Mr. Basusta said of the Shukhmans. “They’re friends.”In fact, with the way Mr. Basusta circulated that night, shaking hands and effusively hugging people, many of the diners seemed to be his friends.Mr. Basusta is from Rize, a city along Turkey’s Black Sea coast, and came to the United States to work as a waiter for the Royal Caribbean cruise line. He ended up moving to Brooklyn and opening Liman, which means “seaport” in Turkish, after visiting a cousin in Brighton Beach. “My cousin ran a Turkish kebab house, and all of the Turkish restaurants in New York only served kebabs, so I got the idea to introduce people to the excellent seafood I grew up eating,” he said.His fish is artfully displayed on a bed of ice behind a case near the restaurant’s entrance. Wild branzino, red mullet and whole turbot arrive several times a week from Turkey. He also gets black bass from Montauk and snapper from Florida. Also on offer are oversize salads and mezze, such as zucchini pancakes, fried liver cubes and braised red beans.The front of the restaurant has fishing nets hanging from the ceiling and a festive atmosphere. There, Larisa Kriss and her husband, Garry, were with their children and two other families. They had made the trip to Liman, as they do weekly, from Marlboro, N.J. “This is where we get together for great food and great times,” Ms. Kriss said.Jeremy Roizin, who lives across the street, was having dinner with his parents, Edouard and Irina, and his children Rachel, 7, and Ryan, 2. “We do a lot of takeout from here, but when we come in, it always feels special,” he said.His mother offered her perspective: “Liman is unique because you can come here for a casual meal or a nice night out. Not many places can claim to offer that.”