http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/16/world/asia/16australia.html
Dozens Die After Refugee Boat Sinks Off Christmas Island - The New York Times
Christmas Island,Australia,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Accidents and Safety,Boats and Boating
Dec. 15, 2010
4785
HONG KONG — More than two dozen people thought to be seeking asylum in Australia died  Wednesday after their boat smashed into the rocks of Christmas Island, setting off a desperate rescue effort by the Australian authorities.Twenty-seven bodies had been retrieved while another 41 passengers were pulled from the ocean, according to the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. One person aboard the small boat reached the island independently, the agency said.The search-and-rescue operation was continuing Wednesday evening, suggesting that the number of people aboard the boat may be higher than earlier estimates by local news media.Earlier in the day, Australian authorities confirmed that a significant number of people traveling aboard the boat had died.“While many details about this tragedy are still unconfirmed, I understand there have been a large number of fatalities and numerous injuries to those aboard the vessel, including women and children,” the West Australia premier, Colin Barnett, said in a statement.Prime Minister Julia Gillard said in a statement that she would return to work from vacation on Wednesday evening to oversee the rescue operations.“This has been a tragic event, and it will be some time before there is a full picture of what has happened,” Ms. Gillard said.Officials in Indonesia’s Navy and Migration Department were unable to say if the boat had set off from the country, which is the main staging point for asylum seekers heading by sea to Australia.The Customs and Border Protection Service said the boat was sighted foundering northeast of Flying Fish Cove, located on the northern tip of the island.Television and newspaper Web sites showed grim images of the wooden boat, about 20 to 30 feet long, splintered in the sea after slamming into the island’s sharp rocks, with people in the water being tossed onto the jagged shoreline. Several people, including women and children, were shown floating among debris in the Indian Ocean. Residents of Christmas Island tried to throw life preservers and other objects to people at sea to help keep them afloat.The Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia was sending two critical-care teams from Perth to Christmas Island, said an agency spokeswoman, Joeley Pettit-Scott. The teams expected to reach the island on Wednesday night, she said. Of the critical patients, two men have head injuries and one woman has blunt abdominal trauma, she said.Australia is a destination for many asylum seekers, attracting people from as far away as Afghanistan and Iraq. Christmas Island is a frequent target.  A detention center exists on the island to house hopeful refugees.Australia admitted 11,100 refugees in 2009, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said in its latest report. The country trailed the United States and Canada for refugee admissions last year, the high commissioner said.Australia has had one of the toughest asylum programs in the developed world in recent years, placing new arrivals  in isolated detention centers, surrounded by electrified razor-wire fences while their claims are assessed.In July, Ms. Gillard announced plans to create a regional center on the island of East Timor that would process refugees.In his statement, Mr. Barnett said Western Australia Police were working with the country’s Federal Police to help with the rescue operations and medical facilities in the region were on standby, waiting to treat injured survivors.“Conditions in the ocean off Christmas Island are extremely dangerous and a rescue and recovery operation coordinated by the Commonwealth is currently under way,” he said.