http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/09/nyregion/prosecution-rests-in-trial-of-dean-skelos-and-his-son.html
Closing Arguments Begin in Trial of Dean Skelos and His Son - The New York Times
Skelos  Dean G,Skelos  Adam B (1982- ),Bribery and Kickbacks,New York State
Dec. 8, 2015
6866
The closing statement seemed right out of a Mafia trial: There was talk of strong-arm tactics, extortion attempts and hostage demands, made by a family intent on using its influence to extract whatever riches it could.But the three-plus hours of arguments from a federal prosecutor on Tuesday were about a former New York State Senate majority leader, Dean G. Skelos, and his son, Adam.The prosecutor said the senator was required to take an oath every two years to faithfully exercise his duties, because with the enormous power and prestige of his office came a simple responsibility. “Do not take the democratic power entrusted to you by the citizens and twist it to make your own family rich,” the prosecutor, Rahul Mukhi, told the jurors hearing the case in Federal District Court in Manhattan. “That’s not just an oath. It’s the law.”Mr. Mukhi, an assistant United States attorney, spent the afternoon outlining the evidence in the case that had been presented to the jurors, including testimony from 20 witnesses, hundreds of exhibits and dozens of secretly recorded conversations during the four-week trial. He said the Skeloses had corrupted one of the most powerful offices in New York State government, transforming it “into a cash cow to fund Adam Skelos’s lifestyle.”While the senator had said several times that Adam was struggling financially when he was pressing for payments for his son, Mr. Mukhi noted that the younger Mr. Skelos’s income at that time ranged from $230,000 to $441,000, and that he had bought a $675,000 house with a pool.Senator Skelos, 67, and his son, 33, are charged with eight counts of bribery, extortion and conspiracy in what prosecutors have said is a scheme that monetized the senator’s official position to direct consulting payments, a check and a no-show job for Adam Skelos, worth a total of roughly $300,000.Neither defendant chose to testify.A developer, Glenwood Management, was allegedly directed to funnel a $20,000 payment to Adam Skelos and to help get him consulting payments at AbTech Industries, an environmental technology company. Another company, Physicians’ Reciprocal Insurers, gave Adam Skelos what amounted to a no-show job. All three companies relied on the senator for legislation vital to their businesses, prosecutors said.Mr. Mukhi said the two defendants repeatedly used “Senator Skelos’s enormous public power for Adam Skelos’s enormous private gain.”“Did the defendants believe that these companies were a good fit for Adam Skelos’s talents and work ethic?” he said. “Or did Senator Skelos and his son ask for and receive these payments because, as they well knew, the companies believed that by paying Adam Skelos, the senator would do right by them,” or, he continued, “at least not punish them for daring to say no.”Mr. Mukhi replayed some secretly recorded phone calls, including one in which the senator and his son seemed to be speaking in code. In doing so, Mr. Mukhi challenged a statement by the senator’s lawyer, G. Robert Gage Jr., in his opening argument that the jurors would hear no coded conversations, and that any elliptical exchange was more a product of how close the senator and his son were — finishing each other’s sentences.Mr. Mukhi also attacked three lines of defense that the defense lawyers raised during opening arguments in the case and in the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses, calling them “huge distractions.”The first was that the senator never did anything wrong and was only a father who wanted to help his son. Mr. Mukhi dismissed that by saying, “You cannot commit a crime and then just say I’m not guilty because I did it to help my son.”The second was that the senator had committed no crime because he never made explicit threats to act against any of the companies involved if they did not pay his son. Mr. Mukhi’s response: “This is the real world, ladies and gentlemen, not some made-up world where public officials make some announcement that they are asking for a bribe.”The third was that the actions prosecutors have charged that Senator Skelos took to help the companies were actions that never differed from what his lawyer called his core positions. Mr. Mukhi noted that a public official is guilty of corruption even “if he would have and should have taken the same action without the corrupt payment.”Mr. Mukhi will finish his summation Wednesday morning and the defense lawyers will then begin their closing arguments. The government would then deliver its rebuttal summation, after which the judge would instruct jurors on the law before they begin deliberations.Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, whose office is prosecuting the case, sat in the back of the courtroom during Mr. Mukhi’s arguments. During a break, Senator Skelos walked up to him and shook his hand.Asked outside the courthouse why he had approached the prosecutor, the senator said, “Because I’m a gentleman.”