https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/09/sports/tennis/milos-raonic-beats-roger-federer-and-heads-to-wimbledon-final.html
Milos Raonic and Andy Murray Reach Wimbledon Final - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Federer  Roger,Raonic  Milos
July 8, 2016
6495
WIMBLEDON, England — Roger Federer had been carefully calibrating expectations — for himself, for the news media, for the fans — before Wimbledon began.He had missed the French Open because of a back injury and was not sure about his fitness going into a two-week tournament of best-of-five-set matches. Nearing his 35th birthday, Federer talked repeatedly about how surprised he was to be playing so well, and to be feeling so good.But there was Federer rallying from a two-sets-to-none deficit in the quarterfinals against Marin Cilic. There he was Friday, commandeering his semifinal against the big-serving Milos Raonic to take a two-sets-to-one lead.Federer’s cautionary words aside, the crowd at Centre Court wanted to believe. After all, Federer had won all 10 of his previous semifinals at Wimbledon, a tournament he has won seven times.But Raonic believed, too. He believed that his previous shortcomings on a Grand Slam stage had provided the lessons needed to seize any little opening.Federer gave him one and Raonic barreled through it to advance to his first Grand Slam final with a 6-3, 6-7 (3), 4-6, 7-5, 6-3 victory. In Sunday’s final, Raonic, the No. 6 seed, will face second-seeded Andy Murray, who dispatched Tomas Berdych, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3.Raonic, a 25-year-old Canadian, had learned from his loss to Federer in the semifinals here two years ago and his loss to Murray in a five-set semifinal at the Australian Open this year.“I know what I need to do on court better,” Raonic said earlier this week. “I know how to sort of turn things around to get them on my terms. I know what I’m looking for. I know how to go about it, to try to get to that position as much as I can. And then when things aren’t going well, I know what things to look for to change.”That was exactly what he showed Friday, when Federer seemed to have all the momentum after winning the third set. But in the fourth, Raonic fought off two break points at 2-2 and another at 4-4. The match appeared headed to a tiebreaker when Federer went ahead, 40-0, while serving at 5-6.But at 40-15, Federer hit two double faults to bring it to deuce. Raonic zoned in on his return and gained three break points, finally converting the third on a backhand passing shot to take the set.“I can’t believe I served a double fault twice,” Federer said. “Unexplainable for me, really. Very sad about that and angry at myself because never should I allow him to get out of that set that easily.”During the changeover, Federer had his right leg looked at by a trainer. He needed a trainer again in the fourth game of the fifth set after his surgically-repaired left knee gave way at the end of a rally, leaving him face down on the grass.Federer saved one break point in that game, but gave Raonic another one with a double fault. With the match on the line, Raonic won a 12-shot rally — one of the longest in a quick-strike match — with a forehand passing shot to gain the decisive break.Raonic added John McEnroe to his coaching team before the tournament and said that McEnroe told him before the match to “leave it all out there.”“Mentally I had one of my best matches in my history, in my career,” Raonic said.With Raonic serving for the match at 5-3, Federer did not get a return in play until 40-0. Raonic hit 142 miles per hour on the first point and a 136 m.p.h. ace on the second.“Two years ago I bottled up all the difficulties I had on court and never got it out,” Raonic said, referring to his semifinal loss to Federer here in 2014. “Today I found a way to keep plugging away, keep myself in the match, then sort of turn it around. I was quite more vocal and a lot more positive on court.”Federer said he did not know the nature or the severity of the injury, but he did not use it as an excuse. “I had missed my chances by then already,” he said.While he lamented how close he came to making the final and the opportunities he failed to seize, Federer maintained that he had “overachieved” at this tournament.“It’s very encouraging for the season, hopefully for the rest of my career,” he said. “Not that I was worried it was going to end somehow, but I was insecure coming into Wimbledon.”Murray, the top British player, knows a thing or two about managing expectations since he rose to prominence in tennis.He has a long list of “first British man since Fred Perry” accomplishments on his ledger already, including his 2013 Wimbledon title. With Britain at such a low morale point after the Brexit vote, he has faced questions this week like, “How does it feel to be the nation’s last hope?”Murray has been the favorite in this tournament from the moment top-ranked Novak Djokovic lost to Sam Querrey in the third round.Sunday will be his 11th Grand Slam final, and his third of the year. But this is his first major final in which he has not played Djokovic or Federer, and the first in which he was the higher seeded player.Friday’s match against the 10th-seeded Berdych was closer than the lopsided score made it appear, at least until the sixth game of the second set. Serving at 2-3, Murray saved two break points, then quickly broke Berdych in the next game. Berdych did not gain another break point in the match. Murray had only nine unforced errors to Berdych’s 30.“It never feels normal,” Murray said of reaching a Grand Slam final. “I never take it for granted. I know how difficult it is to make the finals of these events and how hard they are to win.”It will be a new experience for Raonic, but one built on lessons learned along the way.“Eventually you’re going to break through, get the lucky break, or you just deserve it because you’ve worked hard and you believe in what you’re doing,” Federer said. “Things fall into place nicely.”NOTESVenus Williams and Serena Williams advanced to the women’s doubles final with a 7-6 (3), 6-4 victory over Julia Görges and Karolina Pliskova. On Saturday, a few hours after Serena plays Angelique Kerber in the singles final, the Williamses will face Timea Babos and Yaroslava Shvedova, who lost to Venus Williams in the quarterfinals in singles.