https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/sports/tennis/sloane-stephens-at-a-loss-to-explain-winning-ways.html
Sloane Stephens at a Loss to Explain Winning Ways - The New York Times
Tennis,French Open (Tennis),Stephens  Sloane,Makarova  Ekaterina
May 31, 2014
9407
PARIS —  Asked Thursday if being the top American woman at the French Open affected her, Sloane Stephens said, “It means nothing.”What means something, it seems, is that this is a Grand Slam event.Stephens, seeded 15th, defeated No. 22 Ekaterina Makarova, 6-3, 6-4, on Saturday to advance to the second week of a major tournament for the sixth consecutive time, the longest active streak on the WTA Tour.Since the beginning of 2013, Stephens is 21-5 in Grand Slam singles matches and 32-29 at all other tournaments. This year, she has advanced past the third round in only three of the 11 tournaments she has played: the French Open, the Australian Open and the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif.At her postmatch news conference, Stephens was repeatedly asked to explain the disparity and gave several variations of “I don’t know.”“If I knew, I would capitalize on it,” she said. “I would do it every week. I would, you know, make the most of it. But I guess it’s all just a learning experience. Rather this than anything else, so it’s O.K. for now.”Stephens will next face No. 4 Simona Halep of Romania, the highest remaining seed in the women’s draw. Halep defeated María-Teresa Torró-Flor, 6-3, 6-0, and has lost only 11 games over three matches. She had won only one match here in four previous appearances in the main draw.“It’s not a surprise, because I’m more confident now in myself,” Halep said, adding: “I’m enjoying the moment now. It’s my best of my career, and I have to be happy on court and to fight for my chance.”Stephens, 21, and Halep, 22, were born about 18 months apart and played in junior events together. But their career trajectories have been wildly different of late. Halep has soared up the rankings in the past year, winning seven titles. Stephens is the highest-ranked player yet to reach a singles final on tour.But Stephens has had greater success at Grand Slam events. She reached the semifinals at the Australian Open and the quarterfinals at Wimbledon last year; Halep did not advance past the third round of a major until last year’s United States Open.“For her, I think she’s played really, really well, like, in the smaller tournaments like I haven’t done, and she has a lot of experience with that,” Stephens said. “I have a lot of experience here. I think we’re just going to go out there and compete and just see what happens. I know she’s going to give her best, and so am I.”Also Saturday, No. 1 Rafael Nadal defeated Leonardo Mayer, 6-2, 7-5, 6-2, although he acknowledged afterward that back pain was affecting his serve. No. 5 David Ferrer, Nadal’s opponent in last year’s final, moved on to the fourth round with a 6-2, 7-6 (2), 6-3 victory over No. 32 Andreas Seppi.A brief surge by American men slowed as Jack Sock and Donald Young could not join John Isner in the fourth round. Sock lost to Dusan Lajovic, 6-4, 7-5, 6-3, and Young rallied against Guillermo García-López but fell in five sets, 6-2, 6-4, 2-6, 6-7 (4), 6-4.“Last year or a couple years ago, I would have thrown it in,” Young said. “It would have been three sets to love, whatever the score was, and 6-1, 6-2. I decided to fight, and I felt I was better than that. I felt I had a chance to win even from two sets to love down.”The crowd at Court 1, known as the bullring, appreciated the effort, repeatedly chanting his name and giving him a roaring ovation as he walked off the court.Young’s match was the second wild five-setter of the day after No. 23 Gaël Monfils delighted his home crowd by outlasting No. 14 Fabio Fognini, 5-7, 6-2, 6-4, 0-6, 6-2.A third five-setter will have to wait until Sunday to finish. No. 7 Andy Murray’s match against No. 28 Philipp Kohlschreiber was suspended by darkness tied at 7-7 in the final set. Ahead by two sets to one, Murray was up a break twice in the fourth, but Kohlschreiber fought back to force a fifth. Each player gained a break edge in the fifth set, but neither could put the match away before darkness fell.The women’s draw lost another top-five seed when No. 5 Petra Kvitova fell to No. 27 Svetlana Kuznetsova, 6-7, 6-1, 9-7, after serving for the match twice. No. 23 Lucie Safarova knocked out No. 11 Ana Ivanovic, who had been having a strong spring on clay, 6-3, 6-3.With the women’s field whittled to 16, only seven of the top 15 seeds remain. But among those who did reach the fourth round were No. 145 Pauline Parmentier, a wild-card entry from France, and No. 148 Kiki Bertens, a qualifier from the Netherlands.Halep, a quarterfinalist at the Australian Open, said that she was trying to keep out the pressure of being the highest remaining seed and that her recent success had her more prepared for tough matches.“I found my good way to play, and I found a way to be relaxed on court and just to take the pleasure without pressure,” she said.