https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/20/us/politics/rick-perry-puts-off-talk-of-2016-as-tenure-ends.html
Rick Perry Puts Off Talk of 2016 as Tenure Ends - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Perry  Rick,Texas,Republican Party
Jan. 19, 2015
3515
AUSTIN, Tex. —  On his last full day as the chief executive of Texas, Gov. Rick Perry sat in his nearly empty office here on Monday, coatless in blue shirt sleeves, as he talked about his record-breaking 14 years in office and said he would decide within five months whether to run for president again.“I think most people think we’re probably going to run, but we’ll announce our intentions in May or June,” Mr. Perry, 64, said. “I haven’t tried to be coy at all. I’ve been very forthright with my intentions to do the preparatory work that’s required, and we’ve done that.”During an interview in his second-floor office at the Texas Capitol, Mr. Perry gave hints of how he would use his tenure as governor on the campaign trail, defended his actions on a law allowing undocumented students to pay in-state tuition rates, and said he expected the state’s economy to weather the sharp drop in oil prices.He suggested that he had few, if any, regrets, and said he was proud that the Texas Legislature never overrode one of his vetoes, even as he vetoed more bills than any other governor of Texas. He leaves office under criminal indictment on charges alleging abuse of power, a case that could play out during a presidential campaign.As Mr. Perry puts off his decision about 2016, the field of potential Republican presidential candidates has grown increasingly crowded with those with Texas ties, including Ted Cruz, the state’s junior senator in Washington, and Jeb Bush, the brother of former President George W. Bush. “None of them were governor of Texas for 14 years,” Mr. Perry said bluntly when asked how he expected to stand out among the crowd. “I don’t really pay a lot of attention to who’s in, who’s out, the horse race thing. I did this once, and I know it’s a long process.”On Monday, Mr. Perry also stood by his support of a law, which Texas passed in 2001, that allowed undocumented students to pay in-state tuition rates to attend public universities. Mr. Perry signed the bill, known as the Texas Dream Act, but conservative activists and Republican legislators have vowed to overturn it. The Texas Republican Party’s official 2014 platform calls for repealing it.His defense of the measure during his failed campaign for the presidential nomination in 2012 cost him support among some Republican primary voters.“I still support the concept of allowing those people to be contributors to our society rather than takers,” he said.The sharp collapse in oil prices has caused one expert — Michael Feroli, chief United States economist for JPMorgan Chase — to speculate that Texas was at risk of a regional recession. In the 1980s, a drop in oil prices helped cripple the state’s economy. Mr. Perry said the Texas economy was not as reliant on the oil and gas industry as it was in the 1980s, but he expressed concern about the long-term impact of the drop in oil prices.“Midland, Odessa, it’s going to be tough,” he said, referring to two oil-rich cities in West Texas. “There’s going to be people losing their jobs out there. When you lose your job, that’s a recession, man. Those folks, I’m greatly concerned about. But the great story is that people’s lives have been improved substantially in Texas over the last 14 years, and we’ve had our ups and downs.”He also joked about Texas’ rivalry with California, saying “there are three things that California can do that we can’t do: views, weather and wine.”Mr. Perry cited a report that found that Texas beat California in 2012 in technology exports. And he recalled being in a Laguna Beach resort in Southern California, on a visit to lure businesses to Texas. “I’m making my pitch about Texas, about our tax, regulatory, legal system, our skilled work force,” he said. “And just about the time the sun is touching the horizon, the Pacific, I turn — it’s glorious, it’s magnificent — and I said that is Exhibit A of how a state could foul something up so bad that you would leave that.”Few political leaders have embodied Texas exceptionalism as Mr. Perry has. He once declared in a speech that historians would look back on this century and call it “the Texas century.” Mr. Perry suggested that he was not worried how voters in other states might perceive such comments and views should he make another run for president.“I talk about a model and it can happen anywhere,” he said. “This isn’t, ‘We’re good, you’re bad.’ This is, ‘How can we be good together?’ That’s my goal.”The governor also spoke of performing one of his last informal acts as governor: underlining a passage in the Bible for Greg Abbott, the former state attorney general who will be sworn in as governor on Tuesday. Departing governors have underlined passages for incoming leaders in a tradition that dates to January 1925, using a Bible that Mr. Perry had kept close at hand in a wooden drawer. On Monday, the open Bible — with lines of Scripture underlined by George W. Bush, John B. Connally Jr. and other former governors — was among the few items on his glass-topped desk.Mr. Perry said he selected the passage — Matthew 20:25-28 — because it meant, “If you really want to be great, you must first be a servant.” He added: “That’s exactly what this job is supposed to be about. It’s not about power. It’s about making a difference in people’s lives.”Yet, he might be the last Texas governor to remain so long in office. Two Republican lawmakers are proposing a bill to limit future governors, and all other statewide elected officials, to two consecutive four-year terms. Asked if three four-year terms were too long, Mr. Perry said any such decision was up to Texas voters.“I applied for the job every four years,” he said. But he also defended his decade-plus incumbency.“Why would you get rid of a really good corporate C.E.O. if your company is doing really well?” he said.