http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/09/us/09verdict.html
Officer Guilty in Killing That Inflamed Oakland - The New York Times
Mehserle  Johannes,Grant  Oscar III,Decisions and Verdicts,Murders and Attempted Murders,Race,Bay Area Rapid Transit,Oakland (Calif)
July 8, 2010
1410
A white Bay Area transit officer was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter on Thursday by a Los Angeles jury in the shooting death of an unarmed black man on Jan. 1, 2009, ending a closely watched trial that percolated with racial tension and cries for peace in the city of Oakland, Calif., where the killing occurred.The officer, Johannes Mehserle, 28, had been accused of a more serious charge, second-degree murder, in the death of Oscar Grant III, 22, a butcher’s apprentice who was shot while lying face down on a platform after being removed from a Bay Area Rapid Transit train during a fight.City officials were worried about a reprise of the 2009 riots that erupted in downtown Oakland, with crowds burning cars and smashing storefronts after Mr. Grant’s shooting, which was captured on cellphone video and widely disseminated on the Internet.Initial reaction on Thursday was not promising: several hundred people gathered near Oakland City Hall early in the evening, and were seen to be taunting police officers in riot gear and throwing bottles. At least one person was either hit by a vehicle or injured by the surging crowd. But a heavy police presence seemed to be keeping the peace, and hundreds of others were listening peacefully to speakers who had gathered downtown.Mr. Mehserle, who contended that the shooting was an accident caused when he mistook his sidearm for his Taser, faces up to four years in prison, and additional prison time because a gun was involved in his crime. Sentencing is scheduled for Aug. 6.Mr. Grant’s family seemed disappointed with the verdict, which came after just a day and a half of deliberation by the case’s final jury. “We thought the jury was dismissive,” said John Burris, a lawyer for the Grant family. “It’s a small victory, but it is not a fair representation of what happened, an officer standing over him with his hands tied and shooting him.”The verdict, announced to a packed courtroom at Los Angeles Superior Court, was preceded by anxious moments in downtown Oakland, where some merchants were boarding up storefronts in recent days in expectation of civil unrest.Yolanda Mesa, 31, who said she was Mr. Grant’s sister-in-law, arrived downtown after the verdict and criticized the absence of blacks on the jury in Los Angeles. “We are not happy with this at all,” she said. “This is not justice.”But for some, the very fact of a conviction of a police officer — a member of the Bay Area Rapid Transit police, not the Oakland force — was some solace. Black residents in Oakland, who make up a large portion of the population, have long had an uneasy relationship with the city’s police, whose past episodes of brutality and malfeasance have led to a long period of oversight by independent monitors and a federal judge.“We’ve been suffering police brutality for generations,” said Lesley Phillips, a longtime Oakland resident. “We want it to end.”City officials and the police in Oakland had been preparing for the verdict for several weeks as arguments were under way in Los Angeles, where the trial had been moved because of worries about impaneling an impartial jury in Alameda County. Reaction in front of the Los Angeles courtroom was calm, but officials in Oakland closed City Hall and sent city workers home soon after word that a verdict had been reached.Mayor Ron Dellums and Police Chief Anthony W. Batts had been urging calm as the jury began deliberating. The police had also been put on alert, practicing antiriot maneuvers and coordinating with representatives of several local agencies in case of civil unrest. City officials had argued that much of the violence from earlier riots had been caused by “outside agitators.”That message was echoed by a group called Oakland for Justice, which organized an evening rally to create “a safe space” where youths wouldn’t be “exposed to the risk of arrest because of the actions of others.”But Arnold Lucas Jr., 19, said he was depressed by the verdict and thought it was unfair. “It’s the same thing as Rodney King,” he said. “Its 2010. The same thing is going on. There’s never going to be peace on earth.”City Councilwoman Jean Quan said: “I don’t think anyone is really happy with the verdict. At least we’re pleased he didn’t get total acquittal.”