https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/upshot/biden-sanders-warren-too-soon-for-2020.html
Biden, Sanders, Warren: Too Soon for 2020? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Politics and Government,Midterm Elections (2014),Sanders  Bernard,Democratic Party
Dec. 16, 2016
8299
Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor, peeked ahead to 2020 and back at the recent election, posting a lightly edited transcript of their written exchange.Toni It seems much too early to talk about candidates for 2020, and yet Democrats seem to need some hope. There has already been one poll, with Joe Biden topping the field (31 percent), followed by Bernie Sanders (24 percent) and Elizabeth Warren (16 percent).Biden is 74 years old, Sanders is 75 and Warren is 67. Despite their preferences for those three, Democrats who were polled said they “generically want a younger candidate who hasn’t run for president before,” according to the pollster, PPP.But we seem to be in an era when older candidates are not unusual, and Donald Trump will be 74 in 2020.Of course, there’s also a decent chance it won’t be any of those three.Nate Well, I do think any of the three could win. But the field could be broader and better than people think. There are some credible candidates with potential appeal to those who voted for both Obama and Trump, and who might split the establishment-populist divide, like Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio, if he wins re-election, and Steve Bullock of Montana.I suspect a lot of people will be interested in nominating a woman, and I think Maggie Hassan, Kirsten Gillibrand and even Claire McCaskill (who I think is perennially underrated) could be interesting to watch.I don’t think the Democratic bench of nonwhite candidates is especially strong right now, thanks in no small part to Deval Patrick and Cory Booker’s Wall Street ties. I see a lot of people already tweeting about Kamala Harris, who just won a Senate race in California. My largely uninformed hunch is that there’s more hype than reality there when it comes to 2020, but, hey, Obama won in 2008 and Trump had never been elected to public office before.This is not close to a comprehensive list, but that’s a start. And of course I have no inside knowledge on whether those people would run.Toni Bernie Sanders called you up in July 2015 and explained why he thought he could win the Democratic primary. He said he saw things from “a class-based perspective.”His vision for how to win the primary proved to be wrong — long story short, he wasn’t able to win over black voters.But what about his vision as applied to the recent presidential election, and to future ones? Democrats are now debating whether to take more of a class-based approach, focusing on economic issues for working families instead of on identity politics.[An article on Thursday by our colleagues Jonathan Martin and Alexander Burns had this headline: “Democrats at a Crossroads: Win Back Working-Class Whites, or Let Them Go?”]In a lot of ways, Bernie was made for this moment (although Biden and Warren and Sherrod Brown also have strong claims as fighters for the working class).Sanders has spent his whole career building a message for blue-collar workers. Even though Vermont is a liberal bastion, it is also a mostly rural white state, and for decades he has worked to connect with rural voters over issues like gun rights, trade, even immigration.Nate In some ways, Sanders would have been in a good spot against Trump, who would not have found it so easy to run against trade deals and Washington, which were basically Trump’s two big issues other than immigration. That said, I think the jury is still out on how Bernie Sanders’s politics would work in most of America. I don’t even think we know how well it would do in a Democratic primary against someone other than Clinton. There just aren’t very many candidates like Sanders out there.I do think Democrats ought to question whether they’re as good for working-class voters, and especially white working-class voters, as they say they are. And I’d ask social democrats more widely and Marxists to question it as well.Whenever the left-liberal coalition in the United States is forced to choose between a concern of workers and (for lack of a better word) the activist left, they choose the left. It’s true on the environment, and you can see what that’s done to Democratic strength in Appalachia. It’s true on immigration.The party doesn’t have any credible case for helping the old industrial economy (perhaps in no small part because there is no way to help the old industrial economy, given the rise of automation for one thing). Even if it’s well intentioned, the Democrats’ alternative — to boost the pay and security of new service-sector jobs — just isn’t what these voters seem to want.Toni What are two or three things you’re most interested in still finding out about this election?Nate There are three big sets of data left to come. First is the updated voter file, which will indicate who voted and who didn’t. That will be especially valuable to The Upshot in the states where we conducted polls — Florida, Pennsylvania and North Carolina — but it will be useful everywhere.That will start to come in very soon, but probably won’t be completed for months. Second is the census Current Population Survey, which asks voters about turnout after federal elections. And third is the microdata for pre-election polls, which includes demographic data and vote choice for all of a survey’s respondents, not just the summary result that’s published.At the end of all of this, I suspect we’ll have a much better sense of turnout, vote shifts since 2012 and how the polls were off.Toni It’s still something of a mystery that the state polls were considerably off in some key Midwestern and Northeast states, correct?Nate Yeah. There are theories — and we’ll publish some thoughts on them at some point — but it will be easier to nail down with this information.Toni Regarding vote shifts since 2012, the erosion of Democratic support among working-class whites was happening well before Hillary Clinton. Looking back, Joni Ernst’s 2014 victory in Iowa was a flashing warning sign for Democrats. Harry Enten of FiveThirtyEight wrote an article whose headline was: “Something Funny Happened in Iowa, and It May Hurt Democrats in 2016.”In your midterms analysis in 2014, you wrote:Nate I do think there’s a lot of interesting foreshadowing in the 2014 results. Bruce Poliquin’s win in northern Maine, big Republican House gains in upstate New York and Long Island, and the surprisingly easy G.O.P. wins in the Iowa Senate race and for Wisconsin and Michigan governor foreshadowed the broad contours of Republican gains.And I’d also add that they foreshadowed the polling error as well. You could also add the Kentucky governor’s race in 2015 (Matt Bevin’s victory).That said, 2014 was a midterm election when the president’s approval was in the low 40s. The Republican sweep was broad. Mark Warner, incredibly, nearly lost in Virginia. Mark Udall lost in Colorado. The Republicans picked up governor’s mansions in Illinois, Massachusetts and Maryland. The party’s strength was pretty comprehensive across all categories of white voters.So, personally, I’m not really looking back on 2014 and thinking “we should have known” Clinton would lose in the way that she did. I think 2016 with Trump was much more of a decisive break from recent trends than it was a continuation of what we saw between 2008 and 2014.I’m not at all convinced that Michigan was part of Marco Rubio’s path to victory, for instance. I suspect that a more traditional Republican would have been highly competitive in Virginia and Colorado — just as competitive as in Pennsylvania, for example.Toni The conventional wisdom now seems to be that only Trump could have won this election for Republicans (by breaking through in the three key states in the Rust Belt with a special rapport with working-class whites). But is there an argument that Rubio or John Kasich could have just as easily won — for the simple reason that Hillary Clinton proved to be unpopular, with high and lasting unfavorable ratings?Nate I suspect they would have won. I just don’t think they would have won the way Trump did, with stupendous gains among white working-class voters while losing ground among well-educated whites.I don’t think Rubio could have won some of these white working-class Obama counties in Wisconsin by 25 points, for instance. I absolutely think he could have won Wisconsin.Toni By the way, thanks to you, maybe we’ll see “Steve Bullock for President” trending on Twitter worldwide. The only problem is, people — maybe even people in Montana — may wonder: “Who is Steve Bullock?”Nate Ha, I’m not too worried about that. Gary Locke wasn’t Clinton’s vice-presidential pick, after all.Anyway, Steve Bullock is the governor of Montana. He won re-election last month, even as Clinton lost the state by 20 points.On paper, he’s interesting. He has the sort of complicated biography that gives him the potential to connect with several different parts of the Democratic coalition: He’s a red-state populist with a strong record for progressives on campaign finance when he was the state’s attorney general. He has a pedigree of Claremont McKenna, Columbia Law, professor at George Washington University that, unfortunately, I think is a factor in whether the party elite take him seriously.Obviously “on paper” doesn’t mean all that much — just ask Scott Walker.I’ve watched a few YouTube videos, and Bullock seems compelling to me. (He was on Rachel Maddow’s show when he was attorney general, talking about his suit against Citizens United.)Who knows whether he would hold up in national politics, or whether he’s even interested.He’s just 50 years old, too. The Democrats don’t have too many options who have won re-election in that age range.Toni Fifty? He’s a mere baby in the Democrats’ world right now.