http://www.nytimes.com/1964/08/02/the-einstein-letter-that-started-it-all.html
The Einstein Letter That Started It All - The New York Times
FOREIGN RELATIONS AND SERVICE,WEST,ATOMIC ENERGY AND WEAPONS,GERMANY,UNITED STATES,SZILARD  LEO,WIGNER  EUGENE PAUL
Aug. 2, 1964
7164
ON Aug. 2, 1939, Albert Einstein scrawled his signature on a two­page letter that changed the course of history. The letter began:F. D. Roosevelt,President of the United States,White HouseWashington, D. C.Sir:Some recent work by E. Fermi and L. Szilard, which has been com­municated to me in manuscript, leads me to expect that the element ura­nium may be turned into a new and important source of energy in the immediate future. Certain aspects of the situation which has arisen seem to call for watchfulness and, if neces­sary, quick action on the part of the Administration. I believe therefore it is my duty to bring to your attention the following facts and recommenda­tions.In the course of the last four months it has been made probable through the work of Joliot in France as well as Fermi and Szilard in America that it may become possible to set up a nuclear chain reaction in a large mass of uranium, by which vast amounts of power and large quantities of new radium‐like ele­ments would be generated. Now it appears almost certain that this could be achieved in the immediate future.A third paragaph contained the pro­phetic words: “… it is conceivable —though much less certain—that ex­tremely powerful bombs of a new type may thus be constructed.” Two more paragraphs outlined steps to be taken to accelerate uranium research and the letter ended with a warning that ura­nium sales had been stopped in Czecho­slovakia and secret German research was under way. The letter concluded: “Yours very truly, A. Einstein.”POFESSOR EINSTEIN had never expected he would write such a letter. Apart from the fact that he was an avowed pacifist, he did not believe that the atom's energy would be released. Even after the neutron had been dis­covered in 1932 (it proved to be the magic bullet in atom‐smashing) he had declared: “There is not the slightest in­dication that energy will ever be ob­tainable. It would mean that the atom would have to be shattered at will.”Contrary to his expectations, the atom was shattered late in 1938 by two German scientists. While working at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Ber­lin they split uranium atoms in half. They promptly rushed into print with their findings and by the end of Janu­ary, 1939, when the news reached the United States, American physicists quickly duplicated their experiments.Niels Bohr, the famous atomic sci-RALPH E. LAPP has played an active role in nuclear‐physics research in this country for more than 20 years. Now a consultant, he has written many books, including “The Voyage of the Lucky Dragon” and “Kill and Overkill.”BOHR and Einstein, who conferred and appraised the ominous significance of uranium fission, were not alone in their thinking. That spring over a score of scientists were doing active research on uranium fission, and quite a few of them felt that a bomb might be pos­sible. Two of them, the Hungarian‐born Eugene P. Wigner and Leo Szilard, not only believed that a bomb might be made but they worried about the prog­ress of German scientists—if Hitler got an atomic bomb first, he would have a superweapon for world domination.Both Wigner, who was 36, and the 41-year‐old Szilard knew Einstein well. Wigner was a professor of physics at Princeton and Szilard commuted to Princeton from his post at Columbia University, where he worked with En­rico Fermi.Fermi was then deeply absorbed in research on the chain reaction, but the experiments were difficult because‐no pure uranium was available. Szilard, chafing at the slow pace of nuclear research, expressed his concern to Wig­ner, who felt that aid should be sought from the United States Government. But Szilard was skeptical—late that winter Fermi had gone to Washington to brief U.S. naval experts on the pos­sibility of uranium power, but he had made little impression. It was Szilard. according to Wigner, who finally pro­posed that they enlist the support of Einstein.IT was natural for them to seek out Professor Einstein. As the most famous scientist in the world, his name would command respect if he signed an ap­peal to the President. Einstein had met Roosevelt and, in fact, had been an overnight guest at the White House. As a bitter foe of Hitler, Einstein could be expected to listen sympathet­ically to their proposal. Finally, as author of the relativity theory and the equation relating mass and energy to which all atomic development could be traced, Einstein was the logical person to take the initiative.In July, 1939, Einstein was vacation­ing on Peconic Bay out on Long Island, where he liked to go sailing. Early Sunday morning, July 30, Wigner and Szilard set out for Einstein's hide­away; Wigner was at the wheel of his DodgeWigner recalls that it was a beautiful day but that they made a mistake and headed for Patchogue instead of Cutchogue, as they had been directed. Finally they got on the right route. Near their des­tination, they again asked di­rections, and Wigner remem­bers that the small boy who pointed the way to the Ein­stein place on Old Grove Road found it odd that there were people who did not know where the great Einstein lived.EINSTEIN, attired in an undershirt and rolled‐up pants, led his friends onto a large screened porch which served as a dining room. There for about an hour they talked about progress in research, the secret work of the Uran Verein (Uranium Society) in Ger­many and the problem of get­ting United States Govern­ment's assistance. “It will be a hard thing to put this across to the military mind,” Ein­stein declared. However, he agreed that action had to be taken if the United States were to keep ahead of the Ger­mans, and he proceeded to dictate a letter to President Roosevelt, which Wigner wrote down as the three scientists sat about the wooden table on the porch.“I was amazed,” said Wig­ner in recalling the event. “He had wonderful command of language and the words just flowed out. It surprised me, because you know one does not compose such a letter cas­ually.”It was about noon when their work was finished. The 60-year‐old Einstein saw his two friends off to Princeton and then returned to his sail­boat, for there was a fair breeze that cloudless afternoon.EINSTEIN's letter was typed up the next morning in Wigner's office and handed to Szilard. But before Szilard could proceed, he needed Ein­stein's signature on the docu­ment. This meant another trip out to Long Island. There was some question of wording in the letter and Szilard wanted to discuss the matter person­ally. On Wednesday, Aug. 2, he drove or, more correctly, was driven out to see Einstein. This time another countryman from Hungary was the driver —31-year‐old Edward Teller, professor of physics at George Washington University. Teller, who later joked about his role as Szilard's chauffeur, became deeply involved in the urani­um project himself and, in the postwar period, contributed the basic ideas that flowered into the H‐bomb.Once he had obtained Ein­stein's signature on a letter which he retyped at Einstein's summer place in order to makeSachs, a Russian‐born econ­omist and student of world af­fairs, was an amateur follower of scientific affairs. It was his habit, for example, to read Nature, the British scientific magazine; thus, early in 1939 he had learned about nuclear fission. He says that he called the potential of the atom to President Roosevelt's attention soon afterward. It was through a mutual friend that Sachs had met Szilard and so became the man who was to carry Ein­stein's letter to Roosevelt.But before a White House appointment could be set up for Sachs. Hitler unleashed his Wehrmacht against Po­land. With the declaration of a state of limited nationalTHREE PRINCIPALSAdmitted to the President's office, Sachs began reading from his collection of docu­ments. After a while, the Pres­ident showed signs of inat­tention and Sachs turned from his somewhat diffuse introduc­tion to the Einstein letter, reading out loud the first and final paragraphs. Roosevelt was preoccupied, possibly be­cause of the pressure of other matters or possibly because of the strange jargon of nuclear science. As John Gunther lat­er observed: “Roosevelt had as much knowledge of the possibility of splitting the uranium atom to produce a chain reaction as the corner cop.”Roosevelt asked his visitor to return for a second session early the next day. At this dis­cussion, Sachs reminded the President of Napoleon's skep-TO this Roosevelt comment­ed: “Alex, what you are after is to see that the Nazis don’t blow us up.” “Precisely,” Sachs replied. At this point, the President called in Gen. Edwin M. (Pa) Watson, his secretary, from an adjoining room. “This requires action,” Roosevelt declared and turned the matter over to General Watson, instructing him to set up an advisory group to evalu­ate the problem.Dr. Lyman J. Briggs, Di­rector of the Bureau of Stand­ards, was placed in charge of this Advisory Committee on Uranium. Dr. Briggs, who had entered the Government serv-IN THE DRAMA OF THE EINSTEIN LETTERCOLONEL ADAMSON, an ordnance man, was definitely not impressed. He commented that he had once been outside an ordnance depot when it blew up and that “it didn’t even knock me down.” He then gave the committee a lecture on how wars are won by men and morale, not by weapons. This tried the patience of Dr. Wigner and he retorted: “Per­haps, it would be better if we did away with the War De­partment and spread the mili-AFTER Oct. 21, events were sometimes stalled for months as decisions were de­layed and deferred. During this period Szilard became so perturbed that he complained bitterly about lack of prog­ress. Secrecy around the atomic research became so tight that he was moved to protest. After the war he tes-On the other hand, the atomic scientists looked rather narrowly at their own spe­cialty. Men like Vannevar Bush and James Conant, who mas­ter‐minded the United States wartime research program, had to consider a host of other projects and allocate critical manpower to them. They could not in their own minds be sure that the bomb would work, and if it did not, then effort would have been wasted that could have produced or accel­erated radar, proximity fuse bombs and missiles.Had the A‐project produced its progeny in 1944 rather than in 1945, President Roose­velt would have had to decide whether or not the A‐bomb would be used against Ger­many. Actually, it became clear in the winter of 1944-45 that the bomb would not be used against Germany; it wouldn’t be ready in time.Harry S. Truman learnedBUT the bomb was used at Hiroshima, and almost simul­taneously the world knew about it. A reporter broke the news to Albert Einstein as the scientist returned from sail­ing on Saranac Lake in a sail­rigged canoe. Startled, Ein­stein asked: “Do you mean that, young man?” Assured that it was so, Einstein slow­ly shook his head and after a pause made but one com­ment: “Ach! The world is not ready for it.”Later Einstein was more voluble about the bomb. “Had I known that the Germans would not succeed in develop­ing an atomic bomb, I would have done nothing for the bomb.” In this both Szilard and Wigner expressed agree­ment. Within a year after Hiroshima, Einstein assumed an active role as spokesman for scientists who were wor­ried about the bomb. “The un­leashed power of the atom has changed everything save our modes of thinking,” he assert­ed, “and we thus drift toward unparalleled catastrophe.”The world has averted ca­tastrophe; no nuclear weapons have been used in anger since Nagasaki. But four nations have spent $50 billion in amassing nuclear arsenals and in developing a large family of nuclear weapons. Many times this amount of money has been committed to developing and producing the aircraft and missiles for delivering nuclear bombs and warheads. A vast uranium - mining industry has sprung up; the United States has created a special agency of government, the United States Atomic Energy Com­mission, to deal with this new force, and Congress has estab­lished a Joint Committee on Atomic Energy for this same purpose.THESE developments are specifically atomic, but much more must be credited to Ein­stein's letter. It touched off an explosive growth of all re­search and development and set the pace for our Big Sci­ence of today. The latter is effectively described by one statistic: This year the Fed­eral Government will spend $15 billion on scientific re­search and development.Of the four men who played such prominent roles in usher­ing in the Atomic Age, two are still living.Dr. Wigner, a professor at Princeton, was honored recent­ly with the Nobel Prize in physics, and the judges had a hard time deciding which of his many scientific accom-Alexander Sachs is still ac­tive as an economic consultant and industrial adviser. “I’m the only independent man on Wall Street,” he told this writer recently.Dr. Szilard died in his sleep early this summer after sur­viving a bout with cancer, his success due in no small part to his own recommendations for therapy. In the postwar years Szilard spearheaded many efforts to bring the new force of the atom under con­trol.ALBERT EINSTEIN's last words were spoken at 1:15 A.M. on April 18, 1955, but the world will never know what they were, for a night nurse heard but could not under­stand the mumbled German. By his wish, his body was cre­mated that same afternoon and, with his skeptical permis­sion, the brain was removed for scientific study. It was found to be average in size.The great genius never over­came a constant sense of won­der about the world. “A won­der of such nature I experi­enced as a child of 4 or 5 years,” he wrote, “when my father showed me a compass. That this needle behaved in such a determined way did not at all fit into the nature of events.” And in his autobio­graphical handwritten notes, he adds: “Something deeply hid­den had to be behind things.”It was something most deep­ly hidden that Einstein came upon in the spring of 1905 when he completed his special theory of relativity. So pro­found was the meaning of his lonely theoretical journey into time and space that it was to split history forever into pre­atomic and atomic eras.It was to become a night­mare for a world “not ready for it.” “Our defense is not in armaments,” observed Ein­stein, “nor in science, nor in going underground. Our de­fense is in law and order.”This article can be viewed in its original form.  Please send questions and feedback to archive_feedback@nytimes.com