https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/20/upshot/is-trump-stronger-than-he-seems.html
Is Trump Stronger Than He Seems? - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Polls and Public Opinion,United States Politics and Government
Jan. 20, 2017
2577
New polls suggest that Donald J. Trump has the lowest approval and favorability ratings of any incoming president in the polling era — by a lot. Unsurprisingly, he is not buying it.He tweeted that the polls are “rigged” just like the “phony” pre-election polls that showed Hillary Clinton on track for victory.Mr. Trump’s point is not persuasive. The pre-election polls weren’t off by much over all: Mrs. Clinton won the popular vote by about two percentage points, not far from her edge of three to four points in the final national polls.But there might be some merit to his sentiment about the polls, even if his specific argument isn’t credible.Mr. Trump’s ratings are poor for an incoming president, no matter how you cut it. The question is whether his ratings are merely poor or disastrous. If his approval rating were taken at face value, there would be an argument that his presidency could be in jeopardy before it even started.In general, the postelection period is about as good as it gets for an incoming president. But recent surveys put Mr. Trump’s approval rating around 40 percent — as bad or even worse than President Obama’s approval ratings heading into the 2010 and 2014 midterm elections, when Democrats were dealt huge losses.Mr. Trump, to some extent, has incurred expected and inevitable losses in advance of his presidency. Years of controversial remarks have given him the political baggage that typical presidents of this era, like Mr. Obama, inevitably pick up over their first two years.But Mr. Trump’s ratings aren’t just below those of past incoming presidents; they’re also below re-elected presidents like Mr. Obama and George W. Bush. The postelection honeymoon phase lifted Mr. Obama and Mr. Bush’s approval ratings well over 50 percent after their re-elections, despite all of the scars of their first terms.Some of Mr. Trump’s polling weakness can also be attributed to the difference between adults and likely voters. The adult population is much younger, more diverse and likelier to have been born outside the United States than the voting electorate. Most of the recent polls have measured Mr. Trump’s ratings among all American adults, not registered or likely voters.This can make a sizable difference. Mr. Trump’s favorability rating was seven points higher (his net-favorability rating was nine points higher) among likely voters than adults in New York Times/CBS News surveys last summer that asked all adults whether they had a favorable impression of Mr. Trump. If the gap between adults and likely voters is as large as it was in those surveys, it would bring Mr. Trump’s ratings pretty close to his 46 percent share of the national popular vote.Still, starting with a 46 percent approval rating would be a sign of profound weakness.It would be easy enough to say that Mr. Trump enters as an unprecedentedly unpopular president. But how many times over the last year and a half were the polls cited as evidence that Mr. Trump was historically unpopular? I don’t mean the horse race numbers, which generally showed Mr. Trump competitive for the nomination and the presidency. I mean the questions about character, which painted a far more pessimistic picture of his chances.One could brush all this aside by attributing his victory to the weakness of his opposition. From this point of view, Mr. Trump is a historically weak political figure who benefited from historically weak opposition.The other possibility is that there’s something about Mr. Trump’s appeal that’s not captured in the traditional approval ratings or the character questions.One piece of evidence seems consistent with this possibility: the seeming optimism about his presidency.Take the most recent Quinnipiac poll. At first glance, it’s bleak for Mr. Trump. Just 37 percent of registered voters — a narrower group than the adult population — view him favorably or approve of his performance. But just about every other question is better for Mr. Trump: 45 percent think he’ll take the nation in the right direction, and 52 percent of registered voters are optimistic about the next four years with Mr. Trump as president.Just about every new poll tells a similar story. The most recent CNN poll says that just 40 percent of adults approve of his performance, but 48 percent say they think he’ll do a “very good” or “fairly good” job as president. And 48 percent say his policies will move the country in the right direction. An even larger 61 percent say that he’ll bring back well-paying jobs to economically depressed areas.An ABC/Washington Post poll found that a majority of Americans expect he’ll do a good or excellent job handling the economy, jobs, terrorism, the budget deficit, and in helping the middle class.I don’t have a brilliant explanation for the disconnect between these numbers and his approval ratings. Maybe his postelection honeymoon has made people more optimistic about the next four years, but it hasn’t led people to reassess their deeply held views of his character and ability.Maybe Republican partisans who have long been skeptical of Mr. Trump are nonetheless optimistic about his economic agenda. That suggests that Democrats might have a harder time benefiting from skepticism of Mr. Trump than one might guess.Or maybe these measures are hinting at something about Mr. Trump’s appeal that helps explain the disconnect between his electoral success and his historically bad ratings.No matter what, Mr. Trump is president as of Friday. Most presidents who run for re-election get it. He inherits a healthy and growing economy, which has been the most important predictor of the president’s approval rating. He may enter weaker than any president in memory, but the office and the state of the country will afford him plenty of opportunities to improve his standing.