https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/01/fashion/farfetch-an-online-boutique-enjoys-its-moment.html
Farfetch, an Online Boutique, Enjoys Its Moment - The New York Times
E-Commerce,Farfetch.com,Neves  Jose,Fashion and Apparel
April 30, 2014
4126
José Neves has a certain way of shopping, one that may make him very rich.“When I go to New York, I don’t go to the department store,” he said during a recent interview from London, where he is based. “I go to the meatpacking district or in SoHo. I go into that tiny little boutique, that hole in the wall, where I discovered a selection that I can’t find anywhere else. But how do you do this at scale?”Mr. Neves, a 39-year-old Portuguese entrepreneur, has figured out an answer with his website, Farfetch.com, which provides an Open Table-like platform that connects shoppers to 300 boutiques from all over the world.He has turned his six-year-old site into a big business, and, apparently, a very appealing investment. Farfetch has raised $66 million in its latest investment round, on top of the $42.5 million it had already raised over the previous three years. The start-up had more than $160 million in sales last year and is quickly becoming one of the more intriguing players in the online shopping world.The most recent round of funding is led by a private equity investor, Vitruvian Partners. Private equity money has been flowing in the fashion world recently. Last week, Berkshire Partners became an investor in Opening Ceremony, and earlier this year, Blackstone took a stake in Versace.Farfetch raised $20 million last year, led by Condé Nast, and the publisher has come back for more (Farfetch is one of its biggest independent digital investments).“We made our initial investment into the company over a year ago, and the tremendous growth since then led us to increase our investment through this round,” said Andrew Siegel, the head of strategy and investments for Condé Nast’s parent company, Advance Publications.The Farfetch visitor is a well-heeled one, Mr. Neves said. The average customer spends $650 each shopping session. And those customers are looking for something a little bit different, he said — perhaps a shoe that went with “Look No. 4” from the recent Givenchy show. Bergdorf Goodman might not have it, but there’s a good chance a boutique will.Just as any disrupter would, Mr. Neves found a crack.“If you have a store in, say, Dallas or in Chicago, you only have your own local clientele,” he said. “That clientele is not shopping online as well. This is a huge missed opportunity. These boutiques in these places don’t appeal to the customer just in Chicago or Miami. They appeal to a global audience these days.”So he persuaded them to go online. Some of these boutiques have websites — some where you might be wondering whether your credit card information is actually going to be safely stowed — but many don’t. The boutiques included in Farfetch’s roster includes some heavy hitters, like the Webster in Miami and Kirna Zabête on Broome Street. Mr. Neves finds his revenue by taking a cut of each sale (he won’t say how much).There are still some segments of the fashion world that have been slow to adapt to technology and prefer to sell only in brick-and-mortar shops (Chanel, Céline and Dior among them). Mr. Neves said that this reluctance will not last forever.“For millennial customers it’s beyond comprehension that’s there’s something available in a physical store that’s not available online,” he said. “They just don’t get it. It’s like an artist who releases an album but they cannot download it from iTunes.”When asked to compare his site to the Godzilla of online retail, Net-a-Porter, Mr. Neves bristled.“It’s different,” he said. “The overlap is 4 percent. Ninety-six percent of the products on Farfetch cannot be found on Net-a-Porter and Neiman Marcus. It’s just the way these boutiques buy. They take more risks. They take in many designers that the big department stores don’t buy.”(But no matter how many designers they take a gamble on, it’s the big labels that sell best on Farfetch: Saint Laurent, Valentino, Chloé, Givenchy and Comme des Garcons are among the biggest sellers.)Net-a-Porter’s founder, Natalie Massenet, has made Time Magazine’s list of the 100 most influential people in the world for 2014. Does Mr. Neves have similar dreams? Not quite, but he doesn’t underestimate his ambition.“We think what we’re building is really revolutionary,” he said. “I do think we’re changing the way we shop for fashion.”