http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/arts/design/mayor-de-blasio-names-tom-finkelpearl-of-the-queens-museum.html
Mayor de Blasio Names Tom Finkelpearl of the Queens Museum - The New York Times
Art,Queens Museum,Finkelpearl  Tom,New York City,de Blasio  Bill,Culture (Arts)
April 6, 2014
318
Tom Finkelpearl, the president and executive director of the Queens Museum, is scheduled to be named the cultural affairs commissioner by Mayor Bill de Blasio on Monday, the mayor’s office confirmed, putting Mr. Finkelpearl in charge of a $156 million budget and making him the point person on the arts for a city widely considered the cultural capital of the world.The appointment is in keeping with the new administration’s emphasis on the disenfranchised; in his 12 years at the Queens Museum, Mr. Finkelpearl, 58, has hired community organizers to professionalize outreach efforts and emphasized the diversity of the local immigrant population. (He frequently cites the 138 languages spoken in the borough.)And his institution’s recently completed $68 million renovation was largely aimed at making the museum more inviting and connected to the neighborhood.“Tom believes that art is for everybody, and has developed an exceptional record of fortifying the city’s cultural institutions across all five boroughs,” Mr. de Blasio said. “That’s exactly the kind of energy, leadership and creativity that we want.”The appointment, to be formally announced on Monday at the Queens Museum, begins to shed some light on Mr. de Blasio’s plan for the arts. He succeeds a mayor who was heavily involved in cultural affairs, Michael R. Bloomberg, and who used his own wealth to advance the mission of many arts organizations. Mr. de Blasio’s profile on culture has been something of a mystery.In his meetings with the mayor, Mr. Finkelpearl said, the two have mainly discussed shared principles, like making art available to every child citywide and improving arts education in public schools. “It wasn’t that he created a mandate; it was, do we agree on these core values — openness and inclusiveness, engagement?” Mr. Finkelpearl said in a phone interview. “In terms of exactly how that is implemented, that is something I need to develop.”Some cultural leaders have questioned whether the arts matter to the new mayor, given that he has taken three months to name an arts commissioner. But Mr. Finkelpearl said, “He was aware that this is not the first appointment he made.”“It’s not that he hasn’t been thinking about this,” he added. “It’s that he hadn’t found the right candidate.”The Queens Museum has been something of a template for Mr. de Blasio’s philosophical direction, offering courses in various languages targeted at its borough’s diverse population, like digital sound design in Spanish and Mandarin, along with classes like traditional Korean brush painting.“Where art and culture figure into this progressive moment is a question that lots of people are asking,” said Jimmy Van Bramer, the City Council’s majority leader, who represents Queens and encouraged Mr. Finkelpearl’s appointment. “I think Tom is the perfect person for this because he will help us all answer that question.”Coming to the Cultural Affairs Department will be a return to government for Mr. Finkelpearl. For six years, ending in 1996, he ran New York City’s Percent for Art Program, which requires that 1 percent of the budget for city-funded construction be spent on public artwork. The program is managed by the Cultural Affairs Department.Mr. Finkelpearl began his career in 1982 in Long Island City, Queens, at P.S. 1 Contemporary Art Center — now MoMA PS1 — which he joined as a public affairs officer. After serving as the executive director of programs at the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture in Maine from 1996 to 1999, Mr. Finkelpearl returned to P.S. 1 in 1999 as deputy director, and helped manage its 2000 merger with the Museum of Modern Art. He became executive director of the Queens Museum in 2002, overseeing the upgrade of its building, in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, which was completed last fall.Although many museum directors move on after big renovation projects, Mr. Finkelpearl had planned to stick around, arguing that it is typically “the second or third year when things get difficult.”But several people he respected urged him to consider the job of cultural affairs commissioner, he said, and he took to the idea. “I have a lot of basic core values that I share with this administration,” he said, “and it’s an exciting time to join the team.”Given his work experience, Mr. Finkelpearl has been “some part of 27 years of budgets,” he said. And he has been a vocal advocate for increases in city arts funding. But Mr. Finkelpearl said it was too soon to talk about his hopes for this administration’s budget, which is in flux.“There’s no comment that I could make that would be responsible at this point,” he said. “It’s an ongoing process.”Mr. Finkelpearl also declined to weigh in on controversial cultural projects that may ultimately require city support, namely the New York Public Library’s planned renovation of its flagship building on Fifth Avenue. “I haven’t studied it enough yet,” he said.The performing arts center planned for the former World Trade Center site could also require city involvement. “If there’s an arts organization that’s struggling in one way or another, I think that’s a role for the commissioner on behalf of the administration,” Mr. Finkelpearl said.Raised in Massachusetts and a sculptor by training, Mr. Finkelpearl graduated from Princeton and received his Master of Fine Arts from Hunter College. He is married to Eugenie Tsai, the contemporary art curator at the Brooklyn Museum, and they have a son who is a senior at Carleton College in Minnesota.Mr. Finkelpearl lives in Lower Manhattan, and has a summer home in Rockaway, Queens.As commissioner, he said, he looks forward to experiencing culture in all corners of the city. “People are thirsty for the arts everywhere,” he said. “When you see kids learning the violin in Corona, you realize that these are families that might have all kinds of challenges, but they believe in the power of art.”