https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/30/fashion/rihanna-zendaya-fenty-puma-footwear-news.html
Celebrating Shoes With Rihanna - The New York Times
Shoes and Boots,Rihanna,Sneakers,Puma AG,Footwear News Achievement Awards,Apfel  Iris,Coleman  Zendaya,Music
Nov. 30, 2016
3364
In today’s politically charged climate, even shoes can be contentious.At the 30th annual Footwear News Achievement Awards, held on Tuesday evening at the IAC building in Manhattan, Ronnie Fieg of the label Kith offered a “no comment” when asked about his collaboration with New Balance, a brand that found itself in cross hairs this month after one of its senior representatives voiced support for President-elect Donald J. Trump.“I’m not going to speak on that,” said Mr. Fieg, who had won Retailer of the Year. “I don’t get political.”He wasn’t the only one asked about something besides the accouterments on his feet.Ansel Elgort, the actor and son of the photographer Arthur Elgort, who was there to present the Designer of the Year award to Paul Andrew, reflected on the protests over the Dakota Access Pipeline.“It shows how disappointing our country can be in regards to many things,” he said.Regarding some things, however — like Rihanna — disappointment is not a factor.The singer was on hand to receive the Shoe of the Year award for her collaborative project with Puma, the Creeper, making her the first woman to receive such recognition.Rihanna wore a long-sleeved black top and baseball cap from Vetements with the word “Securite” printed across both, a Vetements x Juicy Couture maxi dress beneath, and the shoe of the hour: a platform sneaker with a black suede top. She swept in just as the ceremony was about to begin, causing a commotion and drawing the attention of guests like Mark King, president of Adidas, and Dick Johnson, chief executive of Foot Locker; the designers Alexandre Birman and John Varvatos; and other celebrities (Dascha Polanco of “Orange Is the New Black” and the model Christie Brinkley).As Rihanna moved toward her table, the speakers pumped “This Is What You Came For,” her song with Calvin Harris, and the crowd turned into a Rihanna-worshipping, bubbly-sipping stampede.On her way, she was stopped by Cuba Gooding Jr., who recently played O. J. Simpson in “The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story,” and who wanted to pay his respects.Given that the shoe of the year was a sneaker, Mr. Gooding was asked whether he’s a sneaker man. “No, but I used to be,” he said. “I used to be a breakdancer back in the ’80s, and you weren’t worth your weight unless you wore Converse high-tops.” Now, however, he’s all about the work boot. “I live in my Blundstones,” he said. “I have eight pairs. They’re all black.”Though Rihanna refused interviews, Adam Petrick, Puma’s director of brand and marketing, offered glowing reviews of the singer-cum-designer, noting that the partnership had cast the brand in a new light.“A lot of streetwear retailers opened their minds to ‘Puma isn’t just a classic, casual comfort shoe, but maybe Puma has an interesting design aesthetic,’” he said. “It helped us with getting a second look from retailers who hadn’t been considering us.”In her speech, Rihanna nodded to that connection, thanking “all the kids in the street that inspired me just by doing things their own way.”Other winners of the evening included the actress and singer Zendaya, 20, for the release of her Daya collection, and Iris Apfel, 95, for, well, being Iris Apfel.Ms. Apfel, the Icon Award winner, brought a dash of levity to the night of networking, long-winded speeches and insistently earnest congratulations.Stepping up to the stage with the help of Michael Atmore, the editorial director of Footwear News, and another man, she noted, “It’s nice to be old and have two pieces of beefcake escort you.” Whomever they voted for.