https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/23/business/spain-banks-imf-rato.html
Former I.M.F. Leader Sentenced for Embezzlement - The New York Times
International Monetary Fund,Rato  Rodrigo,Embezzlement,Bankia SA
Feb. 23, 2017
897
MADRID — Rodrigo Rato, a former managing director of the International Monetary Fund, was convicted on Thursday on charges of misusing the funds of a Spanish bank that he led to near-collapse. He was sentenced to four and a half years in jail.Mr. Rato is the most prominent person to have been convicted since the rescue of the bank, Bankia, in 2012. As such, he has been the face of anger against elites and financial industry executives in Spain, which had to bail out its ailing banks during the European debt crisis.He was sentenced alongside 64 other Bankia directors and executives, who were accused of making unlawful credit card purchases that totaled 12.5 million euros, or $13.2 million, over a decade.The conviction represents a drastic shift in his reputation. Once thought to be a potential Spanish prime minister, Mr. Rato had been finance minister in the conservative government of José María Aznar. In 2004, he left for Washington to take the helm of the I.M.F., winning the job because of his reputation for having presided over the early stages of Spain’s construction-led economic boom.After returning to Spain, Mr. Rato was appointed in 2010 to run Caja Madrid, a regional lender. He soon spearheaded a seven-way merger to form Bankia, consolidating banks after Spain’s construction bubble burst in 2008. But instead of shoring up the sector, the move led to the near-collapse of the new bank.Mr. Rato was forced to resign in May 2012, just before Bankia was nationalized and the Spanish government negotiated a European bailout to rescue the country’s banking sector.The sentence handed down on Thursday can be appealed, but Mr. Rato and other former Bankia executives are also awaiting a ruling in a separate, broader case that is centered on claims of mismanagement of the lender.In that case, he and others are accused of misrepresenting Bankia’s financial soundness as it prepared a public stock offering in 2011. The bank went on to report a loss in 2012 of €19.2 billion, the largest in Spanish corporate history.He is also being investigated separately for tax evasion relating to purchases of property.The case against Mr. Rato and his former colleagues for mismanaging Bankia and misstating its accounts began shortly after the bank’s bailout.In 2013, Mr. Rato’s predecessor as Bankia chairman, Miguel Blesa, was briefly imprisoned in another case relating to the purchase of a Miami bank. On Thursday, Mr. Blesa was sentenced to six years in prison for his role in the Bankia credit card scheme.The following year, Mr. Rato and others were ordered to stand trial for misusing their credit card privileges from 2003 to 2012. They also stood accused of providing unauthorized company credit cards to dozens of board members and friends.The cards were used for personal purchases that included clothing, restaurants and travel, as well as cash withdrawals. Some were also used to pay for golf, seats at the bullring and private parties.At the time, the prosecution said Mr. Rato made illegal purchases of €54,800 while he led Bankia, while Mr. Blesa spent €436,700 with his corporate cards. Both eventually reimbursed the amounts.The ruling on Thursday focused, however, on Mr. Blesa’s role as architect of the corporate credit card scheme and that of Mr. Rato in extending the scheme once he took charge. The court said that Mr. Rato not only benefited personally but also maintained “the same dynamic in every aspect” as his predecessor.The ruling comes shortly after Spain’s judiciary also decided to widen its Bankia investigation to Spain’s top regulators, including the former governor of the central bank, who was ordered this month to appear in court to explain why Bankia’s I.P.O. received regulatory clearance.