https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/us/raymond-tensing-testifies-samuel-dubose.html
Ex-Officer Testifies, Again, in 2015 Death of Unarmed Black Driver - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,University of Cincinnati,Tensing  Ray (1989- ),Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Cincinnati (Ohio)
June 16, 2017
328
CINCINNATI — A former university police officer who fatally shot an unarmed black man during a 2015 traffic stop took the stand in his own defense on Friday for a second time, telling a jury he killed the man because he feared being dragged by the man’s car.“My police instinct kicked in,” the former officer, Raymond M. Tensing, said during two hours of deliberate, and at times tearful, testimony.“I felt my body moving with this car, falling backward, and instinctively I just reached for my gun,” Mr. Tensing said, adding that he shot not to wound or to kill, but “to stop the threat.”Prosecutors have said that the car had only moved slightly and that there was no serious threat.Mr. Tensing, who is white, is being retried for murder and voluntary manslaughter in the death of Samuel DuBose, whom he pulled over after he noticed a missing license plate and, minutes later, killed with a single gunshot. The shooting was one in a series of deaths of black men during encounters with police officers — including Walter Scott in North Charleston, S.C., and Freddie Gray in Baltimore — that fueled a wrenching national debate over race and policing and underscored the challenge, for prosecutors, of persuading a jury to convict police officers. On Friday, a jury in St. Paul acquitted Officer Jeronimo Yanez of manslaughter in the death of a black man, Philando Castile.Mr. Tensing’s first trial ended in November with a hung jury, and his retrial is a second test for prosecutors who have called the killing “asinine” and compared it to a death in a war zone.The fatal encounter, which was recorded by Mr. Tensing’s body camera, began the evening of July 19, 2015, when Mr. Tensing pulled over Mr. DuBose in a 1998 Honda Accord. After repeatedly being asked for his driver’s license, Mr. DuBose said that he did not have it with him.Then, as Mr. Tensing moved to open the car door, Mr. DuBose started the ignition, and the scene turned violent in a split second: Jerky video footage showed Mr. Tensing appearing to reach inside the car, yell “stop” twice, and fire his gun. Mr. DuBose, 43, died of a gunshot to his head.The case is likely to turn on what jurors believe was going through Mr. Tensing’s mind in those seconds.Speaking levelly from the witness stand, Mr. Tensing, 27, said he believed in the moment that his arm was tangled in the steering wheel of the car, although he later realized that it was pinned down by Mr. DuBose.“I just misperceived that my arm was caught in the steering wheel,” he told a prosecutor, Seth Tieger, who asked him about testimony of a video analyst earlier in the trial who said Mr. Tensing had not been dragged by the car.“I made a split-second decision,” Mr. Tensing said. “The experts can sit here and study and evaluate the body camera and break it down. But they were not in my mind during those seconds.”Prosecutors have said Mr. Tensing was not threatened by Mr. DuBose, and that it was a crime driven by anger that Mr. DuBose had not obeyed him. When the trial opened, Stacey L. DeGraffenreid, an assistant prosecutor in Hamilton County, said Mr. Tensing ignored his training by reaching into the car.“You can almost see him flinch right before the shot’s fired,” Ms. DeGraffenreid said of Mr. DuBose. “This was a purposeful killing by Mr. Tensing.”Mr. Tensing’s lawyer, Stew Mathews, appeared during opening statements to try to shift the blame onto Mr. DuBose.“Sam DuBose, all he had to do was cooperate with the officer,” Mr. Mathews said, adding, “This all happened so quickly and instinctively that Ray Tensing did the only thing that he could do to save his own life.”A murder conviction would carry a sentence of 15 years to life in prison. If Mr. Tensing is convicted of the lesser charge of manslaughter, he would face up to 11 years in prison. Judge Leslie Ghiz on Thursday denied prosecutors’ request to add another lesser charge of reckless homicide.During Mr. Tensing’s first trial, it was revealed that he was wearing a T-shirt that showed the Confederate battle flag under his uniform at the time of the shooting, though Mr. Tensing denied the shirt held any significance. The shirt was not allowed into evidence for this trial.Mr. Tensing was fired from the University of Cincinnati Police Department after he was indicted. The department was empowered to patrol some streets near the campus, although Mr. Tensing stopped Mr. DuBose slightly outside of that area. The university agreed to pay Mr. DuBose’s family $4.85 million and to provide a college education to his 12 children.On Friday, Mr. Tensing struggled to maintain his composure as he talked about Mr. DuBose and the final moments of their encounter.“I’ve thought about this,” he said, “every moment for the last two years.”