https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/world/asia/back-in-afghan-hot-spot-us-marines-chase-diminished-goals.html
Back in Afghan Hot Spot, U.S. Marines Chase Diminished Goals - The New York Times
Helmand Province (Afghanistan),Afghanistan War (2001- ),United States Marine Corps,Afghan National Army,Taliban,United States Defense and Military Forces
July 14, 2017
9233
CAMP SHORAB, Afghanistan — The last time American Marines were in Helmand Province, they had a sweeping mission and the resources to carry it out.Tens of thousands of Marines flooded the southern villages here, and they had tens of millions of dollars in cash to throw into projects that would bolster local support. They spearheaded some of the bloodiest battles of this long war, losing 349 dead in the process, but they succeeded in turning much of what had been prime Taliban and opium territory over to the Afghan government.Then, following the Obama administration’s deadline to have combat forces out of Afghanistan by the end of 2014, they went home.Now they are back in Helmand with a changed mission, looking at an overwhelmingly changed map.Within two years, Helmand, Afganistan’s largest province, all but returned to the hands of the Taliban. Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital and a haven for tens of thousands of refugees from the fighting, has been surrounded for more than a year, and in that time has been infiltrated by insurgents at least three times. The performance of the Afghan forces, left on their own, was catastrophic, with 60 to 70 soldiers dying each week.After days of traveling and talking with Marines and their Afghan allies, it is clear there is little glory. Instead, the new mission is a treacherous grind in temperatures well over 100 degrees — described as a “hair dryer in your face” — to achieve expectations lowered to the most basic.The mission is no longer about complete control of Helmand. Old efforts to establish local governance and rule of law here have so clearly failed that they are no longer in the picture. The Marines are simply trying to keep Lashkar Gah from falling to the Taliban, and to help the Afghan forces come out of their barracks and put up a fight.There is no withdrawal deadline this time, and no clearly defined strategy to end the war — other than hoping to persuade the Taliban to give up and eventually talk of peace.The Marines’ diminished goals here reflect a broader American unease and confusion about being pulled back into the Afghan fight. Even as the Trump administration has given commanders the lead in setting increased troop levels, it has sought alternative guidance from wealthy security contractors.As the Pentagon has drawn up its plans, its leaders have studiously refused to talk about timetables. To describe how long this new mission may take, in a war that has already stretched over nearly 16 years, the Marines in Helmand repeatedly referred to American efforts in Germany and Japan after World War II.The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., who visited Helmand for a couple of hours last month, put it more simply: “We are staying.”Task Force Southwest, consisting of about 300 Marines and some sailors, has taken up quarters in a corner of what had been a British base and is now the headquarters of the Afghan Army’s 215th Corps.Many of the senior American officers have served in Helmand before.The last time Brig. Gen. Roger B. Turner Jr., the commanding general of the task force, was in Helmand, in 2011, he was leading a regimental combat team responsible for four southern districts. There they established about 175 outposts. His current deputy, Col. Matthew S. Reid, was in Helmand then, too, leading clearance operations in Garmsir District, establishing about 50 outposts across a 30-mile stretch.Now most of the areas they cleared and held have been retaken by the Taliban. Many of the tribal elders and government leaders General Turner worked with have been killed.For weeks after arriving in April, he struggled with the burden of that past.“You carry that baggage with you — of the places we fought and sacrificed, and to see it rolled back,” he said. “Dwelling on the past is just not useful, because we have a job to do going forward.”Colonel Reid said he was not surprised by the reversals. “It went back to what, I think, you could have reasonably predicted it would have — because, fundamentally, we weren’t here long enough,” he said.“It’s a generational fix.”Capt. John D. Quail, an American operations officer, sat next to the Afghan Army corps’ operations chief, Lt. Col. Abdul Latif. They discussed the dots covering the map on the wall in front of them, representing Afghan presence.“It is easy for us to take Nawa, but difficult to hold,” Colonel Latif said about a Taliban-controlled district bordering the provincial capital. He looked at his gold watch now and then as the session ran deep into lunchtime.“We need at least 300 police, but they cannot provide that,” he added. “They have a lot of guys on paper, but in reality not enough guys.”Captain Quail agreed. “We can’t choose a course of action completely dependent on the police — that might fail.”The Marines are essentially gearing up for an occupation of the province’s crucial areas by an Afghan Army that has close to zero local soldiers in its ranks. Most of the soldiers come from Afghanistan’s north and east.As one Marine officer put it: “It’s like sending the New York or Massachusetts Guard to control Texas cowboy country in the 1800s.”But they have little choice. Despite years of Western training, the police forces, crucial to establishing government rule, are still seen as corrupt, tangled in tribal rivalries and the opium economy. They have little presence beyond the provincial capital.Still, the Marines have been able to call on some old relationships.During a recent operation in Marja, Omar Jan, an Afghan police colonel who in 2011 had served along with Colonel Reid in Garmsir, played an instrumental role. He marshaled his forces to fight aggressively in a way that the battered police had not displayed through the losses over the past year, the Americans say.To thank him, and “leverage the strong leaders,” Colonel Reid had the police commander come to Lashkar Gah for a senior security meeting, along with the top provincial leadership.Later in the evening in Lashkar Gah, as the Marines waited for helicopter rides back to their base, they had more visitors from the old days, including a senior intelligence official who had also served in Garmsir. They all sat on the floor, some Marines removing their boots out of respect.Over bottled water and energy drinks, and in cellphone light since the electricity went off briefly, the men compared aches and pains and receding hairlines, and told stories of the good times they had together.Then, they moved to future operations, and how to try to expand the security belt around Lashkar Gah.The threat next door in Nawa District, which was overrun by the Taliban last year, would have to be addressed. The river that served as a natural barrier around part of Lashkar Gah was also failing them — water levels had subsided so much in places that the Taliban could easily cross. So more men would have to be deployed there.For the Marines, the new mission is close to no action — a lot of talking over maps with little good news on them.Outside those sessions, though, is a reminder the risk could be all around. Young Marines, called “guardian angels,” keep watch outside offices and outposts for potential green-on-blue attackers — Afghans who snap, or are recruited by the insurgents, and turn their weapons against their allies.During a recent visit with the police advisory unit, Sgt. Maj. Darrell L. Carver warned that the Taliban wanted a “catastrophic” attack to sow mistrust between the Americans and the Afghans they are advising.“All it takes,” he said, “is for a couple of you to drop your jaw.”If the job is to be done, it will in large part fall on the shoulders of newer Afghan commanders, elevated after stark failures by their predecessors in the past three years.In Helmand, it is Brig. Gen. Wali Mohammed Ahmadzai, 47, recently promoted out of the commando forces.He took command of the 215th Corps about nine months ago and leads a force of about 18,000 soldiers. That is the number on paper, anyway. In reality, it is more like 14,000, the Marines say.When he arrived here, the corps was on the verge of collapse.The Taliban had seized so many weapons and so much equipment — purchased with American military aid — that one commander said they could “fight for another 50 years.”General Ahmadzai replaced the top cadre and arrested about 200 corps officials. Two battalion commanders, who lost a lot of men, face 12 to 16 years in prison.The American military funneled in about $100 million in 2016 to help the process.The general has now turned to what the Marine advisers have laid out as a priority: The Afghans need to get out of their bases and barracks.Sergeant Major Carver insisted that the Afghan troops outnumbered the Taliban and had better training and equipment. “If only they shot back, and didn’t do this,” he said, displaying a duck-and-cover position.The Marines say they are trying to change the Afghan forces’ “checkpoint mentality,” a hesitant mind-set largely induced by an older generation of leaders.“I don’t think anybody can control Helmand,” Sergeant Major Carver said. “But what you can do is force the enemy to react to you, as opposed to the other way around.”Over the past couple months, the Afghan soldiers have managed to carry out two operations while the Taliban’s offensive was slowed by Ramadan and another huge poppy harvest. The missions have been basic: reinforcement of forces in Sangin District, and resupply of units that had been surrounded in Marja District.That basic missions have been turned into such great undertakings, even requiring extensive air support, suggests just how little control the Afghan forces have.No convoy had made it to Marja for more than a year. On the way there, the forces had to continuously engage the Taliban and clear improvised explosive devices, or I.E.D.s. On the return trip, they found that the Taliban had re-carpeted the roads with I.E.D.s.“We dug up about 75,” General Ahmadzai said. “We didn’t really have the ability to dig up more..”Sometimes, just how different the current mission is from what the younger Marines expected has left them disoriented. Many of them had heard stories of the Marine surge here that started in 2009, and of the years of counterinsurgency tactics that followed.Now, they are not being asked to lead the fight, but to train a local force in hopes it will hold out against the Taliban.When Cpl. Allan Oshea, a heavy-equipment operator from Alabama, arrived in April, he described it as a proud moment as he joined a unique club: American Marines in Helmand.Two months later, he admitted that the routine could get boring at times, and that he “was hoping to do more of my job.” His routine includes going around asking whether anyone needs help with anything.Corporal Oshea said he realized that what they were doing was different from what previous Marines did in Helmand, but he will still have a story to tell back home.“Everybody who’s been here before me has a story — ‘I did this, I did that.’ With them it turned into an ego trip in a way,” he said. “Yeah, you came here and you performed your mission. But now I am here to help the Afghans perform their mission.”