https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/07/business/dealbook/sinclair-is-said-to-be-near-a-deal-for-tribune-media.html
Sinclair Is Said to Be Near a Deal for Tribune Media - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Television,Sinclair Broadcast Group Inc,Tribune Media Company
May 7, 2017
3234
The Sinclair Broadcast Group may not have much name recognition outside its home base near Baltimore, but the company is poised to cover most of the country’s television households.Sinclair is near a deal to buy Tribune Media, people briefed on the matter said on Sunday, as it seeks to expand its empire of local television stations after rule changes by the Federal Communications Commission.A deal between the companies, expected to be announced as soon as Monday morning, would cement Sinclair’s status as a growing power in the broadcast industry. The company, whose 173 properties already make it the largest owner of local stations in the United States, emerged from a field of potential bidders that included 21st Century Fox and the Nexstar Media Group.Sinclair was expected to pay just under $44 a share, some of those briefed on the matter said, valuing Tribune at about $3.8 billion. Details were being ironed out as of Sunday afternoon, and the talks could still collapse.Representatives for Fox, Sinclair and Tribune declined to comment on the status of the talks, which were first reported by Reuters.Sinclair stations cover local news, including fires, crime and traffic, but the company has also used them to advance a mostly conservative political agenda.Buying Tribune Media, once the Tribune empire’s television arm, would give Sinclair control of properties like WGN in Chicago and WPIX in New York. The merged company would own 215 stations around the country, although it might have to sell some to meet federal regulations.Still, a deal would extend Sinclair’s reach at an auspicious time. Since President Trump picked Ajit Pai, a Republican, as its chairman, the F.C.C. has eased limits on the ownership of local TV stations, paving the way for a potential deal frenzy among broadcasters.The commission reintroduced what is known as the UHF discount, under which broadcasters can exclude from ownership caps stations that use ultrahigh frequencies.The change effectively lowered Sinclair’s coverage of American households to about 25 percent, from a current limit of 39 percent, freeing it to pursue acquisitions.Growth would help the 46-year-old Sinclair gain more negotiating leverage in the television industry, which has consolidated rapidly in recent years. Adding stations would give the company more power over cable providers, which pay to retransmit stations’ broadcasts. It could also give Sinclair a presence in most of the country’s major markets.A deal for Tribune would also help Sinclair gird itself against growing online rivals like Netflix and Hulu, as well as content providers like CBS and the Walt Disney Company, which are themselves pushing for bigger fees from cable companies.Sinclair had already taken steps toward being a national player in the industry by buying properties like the Tennis Channel and Comet, a science fiction network.For its part, Tribune would gain from joining a larger corporate parent, with local television advertising sales, excluding political ads and the Olympics, flat last year and likely to drop this year.Acquiring Tribune would give Sinclair a particular advantage over Fox: It would control the most Fox affiliates of any station owner in the country.Concern over the potential outsize power that a bigger Sinclair would hold helped drive 21st Century Fox to explore making a bid for Tribune. Fox weighed making a joint bid with the Blackstone Group, a giant investment firm, in which Blackstone would have provided cash and Fox would have contributed its own stations.News of Fox’s deliberations, and the anticipation of a bidding war, lifted Tribune’s stock price by nearly 7 percent. (Tribune’s shares closed at $40.29 on Friday.)Ultimately, Fox chose not to make a bid, people with knowledge of the matter said.Acquisitions have long been part of the strategy of Sinclair’s founding Smith family. Under the Smiths’ control, the company has spent more than $7 billion on acquisitions, leading David D. Smith, the longtime chairman, to once remark, “We’re forever expanding — like the universe.”Beyond giving Sinclair greater negotiating power, a deal for Tribune would increase the reach of the company’s news operation, which has promoted a mostly conservative agenda since the presidency of George W. Bush.The Smiths have become active in politics. Some of their political donations have gone to Democrats, but the vast majority have gone to Republican causes, like a so-called super PAC that backed Mr. Trump and the National Republican Congressional Committee.Critics of Sinclair have taken aim at what they say are the similar leanings of the company’s Washington bureau, which has provided commentary and syndicated reports that have generally praised Republicans and criticized Democrats. Last month, Sinclair hired Boris Epshteyn, a former spokesman for Mr. Trump, as its chief political analyst.With Tribune poised to be acquired, smaller TV station owners may find themselves courted. The stock prices of broadcasters like the E. W. Scripps Company and Gray Television are up sharply this year, largely on investor expectations that they may get new corporate owners.