http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/13/us/2-albuquerque-officers-face-murder-charges-in-death-of-homeless-man.html
Albuquerque Officers Are Charged With Murder in Death of Homeless Man - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Boyd  James M (1976-2014),Sandy  Keith P (1975- ),Perez  Dominique W (1981- ),Justice Department,Albuquerque (NM)
Jan. 12, 2015
4683
ALBUQUERQUE —  Prosecutors here said Monday that they would pursue murder charges against two police officers who were involved in the fatal shooting last year of a homeless man with a history of mental illness, a case that led to protests and a federal criminal investigation and that is likely to be among the first to rely on evidence obtained by a camera worn by an officer.In court documents filed Monday, prosecutors said the two Albuquerque police officers, Keith Sandy and Dominique Perez, acted with “deliberate intention” in the killing of James Boyd, 38, in the foothills of the Sandia Mountains, where Mr. Boyd was camping. A video of the March 16 shooting, taken by a helmet camera worn by one of the officers and released by the Albuquerque Police Department, was posted widely on YouTube and helped prompt a series of large protests here against the police.“We have evidence in this case to establish probable cause we didn’t have in other cases,” Kari E. Brandenburg, the district attorney for Bernalillo County, said at a news conference Monday, comparing Mr. Boyd’s death with the other allegations of excessive force that led city officials to agree last year to federal oversight of the Police Department.  Each officer faces a single count of open murder, which allows prosecutors to pursue a charge of manslaughter or first- or second-degree murder. A judge will decide at a preliminary hearing if there is enough evidence to go ahead with criminal proceedings; no date has been set for the hearing.Ms. Brandenburg said she opted to file what are known as criminal informations — charges submitted by a prosecutor who wants to avoid going through a grand jury — to present the case in a “totally transparent” way. “Unlike Ferguson and New York City,” she said, referring to the officer-involved deaths of Michael Brown and Eric Garner, “people will see the evidence and hear the witnesses.”The shooting of Mr. Boyd came after a standoff; the police said he was wielding two knives, but he appeared to be turning away as he was shot. He was hit with two bullets, with the fatal shot hitting him on the left side of his lower back, according to an autopsy. The autopsy found no drugs or alcohol in his system.Lawyers for the officers disputed the allegations, saying that prosecutors lacked evidence of criminal wrongdoing and that the officers were following their training to protect a fellow officer, a canine handler working beside them.“We plan on clearing his name through the judicial process now that the district attorney has made the bad decision to drag him through this process,” said Sam Bregman, the lawyer for Detective Sandy, who retired late last year after 20 years working for the Albuquerque police and the New Mexico State Police. “Mr. Sandy not only had the right but the duty to defend his fellow officer,” Mr. Bregman added. “He probably saved that fellow officer’s life, and the idea he’s being criminally charged is disgusting.”Law enforcement analysts said this could be one of the first instances in which footage from a wearable camera would be used as evidence in a murder case against an officer.David A. Harris, a professor of law at the University of Pittsburgh, said that with the video evidence, “it becomes impossible to deny some of the very basic facts.” He added, “That means you start an investigation on an entirely different foundation.”The shooting led to large demonstrations in downtown Albuquerque, with about a dozen people storming the mayor’s office. In a Justice Department inquiry into the Albuquerque Police Department released in April, investigators noted a pattern of excessive force used by the department, which played a role in the deaths of 23 civilians over four years. In October, the city reached a settlement with federal officials, agreeing to have an independent monitor installed.“We trust the judicial system will provide the family, our community and the officers a fair, transparent and unbiased opportunity to explore and present the facts as they relate to this tragic event,” Mayor Richard J. Berry of Albuquerque said in a statement on Monday.The Police Department declined to comment on the specifics of the case, but said that a preliminary hearing will “permit the evidence to be presented in a transparent and public forum.”But Luis Robles, a lawyer for Officer Perez, said the coverage of allegations of police misconduct had been “so pervasive and so negative my client could not receive a fair trial in this particular county.”Activists who have been rallying for reform took the district attorney’s decision as an encouraging development toward restoring a frayed relationship with law enforcement.“Everyone here agrees that the officer-worn video made the difference here,” said Patrick Davis, executive director of the watchdog group Progress Now. “Without it, the officer would have faced another rubber stamp investigation and he-said-he-said grand jury reminiscent of Ferguson. Now, the public will get to see the evidence and judge for ourselves. It’s a good next step on a very long road to rebuilding trust.”