https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/sports/ncaafootball/central-florida-de-la-haye-youtube.html
Central Florida Kicker Debates Choice: YouTube or Football? - The New York Times
De La Haye  Donald,Football (College),YouTube.com,University of Central Florida
June 14, 2017
9369
ORLANDO, Fla. — A player at the University of Central Florida may have to choose between continuing to play college football and building his brand on YouTube.The sophomore kicker Donald De La Haye said in a video that after meeting with the university’s compliance office last week, he might face such a decision. He could be violating N.C.A.A. rules by receiving money from the advertising revenue generated by his YouTube videos, which chronicle his life as a college student and football player.De La Haye has nearly 56,000 subscribers on YouTube, and his latest video detailing his battle to keep his channel going had 113,042 views as of Wednesday afternoon. YouTube pays video creators a percentage of the profits from ad revenue.De La Haye, who could not be reached for comment on Wednesday, discussed his conundrum in his most recent YouTube video posted on Monday.“Some people upstairs aren’t happy with my videos, and they, like, I’m in violation of N.C.A.A. rules and whatnot,” De La Haye said in the video. “I don’t understand, but who am I to say what is in the rule book and what is not.”The university released a statement Wednesday that left it unclear whether De La Haye could continue posting his videos.“U.C.F. athletics is committed to rules compliance,” the statement read. “Our compliance staff strives to make sure our student-athletes are informed about all pertinent N.C.A.A. bylaws.”The N.C.A.A. referred all comments to the university, saying it had not received a waiver from Central Florida about the matter.N.C.A.A. rules prohibit student-athletes from profiting from their likeness or status as student-athletes because doing so violates principles of amateurism. An N.C.A.A. bylaw regarding self-employment says that a student-athlete may establish his or her own business, provided the student-athlete’s name, photograph, appearance or athletics reputation are not used to promote the business.De La Haye, a marketing major from Costa Rica, said in the video posted Monday that he had created the channel as a way to further his career. He went on to say that the channel was a way to make a little extra money that he said his family needed.“Basically, I’m not allowed to make any money off my YouTube videos,” he said. “So I’m working hard — basically like a job, filming, editing, creating ideas — and I’m not allowed to make any money. And if I do, bad things will happen.”De La Haye, who displays a vibrant personality in the videos he creates, began the video taking bites of a hamburger while discussing his quandary and an impending meeting with a university compliance official. Later in the video, with the use of a time-lapse element, he discussed the meeting with the compliance official and said he was disappointed with the decision he believed he now had to make.“I feel like they are making me pick between my passion and what I love to do — make videos, entertain and be creative — and my other passion, playing football,” said De La Haye, a kickoff specialist who appeared in all 13 of the Knights’ games last season. “I’ve really got some decisions to make and not a lot of time to make those decisions.”