http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/09/us/mckinney-tex-pool-party-dispute-leads-to-police-officer-suspension.html
Jarring Image of Police’s Use of Force at Texas Pool Party - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,McKinney (Tex),Casebolt  David Eric (1973- ),Becton  Dajerria,Blacks,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Texas,Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming
June 8, 2015
4610
McKINNEY, Tex. — No lives were lost. The incident played out at a suburban pool party, not an urban neighborhood struggling with crime and drugs.But perhaps it was that suburban setting that helped make the images so powerful and disturbing. Now a video of a police officer pointing a gun at teenagers in bathing suits and shoving a young black girl’s face into the ground has become the latest flash point in relations between the police and minorities.The cellphone video, taken at the community pool in Craig Ranch, a racially diverse subdivision north of Dallas, has set off another debate over race and police tactics, with activists calling for the officer to be fired and others arguing that the blame should fall at least in part on the teenagers.The video appears to show the officer, David Eric Casebolt, briefly waving his handgun at young partygoers who approached him as he tried to subdue the teenage girl on Friday. The officer ultimately immobilized the girl by putting her facedown on the ground and placing a knee on her back.Chief Greg Conley of the McKinney Police Department said that the video had prompted an internal affairs investigation and that Officer Casebolt, a patrol supervisor, had been placed on administrative leave.One adult man was arrested on charges of interfering with the duties of a police officer and evading arrest, Chief Conley said. The 15-year-old girl who had been immobilized by Officer Casebolt was “temporarily detained” but ultimately released to her parents, he said.Benét Embry, the host of an Internet-radio talk show, lives in the neighborhood and said he had seen the party grow out of control. Mr. Embry said as many as 130 young people had attended the party.He said some of them scaled the pool’s fence after being turned away from the entrance by a security guard, who eventually called the police.In a phone interview on Monday, Mr. Embry expressed concerns, as an African-American man, about seeing a 15-year-old black girl in a swimsuit on the ground. “Of course I had concerns when I saw the officer pulling a gun,” he said. “That’s when I started thanking God that nobody got hurt. But I don’t believe that the officer was coming out to pick on black kids.”McKinney, with around 150,000 people, is a fast-growing, mostly middle-class suburb with deep racial and economic divisions. In 2009, according to an article in The Atlantic, the city settled a lawsuit in which it was accused of hindering the construction of affordable housing in the western part of the city, which is more white and more affluent.The pool party took place on the west side, in a neighborhood that residents said is usually marked by friendly relations among black, white, Hispanic and Asian residents.In a statement, the Police Department said officers arrived at the pool around 7:15 p.m. on Friday, responding to a call about a “disturbance involving multiple juveniles at the location, who do not live in the area or have permission to be there, refusing to leave.” The department, the statement added, received “several additional calls related to this incident advising that juveniles were now actively fighting.”Mayor Brian Loughmiller said in a statement that he was “disturbed and concerned by the incident.”On Monday evening, a diverse group of several hundred people gathered at an elementary school for a peaceful protest, waving signs reading, “Don’t tread on me or my kids” and “Stop Police Brutality.”Speakers used a bullhorn to call for the respect all citizens, and for sensitivity training for the McKinney police.Earlier in day, activists outside Police Headquarters said the youths had been subjected to racial bias, and demanded that Officer Casebolt be fired. Dominique Alexander, the president of the Next Generation Action Network, a civil rights group, said it was an “illusion” that youths had been jumping the fence. “They had every right to be there,” he said.After the video spread quickly online, criticism poured in from around the country. The American Civil Liberties Union of Texas said that it while it did not have all the facts about the party, “what we do know is that the police response, as seen on the video, appears to be a textbook case of overuse of force.”In a video posted to YouTube on Sunday, a black teenager named Tatiana said her family was hosting a cookout for friends when a woman insulted them, prompting a 14-year-old family friend to respond. Tatiana said a white woman had then told her: “You need to go back to where you’re from” and to “go back to your Section 8 home.”Tatiana said that she had replied, “Excuse me,” and that then another white woman hit her in the face and “both women attacked” her.Mr. Embry, the neighbor who saw the party, said he had not seen a fight involving blacks and whites.He described a party that began with a D.J. playing music in a nearby park, but that soon grew out of control as the security guard began turning away more teenagers than were allowed in the pool area.The video of the police response shows Officer Casebolt using profanity and shouting at teenagers as he and others officers try to round up some of them and shoo others away from a chaotic scene. He appears to grab the girl in frustration when she does not leave the area.In an interview with KDFW-TV, the girl identified herself as Dajerria Becton. She told the television station that she had been invited to the party and had not been involved in a fight.Brandon Brooks, 15, who shot the video, told a TV station that Officer Casebolt had not confronted him, one of the few white teenagers at the party.“I was one of the only white people in the area when that was happening,” he told the station. “You can see in part of the video where he tells us to sit down, and he kind of like skips over me and tells all my African-American friends to go sit down.”