http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/25/world/americas/ottawa-canada-gunmans-radicalism-deepened-as-life-crumbled.html
Ottawa Gunman’s Radicalism Deepened as Life Crumbled - The New York Times
Terrorism,Ottawa (Ontario),Canada,Zehaf-Bibeau  Michael,Cirillo  Nathan,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Murders and Attempted Murders,Muslims and Islam
Oct. 24, 2014
7861
OTTAWA — A loner. A drug addict. A criminal. A drifter. And lately, an Islamic radical.Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, the bearded, 32-year-old gunman who was shot dead Wednesday after killing a soldier and storming Canada’s Parliament, aptly fit each of those descriptions. In the tumultuous wake of what Canada’s prime minister has called a terrorist act, Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s radicalism has become the defining one.But a closer examination of his past draws a somewhat different portrait: one of an increasingly troubled, mentally unstable man who initially may have embraced religion not as a political cause, but as an attempt to scaffold a disintegrating life.Much remains unknown about the assault, including how Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau, a convicted criminal, managed to acquire the single-action Winchester deer-hunting rifle he used in the attack, killing a ceremonial guard, Cpl. Nathan Cirillo, at the National War Memorial and leaving three people in the national parliamentary complex lightly injured. Investigators have said they do not know whether he acted spontaneously or deliberately, or why.The law enforcement authorities also say they have yet to find anyone who assisted Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau. And on Thursday, the commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police suggested that his principal motivation was frustration over his failure to secure a passport, apparently so he could join Islamist fighters in Syria.Indeed, a counselor at a Vancouver Salvation Army shelter, Paul Jarjapka, said Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau had told him as much before setting off to Ottawa last month. Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau had become exasperated over passport issues, he said in an interview, adding that his understanding was that he “was going to address that.”That would fit an emerging pattern of terrorist acts not just in Canada, but throughout the West: homegrown zealots, often disaffected young men who have embraced radical Islam and act alone, or without evidence of direct aid from foreign jihadist groups. One such act occurred on Monday, when a 25-year-old man who had recently adopted radical Islam ran over two Canadian soldiers near Montreal, killing one. On Thursday, another attack bearing similar characteristics occurred in Queens, when a man attacked two police officers with a hatchet.One analyst of terrorism and intelligence, Wesley Wark of the University of Ottawa’s Graduate School of Public and International affairs, said he believed the terrorist threat posed by Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau had been politically overblown. But the proliferation of homegrown terrorism is, for now, a more pressing danger than the threat of attacks by foreign groups, he added. “We’ve been forced to recalibrate and rethink.”Prime Minister Stephen Harper has asserted that Monday’s automobile attack in Quebec was inspired by calls from the Islamic State to kill Canadians and foreigners from other nations battling the movement’s advance in Syria and Iraq. While that remains unproven, some analysts say the group has deftly seized on the attacks to make it appear as if they have cadres of supporters abroad without having built an infrastructure to support them.“The Al Qaeda ‘fan boys’ never did this, definitely not in so coordinated a fashion in so close a time,” said Will McCants, a scholar of Islamist militancy at the Brookings Institution. Al Qaeda’s constant calls for Muslims in the West to instigate their own attacks “fell on deaf ears” but “the ISIS guys are just really energized,” said Mr. McCants, using a common acronym for the group that now calls itself the Islamic State.Since the Western-led airstrikes began in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State’s social media message to Muslims living in the West has changed sharply, from “come join the attack” to “we are being attacked and what are you doing? You are just sitting there!” said Mokhtar Awad, a researcher at the liberal Center for American Progress in Washington who was visiting Cairo.“They are trying to shame Muslims,” he said. “ 'If you can’t join us over here, at least do what you can over there.' ”Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau appears to have come to Ottawa this month to get the papers he needed to travel to Syria, where Islamic State forces are deeply involved in that nation’s civil war. Besides seeking a Canadian passport to leave the country, Canadian news organizations reported on Friday, he sought unsuccessfully to renew an expired Libyan passport that could have enabled him to travel in the Middle East.Details of Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s life are hard to come by. But his radicalism seems only to have strengthened as his grip on ordinary life grew weak. And his hold appears to have begun to slip in the late 1990s, when his family fell apart.Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s parents are from starkly different backgrounds: His father, Bulgasem Zehaf, was born in Tripoli, Libya, in 1955, according to court records, and had been married and divorced. It is not clear when he arrived in Canada, but for about a decade, he ran a cafe — named after the city of his birth — on a street near McGill University in downtown Montreal.Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s mother, Susan Bibeau, was born in Montreal in 1961, and gave birth to her son in 1982 in Laval, a Montreal suburb. His parents married when he was 6. His early years were so unremarkable that the headmaster of his private high school, College Laval, was unable to remember him even after consulting yearbooks.“He was a student without a history,” said the headmaster, Michel Baillargeon. “He would not stand out.”That would soon change. In late 1998, Mr. Zehaf filed for divorce from Ms. Bibeau, citing adultery, and they divorced in 1999. Ms. Bibeau was granted primary custody of Michael, then about 16, living in their Laval home. A neighbor recalled that the son “was always throwing wild parties at night.”Michael Zehaf-Bibeau transferred to a public high school. His yearbook photograph shows a smiling, heavy-lidded young man with a wisp of a mustache and hair parted in the middle.It was around that time that he began to have run-ins with the law.From 2001 to 2005, Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau was arrested repeatedly: for stealing a credit card, for marijuana possession, for driving under the influence. He was sentenced to two years in prison for possessing a weapon related to a robbery, and served nine months, only to be arrested again and sent to jail for 60 days for possessing marijuana and PCP.In 2007, he traveled to Libya, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported on Friday, using a Libyan passport he had acquired in 2000 by virtue of his father’s citizenship. Sometime after returning, he left Montreal and headed west; Ms. Bibeau, the deputy chairwoman of the immigration division of the Refugee and Immigration Board of Canada, said in a statement that until last week, she had not seen her son in five years.He drifted to a tunnel-drilling job in British Columbia, then to a one-room flat in Burnaby, a suburb of Vancouver. By 2011, he had converted to Islam and was praying at the Masjid al-Salaam and Education Center, an impressive mosque known for its community outreach programs involving Muslims and non-Muslims alike.Yet he did not remain there long. “He didn’t like the constant presence of non-Muslims there,” said Aasim Rashid, a spokesman for the British Columbia Muslim Association. “He thought it should be just Muslims.” Mosque leaders suggested that he pray elsewhere, and he left — but returned and somehow entered the mosque at night to sleep.The mosque’s leaders changed the locks.Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau’s life was crumbling, and he responded with an odd act of desperation: in December 2011, he walked into a police station in Burnaby and said he had committed armed robbery in Montreal a decade earlier, and wanted to be jailed. The police could find no record of the robbery, and turned him away.The next night, he tried to rob a McDonald’s restaurant with a sharpened stick. When the police were summoned, he sat outside to wait for them. “I’m a crack addict,” he told a judge, according to a court transcript, “and at the same time I’m a religious person, and I want to sacrifice freedom and good things for a year maybe, so when I come out I’ll appreciate things in life more and be clean.”Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau spent 66 days in jail, in part because he threatened to commit more crimes if released, but a psychiatric examination pronounced him “fit and not certifiable,” a prosecutor said in court.In recent years, Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau regularly found refuge at the Beacon, a shelter in Vancouver run by the Salvation Army. Mr. Jarjapka, the counselor at the charity’s shelters, said he spoke with him often, and described him as immersed both in his faith and in a pitched struggle with addiction.“He was doing heroin to take the edge off the crack,” he said.Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau spoke constantly of his frustration with the involvement of the United States in the Middle East, Mr. Jarjapka said, and the two feuded regularly over his support for the Islamic State. His arguments were extreme — American bombing in Syria was the moral equivalent of bombing a loaded school bus in the United States, he told Mr. Jarjapka — but they were not delusional.“His viewpoint was bizarre,” he said. “The guy was not deranged. He was articulate. He was intelligent. His rationale was warped.”Mr. Jarjapka said he last saw Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau about three weeks ago, when he appeared at the shelter’s front desk with his bags packed.He said Mr. Zehaf-Bibeau told him, “I’m hitchhiking back east.”