https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/20/upshot/ossoff-and-a-different-democratic-plan-for-every-district.html
Ossoff and a Different Democratic Plan for Every District - The New York Times
Elections  House of Representatives,Ossoff  Jon,Democratic Party,Republican Party,Georgia
April 20, 2017
8381
Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s elections analyst, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor, discussed the Democrats’ strategy in coming elections after Jon Ossoff fell just short of winning outright Tuesday in a House special election in Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District. Toni: Ossoff started off his campaign with the idea to “Make Trump Furious,” but some people might not realize that he proceeded to run a moderate, tame campaign. What do you think it suggests about the broader issue of where Democrats will be positioning themselves heading into 2018 and beyond?Nate: Yeah, it was one of the most anodyne campaigns I can remember. He took bold stances against corruption and wasteful spending. He wants Atlanta’s north side to become the “Silicon Valley of the South.”Toni: He wants babies and puppies to grow up to be healthy and for skies to be sunny.Nate: This is probably a tactic that a lot of Democrats will adopt in traditionally conservative, well-educated districts where Trump struggled in November.I think the good news for Democrats is that progressives were excited about this race, even though Ossoff didn’t give them any red meat. In a lot of these Republican-leaning districts, the Democrats will need both high progressive turnout and some inroads among voters who don’t always vote Democratic. It wouldn’t surprise me if Ossoff goes even further in the runoff. You could imagine him coming out in favor of a lower corporate tax rate, for instance.Toni: You wrote recently that if Democrats wanted to retake the House in 2018, they’d need to follow the sun — to win districts in places like California’s Orange County.Nate: Yeah, the bad news for Democrats is that this might not help their post-2016 identity crisis. They’re torn between the well-educated Sun Belt seats where they have a great opportunity in the Trump era and the working-class Northern states they need to win the Senate and the presidency. They have an energized progressive wing clamoring for single-payer and other bold policies, but they might be about to add representatives who have to vote like neoliberal technocrats to win in their wealthy and somewhat conservative districts.Toni: This tension was evident in an interview on Chris Hayes’s “All In” show on MSNBC on Tuesday night. Tom Perez, the new Democratic National Committee chairman, was notably evasive on specific questions about a single-payer health plan and taking on the ruling class. Bernie Sanders, sitting next to him, was asked if he considered himself a Democrat, and he pointedly said no.[In a later interview with The Wall Street Journal, Sanders said he didn’t know if Ossoff was a progressive.]Asked if Democrats needed enemies, Sanders had no trouble naming them: the insurance companies, billionaires, Wall Street. Perez didn’t want to name enemies other than Trump, and Ossoff doesn’t seem to want to, either. Is there an argument that, for now, that’s perfectly O.K. from a political standpoint? In other words, you treat each district as a separate entity, and you use whatever strategy works for that district?Nate: Yes, I think it’s entirely O.K. There’s no need for Democrats to relitigate the 2016 Democratic primary — not until the next one, at least. Right now, and in general, the Democrats can nominate candidates who fit their districts. It might mean a white male veteran who used to be a local union leader in Indiana, for example, or a woman who works in the tech sector in Orange County.When it comes to the House, though, I think it’s hard to avoid the conclusion that the Democrats will need to nominate people more like Jon Ossoff than Bernie Sanders in the most competitive districts, which tend to be well-educated, traditionally Republican, affluent districts that backed Clinton over Sanders in the primary.