http://www.nytimes.com/1975/11/23/archives/one-dead-as-us-ships-collide-in-mediterranean-2-us-warships-crash.html
One Dead as U.S. Ships Collide in Mediterranean - The New York Times
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION,NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION,SHIPS AND SHIPPING,ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY,SHIPS AND SHIPPING,ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY,MILITARY PERSONNEL AND ORGANIZATION,MILITARY PERSONNEL AND ORGANIZATION
Nov. 23, 1975
3037
WASHINGTON, Nov. 22—The aircraft carrier John F Kennedy and the guided‐missile cruiser Belknap collided today during flight operations in the Mediterranean Sea. One man was known to have been killed and other casualties were considered likely.The ships crashed about 70 miles east of Sicily at about 10 P.M., local time (4 P.M., Eastern standard time). The Belknap burned for 21 hours before firefighters, some from the four destroyers Involved in the operation, could bring the fire under control.Cause Not CertainA fire broke out on the flight deck of the Kennedy, but was controlled within 10 minutes. The 4,500‐man carrier, the only one with the Sixth Fleet now, remains capable of night operations, a spokesman said.The cause of the collision was not known with certainty and an investigation was under way, but there was speculation that the overhang of the angled flight deck of the Kennedy had struck the superstructure of the Belknap.The Pentagon, In a statement released late tonight, said:“At the time of the collision both the Kennedy and the Belknap were maneuvering for flight operations. Fires on the flight deck of the Kennedy were extinguished in about 10 minutes. Fires aboard the Belknap were reported under control after 21/2 hours and are now completely extinguished.“The Belknap is now under tow by the destroyer U.S.S. Bordelon.The full extent of casualties is unknown. One man from the J.F.K. is known dead. Fires which occurred aboard the Belknap make additional casualties likely. Some men were reported in the water.“Helicopters from the Kennedy and accompanying destroyers are assisting in the rescue and in the casualty transportation.”“Casualties are being taken to the J.F.K. and to the naval hospital at Sigonella, Sicily. The naval hospital at Naples can also assist. Commander in Chief of the U.S. Navy, Europe, Adm. David H. Bagley has ordered an investigation of the mishap.”Both ships are among the most modern in the Navy and are•equipped with sophisticated, radar, computer and communications systems. It was not known whether they were operating under any special conditions, such as radio silence. The sea was mild at the time of the collision, and the ceiling was 4,000 feet with scattered clouds.A Pentagon spokesman identified the skipper of the Kennedy as Capt. William Gureck. The captain of the Belknap is Walter R. Shafer. Their hometowns were not immediately known. [Relatives of the two officers, quoted by The As'iociated Press in Norfolk, Va., the vessels’ home port, said Navy officials had reported they were “all right.”]The Kennedy, commissioned on Sept. 7, 1968, is propelled by oil, and measures more than 1,000 feet in length. It carries 32 F‐14 fighters and eight S‐3 antisumarine planes, in addition to the 4,500‐man crew.The Belknap was launched in 1963 as a guided‐missile frigate, comparable to a large destroyer. Its designation was changed on July 1 of this year to guided missile cruiser. About a third the size of the carrier, the Belknap's function is in antisubmarine and surface warfare, the spokesman said.Soviet Destroyer in VicinityWASHINGTON, Nov. 22 (AP) —A Penagon spokesman said tonight that one Soviet destroyer was in the area at the time of the collision of the John F. Kennedy and the Belknap and the subsequent rescue operations. He said he did not know how close the Soviet ship had come to the collision scene or if it offered any help.