http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/10/opinion/virginias-republicans-turn-back-the-clock.html
Virginia’s Republicans Turn Back the Clock - The New York Times
Virginia,Ex-Convicts,Voter Registration and Requirements,McAuliffe  Terry,Republican Party,State Legislatures,Blacks,Discrimination,Editorials
Sept. 9, 2016
8722
In the last couple of decades, states have begun to recognize the particular viciousness of laws that prevent people with felony convictions from voting. Virginia Republicans, on the other hand, appear eager to return to the 19th century, when most of these laws were drafted explicitly to keep African-Americans away from the ballot box.Virginia’s version dates to 1830. When it was expanded in 1902, one state senator said the goal was to “eliminate” black voters “as a political factor in this state in less than five years, so that in no single county in the commonwealth will there be the least concern felt for the complete supremacy of the white race in government affairs.” Today, one in five black Virginians is barred from voting because of a felony conviction.Virginia is one of just four states — along with Florida, Iowa and Kentucky — that still impose a lifetime voting ban on those convicted of felonies. In April, Virginia’s governor, Terry McAuliffe, tried to restore voting rights to more than 200,000 people who had completed their sentences. “I want you back in society,” Mr. McAuliffe, a Democrat, said. “I want you feeling good about yourself. I want you voting, getting a job, paying taxes.”But Republican lawmakers objected, saying Mr. McAuliffe did not have constitutional authority to issue a blanket restoration. The State Supreme Court agreed, ruling 4 to 3 that he could restore voting rights only case by case. The ruling had no basis in the text of the state’s Constitution, which places no limit on the governor’s power “to remove political disabilities consequent upon conviction” for felonies. But Mr. McAuliffe has followed it by  restoring voting rights one by one to roughly 13,000 Virginians who had registered to vote before the court decision.This has not pleased top Republicans, who keep looking for ways to restrict access to the polls. This month, the State Senate’s majority leader, Thomas Norment Jr., proposed amending the state’s Constitution to remove the governor from the voting-rights restoration process.Under the proposal, people convicted of “nonviolent” felonies would have their voting rights automatically restored after completing their sentences and paying any fines, court costs and restitution to victims. Those convicted of “violent” felonies would be barred for life from voting, with no recourse to the governor or anyone else.And what is a violent felony? The constitutional amendment offers no definition. In other words, it’s whatever lawmakers decide, and they could well include even minor drug offenses.This is a terrible idea. The whole point of giving a broad power of mercy to the executive branch — as the United States Constitution and most state constitutions do — is to balance the tendency of legislatures to pass overly harsh laws.It does not make sense to decide whether a person should be allowed to vote depending on the nature of the crime. As one Democratic lawmaker pointed out, Mr. Norment’s amendment would restore the vote to someone convicted of widespread financial fraud costing millions of dollars but not to someone convicted of assault in a bar fight.But rationality isn’t the point of this proposal. It’s to protect a racist and vindictive practice that should have been consigned to history long ago.