http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/28/theater/reviews/28brantley.html
Philip Seymour Hoffman as the General in His (High-Tech) Labyrinth - The New York Times
Theater,Othello (Play),Sellars  Peter,Hoffman  Philip Seymour,Ortiz  John,LAByrinth Theater Co,Public Theater,Shakespeare  William
Sept. 27, 2009
6749
Imagine, please, that a screenwriter named Will Shakespeare takes a meeting with some big-studio executives to pitch a script about a military hero who thinks his wife is cheating on him.“You’re the absolute best at dialogue, Will,” the suits tell him. “And we want to keep as much of it as we can. But can’t we sex it up a little? Add some real hanky-panky, instead of just fantasies about making the ‘beast with two backs’? (Brilliant phrase, dude.) And what if we make things super tense by having all the characters on the same short fuse, like they’re suffering — I got it!  — from post-traumatic stress disorder?“And by the way, Will, does the hero have to be a black guy in a white man’s world? That seems so 20th century.”The end product of such a discussion might well resemble Peter Sellars’s exasperatingly misconceived “Othello,” which opened on Sunday night at the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, with a cast led by Philip Seymour Hoffman as Iago and John Ortiz as Othello. Mr. Sellars has been vivisecting and reassembling sacred cows since he emerged 20-some years ago as a brash young director with a genius for self-promotion. And his “Othello,” which features standard avant-garde theater signposts like walls of television monitors, may at first glance seem like yet another high-tech deconstruction of a classic.But this production is wrongheaded less in the anarchic tradition of Dadaists making merry than in the reactionary mold of Depression-era MGM retailoring literary classics for mass consumption. Characters who might seem distractingly bigger than life have been shrunk to average proportions, so we can identify with them more fully as creatures of our time and place. Shakespearean titans: they’re just like us!The mighty, exotic general Othello and his diabolical flunky Iago have been stripped of their singularity, whether of greatness of spirit or capacity for evil. They’re ordinary guys here. Othello is a Latino soldier who has risen in the ranks but retains an aura of working-class humility; Iago, a sour schlemiel who has trouble controlling his temper. For him, revenge is a dish best served hot, like a Big Mac picked up on the fly.While retaining much of the original text, Mr. Sellars has also eliminated, conflated and rearranged characters to further his idea of the play as a portrait of life in the United States military in the 21st century. This means, among other things, that in the opening scenes, where Othello, newly married to Desdemona (Jessica Chastain), is ordered to Cyprus, all discussions are conducted via cellphone and BlackBerry. When Iago and his dupe, Roderigo (an entertaining Julian Acosta), break the news of Desdemona’s elopement with Othello to her father (whom we never see), that too is done by phone.That telephone stuff is just relevance-making gimmickry as usual, though. More daringly, Mr. Sellars has made a rowdy drinking party end disastrously not in a sword fight but with an officer attempting to rape Montano, the governor of Cyprus, who in this version happens to be a woman. Played by Saidah Arrika Ekulona, the character is a combination of the governor and the whore Bianca, and she is having a hot-and-heavy secret affair with Othello’s noble lieutenant, Cassio (LeRoy McClain), which seems a lot more intense than anything going on between the general and his bride.This despite the newlywed’s spending much of the play’s first half in a state of semi-undress on a big, big bed with a headboard made of screens that show abstract geometric forms and close-ups of strands of hair and leaves. (The way-too-familiar Wooster Group-style scenic design is by Gregor Holzinger; Cath Brittan is the technical artist.) Othello and Desdemona keep stroking each other, but in a way that suggests therapeutic massage more than  passionate foreplay.I didn’t really sense much passion between Othello and Iago, either, although I had always thought that was what the play was about. Mr. Ortiz and Mr. Hoffman, longtime friends and associates in the LAByrinth Theater Company (which is producing this “Othello” with the Public Theater), have spoken about wanting to explore the natural, long-lasting bond of men who have known battle together.But I failed to discern any special connection between this Othello and Iago. Mr. Hoffman being Mr. Hoffman  — one of the best stage and screen actors of his generation  — he creates a provocative portrait of a man burned to an ashen, angry nihilism by years of unrewarded service. (Admittedly, he has played this part more satisfyingly before, in the movie “Before the Devil Knows You’re Dead,” for example.)He is the only Iago I’ve seen with such a porous mask of deception. Even when he’s trying to manipulate others into self-destruction, he comes close to spoiling everything by erupting into genuine, volcanic fury. Shouldn’t these anger-management issues raise red flags among his superiors? You’d think so. Then again, all the military personnel and their families in old Venice and Cyprus are uncommonly testy.Lines meant to be playful  — as when Iago flirts knavishly with Desdemona and his wife, Emilia (Lisa Colon-Zayas)  — are delivered with snarls and curled lips. Even Ms. Chastain’s Desdemona, a cool and impersonal trophy wife, loses it from time to time. On the other hand, people rarely speak in haste, instead stretching out ev-ery sin-gle syl-la-ble with portentous gravity  — making the show’s running time a turgid four hours  — while Mark Grey’s horror-movie music reminds us of dark troubles ahead.Only Mr. Ortiz’s Othello registers as a rational, temperate soul, which you must admit is a novelty. His epileptic seizure in the throes of jealousy is quite subdued compared with the sobbing tantrum Cassio throws when he thinks he has lost his job and reputation. And by the way, this Othello isn’t all that noble to begin with, since the production suggests he may be getting a little on the side from Emilia, who for some reason spends a lot of time alone practicing Santería rituals in a spotlight.As a director of plays and operas, Mr. Sellars is known for interpolating entire invented back stories for classic characters. (In his “Così Fan Tutte” he made Don Alfonso a Vietnam veteran.) And, hey, there’s no question that when this Emilia delivers her fifth-act diatribe against men, it has a new resonance if we believe she’s sleeping with the boss. But by that time, you’ve started thinking that Mr. Sellars has written his own play about love and war, and that Shakespeare’s words mostly just get in the way.OTHELLOBy William Shakespeare; directed by Peter Sellars; sets by Gregor Holzinger; costumes by Mimi O’Donnell; lighting by James F. Ingalls; music and sound by Mark Grey; technical artist, Cath Brittan; associate artistic director, Mandy Hackett; associate producer, Jenny Gersten; director of production, Ruth E. Sternberg. Presented by the Public Theater, Oskar Eustis, artistic director; Andrew D. Hamingson, executive director; and the LAByrinth Theater Company, Stephen Adly Guirgis, Ms. O’Donnell and Yul Vázquez, artistic directors; Marieke Gaboury, producing director. At the Skirball Center for the Performing Arts, 566 LaGuardia Place, at Washington Square South, Greenwich Village; (212) 352-3101. Through Sunday.  Running time: 4 hours.WITH: Julian Acosta (Roderigo), Gaius Charles (Duke of Venice), Jessica Chastain (Desdemona), Liza Colón-Zayas (Emilia), Saidah Arrika Ekulona (Bianca Montano), Philip Seymour Hoffman (Iago), LeRoy McClain (Cassio) and John Ortiz (Othello).