https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/27/us/politics/who-won-the-debate.html
Who Won the Debate? Attacks on Donald Trump Help Marco Rubio More - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Republican Party,Cruz  Ted,Rubio  Marco,Trump  Donald J,Kasich  John R,Carson  Benjamin S
Feb. 26, 2016
8528
Donald J. Trump faced a barrage of attacks from his Republican rivals during their debate Thursday night, the last face-off before Super Tuesday next week. Senator Marco Rubio assailed Mr. Trump’s record as a businessman and his knowledge of policy. Senator Ted Cruz called him a closet liberal in a multitude of ways. Mr. Trump responded forcefully and with a torrent of schoolyard taunts. Many critics and commentators thought that Mr. Rubio was the clear winner on Thursday night, but said that his newfound toughness may have come too late.“Won tonight: Rubio. Broke even: Trump. Lost: Cruz. Off fishing: Kasich, Carson.” — Nicholas Thompson, editor, TheNewYorker.com“Rubio is killing it.” — Glenn Beck, conservative talk radio host who supports Ted Cruz“Rubio mockery of Trump was priceless. Loved it when he twirled his arms to illustrate ‘the lines.’ Very effective. He stood up to bully.” — Max Boot, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations“The most important thing to understand is for people who attend Trump rallies, the attacks by Rubio and Cruz validate everything he says.” — Matthew Dickinson, political science professor at Middlebury College“For most of the night, Donald Trump physically sweated as Cruz and Rubio tag-teamed him. Rubio, frankly, did a better job of keeping his eye on the prize. Cruz let a few opportunities go without attacking and got distracted by trying to make points about Rubio.” — Eric Erickson, conservative blogger for The Resurgent“Rubio had a good night. He was good at challenging Trump, especially when he mocked him for repeating himself. Turned the tables. Good to keep a smile through all Trump’s pushback. I believe Rubio has more than recovered from the Christie takedown of earlier in February.” — Ruth Sherman, a Connecticut-based public speaking expert“Blitzer loses. Cruz-Rubio tag team against Trump effective, but too late? Trump took big hits. Kasich blah. Goodbye, Ben.” — Mary Kissel, member of The Wall Street Journal editorial board“Holy moly! Marco Rubio just tore into Donald Trump — and made him look like an idiot.” — Van Jones, Democratic commentator for CNN“This is degenerating into a food fight where no one looks good.” — Ramesh Ponnuru, senior editor at the conservative National Review“Tonight we saw another spirited debate between the most diverse and well-qualified group of presidential candidates in history.” — Reince Priebus, chairman of the Republican National Committee