http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/10/world/at-least-14-dead-as-suicide-bomber-strikes-jerusalem.html
AT LEAST 14 DEAD AS SUICIDE BOMBER STRIKES JERUSALEM - The New York Times
ISRAEL,RAMALLAH (WEST BANK),JERUSALEM,GAZA STRIP,PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION,PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY,GREENBAUM  JUDITH L,QUREI  AHMED,ARAFAT  YASIR,PALESTINIANS,ARMAMENT  DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES,BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES,TERRORISM
Aug. 10, 2001
5626
A Palestinian suicide bomber took the Middle East conflict to the core of downtown Jerusalem on Thursday when he blew himself up in a crowded Israeli restaurant, killing at least 14 people besides himself and wounding about 130 others. Six children were among the dead.Israel responded early today with its most sweeping assault to date on the Palestinian Authority led by Yasir Arafat.In an action of potentially far-reaching political significance, dozens of Israeli police officers occupied Orient House, headquarters of the Palestine Liberation Organization in East Jerusalem, where they lowered the Palestinian flag from the roof and raised the Israeli flag in its place. Half a dozen Palestinian guards were taken in for questioning, and Orient House documents were reportedly removed.The police seized eight other Palestinian offices in East Jerusalem, including a building that housed Palestinian intelligence services in the village of Abu Dis. In Ramallah, north of Jerusalem, Israeli F-16 fighter planes fired missiles that destroyed a Palestinian police headquarters. And Israeli tanks reportedly entered Palestinian-controlled areas in the Gaza Strip. There were no immediate reports of casualties.Israeli officials described these events as ''pinpoint actions'' against what they called the sources of Thursday's attack in Jerusalem, one of the most severe in a conflict that is now more than 10 months old. But a senior Palestinian official and former peace negotiator, Ahmed Qurei, said, ''I believe it's re-occupation, with all its toughness.''The dead on Thursday mostly Israelis, but they included a visiting American woman, identified by the United States Embassy as Judith L. Greenbaum, 34, of Passaic, N.J. Four Americans were among the wounded, one of them a woman said to be in grave condition. Given the nature of some of the wounds, the death toll seemed likely to rise.It was the worst attack since a suicide bomber killed 21 Israelis at a Tel Aviv disco in June. It was also the hardest that Jerusalem had been hit since the start of this bloody chapter in the long Israeli-Palestinian ordeal.The timing and location of the bombing were significant: lunch hour at the intersection of Jaffa and King George Streets. This was equivalent to a midday attack in the heart of Times Square.Israeli police officers said the bomb was packed with nails, guaranteeing that it would cause maximum harm. And by striking at this particular restaurant, an outlet of the Sbarro pizza chain, the bomber made it inevitable that many of his victims would be young families, including small children.Strollers and baby carriers lying in the wreckage testified to that. Among the critically wounded, with uncertain chances of surviving, was a baby only a few months old.Naor Sharabi, a young Israeli soldier, happened to be passing by when he heard the explosion, which blew out the front of the restaurant and sent bodies flying across the street, along with shattered glass and twisted metal. He turned and saw a girl on the ground. She was 2 or 3 years old.  She was dead.''Someone took her mother to a store and tried to calm her down,'' the soldier said. ''But she was looking at her dead baby. She could see her girl was dead, and she was screaming hysterically.''Apparently fearing a strong Israeli reprisal, Mr. Arafat, condemned the attack on Thursday and urged Israel to join him in a ''joint declaration for a cease-fire'' leading to a cooling-off period ''under international supervision.''His appeals was swiftly dismissed as a ploy by a spokesman for the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, who noted that Mr. Arafat had called for a cease-fire after the disco bombing in Tel Aviv. A truce was then arranged. But it never took hold.''This is another P.R. ploy after the event,'' the spokesman, Raanan Gissin said of the Arafat statement. ''He's heading a consortium of terrorist organizations that he can control when he wants to.''Mr. Sharon has promised to strike back at Palestinians after every anti-Israel attack. But his spokesman said that any action would be ''a measured, proper response,'' suggesting that a full-scale assault by Israel was unlikely.''We're talking about surgical operations,'' Mr. Gissin said. ''We're not talking about all-out war. We never have been. There's not going to be an escalation. But we'll definitely take all actions necessary to remove these beasts from society.''The implication was that, at the least, Israel would continue to single out certain senior Palestinian figures for death, a policy that has been condemned overseas and denounced by Palestinians as state-sponsored assassination.But Mr. Sharon has repeatedly defended this tactic as an act of self-defense, intended to stop those who dispatch suicide bombers like the one Thursday. It seemed certain that he would regard the Jerusalem attack as strengthening his case.Indeed, the Israeli foreign minister, Shimon Peres, said on Thursday that the Jerusalem bomber had been guided by a man who appears on a list that Israel made public on Sunday: seven Palestinians accused of sponsoring terrorism. The Israelis said they had asked in vain that Mr. Arafat's Palestinian Authority arrest these men. By making the list public, Israel suggested that the seven could become its next targets.At first, two militant Islamic groups, Hamas and Islamic Jihad, or Islamic Holy War, took responsibility for Thursday's terrorism. But then Islamic Jihad withdrew its claim, leaving it to Hamas, which released a photograph of the bomber, Izzadine Masri, 23, holding an automatic rifle in one hand and a copy of the Koran in the other.A statement said the attack was a response to Israel's killing of several key Palestinians, including Hamas leaders, in the last few weeks.Some senior officials in the Palestinian Authority also cited those killings as a factor in the bombing Thursday, though Mr. Arafat himself did not do so. Yasir Abed Rabbo, the authority's minister of culture and information, went so far as to say that the Israeli prime minister bore responsibility. ''Sharon provoked these attacks,'' Mr. Abed Rabbo said. ''He wanted, and waited for, them.''There were reports of Palestinians' celebrating in the streets, notably in the West Bank city of Hebron, after the bombing.The events in Jerusalem eclipsed other acts of violence. Two Israelis were killed in their cars by Palestinian shooters -- a man near Tulkarm in the West Bank and a teenage girl near Merva, a kibbutz that is not far from the West Bank line.The Israeli government has not been a monolith with regard to dealing with the persistent violence, and the fissures seemed to widen on Thursday. A tug of war is on between the hawkish Mr. Sharon and the dovish Mr. Peres. While the prime minister by definition has the stronger hand, he has also shown no desire to alienate his foreign minister to the point that it imperils their uneasy five-month-old coalition.In particular, Mr. Peres criticized Mr. Sharon's insistence that he would negotiate nothing with the Palestinians until the violence stopped completely. In an Israel Radio interview before the bombing, Mr. Peres said, ''If we say we won't talk under fire, it means that every gunman can decide there will be no dialogue.''He also warned that Israel's tight restrictions on Palestinians were causing tensions that ''could explode in our face.''Mr. Peres's views received support on Thursday from an unexpected source, an unidentified ''security source'' in the army. He was quoted on Israel Radio as cautioning that ''there is no military solution to the present situation'' and that a refusal to talk with the Palestinians until all shooting stopped meant ''preventing peace negotiations.''It is unusual for someone in the military to break ranks in this manner -- taking his case to the news media, albeit anonymously. The implication was that senior officers might be divided on what course Israel should take.But that debate took a back seat after the blast. Jerusalem, more than almost any other city in Israel, had been on edge for weeks, waiting for a major terrorist attack that many here felt was inevitable.It finally happened right after 2 p.m. when a young man carrying a shoulder bag walked into the restaurant, which is kosher and draws Orthodox Jewish families living in nearby neighborhoods, along with  Americans and other foreigners.The young man's shoulder bag contained the bomb. When it exploded, it gutted the restaurant, leaving bodies strewn inside and outside.Rabbi Binny Freedman was in the Sbarro's, eating a plate of baked ziti, when ''there was this incredible explosion and people went flying.''''I got not a scratch,'' Rabbi Freedman said. ''I still can't believe it. This guy sitting six or seven feet from me went flying.''Trained in first aid, the rabbi took the pulse of a woman lying at his feet. ''It took me a moment to realize she was dead,'' he said. ''I think she died in front of me.''In a ritual that has become distressingly familiar here during the last seven years of frequent bombings, ultra-Orthodox men sifted through the rubble looking for body parts and even strips of flesh that, according to Jewish law, must be buried.Panic gripped some Jerusalem residents when they could not reach loved ones on their cell phones. One woman seemed near collapse at Bikur Holim Hospital, a few blocks from the restaurant. ''I can't find her! I can't find her!'' she screamed, referring perhaps to her daughter. Nurses took her into an emergency room to see if she recognized anyone.On King George Street, a bloodmobile had been in operation since the morning. After the explosion, people formed a long line there, quietly waiting their turn. Behind them, outside the restaurant, work crews put some of the wreckage in the King George-Jaffa intersection.Several baby strollers sat there through the afternoon.