http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/28/us/amid-violence-factions-and-messages-converge-in-a-weary-and-unsettled-baltimore.html
Amid Violence, Factions and Messages Converge in a Weary and Unsettled Baltimore - The New York Times
Baltimore (Md),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks,Gangs,Crips (Gang),Bloods (Gang),Looting (Crime)
April 27, 2015
4618
BALTIMORE — The middle-aged woman buried deep in a crowd of protesters near the intersection of North Fulton and West North Avenues held up a yellow sign with black lettering. One side issued a demand: “Stop the lethal force.” The other provided what could be seen as an ominous warning: “Pow pow you reap what you sow.”All around, not far from the Gilmor Homes, the public housing development where Freddie Gray was arrested before suffering a spinal cord injury in police custody, the battle between chaos and calm raged.Young men, some in surgical masks, pulled cases of water from a looted convenience store while peaceful protesters from 300 Men March, a local anti-violence group, tried to persuade women and children to go back inside after ambulances slowly moved through streets marked by burned or abandoned cars.“This is what you have from years and years of police brutality and abuse in this city,” said Deontrae Lucas, standing near a car burning outside her house. “It’s just now boiling over.”Minutes later, Representative Elijah E. Cummings, a Democrat from Maryland, appeared in the middle of a spontaneous march. He was surrounded by several hundred people, walking arm in arm down West North Avenue, singing, “I’m going to stay on the battlefield.”They walked away from the police gathered just a few blocks away. Every few steps, more people joined the group. A man in a blue shirt locked arms with a man in a gray suit; a man rolled forward in a wheelchair.“We’re out here, and this is peaceful,” Bishop Walter S. Thomas, pastor of the New Psalmist Baptist Church, shouted to the crowd. After a pause, they continued, singing “This Little Light of Mine.” Helicopters shined spotlights on the group, the thwack-thwack of their rotors competing with the music.The march ended at New Shiloh Baptist Church on North Monroe Street, where people raised their hands in a moment of silence to commemorate Mr. Gray, who died a week after his arrest. Several of the ministers, led by the Rev. Ron Owens, convened a meeting with some of the young rioters. While about 50 people sat in pews, six or seven young men went to the front of the church with the ministers, where they laid out their own mix of chaos and calm.A couple of the young men wore bandannas to hide their identity. The young men identified themselves as members of the Crips, Bloods and Black Guerrilla Family street gangs. One of the Crips members, who called himself Charles, wearing a red Chicago Bulls Derrick Rose T-shirt, said the gang members had taken to the street because “there is only so far that you can push people into a corner.”“We’re frustrated,” he continued, “and that’s why we’re out there in the streets.”Then he described how he and some Bloods had stood in front of black-owned stores to protect them from looting or vandalism. He said they had made sure no black children, or reporters, were hit by rioters. They pointed them toward Chinese- and Arab-owned stores. Charles said Mr. Gray had brought gangs together.“I rolled over here on a truck, and I was the only Crip and everybody else was Bloods. And they didn’t do anything to me. We’re together in this.”