http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/08/business/economy/in-outsourcing-attacks-tired-rhetoric-and-no-political-leadership-economic-scene.html
In Outsourcing Attacks, Tired Posturing and Little Leadership - Economic Scene - The New York Times
United States Economy,Labor and Jobs,United States Politics and Government,Outsourcing,International Trade and World Market,Protectionism (Trade)
Aug. 7, 2012
5519
The middle class, I’m sure you’ve heard, is under threat by cheap foreign labor. We must be having an election soon. President Obama’s assault on Mitt Romney for sending jobs overseas draws from a playbook used repeatedly by politicians of the right and left over the last two decades.In 1992, Ross Perot ran for president on the strength of the “giant sucking sound” of jobs going to Mexico. Four years later, Pat Buchanan tried to gain the Republican nomination by promising to repeal the North American Free Trade Agreement and withdraw from the World Trade Organization. In 2004, John Kerry accused George W. Bush of providing tax breaks to outsourcers.What’s most revealing about the political assault on outsourcing is that while the critique of foreign commerce has moved decisively from the fringes into the political mainstream, our political leaders have yet to turn their rhetorical skepticism into policy.Americans’ fear of foreign trade has grown sharply in the last 20 years, in tandem with a rising tide of globalization that has exposed American workers to overwhelming competition from laborers in developing countries.In 1994, the year Nafta went into effect, trade amounted to 22 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product. By the eve of the financial crisis in 2008, it amounted to 31 percent. Over this period, the share of Americans who believed trade was a threat to the economy rose to 52 percent from 38 percent. Still, though our political leaders may feel workers’ pain, they have stopped short of following voters’ preferred prescriptions.Last year, the White House pushed through free trade agreements with South Korea, Colombia and Panama despite the fact that only 38 percent of Americans supported the deals and 41 percent opposed them. Most Americans fear China’s rise as an exporting powerhouse. Many think Congress should slap tariffs on Chinese imports to compensate for its manipulation of the exchange rate. But the Obama administration, like the Bush administration before it, has repeatedly refused to do so.A disconnect between campaign rhetoric and policy is hardly surprising. The most committed critics of the nation’s trade policies will argue that President Obama, like his predecessors, has been co-opted by pro-trade corporate interests. But the political contradictions wrought by globalization ring of more than politics as usual. More likely, our political leaders haven’t figured out what to do about this relentless economic force that is reshaping the American economy and society.This is boxing the political class into a somewhat sterile debate. Political leaders promising that globalization can be slowed, stopped or even reversed by raising barriers against imports or penalizing companies that send jobs overseas are offering false comfort. They are also distracting voters from a necessary debate about how to make the relentless tide work for the American middle class even as it brings impoverished nations like India and China into the modern economy.The political debate about globalization tends to get stuck between a couple of propositions: on the one hand, globalization tends to reduce prices of goods and services and bolster economic growth, helping companies become more efficient. On the other, it hurts the workers who are brought into direct competition with cheaper labor overseas. Yet the debate often ignores an essential fact: regardless of who wins and who loses from the process, it is pretty much irreversible.Businesses are too far along in the process of globalizing their supply chains, building international production lines that draw ideas, components and resources from wherever they are best, most abundant or cheapest in the world. In 2006, intracompany trade accounted for nearly 33 percent of the nation’s imports and more than 27 percent of its exports. Raising a wall against a given import would short-circuit production lines around the world, including in the United States.What’s more, most growth over the next decade will happen in big developing countries beyond the nation’s borders. Using barriers and penalties to bar imports and discourage outsourcing — which would surely draw retaliation from other countries — would unhitch the nation from the world’s main economic engines.But the fact that globalization is here to stay doesn’t mean that nothing can be done for workers, who have come to fear the process of global integration as a zero-sum game, which ends with their jobs moving somewhere where labor is cheaper. Some of the prescriptions are straightforward. Ambivalence toward globalization is not unique to the United States. But Americans tend to be more fearful of the impact of trade than, say, Europeans.One reason is that American workers are particularly ill equipped to cope with the dislocations caused by foreign competition. An American worker who loses her job to trade or technology will find herself in a much worse spot than if she was, say, German or French. For starters, she will lose her health insurance. And her unemployment benefits will be considerably less generous.The United States also does a poor job of educating workers to take advantage of globalization’s opportunities. We were once the most educated nation in the world — the first to provide universal high school education and the first to provide widespread access to college. But college graduation rates have stagnated and are now at the same rate they were a generation ago, while a host of other countries have barreled ahead. The lag leaves American workers particularly exposed to foreign competition for lower-skilled jobs — which has been weighing down their wages for more than a decade.Coping with globalization isn’t going to get easier, as companies in developing countries continue to rise up the technological ladder to produce more advanced goods in direct competition with workers in the United States.Multinational companies’ freedom to move their money across borders, to wherever the return is highest, raises new issues. Corporations can relocate to escape taxes and regulation, setting up shop where the rules are easiest. Investment in machines and high-technology plants abroad erodes the productivity edge that American workers hold over workers in China or Brazil.The challenges call for a more sophisticated debate about trade. American policy makers might consider global taxation treaties, to reduce the scope for tax competition. They could engage foreign countries in a debate on global standards — overcoming mistrust of American protectionism to develop rules protecting workers from abuse by footloose corporations seeking the cheapest labor. And they could think about the kind of safety net needed to protect workers from the dislocations that the relentless onslaught of globalization is sure to bring.The Obama administration has made some progress along these lines. The Obama health care law is the single most important contribution to the nation’s social safety net since the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson, ensuring that workers who lose their jobs in the future do not also lose their health insurance. But President Obama has yet to move beyond blunt criticism of outsourcing to sketch out a strategy to embrace the inevitable march of globalization.He could still criticize Mitt Romney. But the most useful critique of Mr. Romney’s stance is not that he favors outsourcing but that the rest of his economic platform — which proposes cuts in government spending on education, unemployment insurance and other social programs to pay for tax cuts for high-income Americans — would undercut the nation’s ability to cope in the globalized economy he appears to champion.Hewing to the standard anti-outsourcing playbook may gain a few votes in November. But American workers need more. They need a set of policies that gives them a stake in the fruits of the more prosperous global economy that globalization can bring.