https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/15/arts/design/nancy-spector-returns-to-guggenheim-museum.html
Nancy Spector Returns to Guggenheim, as Chief Curator and Artistic Director - The New York Times
Museums,Appointments and Executive Changes,Spector  Nancy,Guggenheim  Solomon R  Museum,Brooklyn Museum,Armstrong  Richard (1949- )
Feb. 15, 2017
4577
Brooklyn taketh, but sometimes Brooklyn giveth back.Nancy Spector, the longtime chief curator of the Guggenheim Museum who made an unusual career move last spring to lead the curatorial team at the Brooklyn Museum, has decided to reverse course and go back to the Guggenheim as both chief curator and artistic director, a new and more powerful position created for her.Richard Armstrong, the Guggenheim’s director, said that after the departure of Ms. Spector, a highly respected voice in contemporary art, the museum had put together a strong group of international candidates to replace her, “but for various reasons none of that really bore fruit, and as I came to a point of aggravation, I guess, Nancy and I saw each other and started a conversation.”He said that as artistic director, Ms. Spector would have a greater say in programming and acquisitions not only at the Guggenheim in New York, but also at the museum’s satellites in Bilbao, Spain, and Venice, and an outpost being planned in Abu Dhabi. (Late last year, longstanding plans to build another satellite in Helsinki were voted down by Finnish lawmakers; besides giving the Guggenheim a presence there, the agreement to create the new museum would have added money to the Guggenheim’s endowment.)“Because we’re multi-sited and that’s growing, it seemed to me like the institution really needed a discriminating synthesizer, and Nancy was interested in that and I think really the best person for it,” Mr. Armstrong said.Ms. Spector said her decision was not motivated by any dissatisfaction with her job in Brooklyn, where she has restructured curatorial departments and begun to have a hand in exhibition programming for one of the city’s two encyclopedic museums (the Metropolitan Museum of Art is the other). “It was about my realizing that it’s an opportunity I didn’t want to pass up given the number of years I’d already committed to the Guggenheim,” she said. “It was a very difficult decision.”She added of her time in Brooklyn, where she also lives: “I can’t say it was a negative experience. It was a very amenable parting of ways.”Anne Pasternak, the Brooklyn Museum’s director, said in a statement that Ms. Spector’s brief stay at the museum had been a time of real action. “We will build on these foundations and look forward to collaborating with Nancy in the future,” she said.Ms. Spector had previously served at the Guggenheim for more than 29 years, most recently as deputy director, as well as chief curator. She also served as an organizer of the first Berlin Biennale, in 1998, and in 2007 as the United States’ commissioner for the Venice Biennale.