https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/05/us/san-bernardino-shooting-the-investigation-so-far.html
San Bernardino Shooting: The Investigation So Far - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Farook  Syed Rizwan,Malik  Tashfeen,San Bernardino (Calif),School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Terrorism,Firearms,Gun Control
Dec. 4, 2015
7953
The investigation into the shooting at San Bernardino, Calif., that killed 14 people and wounded 21 continued Friday.What We Know• Federal authorities said Friday that the attack is now being investigated as a terrorist act.• The suspects, Syed Rizwan Farook, 28, and Tashfeen Malik, 29, fired as many as 150 bullets during the attack and in a subsequent shootout with police.• They were armed with two .223-caliber assault rifles and two 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistols, all obtained legally.• They left behind three pipe bombs at Inland Regional Center. They did not detonate.• Authorities also found ammunition in their rented S.U.V. and in their townhouse nearby, along with pipe bombs and bomb-making supplies.• Officials said Friday that Ms. Malik had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State on Facebook.• The Federal Bureau of Investigation uncovered evidence that Mr. Farook communicated with extremists, domestically and abroad, a few years ago, but not recently.• One was associated with Shabab, the Islamist militant movement in Somalia, and another with the Nusra Front, the wing of Al Qaeda in Syria.• In all five cases, the investigations were closed and no charges were filed.• A day before the attack, Mr. Farook deleted data from his electronic devices.• Mr. Farook, born in Illinois to Pakistani immigrant parents, was a Sunni Muslim.• He traveled to Saudi Arabia multiple times, including a 2013 trip for the annual hajj pilgrimage, and visited Pakistan in 2014.• He entered the United States from Saudi Arabia with Ms. Malik, who had a Pakistani passport, in July 2014. She entered the country on a K-1 visa for fiancées.• They later married and had a 6-month-old daughter at the time of the rampage.What We Do Not Know• The F.B.I., examining the electronic devices, has not confirmed the extent to which the suspects had been planning the attack.• It is not clear how the two rifles, purchased in 2011 and 2012, ended up with the couple. (Mr. Farook purchased the pistols.)• Investigators were looking into the possibility that the design of the explosive devices had come from Inspire, an online magazine published by an arm of Al Qaeda.