http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/28/health/fda-approves-another-in-a-new-class-of-cholesterol-drugs.html
F.D.A. Approves Repatha, a Second Drug for Cholesterol in a Potent New Class - The New York Times
Cholesterol,Repatha (Drug),Amgen Inc,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals),Food and Drug Administration,Heart
Aug. 27, 2015
9895
The Food and Drug Administration on Thursday approved the second drug in a novel class of powerful cholesterol-lowering medications.The new drug, Repatha, made by Amgen, is intended for people with extremely high cholesterol levels and those with heart disease who cannot sufficiently lower their cholesterol levels with statins and other therapies. Repatha will cost $14,100 per year.The two drugs are the first highly effective cholesterol-lowering medications in a generation.Currently, two-thirds of people at high risk for cardiovascular problems like heart attacks and strokes who are treated for high cholesterol levels still do not have them under adequate control, Dr. Sean Harper, Amgen’s executive vice president, estimated.The new drugs, called PCSK9 inhibitors, have lowered levels of LDL, the dangerous form of cholesterol, by 54 to 77 percent in people already taking other cholesterol-lowering drugs. Some patients in clinical trials have even seen their LDL levels drop into the single digits.Repatha joins Sanofi Regeneron’s Praluent, approved last month, a similar drug that costs $14,600 per year. So potent are these new drugs that they give rise to a question that has rarely been asked: How low should a person’s cholesterol go?The two companies have arrived at very different answers.Amgen scientists say the lower the better, and the company offers just one dose of Repatha — the maximum dose. Sanofi offers two doses of Praluent; the lower dose is half the maximum one.Patients taking Praluent are to begin with the lower dose and stop there if cholesterol declines enough, in a doctor’s judgment.Both drugs are antibodies that inactivate a gene called PCSK9. In studies of large populations, academic researchers discovered that people whose PCSK9 genes were naturally less active or completely inactive had very low levels of LDL cholesterol and were protected from heart disease.Drug companies seized upon the finding and began developing PCSK9 inhibitors with record speed. But company scientists realized it would not be enough to show that the drugs slash LDL levels. They would also have to conduct huge clinical trials to show these drugs prevent heart attacks and strokes.Those studies are still underway, but the F.D.A. approved Repatha and Praluent anyway for people at high risk.PCSK9 inhibitors so far seem remarkably safe, with few side effects as compared to those seen in people taking placebos. But the safety studies have only been short term.As for the efficacy of the drugs, it is not yet proved that very low LDL levels produced by drugs lead to sharp reductions in heart attacks, strokes and deaths from cardiovascular disease, as researchers have seen in people with the naturally inactive PCSK9 gene.Many cardiologists, though, are persuaded by a large body of evidence supporting the idea that the lower the LDL, the lower the risk.“I believe lower is better and do not believe that a very low LDL is harmful,” said Dr. Daniel Rader, a cardiologist at the University of Pennsylvania.Others, like Dr. Harlan Krumholz, a cardiologist at Yale, urge caution. “We are in a period of exuberant enthusiasm about these drugs,” he said. “We could just be performing cosmetic surgery on a lab value.”If it were certain that the PCSK9 inhibitors were safe and effective in preventing heart attacks and deaths there would be no need for clinical trials, he noted.It is remarkable that the medical community is even having this conversation, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic.In 1998, prominent cardiologists argued in the journal Circulation that an LDL level of 125 mg/dL was optimal for people at high risk. Later clinical trials with statins and other drugs showed that levels below 125 mg/dL were better for people at high risk.Today, doctors often tell people at high risk for heart attacks to aim for LDL levels of 70 mg/dL. But even with potent statins, the cholesterol-lowering drugs that are a mainstay of current therapy, some patients find it hard to get their LDL cholesterol much below 100 mg/dL and some cannot even get to 100 mg/dl.Amgen and Sanofi have been in a neck-and-neck race to bring PCSK9 inhibitors to market. But, Dr. Harper said, the way they developed their drugs was very different.When deciding how much to suppress the PCSK9 gene, he said, Amgen scientists opted for “maximum inhibition.” That means getting LDL as low as it can go, even to levels almost never seen in adults.At Sanofi, said Dr. Jay Edelberg, vice president at Sanofi’s PCSK9 development and introduction unit, the idea was to get to LDL levels thought to be safe and effective because they had been seen before in some patients taking maximum doses of the most potent statins. That usually means levels around 50 mg/dL, or possibly even in the 40s, he said.“This is a new class of drugs,” Dr. Edelberg said. “With any therapy, you always want to treat with the amount of drugs patients need and not more.”Until 2017, when the clinical trial results are expected to be in, doctors and patients will have to choose the outcome that makes them most comfortable: the lowest possible LDL level, or the lowest dose that gets their LDL to what appears to be a safe level.For now, it’s anybody guess which treatment strategy is the optimal one. “You might as well flip a coin,” Dr. Krumholz said.