https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/11/fashion/weddings/christiana-ball-and-jasper-vicenti-the-firebrand-and-the-math-whiz.html
Christiana Ball and Jasper Vicenti: The Firebrand and the Math Whiz - The New York Times
Vows (Times Column),Weddings and Engagements,Vicenti  Jasper,Ball  Christiana
Oct. 7, 2015
4707
From the moment she was born, Christiana Janina Ball seemed to have her grandmother looking out for her. Ms. Ball was born with the umbilical cord wrapped around her neck three times, a knot pressing against her throat. Her chances of survival were not good.“The doctor said, ‘In my entire career, I have never seen a child survive with the umbilical cord wrapped three times,’ ” said her father, Bruce Ball.But Ms. Ball not only survived, she also thrived, with her maternal grandmother by her side. The grandmother, Janina Tomczynska, was a Polish nurse and underground resistance soldier who was captured by the Gestapo, sent to Auschwitz and subjected to chemical torture and experimentation before she finally escaped the brutalities that for many women caused sterility.“She was an Earth angel to the hundreds of people she saved during World War II,” wrote her granddaughter, now 31, in an essay that was included in a book, “Earth Angels,” compiled by Jerry and Lorin Biederman. Ms. Tomczynska’s sacrifices during wartime, her survival and her ability to give birth to her daughter, Vanda, who then gave birth to Ms. Ball, have gone down in family history as miracles.Ms. Ball grew up living around the world, as her father, a vice president at Alstom Group, an energy company, moved his family from their home in Toronto to Paris, London and the United States.Wanderlust shared top billing with a passion for horses, a pursuit she believed her father allowed to keep her “out of trouble and away from boys,” Ms. Ball said.As she grew up, she matured into a willowy blonde with a Grace Kelly comportment. She speaks flawless French, boasts a wide knowledge of wines and colored her hair purple while a student at the American University in Paris, where she was a firebrand so passionate about issues of justice and society that her friends called her Little Bolshevik.Her grandmother, with whom Ms. Ball remained close until her death in 1997, had become a beacon.“We always said to Christiana, ‘Granny is inside of you,’ ” Mr. Ball said. “You can’t sit by when it comes to injustice.”Ms. Ball worked for nonprofit organizations in many cities, and for The Economist in London; she then went to work for iRobot as an international public relations specialist.In June 2014, despite knowing no one in Massachusetts, she agreed to transfer to iRobot’s office in Bedford, about 45 minutes outside of Boston.The company is perhaps best known for the Roomba, a roaming robot vacuum that sucks up dirt and dust for hours without human intervention.But humans do make the Roomba, and one was Jasper Fourways Vicenti, 35, a tall, slim engineer with dark romantic features inherited from his father and his Apache ancestors.As a child, he was a computer geek long before computer geeks were classified as cool.“He was teased in school,” said Susan Woodman, his mother. “But he was such an interesting kid. He would ask me questions like, ‘Do goldfish eat carrots?’ and ‘Which goes faster, a clock or the Earth?’ ”When he was in elementary school in Ipswich, Mass., he asked his mother for a computer. “The computer was $3,000,” Mrs. Woodman said. “I was a single parent.” Still, she took out a three-year loan to buy it for him.Peter Day, a schoolmate from Waring, the private high school in Beverly, Mass., that Mr. Vicenti talked his mother into allowing him to attend, said, “Jasper is a genius.”“He worked his way through the highest level of math textbook the school had,” Mr. Day said. “They got him a higher level text, and he had to teach that one to himself.”Mr. Vicenti exposed his friends to modems and DVRs long before the general public understood what they were; he would hook up three TV monitors at once for a Patriots game and was so devoted to his computer that his mother, when finding him on it when he was supposed to be doing his homework, would drape a cloth over it.“But I realized he wasn’t just playing games,” Mrs. Woodman said. “He was learning how to operate it.”After graduating from M.I.T. and getting a master’s degree there, and then working briefly at a technology start-up, in 2007 Mr. Vicenti took a job at iRobot.He opted to live in Boston and commute.Years later, when Ms. Ball arrived in the area, she, too, decided to live in Boston. But her reliance on the Métro in Paris and the Tube in London had caused her driver’s license to expire.While getting the license and waiting for a lease on a car, she began asking around for a ride. Suggestions were made. But when Ms. Ball heard Mr. Vicenti’s name — they had met briefly at a work gathering, where he had planted his sunglasses on her face and said, “You’re cute” — she was done.“He’s absolutely gorgeous,” she said. “I sent him an email. It said: ‘Do you think you could drive me to work? I could give you gas money, or take you out for a drink.’ ”There was one wrinkle. Ms. Ball needed to be in work about 9 a.m. Mr. Vicenti went in about 10. He stalled in his response.“I didn’t want to seem too eager,” he said. Finally he wrote back, suggesting other individuals as possibilities.Nonplused, Ms. Ball responded, “Pick me up at 8:30 tomorrow.”Mr. Vicenti, whose typical work uniform is a polo shirt and jeans, hair landing wherever it landed, appeared at her doorway in a button-down shirt and dress pants, cologne wafting, hair uncharacteristically styled. After that first ride, they became inseparable.“I had never felt so enamored of anyone before,” Ms. Ball said.One night, about a month after they began dating, Mr. Vicenti was sitting on his sofa when Ms. Ball began dancing around to British pop music, her favorite. He remembers gazing up at her and saying to himself: “This woman is so incredible. I want to be around her every waking moment.”They discussed string theory, took cooking classes, traveled to Europe and Japan, went sailing and sang at karaoke bars.“They are a perfect match,” said Darwin Zook, a high school friend of Mr. Vicenti. “The energy they have when they are together is amazing. You just can’t fake something like that.”On Dec. 21 last year, on the winter solstice, Mr. Vicenti took Ms. Ball to the Crane Estate in Ipswich. As he set up his camera, ostensibly to take some photos of the beachfront, snow began to fall.He knew the moment had arrived. He reached into his camera bag, pulled out a ring, dropped to one knee and said to Ms. Ball: “I know it’s been a whirlwind six months but it’s been the best six months of my life. You’re the love of my life, and I want to spend the next six months, the next 60 months, the rest of my life with you. Will you marry me?”On Sept. 18, the two were married by Darlene Shlesinger, who was ordained by Rose Ministries. Ms. Ball, with her father by her side, strode down the grand stairway of Rosecliff in Newport, R.I., her lace veil trailing several yards behind. They walked through the foyer, with its carved plaster and marble, past a small table that had been decorated with framed photographs of long-deceased relatives.In one of those frames was her grandmother on her wedding day, resplendent in a long white dress not dissimilar to the one her granddaughter was wearing. As Ms. Ball and her father walked slowly past, the photograph seemed to follow them — the freedom fighter looking after the firebrand, the past hailing the future.Read more: Jessica Hershberg and Santino Fontana: A Real-Life Fairy TaleJoshua Jay and Anna Kloots: A Magician Marries His Assistant