https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/sports/basketball/knicks-justin-holiday-chicago-bulls.html
Knicks Lose Justin Holiday to the Chicago Bulls - The New York Times
Basketball,Free Agents (Sports),New York Knicks,Chicago Bulls,Holiday  Justin (1989- )
July 3, 2017
3568
The Knicks’ quiet off-season continues. While the rest of the N.B.A. churns, with star players moving around as if they were on a carousel, the Knicks have chosen to hold almost entirely still.On Sunday night, they lost Justin Holiday, a free-agent shooting guard, to the Chicago Bulls after not making a formal offer to re-sign him. Holiday, 28, will sign a two-year, $9 million contract with Chicago, according to a league source. The deal was first reported by Yahoo Sports.While the Knicks did not enter this summer with prodigious cap space — about $20 million if they renounced the rights to each of their four free agents — they have watched from the sideline as free agency shakes out.The Knicks did re-sign point guard Ron Baker to a two-year deal, bringing him back after he impressed the team with his defense and energy as an undrafted rookie.Derrick Rose and Sasha Vujacic, the Knicks’ two other free agents, remain unsigned. The Knicks have probably been on the lookout for a point guard to join Frank Ntilikina, the eighth overall pick in the N.B.A. draft last month, but most of the top choices on the market have signed. Rose is coming off a knee operation — the fourth of his career — in April.The Knicks, despite opening a roster spot and saving room under the salary cap by waiving forward Maurice Ndour before the start of free agency, do not have the financial flexibility to vie for the top point guards anyway. So cautious discretion is not necessarily a poor path.Holiday, however, is the type of player who would have been a natural choice for the Knicks to re-sign after he came to the team from the Bulls as part of the trade for Rose last summer.At 6 feet 6 inches and possessing a capable 3-point stroke, Holiday emerged as a top option off the bench last season, averaging 7.7 points per game. He was also a valuable defensive presence, appearing in many of the team’s most effective lineups by net rating.The Knicks are in short supply of wing players who can hit 3-pointers and play defense, especially those on inexpensive contracts.General Manager Steve Mills, who took over basketball operations after the departure of the team president Phil Jackson last week, has not spoken publicly during the free-agent signing period. He and other team officials are in Florida, where the Knicks are participating in the Orlando summer league.