http://www.nytimes.com/1964/12/22/temples-at-abu-simbel-protected-with-sand.html
Temples at Abu Simbel Protected With Sand - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Dec. 22, 1964
6111
CAIRO, Dec. 21—With care normally reserved for fading feminine charms, a dedicated band of men is applying a mas­sive facial pack to the stone face of Pharaoh Ramses II.The beauty parlor is the 3,200­year‐old Great Temple, carved into the belly of a sandstone mountain at Abu Simbel, 800 miles south of here on the banks of the Nile.Four colossal 65‐foot statues of Ramses, chiseled into the east facade of the mountain, are being tenderly packed in 121,000 pounds of fine, clean sand. The statues, among Egypt's top tourist attractions, are widely considered one of the crowning achievements of the ancient Nubian civilization.The sand‐packing, now near­ing completion, is only tempo­rary. The work is part of the $36‐million international project to save the temples of Ramses and his consort, Queen Nefer­tari, from being submerged in Nasser Lake. The steadily rising lake, created by the Aswan High Dam, will flood all of Nubia in four or five years.Already its waters have risen higher than the base of theThe sand‐packs are designed to protect the statues from an avalanche of falling rocks once workmen begin the ticklish task of cutting the temples apart to move them to dry ground.The actual cutting will not take place for a year. First, bulldozers and rock‐blasters must chop away five million cubic feet of solid sandstone at the mountain to get down, to the roofs of the temples.Workmen will: then begin to dismember the temples—top to bottom —‐ carefully numbering each chunk. In all, the temples with their precious statuary and murals will be cut into 1,000 blocks of stone, each weighing 20 to 30 tons.A five‐nation team of 2,000 workmen is now racing the rising river. Dump trucks bounce back and forth to a near­by quarry with loads of sand and rock and laborers toil in the sun by day and by flood­light at night.In September, 1966, the water of Nasser Lake will spill over the protective cofferdam and flood the site.Every precaution is being taken to enable the temples to withstand the strain of dis­mantling and moving.The interiors of the templesSpecial care is being taken with the painted ceilings. Dur­ing the excavation, they will be exposed for the first time in 32 centuries to the full force of daylight.Once the cutting and moving begin, some stones will be re­inforced with a mixture of ce‐ment, plastic and silica. The blocks of stone, some to be in­sured for millions of dollars, will be transported by truck in special cases cushioned with sand. They will be stored 30 feet above the projected level of Nasser Lake.To Be on IslandThe final phase of the Abu Simbel project, to be completed in 1970, will be the reconstruc­tion of the great temples on an island in Nasser Lake near the present site.An artificial mountain, faced with sandstone to duplicate the original mountain, will cover the two temples. Their facades will face to the east.Forty‐seven nations have pledged to share the $36‐million cost under the auspices of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organi­zation. The United Arab Re­public, which has allocated $15.5 million, and the United States, which recently announced a $12­million gift, are the major con­tributors. A total of $5 million more has been pledged by other nations.Five nations are doing the actual work—West Germany, France, Italy, Sweden and Egypt. The project has become so large that a city for workers, engineers and experts is being built five miles from the tem­ples.This article can be viewed in its original form.  Please send questions and feedback to archive_feedback@nytimes.com