https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/10/opinion/united-airlines-and-the-port-authority.html
United Airlines and the Port Authority - The New York Times
Editorials,United Airlines,Newark Liberty International Airport (NJ),Christie  Christopher J,George Washington Bridge,Airlines and Airplanes,Corruption (Institutional),Smisek  Jeffery A,Newark (NJ),New York State,New Jersey,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
Sept. 9, 2015
6381
Reverberations from the traffic jam engineered two years ago by aides of Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey have now hit United Airlines. Jeff Smisek, United’s chief executive, and two senior officials resigned this week “in connection with the company’s previously disclosed internal investigation related to the federal investigation associated with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,” according to the official company statement.Not much detail is available at this point, but the United States attorney for New Jersey, Paul Fishman, has been investigating the relationship between United officials and a former Port Authority chairman, David Samson. The authority controls airports in the region, and while Mr. Samson was chairman, United was working to renegotiate its lease at Newark Liberty International Airport. In 2012, United restored a money-losing flight to Columbia, S.C., near where Mr. Samson had a vacation home. At the authority, it was known as “the chairman’s flight.” Shortly after he resigned over accusations of conflicts of interest between his position and his law practice, United canceled that service.That United Airlines would try to curry favor with Port Authority officials should come as no surprise. It is the biggest airline at Newark, controlling about two-thirds of all flights at the airport, according to a recent Associated Press analysis. Had there been more competition at the airport, authority officials and Newark’s top tenant might not have been able to trade favors so easily.The authority’s shady operations might have remained secret but for the four days in 2013 when Mr. Christie’s appointees shut down traffic lanes on the George Washington Bridge as punishment for a political rival. The episode prompted federal investigators to take a harder look at the authority’s management, including how the agency’s $8.2 billion budget was used by governors of New Jersey and New York.The executive resignations at United Airlines are a spectacular reminder of the troubled culture in the bistate agency. The bridge scandal resulted in resignations of four top New Jersey officials in the Port Authority, including Mr. Samson. One former Christie appointee, David Wildstein, has pleaded guilty to charges that he conspired “against civil rights” of those caught in the bridge gridlock. Two other Christie appointees are fighting federal charges on nine counts, including fraud and conspiracy.Since then, authority commissioners have adopted new rules, including one designed to keep board members from discussing or voting on any item if they have a financial interest, and there is a new hotline for employees to report anything suspicious. But these and other modest changes are only as good as the political appointees; any new board could sweep them aside.The only permanent solution is to change the laws. Legislators in both states must pass exactly the same set of strong reforms to ensure transparency, provide public notice about coming decisions and create protections for whistle-blowers. Last year both legislatures passed good bills. Mr. Christie and Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York vetoed them, however, saying they would wait for the internal authority reforms.Now the New York Legislature has passed a promising set of reforms with a crucial requirement that commissioners serve the authority’s interests, not their own or their political benefactors’. But the Democrats in New Jersey’s Legislature have decided they want a very different bill, which may mean nothing will get done this year.Unless politicians from both states can agree on how to reform this powerful authority, it is in danger of sliding back to its old, secret and suspect ways.