https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/media-democratic-national-committee-emails.html
Ego Clashes Exposed in Leaked Emails From Democratic National Committee - The New York Times
Democratic National Committee,Democratic Party,News and News Media,Schultz  Debbie Wasserman,Brzezinski  Mika,MSNBC,WikiLeaks,Presidential Election of 2016,E-Mail
July 24, 2016
2308
Follow along with our coverage of the Democratic National Convention.There were pleas for favors, as when a Democratic Party official emailed Chuck Todd, the “Meet the Press” host, for tickets to an exclusive NBC soiree. (“I can’t even get every producer on my cable show into the party,” Mr. Todd replied.)There were gripes about coverage, with party aides dismissing the MSNBC host Steve Kornacki as a “hipster pit bull.”And there was disdain for the frequent flattery by television journalists. When Fox News sought permission to sponsor a Democratic primary debate — “Please know that you are always welcome at Fox,” an executive wrote — the chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, seemed unimpressed.“Boy,” Ms. Wasserman Schultz wrote to an aide hours later. “They are laying it on thick.”The collection of committee emails released last week by the guerrilla journalism group WikiLeaks seemed intended to hurt Democratic unity on the eve of the party’s convention, revealing concerted efforts to undermine Senator Bernie Sanders’s campaign. (On Sunday, Ms. Wasserman Schultz said she would resign.)But the documents also offered an unusual and evocative glimpse at the simmering feuds, attempts at ingratiation and clashes of ego that are regular occurrences between media organizations and Democratic power brokers, an elbows-out reality of Washington life that is usually hidden from public view.Emails show that Ms. Wasserman Schultz stewed for weeks over what she perceived as unfair coverage by MSNBC, arranging meetings with executives there to improve relations and privately lamenting her lack of on-air appearances on the network.She was particularly displeased by Mika Brzezinski, a co-host of “Morning Joe,” who had questioned Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s impartiality during the Democratic primary battle between the presumptive nominee, Hillary Clinton, and Mr. Sanders.“This is the LAST straw,” Ms. Wasserman Schultz wrote on May 18 to Luis Miranda, her communications director, after learning that Ms. Brzezinski had called for her resignation during that day’s broadcast. “This is outrageous. She needs to apologize.”Ms. Wasserman Schultz instructed Mr. Miranda to complain directly to MSNBC’s president, Phil Griffin. Minutes later, she emailed Mr. Todd directly. “Chuck,” she wrote in the subject line, “this must stop.”Representatives for Ms. Wasserman Schultz, Ms. Brzezinski and NBC News declined to comment on Sunday. Mr. Todd did not respond to an emailed inquiry.Skirmishes are inevitable between journalists and their subjects, and Ms. Wasserman Schultz and her Democratic aides are by no means the only high-powered figures who engage in brinkmanship and back-channeling with the news outlets that report on them. The emails show that Ms. Wasserman Schultz sought private meetings with prominent journalists from several leading news outlets, including The New York Times.Still, those seeking insight into journalistic and political sausage-making could do worse than perusing the emails, which feature the sort of snarky and un-self-conscious exchanges that are common between reporters and politicos in their day-to-day discussions. WikiLeaks has not revealed a source for the nearly 20,000 emails, but they are believed to have been obtained by hackers.Jake Tapper, the CNN anchor, on Friday addressed a leaked email from one of his producers, who was organizing an on-air appearance by Mr. Miranda. “Any particular points he’ll want to make?” the CNN producer asked a Democratic aide, after thanking the aide for being patient “through a melee of G.O.P. nonsense.”Some critics, wary of media bias, suggested that the language betrayed a coziness between Mr. Tapper’s team and the Democratic committee. “I think the staffer was just being collegial,” Mr. Tapper replied on his Tumblr, adding, “Some days we have G.O.P. nonsense/booking issues, some days we have Democratic nonsense/booking issues.”Mr. Tapper also noted that the question about Mr. Miranda’s talking points was standard practice for television producers, who seek to flag any potential news-making comments.Other emails revealed the bawdier side of news relations. When Fred Lucas, a reporter who said he was a freelancer for FoxNews.com, emailed for comment about an article related to Bill Clinton’s infidelity, amused Democratic aides forwarded the request among themselves. Mr. Miranda asked if there was an emoji for a common and profane expression of contempt.When Mr. Lucas followed up days later, another aide forwarded his note and added, “I did some research and there’s still no” emoji of that kind.As for Ms. Wasserman Schultz, her attempts to repair relations with Ms. Brzezinski did not appear to succeed.She had hoped to meet with the anchor in early May during a meeting in New York with Mr. Griffin, the MSNBC president, but Ms. Brzezinski declined to join. (An internal memo, prepared by Mr. Miranda, noted rumors that Mr. Griffin could soon be fired; “however, internal sources suggest he is fine and not going anywhere,” Mr. Miranda wrote.)After Ms. Wasserman Schultz relayed her complaints to Mr. Todd on May 18, he and Mr. Miranda emailed privately. “You think the call is a good idea?” Mr. Todd asked, referring to a possible clear-the-air meeting between Ms. Wasserman Schultz and Ms. Brzezinski.“Not necessarily,” Mr. Miranda replied. “If Mika just doesn’t like her, I’m not sure it’s worth either of their time.” He wrote that he was trying to manage Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s expectations about improving her coverage, adding, “If you think Mika is set in stone I’m happy to kill it.”“I don’t know,” Mr. Todd wrote back. “She can do 180s after these calls.”But the anchor added, “It can’t get worse.”