https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/23/nyregion/community-leaders-criticize-police-in-new-york-over-fatal-shooting-of-unarmed-brooklyn-man.html
Community Leaders Criticize Police Over Fatal Shooting of Unarmed Brooklyn Man - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Police Department (NYC),Gurley  Akai,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Brooklyn (NYC),Williams  Jumaane D,Sharpton  Al,Bratton  William J,National Action Network,Harlem (Manhattan  NY)
Nov. 22, 2014
4870
Two days after an unarmed black man was shot and killed by a police officer in a darkened stairwell of a Brooklyn housing project, community leaders expressed exasperation with the pace of change at the New York Police Department.Speaking on Saturday at his National Action Network headquarters in Harlem, the Rev. Al Sharpton said the circumstances surrounding the shooting, which police officials have described as an accident, required a more complete inquiry.“They are saying it was an accident,” Mr. Sharpton said. “We are saying, ‘How do we know until there is a thorough investigation?’ ”The victim, Akai Gurley, 28, had just entered a stairwell at the Louis H. Pink Houses in the East New York neighborhood of Brooklyn, when he was shot by Officer Peter Liang, 27, a probationary officer with less than 18 months on the job.Commissioner William J. Bratton on Friday said that Officer Liang’s gun had discharged inadvertently as he was opening a door a flight above Mr. Gurley.Mr. Gurley’s domestic partner, Kimberly Michelle Ballinger, and the couple’s 2-year-old daughter sat on stage behind Mr. Sharpton on Saturday. Gwen Carr, the mother of Eric Garner — a Staten Island man who died in July after a confrontation with the police — sat beside her.The deaths of Mr. Garner and Mr. Gurley have increased scrutiny of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s efforts to reshape the Police Department.At the time of the shooting, Officer Liang was conducting what is known as a vertical patrol, an inspection of the building’s stairwells, with Shaun Landau, 27, another probationary officer. Mr. Landau did not draw his gun, the department said.Mr. Sharpton likened the patrols to the stop-and-frisk tactics that drew withering criticism from Mr. de Blasio during his mayoral campaign last year.Other speakers conveyed frustration with the state of public housing buildings, including the dimly lit stairwell where Mr. Gurley was shot.“Why didn’t an electrician make a vertical patrol?” asked Councilman Jumaane D. Williams of Brooklyn.Speaking on Saturday, a firearms expert said stress can trump the training officers receive.“There are certain things you train officers to do in almost all situations, and that’s not to have their finger on the trigger,” said John C. Cerar, a retired New York deputy inspector who was the commander of the department’s firearms training. But, he said, the fear that can come with patrolling the stairwells can overwhelm the protocol.According to a high-ranking police official, Officer Liang was trying to open the door that leads to the stairwell while holding his gun and a flashlight. In turning the knob and pushing the door open, he may have rotated the gun’s barrel down and accidentally fired, said the official, who added that the account of events could change.The audience on Saturday became animated as speakers noted that the officer had drawn his gun in the absence of a clear threat. Mr. Bratton has said that officers have discretion to draw a weapon while on patrol.Mr. Williams said that drawing a gun, with a finger on the trigger, without provocation “sounds like criminal negligence.”Hours later, Mr. Gurley’s sister, Akisha Pringle described him as “very giving, very kind.”“All he is, is an innocent guy walking down the stairs who was killed for no apparent reason at all,” she said.Moments after she left the stage, she, Ms. Ballinger and Mr. Sharpton brought Mr. Gurley’s daughter, Akaila, to the microphone. The group went quiet.“She told us she wanted to say she loves her daddy,” Mr. Sharpton said.