https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/12/arts/television/review-vinyl-resurrects-the-70s-music-industry-amid-proto-punk-squalor.html
Review: ‘Vinyl’ Resurrects the ’70s Music Industry, Amid Proto-Punk Squalor - The New York Times
Television,Home Box Office,Cannavale  Bobby,Wilde  Olivia,Scorsese  Martin,Winter  Terence,Vinyl (TV Program)
Feb. 11, 2016
3778
There are moments throughout the two-hour premiere of HBO’s pop-music drama “Vinyl” on Sunday night that will make you sit up and say, oh, yeah, Martin Scorsese directed this.A coke-addled record executive on a downtown New York street hears the pitter-patter of young feet running past, around and over his car, and as he follows the kids to a nearby New York Dolls concert (it’s 1973), a scene of quiet squalor is transformed into a pulsating production number.Later, when he’s driven home in a limo from his Brill Building offices in Midtown to his Connecticut manse, the trip becomes a flickering, nightmare journey expressing the ambient dread we associate with the city in the mid-’70s. And Mr. Scorsese’s movie love is given free rein — a quick flash of the opening credits of “Blackboard Jungle”; snippets of the 1931 “Frankenstein”; a knowing reference to “On the Waterfront.”The “Vinyl” pilot, written by Terence Winter, who is also the 10-episode series’s show runner, and George Mastras, isn’t great Scorsese (like “Mean Streets” or “Age of Innocence”). But its best parts stand comparison to pretty good Scorsese (like “Goodfellas”), and it’s much better — more entertaining, more emotional — than his previous venture in episodic television, the slightly moribund pilot for HBO’s “Boardwalk Empire.”“Boardwalk Empire,” however, steadily improved (also under Mr. Winter’s supervision). It would be nice to report that “Vinyl” sustains the momentum Mr. Scorsese establishes in the pilot, but through five episodes, it tends to bog down. What promises to make the series distinctive is its simultaneously jaunty and corrosive depiction of the music industry — bloated, spectacularly corrupt and stuck in the soft-rock doldrums before the emergence of punk and hip-hop. But the show quickly begins giving less time to the music and more to duller, formulaic plot lines including a marital crisis, a murder investigation and a female secretary’s attempts to break the hemp ceiling of the recording business.You might want to keep “Vinyl” spinning, though, if only for Bobby Cannavale’s smart, sardonic portrayal of Richie Finestra, president of a once-dynamic but now foundering label called American Century Records. Richie is hoping to bail out American Century by selling it to the German behemoth PolyGram, and the pilot follows those negotiations while flashing back to his early days in the business.Having betrayed a friend (Ato Essandoh) years before to get his first big break, Richie begins the series at his (and New York’s) lowest point but gets a second chance, figuratively rising from the dead after a catastrophic accident based on a real event in Greenwich Village in August 1973. But at the same time, his volcanic temper, fueled by wholesale amounts of cocaine and booze, puts him in jeopardy. That contest between redemption and self-destruction may be the most Scorsesean thing about “Vinyl” (which was created by Mr. Scorsese, Mr. Winter, Rich Cohen and Mick Jagger).It also plays out in story strands that are well performed and produced — “Vinyl” is definitely HBO luxury goods — but not very compelling or fresh: the tension between Richie and his wife (Olivia Wilde), a former photographer and Warhol factory girl now stuck in the Connecticut house; the tension between Richie and his father (David Proval, a star of “Mean Streets”), a horn player who represents the jazz and blues roots Richie abandoned to peddle meretricious pop.The show’s approach to music has its tired elements, too. There’s a lot of piety about the pure virtues of the blues, soul and early rock. And a recurring series of snippets in which actors lip-sync to famous performers, most of them black — Ruth Brown, Bo Diddley, Otis Redding — are handsome but don’t have the impact they’re meant to.But nearly everything that has to do with the actual making and selling of records is pungent, funny and even educational. Ray Romano, as American Century’s payola master, and J. C. MacKenzie, as its deeply compromised accountant, are consistently amusing. In smaller roles, Ian Hart gives good bluster as the real-life Led Zeppelin manager, Peter Grant, and Andrew Dice Clay is convincing as a vulgar, brutal radio mogul.The American Century roster, as it stands when the series begins, is a terrific in-joke in itself: a shag carpet of middle-of-the-road hitmakers like Lobo, Dr. Hook, Robert Goulet, Donny Osmond, and the definitively inoffensive England Dan and John Ford Coley. Richie weeds out a number of them in an attempt to update the label’s sound, including the “no sales” Terry Jacks, who — another good in-joke — would hit No. 1 with “Seasons in the Sun” in 1974.That sophistication extends to the soundtrack, which samples the period’s hits without landing on too many obvious choices. Fifty-something viewers will tingle at the sound of “Ride Captain Ride,” “Pillow Talk,” “Love Train,” “Down by the Lazy River” and “Conquistador.” They’ll also appreciate the ’70s fetishism of the costumes and hairstyles, car phones, graffiti-covered subway cars, Times Square grindhouses and gratuitous Topo Gigio references.“Vinyl” tries to roll together art, race, romance, mystery, downtown excess and suburban angst, and when it feels as if it’s less about music and more about a midlife crisis, it doesn’t succeed — it wants to be Velvet Underground but lands somewhere closer to Emerson, Lake and Palmer. Throughout, Mr. Cannavale is the show’s saving grace. A repeated motif has Richie, at a moment of defeat, hearing a snatch of music and following it to its source — the Dolls, an early two-turntable D.J., a proto-punk band fronted by a snarling young Briton (James Jagger, Mr. Jagger’s son).Richie listens, and Mr. Cannavale’s expression during these epiphanies is a perfectly balanced blend of rapture and calculation. It embodies the show’s ideas about music in a way that the show itself doesn’t always manage.