https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/21/nyregion/police-combing-through-shooting-suspects-arrest-history-and-violent-day.html
Police Combing Through Shooting Suspect’s Arrest History and Violent Day - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Attacks on Police,Brinsley  Ismaaiyl Abdullah,Police Department (NYC),Liu  Wenjian (1982-2014),Ramos  Rafael (1974-2014),Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Maryland
Dec. 20, 2014
7144
Hours after Ismaaiyl Brinsley shot a former girlfriend in Maryland on Saturday, he returned to New York, his place of birth, armed with a gun and harboring intentions to attack police officers, officials said.He would do so by the afternoon, they said, killing two New York City police officers in an ambush shooting in Brooklyn and then killing himself.By the end of the day, detectives were combing through the life of Mr. Brinsley, 28, who has ties to East Flatbush and whose last known address appeared to be in Atlanta, said William J. Bratton, the police commissioner.His recent arrest history, mostly in Georgia and Ohio, depicted a man familiar with the criminal use of firearms — but without any apparent acts of serious violence that would have anticipated the sort of premeditated killing of police officers that Mr. Bratton called an “assassination” and that Mayor Bill de Blasio said had been done “execution-style.”Mr. Brinsley was arrested on robbery charges in Ohio in 2009 and weapons possession in Georgia, court records showed. Investigators in New York believe he had been in the city as recently as 2011 when he was a suspect in a harassment case.Later that year, he was convicted of felony gun possession in Georgia, and sentenced to two years in prison. It was not immediately clear when he was released from custody.Reached by phone at her Georgia home, a woman who identified herself as Mr. Brinsley’s sister said she had not seen him in two years. She said she did not remember hearing her brother express anger at police officers. “I need to call my mom,” she said before hanging up.It was not immediately clear what brought Mr. Brinsley to Baltimore County. But he was there Saturday around 5:45 a.m., when the authorities said he shot the former girlfriend, 29, in the stomach, wounding her in her apartment in Owings Mills, Md.Soon after, messages began appearing on the woman’s Instagram account, believed to have been posted by Mr. Brinsley, that carried some “very antipolice” messages, Mr. Bratton said at a news conference on Saturday evening. Based on the postings, Baltimore County authorities determined one of them had come from Brooklyn. They said they placed a call to the 70th Police Precinct in New York City around 2:10 p.m.By 2:45 p.m., law enforcement officials in Baltimore County had warned their counterparts in New York and elsewhere to be on the lookout, sending around a digital warning poster with Mr. Brinsley’s face and history. Around that time, the police said, Mr. Brinsley walked up to a marked squad car on a Brooklyn street with a silver semiautomatic handgun and opened fire at the two police officers inside, Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos.Mr. Brinsley shot himself a short time later on the platform of a subway station.As Mr. Brinsley appeared to have posted antipolice messages to the web before the killings, Mr. de Blasio implored New Yorkers to tell the authorities if they see similar postings warning of coming violence.Yet even as Mr. Brinsley “indicated” on the account that he was going to attack the police, Mr. Bratton told reporters on Saturday night that the motive for the shooting remained unclear. Investigators were looking into whether Mr. Brinsley had considered killing police officers before the shooting in Maryland, or if had been a deadly outgrowth of that burst of violence.Part of the investigation, Mr. Bratton said, would be focused on his recent activities, including whether he had taken part in any of the protests after the deaths of two unarmed black men in confrontations with the police. No indication emerged as of late Saturday that he had. With Mr. Brinsley taking his own life, Mr. Bratton said, investigators were now working to piece together his movements and motivations with an eye toward restoring “some sanity to the madness that occurred here this afternoon in the streets of Brooklyn.”