https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/26/arts/television/key-and-peele-to-end-after-its-fifth-season.html
‘Key & Peele’ to End After Its Fifth Season - The New York Times
Television,Comedy Central,Key  Keegan-Michael,Peele  Jordan,Key & Peele (TV Program)
July 25, 2015
7617
Somewhere, we have to assume that President Obama’s anger translator is very upset with this decision: the current fifth season of the influential Comedy Central sketch series “Key & Peele” will be its last, the network said.From its debut in 2012, “Key & Peele,” starring the “Mad TV” alumni Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele, has become a hallmark of the Comedy Central lineup, with closely observed bits on oddball personalities, like a college football roster full of strangely named players, or a pair of valets who are irrationally excited about the actor Liam Neeson. The series often satirized issues of race, with characters like Luther, an employee of Mr. Obama’s who gives voice to the frustrations and disappointments that the president seemingly cannot.In an interview with the entertainment trade publication The Wrap, Mr. Key said his and Mr. Peele’s decision to end the show was “not because of Comedy Central, it’s us.”“It was just time for us to explore other things, together and apart,” Mr. Key said. “I compare it to Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor. We might make a movie and then do our own thing for three years and then come back and do another movie.”“Key & Peele” won a Peabody Award for what its organizers said was the ability to “tackle racially charged issues and ideas like no one else on television.”In accepting the show’s Peabody Award, Mr. Key expressly thanked the network for allowing “Key & Peele” to tell a diverse set of stories.“We’d like to thank Comedy Central for giving us the opportunity to show the African-American experience as not a monolith, because it’s not,” he said. “It’s so many different stories and the danger of the world sometimes is trying to assign a single story to an entire group of people.”Earlier this month, the series was nominated for an Emmy Award for outstanding variety sketch series, and Mr. Key was nominated for outstanding supporting actor in a comedy.Fans expressed their sadness at the news on Twitter, many responding to a tweet Mr. Peele sent entreating fans not to miss the last eight episodes of the show.One fan compared the comedians’ departure to that of Dave Chappelle, another star who abruptly walked away from Comedy Central when his show was one of the network’s most beloved offerings.