https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/02/science/mammoths-extinction-saint-paul-island-alaska.html
Island’s Mammoths May Have Been Thirsty at Their Extinction - The New York Times
Mammoths (Animals),Water,Alaska,Endangered and Extinct Species,Global Warming,Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,Graham  Russell W
Aug. 1, 2016
365
About 6,000 years ago, St. Paul Island, a tiny spot of land in the middle of the Bering Sea, must have been a strange place. Hundreds of miles away from the mainland, it was uninhabited except for a few species of small mammals, like arctic foxes, and one big one: woolly mammoths.This population of woolly mammoths, one of the world’s last, had been comfortably living there for a few thousand years — they had no predators (humans didn’t arrive until the 18th century), a good amount of fresh water and plenty of food. But environmental changes, strikingly similar to those in our time, caused the mammoth population on this island to die out.At the time, a changing climate caused sea levels to rise, shrinking both the island’s size and the mammoth herd. A drier climate meant less rainfall and lower lake levels, and the lack of freshwater may have been a driver of the mammoth’s extinction, according to a new study published Monday in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The authors argue that this extinction offers important lessons about freshwater availability and island populations in a changing climate.For the first time, scientists have been able to pinpoint the date and likely cause of the extinction of woolly mammoths on this Alaskan island, once a part of the Bering Land Bridge that connected North America to Asia, but made an island when sea levels rose and glaciers disappeared around 14,000 years ago.The study, led by scientists from Pennsylvania State University along with scientists from elsewhere in the United States and Canada, analyzed a variety of indicators to show that these woolly mammoths became extinct about 5,600 years ago. According to Russell W. Graham, a professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State and the study’s lead author, this may be the most precisely dated prehistoric extinction.The authors of the study found that rising seas, which shrank the island’s size, were not enough to cause extinction, but may have indirectly caused the extinction event: The swelling seas reduced available habitat and freshwater sources, making life difficult for the giant animals.The scientists analyzed four proxies for megafaunal presence (in this case, mammoths): sedimentary ancient DNA and three fungal spore types from near a lake, a key source of freshwater on the island. They also were able to get a sense of the vegetation on the island at the time, using several proxies from sediment cores. These cores showed that the area around the lake was likely stripped of vegetation by the mammoths, which might have sped up the lake’s erosion, causing it to fill in and worsening its quality.Dr. Graham said that this study has profound implications for both island and low-lying populations today.Changes in sea levels that would have been relatively inconsequential for continents were magnified on tiny St. Paul Island. What happened on the remote Alaskan island is a scenario that could be faced by small, low-lying islands globally, especially in the South Pacific, he said.As sea levels rose around the island, the salt water pushed inland and displaced some of the freshwater, so the mammoths had less to drink. This happens all over the world now, in large part because of groundwater extraction, and can contaminate drinking-water wells.Dr. Graham said that he and his fellow scientists were surprised that the availability of water was such a powerful limiting factor for the woolly mammoths, and that it has often been overlooked in the study of prehistoric extinctions.