http://www.nytimes.com/1998/11/12/nyregion/critic-of-city-s-foster-care-system-leaves-a-costly-mark.html
Critic of City's Foster Care System Leaves a Costly Mark - The New York Times
NEW YORK STATE,NEW YORK CITY,GRABER  BRACHA,FRAUDS AND SWINDLING,WHISTLE-BLOWERS,FOSTER CARE,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,SUITS AND CLAIMS AGAINST GOVERNMENT
Nov. 12, 1998
7720
For 28 years, Bracha Graber has toiled in the back rooms and back alleys of New York City foster care, mastering the bureaucratic intricacies of the system but never forgetting the children at stake behind the rules. Yesterday, Ms. Graber, a 49-year-old city social worker, suddenly stepped into the public glare after her whistle-blower lawsuit against the keepers of the system brought her $4.9 million.The money is her share of the $49 million that New York City and New York State have agreed to pay the Federal Government to settle the suit, which charged that New York fraudulently collected hundreds of millions of dollars between 1990 and 1994 for foster care services that were not provided. Much of the windfall will go to her lawyers, the Internal Revenue Service, and to college costs for her two sons.But Ms. Graber, whose wheezy laugh, rapid-fire command of detail and stubborn streak have become uncomfortably familiar to a long succession of child welfare officials, is spending $360,000 immediately the way she always said she would if she got the chance: on a new foundation that will bring music, art and dance into the lives of foster children.''It still doesn't seem real,'' she said, after hastily changing from denim into a navy blue suit to face the television cameras in the offices of her lawyers, Carl D. Bernstein and Carl H. Loewenson Jr.It was her day off. The night before, as city officials deplored the terms of the settlement they had signed in Federal court, she was working past midnight in lower Manhattan, training caseworkers at the city's emergency placement office to cope with wrinkles in the new statewide foster care computer system.''Nobody else knows this stuff,'' she said with a smoker's laugh, explaining how she, a $54,000-a-year city employee who hasn't had a real raise in a decade, not only managed to win as a whistle-blower, but keep her job.It does not bother her too much, she said, that some of her supervisors have not said hello to her in two years, ever since her suit, originally filed under seal, became public. Some have supported her, she added, and people she did not know inside the system called to thank her.Ms. Graber has had years of practice in being the odd one out. Born in Israel, she spoke no English when she came to New York at the age of 11. After receiving a B.A. in psychology from Stern, Yeshiva University's college for women, she became the only Jewish caseworker at Catholic Guardian, a private foster care agency run by the Brooklyn Diocese, which sent her to Fordham University for her master's in social work.She still remembers the first child she placed in foster care, a baby boy named Eladio who had been living in an institution. The foster mother she had recruited for him ''took him in her arms with such love,'' she said, ''I thought that's the kind of thing that should happen to every foster child.''Nor has she forgotten the case that pitted her against the New York Civil Liberties Union, which challenged Ms. Graber's decision to remove two foster children from an elderly foster mother whom Ms. Graber considered unfit. The city eventually let the foster mother keep the children and adopt them, but the lawsuit on the constitutional issues Ms. Graber had stumbled on went all the way to the United States Supreme Court.Those were days -- the 1970's -- when even children long forgotten by their parents had little hope of being freed for adoption under the law, and longtime foster parents often abruptly turned the children out when they reached a troublesome adolescence. The state's 1979 Child Welfare Reform Act and the omnibus Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Reform Act passed by Congress in 1980 sought to change all that, in part by mandating a system of case record reports that were to reflect required visits, reviews and long-term planning every six months.In the early 1980's, Ms. Graber worked for the city in the Program Assessment System unit, a hard-won measure of foster care reform that rated private agencies according to performance on such services, and tried to steer children to those that scored best.She returned to the world of voluntary child care agencies in 1983, as director of adoption and foster care services for Graham-Windham, and soon found herself opposing her own staff and a Family Court judge who wanted to return 6-year-old twins to their father, an ex-convict. Her stubbornness won a crucial six-month delay, she said, and before it was up the father was arrested for murder. The twins were later adopted.Ms. Graber's indifference to being a team player was not shaken in the late 1980's and early 1990's, when she returned to a city child welfare agency in crisis. The number of children placed in foster care with relatives ballooned, and as the city slipped into recession, the number of caseworkers looking out for them was greatly reduced. Yet month after month, the city began reporting almost perfect compliance with the Federal requirements for foster care services.''In effect they were billing the Federal Government for services they weren't providing,'' Ms. Graber said. In papers submitted by Federal prosecutors, she chronicled how she resisted pressure to join what she said was a scheme to maximize Federal foster care reimbursement by falsifying computer records to show that children were being visited, when she knew they were not. The city has denied that there was any such scheme.The lawsuit also documented her fruitless efforts to get government officials to investigate. At various times beginning in April 1991, Ms. Graber, who was then acting director of the Office of Case Management, contacted the head of the city's Human Resources Administration, the Comptroller's offices of the city and state, and officials in the city's Office of Management and Budget and told them what she had seen, all to no avail.Finally in 1993, discouraged and fearful of being fired, she heard from a friend about the Federal whistle-blower statute. With the law's potential for a reward, Ms. Graber said she was able to get a lawyer who later joined forces with Federal prosecutors.City officials say they are unhappy about the payment of public money to Ms. Graber, but her lawyers point out that Congress authorized paying whistle-blowers up to 25 percent of the money recovered to encourage citizens to report fraud against the Federal Government.''Realistically, if anybody had listened to me I wouldn't have gotten any of this money,'' Ms. Graber noted. There were times, she added, when she almost lost heart. Doctors diagnosed breast cancer early in 1997, and she was still undergoing chemotherapy when she was deposed in the lawsuit.The real payoff, she said, is her new foundation for arts scholarships for foster children. She has named it for Mel Collins, her former boss at the city agency, who died in 1990. Mr. Collins was a child welfare administrator and Fulbright scholar whose principles and compassion for children Ms. Graber said she greatly admired.''I honestly believe if Mel was alive this would never have happened,'' she said. ''He was a phenomenal human being who really cared about children. He had no children of his own, so I feel this should be his  legacy.''