https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/opinion/campaign-stops/a-time-to-keep-fighting.html
A Time to Keep Fighting - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Race and Ethnicity,Elections  House of Representatives,Minorities,Democratic Party,House of Representatives,Republican Party,Supreme Court (US),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Hamilton  Alexander,Obama  Barack,Trump  Donald J,Southern States (US),United States,Hamilton (Movie)
Nov. 9, 2016
5140
As I watched the unfolding electoral disaster on Tuesday night, a banner appeared on the New York Times website for the musical “Hamilton.”It made me wonder what Alexander Hamilton would think of the state of the nation he helped create and the man who just took the White House. But even more, it reminded me that the battle that has consumed, tormented and once almost destroyed our country is still raging.It is the battle between rural and urban, between those who want to keep things as they are, and those who are not part of that order and want a new one. It started when the country was born, and it has been bound up inextricably in race. It’s a battle of culture and religion, too, but race — starting with the implacable evil of slavery — has primarily driven the divisions in this country since 1789.On Tuesday, every nonwhite group in America voted overwhelmingly for Hillary Clinton. Actually, Clinton seems to have won the national vote by a small margin, but that’s not what counts. The Electoral College system has long been broken, but President-elect Donald Trump won decisively and we have to honor the legitimacy of his election, which is probably more than he would have done.But did it have to be so ugly and leave us a nation more divided and mistrustful of one another than ever? Did it have to be about racial and ethnic and cultural intolerance — about the forces of fear and division that the Republican Party has been exploiting for decades?On Tuesday, Trump built his victory in rural, white America. He built it on the backs of ordinary working Americans, for whom I doubt he has any real regard, and those who are angry at corruption and the power of the wealthy establishment, even though he epitomizes both. Exit polls show that huge majorities of Americans think illegal immigrants should not be deported, and yet many of those same people gave their votes to Trump.Racial divisions tore Americans apart in the Civil War, and during Reconstruction, the Depression, the evil days of segregation, Jim Crow and lynching, and after the passage of the major civil rights laws, against which the right has been fighting since they were signed.The conservative justices on the Supreme Court deepened the problem when they gutted the Voting Rights Act in 2013, and Republican-controlled legislatures swiftly enacted new laws to drive away minority voters, especially in the South.President Obama was gracious on Wednesday morning, saying he was heartened by Trump’s talk of unity. (We will have to see whether that’s the usual message of unity from the right, which translates as “Agree with us and we’re happy to include you.”)“We all go forward with a presumption of good faith in our fellow citizens,” Obama said.He was right. In fact, his election should have proved that. But the intolerant right never gave him that benefit of the doubt, and race was at the core of their response. Trump created his political platform by trying to destroy the legitimacy of Obama’s presidency on racial and jingoistic grounds.The Supreme Court is likely lost now for generations, since Trump will get one and probably two choices for that body. The entire Washington government is in the grip of a new and frightening Republican Party. Hard-won rights may well be lost, especially for women and minorities.It would be easy to be consumed with anger, and I am. It would be easy to walk away. But Obama was right. This is a moment to stay engaged, and to fight back.As the Texas politician Jim Hightower wrote, “striving for democracy is bone-wearying agonizing, frustrating, cruel, bloody and often deadly work.”Democrats and others alienated by this election will need to find leaders who will make far better candidates than Hillary Clinton ever was. There will be a Congressional election in two years, and a governing coalition that depends almost entirely on aggrieved whites cannot long endure.“The important thing to know is that you are wanted,” Hightower said. “You are needed. You are important. You are not only what democracy counts on, you are what democracy is.”