http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/29/nyregion/rep-michael-grimm-physically-threatens-a-ny1-reporter.html
Rep. Michael Grimm Threatens an NY1 Reporter - The New York Times
Grimm  Michael G,NY1,State of the Union Message (US),News and News Media
Jan. 29, 2014
2393
WASHINGTON —  Footage showed Representative Michael G. Grimm physically threatening a reporter in the Capitol, shining a harsh light on the embattled Staten Island Republican in the hours after President Obama’s State of the Union address here on Tuesday.Mr. Grimm can be heard telling Michael Scotto, a reporter for NY1, “I’ll break you in half” in footage broadcast by the network. Moments earlier, Mr. Grimm had walked away from an interview when Mr. Scotto began asking him questions about allegations of campaign finance violations.According to a transcript provided by NY1, Mr. Grimm also threatened to throw Mr. Scotto off a balcony.Mr. Grimm issued a statement late Tuesday evening: “I was extremely annoyed because I was doing NY1 a favor by rushing to do their interview first in lieu of several other requests. The reporter knew that I was in a hurry and was only there to comment on the State of the Union, but insisted on taking a disrespectful and cheap shot at the end of the interview, because I did not have time to speak off-topic. I verbally took the reporter to task and told him off, because I expect a certain level of professionalism and respect, especially when I go out of my way to do that reporter a favor. I doubt that I am the first member of Congress to tell off a reporter, and I am sure I won’t be the last.”This month, the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested Diana K. Durand, a fund-raiser for Mr. Grimm, on charges that she illegally funneled more than $10,000 into his campaign. Mr. Grimm has also faced an ongoing federal investigation into accusations that he or his campaign illegally solicited money from foreign donors.Calling Mr. Grimm’s behavior “unacceptable,” NY1’s political director, Bob Hardt, demanded a full apology from the lawmaker.“It is extremely disturbing when anyone threatens one of our reporters — let alone a U.S. Congressman,” Mr. Hardt said in a series of messages on Twitter.