http://www.nytimes.com/1996/01/28/world/russian-banking-scandal-poses-threat-to-future-of-privatization.html
Russian Banking Scandal Poses Threat to Future of Privatization - The New York Times
RUSSIA,ONEKSIM BANK,CHUBAIS  ANATOLY B,YELTSIN  BORIS N,PRIVATIZATION,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS,BANKS AND BANKING
Jan. 28, 1996
5597
In a vast ballroom of the Noga Hilton in Geneva in October, directors of Russia's largest private bank, Oneksim Bank, celebrated the opening of their Swiss affiliate over caviar and chilled Russian vodka.Oneksim Bank, which was founded in 1993, is the only Russian commercial bank  to have met the starchy conditions of the Swiss Central Bank, a feat so challenging that a financial reporter in Moscow likened it to "me flying to the  moon." Almost as if feting a lunar landing, Russia's Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, sent the bankers an effusive congratulatory telegram.These days, Government officials are no longer leaping to embrace Oneksim Bank -- at least not publicly. For it was the initiator of a privatization program whose blatant favoritism ignited a political scandal that inflamed the presidential campaign and cost Anatoly B. Chubais, the last free-market reformer in President Boris N. Yeltsin's Cabinet, his job.Privatization began two years ago as a revolutionary step to roll back 70 years of Communism, selling off state assets to create a society of property owners with a stake in the success of a free-market economy. But its inequities  -- most vividly illustrated by the bank's scheme -- have led the Yeltsin administration to disavow the process.Under the deal, known as loans-for-shares, a few Kremlin-favored banks lent the Government money last year in return for a chance to buy shares in some of the state's most valuable assets at dirt-cheap prices.As Mr. Yeltsin struggles to distance himself from the more unpopular economic policies of his tenure, some of the very advisers who helped push the loans-for-shares plan through the upper echelons of power are now saying, Casablanca-style, that they were "shocked, shocked" to find abuses.Some Communists say they will reverse privatization if they come to power. Communist members of Parliament are already calling for immediate renationalization of the industries involved. And so is the populist Mayor of Moscow, Yuri Luzhkov, who is the deputy chairman of Mr. Yeltsin's election campaign.Mikhail G. Delyagin, an economic adviser to the President, said many companies the Government planned to privatize will almost certainly not be privatized any time soon. "Nobody wants to unleash another scandal before the election," he said.Privatization is deeply unpopular with voters, who cynically refer to it as "prikhvatizatsiya," or "grabification," the giving away of government wealth to  a few well-connected and unscrupulous businessmen and bankers.While the loans-for-shares program briefly lifted the thin veil covering the  symbiotic relationship between Government officials and major banks, the political and economic consequences are far broader.If the Government halts further privatization, it will lose a means of raising badly needed cash to cover its deficit -- and the already strained good  will of the International Monetary Fund, which is now negotiating a $9 billion loan to Russia.Loans-for-shares was only one program among many in the Government's ambitious drive to redistribute the property of a state that once owned everything. During the last two years, more than 100,000 state companies -- from small shops to oil conglomerates to enormous, and enormously inefficient, factories -- have been transferred to public ownership, at least formally. (Often, Soviet-era directors bought the companies themselves, and continue to run them Soviet-style.) The 15,000 factories involved thus far represent two-thirds of industry and 60 percent of the industrial work force.The idea was first floated on March 30 at a Cabinet meeting presided over by  Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. The hard-driving 35-year-old president of Oneksim Bank, Vladimir O. Potanin, proposed that a consortium of major banks could fill the Government's budget gap by lending it $2 billion in exchange for a first crack at shares in some of Russia's most valuable industries, like oil, shipping and metals. When Mr. Chernomyrdin expressed doubts at the meeting, he was assured by Mr. Chubais and Oleg D. Soskovets, a Deputy Prime Minister, that  they approved of the deal.The chosen banks like Oneksim Bank, Menatep, Rossiisky Kredit and a half a dozen others just happened to be those with deep financial and personal ties to  the Government -- and a vested interest in helping it stay in power through the  coming presidential elections.When the auctions began last fall, it became all too obvious that a fix was in. Foreign investors were barred from bidding for the most desirable assets, and the same banks that were assigned by the Government to organize the auctions ended up winning them, and usually at only a fraction over the minimum bid.Oneksim Bank, for instance, organized the auction for 38 percent of Norilsk Nickel, which produces platinum and a quarter of the world's nickel, and won it  for $171 million, only $100,000 above the minimum bid and half as much as the rival Rossiisky Credit bank was prepared to pay. Oneksim Bank spokesmen say they disqualified Rossiisky Credit because it filed its applications late and wanted to guarantee its bid with treasury bills as well as cash. Rossiisky Bank  said it would sue.Shares in some of Russia's largest oil conglomerates, including Lukoil and Yukos, were sold off for what Western analysts considered to be a fraction of their real value. When the buying frenzy subsided, the Government collected $1 billion, half of what it had expected to collect."It was disgusting," said Boris G. Fyodorov, a liberal member of Parliament who, when he was Minister of Finance in 1993, helped Oneksim Bank get the Government licenses it needed to go into business.Mr. Fyodorov described the bank he helped start as a well-run, aggressive institution that got too greedy as it cozied up to the state. "When you can make a billion-dollar deal in one coup, it's difficult to pass up," he said. "Oneksim Bank could never have grown so big so fast without easy money coming from the Government."The arrangement calls for the shares to be held by the winning banks in trust. The Government could repay the loan later this year and cancel the transfer, but the goal is for the banks to hold on to their shares and make management changes in the companies, and in many cases, sell their shares within two years on the open market at a windfall profit.And the Yeltsin administration had its own stake in the process. "The Government got some cash and a guarantee of share-owners' loyalty to the President's re-election," a Yeltsin adviser said with a smile.Mr. Potanin, like other bankers and Government officials involved in the scheme, declined to be interviewed for this article. A company spokesman, Mikhail M. Kozhokin, gingerly conceded that "there were some drawbacks in the organization of these auctions." But he blamed the Government ministries involved.There are thousands of banks in Russia, most of them shady and fly-by-night.  The consortium, however, was made up of Russia's finest. Oneksim Bank, with assets of more than $3.4 billion, has passed the stringent inspection of Swiss officials, the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. But loans-for-shares has cast a pall on the reputations of Russia's best banks. And privately, they are deeply worried."There is great fear among Russian bankers, especially among those who participated in the loans-for-share scheme," said an executive whose bank took part and who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. "Renationalization of all these enterprises could happen, and now nobody in Government can help us."Mr. Chubais publicly defended the loans-for-shares deal and took the fall for its abuses, but by many accounts, he fought the banks and their friends in high  places to keep the process open to real competition."In the original proposal made by the banks, and Oneksim Bank in particular,  there was no competition and no transparency whatsoever," said Maksim Boyko, director of the Russian privatization center. "By the end, there was some progress, but it was obviously less than perfect."Mr. Chubais declined to give an interview. A Western investment banker who debated the deal with Mr. Chubais and spoke on the condition of anonymity put it this way: "I questioned him about it, and he told me, 'You don't understand, it  was between doing it badly or horribly badly -- I'm under constant, constant pressure to give it all away for nothing.' "That pressure came not just from banks, but also from high-level Government officials lobbying Mr. Chubais on their behalf. The inner workings of Kremlin decision-making are murky and well-concealed. But few in Russia doubt that the loans-for-shares could only have worked with the complicity of the state's most  senior officials."There was huge resistance to this scheme from factory directors, managers, regional governors -- everyone was complaining," said an analyst at a Russian bank that did not take part. "There had to be a clear order from the top: 'We are selling you.' "Mr. Chubais's replacement by Vladimir V. Kadannikov, the director of the state-owned car company Avtovaz and an advocate of government measures to protect Russian industry, was one sign of a hasty retreat from privatization at  the top.Another was the about-face of Mr. Soskovets, the Deputy Prime Minister who along with Mr. Chubais played a critical role in brokering the Government's and  industries' compliance in loans-for-shares."Many mistakes were made in the course of reform," he said after Mr. Chubais, his longtime rival, was dismissed. Those mistakes, he said, were prompted "by attempts of some leaders to mimic market reform practices of other countries on  Russian soil."