https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/30/arts/television/stephen-colbert-internet-privacy-congress.html
Stephen Colbert Thinks We’d Rather Keep Our Web Browsing to Ourselves - The New York Times
Bee  Samantha,C K  Louis,Colbert  Stephen,Fallon  Jimmy,Freeman  Morgan,Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Full Frontal With Samantha Bee (TV Program),Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
March 30, 2017
3762
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.A day after House Republicans voted to let internet companies sell customers’ browsing information without permission, Stephen Colbert led the late-night blowback.Seth Meyers was more blasé about the bill’s passage. He said he hadn’t really believed internet privacy existed anyway.Morgan Freeman is the owner of one of the most famous voices in the United States. He’s narrated an array of films and commercials, and Mark Zuckerberg recently asked him to record the voice for Jarvis, a virtual home assistant system that he designed. But the actor, who spoke to Mr. Meyers on “Late Night” on Wednesday, is getting tired of friends asking him to record voice mail greetings.On “Full Frontal,” Samantha Bee took a break from skewering the president and Georgia Republicans to celebrate a moment of bipartisan consensus.On “The Tonight Show”: Puppies! That’s all.Dave Chappelle isn’t the only guy with standup specials coming out on Netflix. Louis C. K. has released one this year (“Louis C. K.: 2017”), with another on the way. He’ll talk to Mr. Fallon on “The Tonight Show” on Thursday. Comedy’s king of philosophical angst interviewed by the kid who worries less than Alfred E. Neuman? Could be interesting.Understanding social movements means understanding how people share information and ideas. So there is a lot to be gleaned from a newly discovered trove of nearly 100 letters that leaders and thinkers in the women’s suffrage movement sent to one another. The collection has been acquired by the University of Rochester in Susan B. Anthony’s hometown.