https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/fashion/elsa-cocktail-bar-brooklyn-cobble-hill-east-village.html
The East Village Cocktail Bar Elsa Reopens in Cobble Hill - The New York Times
Elsa (Brooklyn  NY  Bar),Bars and Nightclubs,Cocktails and Mixed Drinks,Cobble Hill (Brooklyn  NY)
July 12, 2017
1237
Three years ago, the cocktail bar Elsa closed in the East Village, becoming yet another victim of the red-hot Manhattan real estate market. Now, in a second familiar twist, Elsa has reopened in Brooklyn. “So many of our new regulars are old regulars who moved out here,” said Natalka Burian, 35, who owns the bar with her husband, Jay Schneider, 37, and her brother-in-law Scott Schneider, 30. “We moved the bar with our customers.”Elsa occupies the former home of Last Exit, an Atlantic Avenue dive bar that closed in 2014. It’s also a 10-minute walk from the Carroll Gardens brownstone where Ms. Burian and her husband now live. “It’s not intentional but very lucky,” she said.THE PLACE Much like Elsa 1.0, the Brooklyn bar is bright and airy, with a distinctly lighter touch. “I wanted it to feel very feminine,” Ms. Burian said. “So many cocktail places are so masculine and intimidating. I wanted it to feel like a place where women could come and drink and feel comfortable and welcome.” While they’ve kept some pieces from the old bar (the white-frame wall mirrors and the Singer sewing machine beer tap), new marble-and-brass tables and curved banquettes give it a more modern feel.THE CROWDYes, the ladies represent, but there are plenty of gentlemen, too. The unwritten dress code is casual (jeans, T-shirts and cutoff shorts), and the crowd tends to be in their 30s, whooping it up in small but loud groups. The bright lighting and high volume make the bar more conducive to socializing than flirting.THE PLAYLISTIt sounded like indie rock, though the beat was barely discernible on a recent Saturday night.GETTING INSpace is at a premium after 9 p.m. on weekends, with no reservations or waiting list. The patio out back has more room but closes at 10 p.m.DRINKSOld cocktails (from $13) from the East Village space are joined by adventurous new concoctions like the Queen of Swords, which colorfully combines matcha horchata, amaro and whiskey. The drinks menu is seasonal, with current standouts like the Glassine Stamp with Earl Grey gin and yellow chartreuse. There is also a fine assortment of beers (from $6) and wines (from $9).