https://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/17/books/chapters/1217-1st-kagan.html
‘Dangerous Nation’ - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Kagan  Robert
Dec. 17, 2006
4096
Misperceptions about the history, traditions, and nature of American foreign   policy begin with the popular image of the Puritans who settled in New England   in the 1630s. John Winthrop's hopeful description of the Massachusetts Bay   theocracy as a "city upon a hill" is emblazoned in the American self-image, a   vivid symbol of what are widely seen as dominant isolationist and   "exceptionalist" tendencies in American foreign policy. The Puritan "mission,"   as the historian Frederick Merk once put it, was "to redeem the Old World by   high example," and generations of Americans have considered this "exemplarist"   purpose the country's original mission in its pure, uncorrupted form: the desire   to set an example to the world, but from a safe distance. Felix Gilbert argued   that the unique combination of idealism and isolationism in American thought   derived from the Puritans' "utopian" aspirations, which required "separation"   from Europe and the severing of "ties which might spread the diseases of Europe   to America." The true American "mission," therefore, was inherently   isolationist, passive, and restrained; it was, as Merk put it, both "idealistic"   and "self-denying ... a force that fought to curb expansionism of the   aggressive variety."This picture of Puritan America as a pious Greta Garbo, wanting only to be left   alone in her self-contained world, is misleading. For one thing, Winthrop's   Puritans were not isolationists. They were global revolutionaries. They escaped   persecution in the Old World to establish the ideal religious commonwealth in   America, their "new Jerusalem." But unlike the biblical Jews, they looked   forward to the day, they hoped not far off, when they might return to a reformed   Egypt. Far from seeking permanent separation from the Old World, the Puritans'   "errand into the wilderness" aimed to establish a base from which to launch a   counteroffensive across the Atlantic. Their special covenant with God was not   tied to the soil of the North American continent. America was not the Puritans'   promised land but a temporary refuge. God had "peopled New England in order   that the reformation of England and Scotland may be hastened." As the great   scholar of Puritan thought Perry Miller explained many years ago, the Puritan   migration "was no retreat from Europe: it was a flank attack." The "large   unspoken assumption in the errand of 1630" was that success in New England would   mean a return to old England.The Massachusetts Bay colonists neither sought isolation from the Old World nor   considered themselves isolated. The Puritan leaders did not even believe they   were establishing a "new" world distinct from the old. In their minds New   England and Old England were the same world, spiritually if not geographically.   A hundred years after Winthrop's settlement, when the Puritan evangelist   Jonathan Edwards spoke of "our nation," he meant both Britain and the British   North American colonies. It was a measure of how little the New England Puritans   sought isolation from the Old World that their greatest disappointment came when   England's Puritan revolution in the mid-seventeenth century abandoned rigid   Calvinism, the Puritans' model, thus leaving the Puritans theologically isolated   in their American wilderness.America, in turn, became not a promised land but a burial ground for the kind of   Puritan theocracy Winthrop and his followers had hoped to establish. Puritanism   died in part because the American wilderness, like the biblical Israel, was a   land of milk and honey. The New World was too vast for the Puritans' worldly   asceticism. Their rigid theocracy required control and obedience and   self-restraint, but the expansive North American wilderness created freedom,   dissent, independence, and the lust for land. The abundance of land and economic   opportunities for men and women of all social stations diverted too many minds   from godly to worldly pursuits. It undermined patriarchal hierarchy and   shattered orthodoxy. Those who did not like the way the doctrines of Calvinism   were construed and enforced in the Massachusetts Bay Colony had only to move up   the Connecticut Valley. Within a dozen years after Winthrop's arrival, Puritan   divines were decrying their parishioners' sinful desire for ever more   "elbow-room" in their New World. "Land! Land! hath been the Idol of many in   New-England," cried Increase Mather. "They that profess themselves Christians,   have foresaken Churches, and Ordinances, and all for land and elbow-room enough   in the World."The rich lands of North America also helped unleash liberal, materialist forces   within Protestantism that overwhelmed the Puritan fathers' original godly vision   and brought New England onto the path on which the rest of British-American   civilization was already traveling: toward individualism, progress, and   modernity. With so many opportunities for personal enrichment available in the   New World, the "Protestant ethic," as Max Weber called it, which countenanced   the rewards of labor as a sign of God's favor and which demanded hard work in   one's "calling" as a sign of election, became a powerful engine of material   progress. In a short time, settlers, plantation owners, and the increasingly   prosperous and powerful merchants of Boston-the so-called River Gods-came to   worship at altars other than those of their Calvinist fathers and grandfathers.   The liberal, commercial ethos of these new mercantile groups represented the   spirit of a new age, whose "guiding principles were not social stability, order,   and the discipline of the senses, but mobility, growth, and the enjoyment of   life."By the early eighteenth century Puritan New England had entered "the emerging   secular and commercial culture" of Anglo-America. The New Englanders   "relinquished their grand vision of building a city upon a hill," and Puritanism   itself melted into the new, modernizing society. The burst of religious   revivalism in the early to mid-eighteenth century, termed the Great Awakening,   was a monument to Puritanism's failure, a worried response to the increasing   secularization of American society and to the spread of Christian rationalism   and Deism among colonial elites. From its original pious ambitions, Jonathan   Edwards lamented, the Puritans' America had fallen into sin. History had never   witnessed "such a casting off [of] the Christian religion," nor "so much   scoffing at and ridiculing the gospel of Christ by those that have been brought   up under gospel light." Even Edwards's own reactionary revivalism was shaped   by the new realities of life in an expansive, modernizing, and free America, for   his was a democratized, antihierarchical Puritanism that conformed to the   increasingly fluid nature of colonial American society. His effort to stem the   tide of liberalism and modernity was futile. As Edwards wrote his treatises on   faith and salvation and obedience to God, his fellow British colonials were   "beginning to think of themselves as having individual rights that were   self-evidently endowments of nature." By the last quarter of the eighteenth   century a foreign observer like the French immigrant Michel-Guillaume-Jean de   CrËvecoeur could write of Americans that they "think more of the affairs of this   world than of those of the next."Not only has the original Puritan mission often been misunderstood, therefore,   but the rapid absorption and dissipation of Puritanism within the mainstream of   colonial American society meant that the Puritan influence in shaping the   character of that society, and its foreign policies, was not as great as has   sometimes been imagined. Most of America outside of New England had never been   under Puritan influence, and by the early eighteenth century even New England   was no Puritan commonwealth but a rising center of liberalism and commercialism.   In the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries it was the southern and middle   colonies, not New England, that "epitomized what was arguably the most important   element in the emerging British-American culture: the conception of America as a   place in which free people could pursue their own individual happiness in safety   and with a fair prospect that they might be successful in their several   quests."The society and culture that took root in the Chesapeake Bay region had far   greater influence on the evolution of American society, and therefore on   American foreign policy, than did Puritanism. This colonial America was   characterized not by isolationism and utopianism, not by cities upon hills and   covenants with God, but by aggressive expansionism, acquisitive materialism, and   an overarching ideology of civilization that encouraged and justified both. In   Virginia and the other settlements along the Chesapeake Bay that predated the   Puritans' arrival in New England, the dreams that drew Englishmen to a rough and   untamed country were of wealth and opportunity, not the founding of a new   Israel. The boom years that came to Virginia in the middle of the seventeenth   century produced no utopia but, at first, an almost lawless capitalism run amok:   the "fleeting ugliness of private enterprise operating temporarily without   check," a "greed magnified by opportunity, producing fortunes for a few and   misery for many," and, of course, the first steps "toward a system of labor that   treated men as things." Although gradually this rampant capitalist beast was   tamed by the establishment of laws and institutions modeled after England's, the   acquisitive, individualistic, modern spirit of liberalism formed the bedrock of   American society more than a century and a half before the American revolution   proclaimed liberty and the pursuit of happiness to be the natural rights of all   men.This acquisitive individualism was the powerful engine of an Anglo-American   territorial expansion that was neither particularly godly nor especially   peaceful and certainly not "self-denying." In the Chesapeake Bay area settled by   the Virginia Company and its "adventurers," expansion throughout the tidewater   began immediately, stretching up the fertile and accessible valleys of the   James, Rappahannock, and York rivers. In the Massachusetts Bay Colony, too,   expansion from Boston into the Connecticut Valley and the New England interior   began within a few years after the colony's founding. In both the northern and   southern colonies expansion brought the settlers into bloody conflict with   Indians-first the Pequot and later the Wampanoag, the Narragansett, and the   Nipmuck in the North, and the Susquehanna in the South. In 1637 settlers from   Boston and the Connecticut River Valley united in a two-pronged attack that   ended in the massacre and virtual extermination of the Pequot. That victory   opened up even more territory for expansion and settlement, which in turn led   less than four decades later to another, albeit more costly triumph for the   expansion-minded settlers against an alliance of Indian tribes loosely led by   the Wampanoag chief whom the Anglo-Americans called King Philip. In Virginia   that same year Governor William Berkeley's refusal to launch a war against the   Susquehanna resulted in a frontier rebellion led by Nathaniel Bacon and the   burning of the Virginia capital of Jamestown. Thereafter in Virginia, as in New   England, expansion proceeded apace throughout the latter half of the seventeenth   century and into the eighteenth, out into the Virginia Piedmont and the Great   Valley of the Appalachians and, in the north, up into Vermont and New Hampshire.Like most expansive peoples-the Greeks and Romans, for instance-Anglo-Americans   did not view themselves as aggressors. In part, they believed it only right   and natural that they should seek independence and fortune for themselves and   their families in the New World. Once having pursued this destiny and   established a foothold in the untamed lands of North America, continued   expansion seemed to many a matter of survival, a defensive reaction to threats   that lay just beyond the ever-expanding perimeter of their English civilization.   The French and Spanish empires were competing with the English for control of   North America. And the Indian nations, defending their own shrinking territories   and, indeed, their very existence against European aggression, were a constant   threat to the settlers' security-at least from the settlers' perspective. Native   Americans pushed off one stretch of land, and fearing they would soon be pushed   off the next, frequently struck back, both out of vengeance and in the hopes of   convincing the settlers to halt their advance and retreat. Settlers under siege,   and the governments charged with protecting them, could easily view the Indians   as the aggressors and their own actions as aimed at establishing nothing more   than a minimal level of security. Attaining even minimal security, however,   required an ever-enlarging sphere of control and dominance, for whenever one   boundary of security was established, other threats always existed just beyond   it. The "original sin" of displacing the first Indians from their lands began a   cycle of advance and conquest. As Catherine the Great is supposed to have   remarked, "I have no way to defend my borders but to extend them." And indeed,   what has been said of Russia, that it found its security only in the insecurity   of others, could be said of colonial Anglo-Americans, too. In the seventeenth   and eighteenth centuries, they purchased their security at the price of the   insecurity, and often the ruin, of Pequot, Iroquois, and Narragansett, of French   and Spaniards, and by the time of the Revolution, of the British, too.The Expansionist "Mission"The search for security, however, was not the sole motive for expansion. There   were other powerful motives as well, and more exalted justifications. The   Anglo-American settlers pressed into territories claimed by others in the   conviction that they were serving a higher purpose, that their expansion was the   unfolding of an Anglo-Saxon destiny. They saw themselves as the vanguard of an   English civilization that was leading humanity into the future. The first   American exceptionalism was really an English exceptionalism, the first American   mission an Anglo-Saxon, Protestant, imperial mission. Even the Virginia Company   portrayed itself as more than a purely commercial entity. The company's   stockholders insisted theirs was a different kind of commercial enterprise, "the   ends for which it is established beinge not simply matter of Trade, butt of a   higher Nature." Clearing away the wilderness and implanting English   civilization in its place was in their eyes an inherently noble task, as well as   being lucrative. While making money for themselves and their London   stockholders, the colonists would "bring the infidels and salvages lyving in   those partes to humane civilitie and to a setled and quiet govermente." Not for   the last time in American history, these early settlers made their way forward   in the conviction that enterprise, trade, and the advance of civilization were   interlinked. Their civilization, they believed, was beneficial both for those   who advanced it and for those upon whom it was advanced. This Anglo-American   mission was neither passive nor "exemplarist," however. The settlers moved ever   forward; they did not stand still. And they did their converting with their   hands, their tools, and their weapons, not by the force of their example. 