http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/27/nyregion/mcgreevey-s-nominee-to-lead-port-authority-withdraws.html
McGreevey's Nominee to Lead Port Authority Withdraws - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Feb. 27, 2003
7585
Gov. James E. McGreevey's nominee for chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey today asked to withdraw his name from consideration and resigned from the board, amid complaints that his generous contributions to New Jersey Democrats may have violated campaign-finance and conflict-of-interest laws.Charles Kushner, a real estate developer who was the single most prolific donor to Mr. McGreevey's 2001 campaign, was appointed to the Port Authority board last February and was the governor's choice to become chairman in April. But his bid for the job began to sputter early this month, when a former employee filed a lawsuit claiming that Mr. Kushner had improperly allocated money from his businesses to make donations to favored candidates.The United States attorney's office in Newark opened an investigation into the allegations, and Republican legislators began pointing to Mr. Kushner's appointment as the kind of political patronage that Mr. McGreevey had vowed to end when he was elected. After Mr. Kushner declined a request that he answer questions before the State Senate Judiciary Committee, a Republican lawmaker, Senator William L. Gormley of Atlantic County, released documents this week saying that Mr. Kushner may have violated a state law that prohibits anyone who owns more than 10 percent of a bank from making political contributions.Mr. Kushner called those charges ''baseless'' and ''innuendo'' and said he had a legal expert review every contribution he and his employees made during the past two years to ensure that he complied with campaign-finance laws. In announcing his resignation from the board today, Mr. Kushner said that he wanted to spare his family the ordeal of a bitter confirmation process and allow Governor McGreevey to find a chairman who could focus on the agency's role in redeveloping the World Trade Center site, which it owns.''The Port Authority faces too many important goals and decisions to be distracted by the political nonsense and bickering generated by local partisan politics,'' he said in a written statement.Mr. McGreevey had expressed enthusiastic support for Mr. Kushner until the documents released by Senator Gormley on Monday raised new questions about his compliance with campaign-finance laws. In a written statement today, the governor called Mr. Kushner's decision to leave the authority board ''regrettable.''''His integrity, decency and commitment to the highest ethical standards are beyond reproach,'' he said.The collapse of Mr. Kushner's nomination comes as Mr. McGreevey's standing in public opinion polls has been hurt by the state's budget woes, several embarrassing appointments and press coverage critical of his use of state money to entertain relatives in Ireland and shower legislators with Christmas gifts.The governor today tried to put the issue to rest quickly, announcing that he had nominated Anthony R. Coscia, chairman of the New Jersey Economic Development Authority, to be the chairman of the Port Authority board. But Mr. McGreevey also held out the possibility that Mr. Kushner might be offered some other appointment in the future, if he can resolve the dispute over his campaign contributions.Republicans appeared unwilling to let the matter drop. Hours before Mr. Kushner withdrew from the Port Authority, State Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos Jr., the Republican Party's state chairman, wrote to the acting attorney general, Peter C. Harvey, asking for an investigation of the millions in campaign cash Mr. Kushner gave Democrats, including the $1.5 million that went directly to Mr. McGreevey's campaign.''Mr. Kushner's resignation does not resolve the issue of potentially illegal campaign contributions he has made as a major contributor to New Jersey's Democrat Party,'' Mr. Kyrillos said. ''It is the duty of the state attorney general to enforce the law.''Assemblyman Alex DeCroce, a Republican from Morris Plains, today called on any elected official or committee that received donations from Mr. Kushner and his companies to return the money.Republicans charge that the donations violated the ban on campaign donations by bank owners because Mr. Kushner and his children control 20 percent of the NorCrown Bank in Morristown.But Mr. Kushner's lawyers insist that the donations were legal because he only owns 5.6 percent of the bank, and his children's trust funds control another 13.5 percent.