https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/28/nyregion/for-politician-an-indictment-looms-and-so-does-a-campaign-for-re-election.html
For Politician, an Indictment Looms, and So Does a Campaign for Re-election - The New York Times
Recchia  Domenic M Jr,Grimm  Michael G,Republican Party,Elections  House of Representatives,United States Politics and Government,New York City,Frauds and Swindling,New York State,United States,Congress
April 27, 2014
7746
Republican Party leaders in Staten Island had long heard murmuring about Representative Michael G. Grimm’s possible legal troubles. But Mr. Grimm maintained his innocence, and party leaders stood behind his bid for a third term this November.Now, with an indictment against Mr. Grimm on federal fraud charges expected to be unsealed on Monday, Republicans are facing a dreaded scenario as they try to retain their party’s only congressional seat in the New York City delegation.Even before the new developments, Mr. Grimm, who was first elected in 2010, was facing a formidable challenge from a former city councilman, Domenic M. Recchia Jr., a Democrat. Democrats in Washington viewed the race as one of their top chances to pick up a Republican-held seat.Over the weekend, Republicans in New York were coming to grips with the troubles facing Mr. Grimm, and whether he could continue to wage a viable campaign for re-election.One issue they faced is the election calendar: The deadline for a candidate to decline his party’s nomination passed two weeks ago, meaning that Mr. Grimm’s name is already set to be on the November ballot. Jerry H. Goldfeder, an election lawyer, said it would be “next to impossible” for Mr. Grimm to get off the ballot, adding that the only possible avenue appeared to be if Republicans were to nominate Mr. Grimm for a judgeship or other public office.Moreover, since word of his indictment emerged on Friday, Mr. Grimm has shown no sign of curbing his campaign. A lawyer for Mr. Grimm said he was the victim of a “politically driven vendetta.” And for now, party leaders are sticking with Mr. Grimm, whose district includes Staten Island and part of southern Brooklyn.John Antoniello, the Staten Island Republican chairman, said he spoke to Mr. Grimm on Friday, and Mr. Grimm said he definitely planned to continue his campaign.“He’s got my complete support, and I’m sure the party’s also,” Mr. Antoniello said on Sunday night.Guy V. Molinari, the former Staten Island borough president and congressman who has been a mentor to Mr. Grimm, said he was convinced Mr. Grimm was innocent.“My support is 100 percent,” Mr. Molinari told The Staten Island Advance. “We are going to run and we are going to win.”But others acknowledged that the prospect of seeking re-election while under indictment was a tall order. In an interview, Michael R. Long, who is the chairman of the state’s Conservative Party, questioned the timing of the indictment’s unsealing, given the election calendar. But he said that Mr. Grimm “ought to give some serious thought to the citizens of his district and do the right thing for those citizens.”“I don’t know what the truth is,” Mr. Long said, “but I do know that I think it’s going to be very difficult for him to mount a serious campaign when this is hanging over his head.”The investigation into Mr. Grimm, by the United States attorney in Brooklyn and the F.B.I., started over two years ago with an inquiry into Mr. Grimm’s fund-raising for his 2010 race. Two of his fund-raisers have already been charged.Mr. Grimm won re-election in 2012 by five percentage points, but will face a more formidable opponent this year. Representative Steve Israel, who is the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said on Sunday that the race “was already one of our best pickup opportunities in the country.”Between campaign stops on Sunday, Mr. Recchia, who lives in Gravesend, Brooklyn, said the expected charges against Mr. Grimm were troubling. “People are tired of what’s been going on with him — all these investigations,” he said. “They think it’s time for our Congress member to focus on them 100 percent.”Leticia Remauro, a political consultant and former chairwoman of the Staten Island Republican Party, said party leaders took a risk when they decided to continue backing him despite the possibility that he could face criminal charges.Now she said they needed to stick with him. “He’s a fighter,” Ms. Remauro said. “He’s a Marine. He said he’s innocent, and you can take it to the bank that he will not change that tune.”