http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/17/nyregion/facing-ground-zero-again-firefighters-are-return-quarters-damaged-sept-11.html
Facing Ground Zero Again; Firefighters Are to Return to Quarters Damaged on Sept. 11 - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC),TERRORISM,FIRES AND FIREFIGHTERS
Oct. 17, 2003
9023
Everyone in the Fire Department lost incalculably on Sept. 11, 2001. The men of Engine Company 10 and Ladder Company 10 lost one thing more: their home.Astonishingly, the plain brick box known as 10 House was not destroyed by the collapse of the World Trade Center across Liberty Street. But the building was damaged enough to need rehabilitation. And that has taken some time.The companies were once the first due at any alarm that sounded in the trade center and were so closely identified with it that their patches show a colossal firefighter astride the twin towers. They are now across town from one another, each about a dozen blocks from their old house. Engine 10 shares quarters at 100 Duane Street while Ladder 10 is at 42 South Street.It appears that a reunion is imminent, although a department spokesman, Jim Long, said yesterday that no date had been set for the reopening of the three-story firehouse at 124 Liberty Street.This week, workers from the department's building division were putting finishing touches on the house. They set up the long dining table on the first floor and assembled bunks in the second-floor dormitory, which has -- at least for now -- a broad view of ground zero.What used to be a plain brick front is now an architectural statement. Four-foot-high F D N Y initials seem to float over the truck bays, cut out in relief from a screen of aluminum slats. The bays, which still have their original red roll-down doors, are now framed in gray steel plate. The house-watch, or dispatch, office at the corner of Greenwich Street is clad in stainless steel.The point of the design is ''to create a stronger identity in keeping with the building's location at ground zero,'' said the architect of the renovation, David W. Prendergast of Prendergast Laurel Architects of Manhattan.Up above, the American flag is already flying.To a civilian, it might seem that the last place a firefighter would want to be stationed is in a house overlooking the place where 343 others died that day, including Lt. Gregg A. Atlas, Lt. Stephen Harrell and Firefighters Jeffrey J. Olsen, Paul Pansini and Sean P. Tallon of the Liberty Street house.But one man familiar with the reconstruction of 10 House said physical distance offered no insulation in any case. ''This is the location of tragedy, yes, and you're that much closer,'' he said. ''But you're never separated from it. You see the faces. You hear the voices. You have the memories.''(Neither he nor the firefighters assigned to Engine 10 and Ladder 10 were authorized by the department to be interviewed for this article.)Mr. Prendergast said the big window in the dormitory would one day offer a more heartening prospect. ''I assumed throughout that they would want to look at the rebuilding,'' he said. ''I thought, These guys are living in a house; this is their bedroom.'' It may happen, however, that the firefighters block the window themselves to keep the room dark enough for sleeping.In some ways, the heart of the house will be a red six-burner Wolf stove, decked out with a Maltese cross, the firefighting emblem, on the backsplash and gold-leaf lettering: ''The Ten House.'' The customizing, a labor of love, was by municipal workers in Pleasanton, Calif. ''We maintain firehouses and there's a lot that revolves around the stove,'' said Thomas Fullam of the Pleasanton support services division, which takes care of public buildings. ''It's almost a centerpiece in the kitchen.''The division has made a specialty of refitting stoves in that city's fire stations to look somewhat like fire trucks. Last year, Mr. Fullam and his colleagues Chris Rizzoli and Steve Castaneda were talking about donating such a stove to the devastated New York Fire Department. The Pleasanton fire chief, Stewart Gary, told them about the plight of 10 House.Through discounts, donations and volunteer labor, the stove was acquired, redesigned and shipped to New York. Another gift came from the Dierks Heating Company of Long Island City, which donated its work on the new heating and air-conditioning system.The reconstruction was financed in large part by a $1.45 million grant from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. ''Restoring 10 House makes an important statement about our resolve to overcome the attacks on the World Trade Center,'' said Joe M. Allbaugh, who was the agency director when the grant was announced last year.Among the oldest fire companies in New York, the units were formed in 1865, though Ladder 10 was disbanded in 1975 during the fiscal crisis. It was reorganized in 1984 and moved into the Liberty Street house, which was built for Engine 10 in 1980.''As much as we want to be protected, most of all we want them to be together,'' said Rosalie Joseph, co-president of the Battery Park City Neighbors and Parents' Association, which has lobbied for the return of the companies, whose old quarters are only three blocks away.Neighbors worry about how the firefighters will cope with the stream of visitors outside their door, as Liberty Street is a principal sightseeing corridor.''Understandably,'' Ms. Joseph said, ''tourists are going to stop there and say: 'Were you there that day? Could we have our picture taken with you?' I know firefighters have been gracious, but you worry about how do you do it all day, every day. Are they going to be prisoners in their house? I don't know.''But, she added: ''These guys are professional. They want to do their job. If they have to be there, they will.''