https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/upshot/what-a-bipartisan-paid-leave-plan-might-look-like.html
What a Bipartisan Paid Leave Plan Might Look Like - The New York Times
Family Leaves,United States Politics and Government,Paid Time Off
June 6, 2017
4845
Paid parental leave seems as if it has at least a chance of becoming reality in the United States for the first time. But agreeing on the policy’s details would require many compromises from all involved.A new report — by a group of experts from across the ideological spectrum — offers an idea of what a compromise plan might look like.The plan, which the group presented to Ivanka Trump at the White House on Monday, would give all new parents, including fathers and gay and adoptive parents, eight weeks of job-protected paid leave. They would receive 70 percent of their pay up to $600 a week, financed partly by a small increase in payroll taxes and partly by cuts in government spending.The group’s directors were Aparna Mathur, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, a right-leaning think tank, and Isabel Sawhill, a senior fellow at Brookings, a center-left think tank.They’re doing it now because paid leave has become a paradox: Large majorities of Americans say they support it, yet legislation has never gone anywhere in Congress. Now could be different because for the first time, a Republican administration is backing it. The group’s final proposal is a rare bipartisan compromise: less generous that what Democrats in Congress have proposed or what many other countries offer, and more generous that what Republican lawmakers have proposed.Paid leave, which is available in every industrialized country except the United States, has long been a Democratic cause. But Republicans supported it for the first time during the presidential campaign, and the Trump administration’s budget proposal last month included a $19 billion plan over 10 years, championed by Ivanka Trump.Most Americans support paid family leave, though only 13 percent have access to it. Most parents work, and paid leave has been shown to make it more likely that women continue to work. It has also been shown to improve economic growth, babies’ health and development, and gender equity. The disagreements have been about who pays for it, who receives it, how generous it should be and how to protect businesses from its costs.The proposal from the group of experts has more details than the Trump proposal, and differs in a few ways. It would require eight weeks of paid leave for new parents, while the Trump plan would offer six. Both would be financed by spending cuts — the Trump plan suggests they would come from reforms to unemployment insurance — but the experts’ plan would also tax workers.The administration considered its proposal to be a first step, and is meeting with members of Congress and outside groups on both sides of the issue to devise a final policy, a White House spokesman said. Ms. Trump and her aides said in the meeting Monday that they were not committed to financing it through unemployment insurance reform and were open to other methods, according to the experts who attended.The sticking point, though, is likely to be whether a leave policy raises workers’ taxes.The group of experts said the most realistic option to keep the plan budget-neutral would be a combination of a tax increase on employees and cuts in government spending in areas that benefit high earners, though many of them initially rejected the tax increase.In general, Republicans “simply didn’t want a new payroll tax or a new entitlement, but they came on board if we said this will be matched by spending cuts elsewhere,” Ms. Mathur said. Also, they supported the idea of workers paying to earn the benefit.A government program involving tax increases is least popular with Americans, among various proposals, though about 60 percent support it, according to a pair of Pew Research Center surveys in March. Pew found that people were more likely to support tax credits for employers or flexible savings accounts.The research group considered those ideas and others, but most members rejected them for various reasons, including:• Tax credits, because they would end up subsidizing businesses that already offer leave.• Savings accounts, because they would not help many low-income families that couldn’t afford to contribute to them.• Cash benefits in a fixed amount for low-income families, because middle-class families also need financial help to take leave. • Mandates that employers pay for the leave, because it would be expensive for businesses and might encourage them to discriminate against young women when hiring.The group’s final proposal would cover only new parents, not people who need to recover from an illness or care for a family member, as proposals in Congress would do.Though there’s general agreement in Congress on the need for paid leave, there is still a lot of ground between the two parties’ ideas for it. The Democrat-backed Family Act would provide 12 weeks of family and medical leave by raising payroll taxes for employers and employees by about $2 a week for a typical worker. The Republican-backed Strong Families Act would give tax credits to companies that provided at least two weeks of paid leave.“Nobody’s entirely happy with the entire plan, but it’s the only thing everybody could come on board for,” Ms. Mathur said. “There are two ends and we tried to find a middle ground.”Finding a middle ground in Congress, however, often proves to be more difficult.