http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/27/sports/tennis/roger-federer-will-miss-the-rest-of-the-season.html
Needing Time to Recover, Roger Federer Will Miss the Rest of the Season - The New York Times
Tennis,Sports Injuries,Federer  Roger
July 26, 2016
6532
Roger Federer announced Tuesday that he would miss the rest of the tennis season, including the Rio Olympics and the United States Open, to rehabilitate a knee injury.Federer, who turns 35 next month, tore the meniscus in his left knee while running a bath for his twin daughters a day after losing in the semifinals of the Australian Open. In February, he had surgery, the first of his 18-year career.“The doctors advised that if I want to play on the ATP World Tour injury free for another few years, as I intend to do, I must give both my knee and body the proper time to fully recover,” Federer said in a statement on his Facebook page. “It is tough to miss the rest of the year. However, the silver lining is that this experience has made me realize how lucky I have been throughout my career with very few injuries.”Federer, a 17-time Grand Slam singles champion, has not played since losing in the Wimbledon semifinals about three weeks ago. Although he pulled out of this week’s Rogers Cup in Toronto, he was expected to play singles, doubles and mixed doubles for Switzerland at the Olympic tennis tournament, which begins Aug. 6. He will miss the United States Open, where he was a finalist last year.Until this year, Federer had avoided the long-term injuries that have plagued his rival Rafael Nadal, who is sidelined with a wrist injury.Federer returned from the knee surgery in April, but his injury problems continued. He withdrew from the Madrid Open in May, citing a back injury, and did not play the French Open, saying, “I am still not 100 percent.” That ended a record streak of 65 straight Grand Slam singles tournaments.Federer’s back, an occasional problem in recent years, was the primary source of questions when he came back for the grass-court season. He reached the semifinals of Wimbledon while playing down his fitness and his expectations.But late in his five-set loss to Milos Raonic, Federer slipped and fell awkwardly. He immediately called a trainer to look at his surgically repaired knee.“I hope I didn’t hurt myself,” Federer said after the match. “Then, is it a three-day thing, is it a 24-hour thing or is it more? I don’t know at this point. I hope it’s not so bad. I walked it off. I was able to finish. But I don’t slip a lot. I don’t ever fall down. It was a different fall for me than I’ve ever had.”Carlos Moya, one of Raonic’s coaches, said it was difficult to tell if Federer had reinjured the knee in his fall.“Obviously, Roger has been having health issues this year more than he’s had in past years,” Moya said Tuesday in Toronto. “It’s unfortunate, but this is what starts to happen when the age creeps up. And with the injuries, the level of consistency can’t be what it used to be because you have to miss time.”Tennis fans and his fellow players would prefer if he did not miss so much time.“I mean, every tournament is better when Roger’s there,” Sam Querrey said. “It’s the little things in the locker room — he’s nice to all the guys. When his matches are on TV, everyone watches. He single-handedly draws thousands and thousands of fans and fills up stadiums. He’s totally a positive influence and I’m personally bummed he’s not going to be there the rest of the year. I like having him around.”Told that Federer’s knee problem had recurred, Gaël Monfils shook his head and said, “I love Roger, so obviously I’m very sorry for him.”Monfils has been sidelined with knee problems several times during his career and was forced to miss the 2012 London Olympics.“For sure, we use our knees very much, every surface, every court,” Monfils said, adding that his rehabilitation involved daily treatment and a mentality not to rush back. “Sometimes it takes a long time to feel 100 percent.”Before Wimbledon in June, nearly five months after his surgery, Federer was still emotional when talking about it.“I was very, very sad, just because I thought I was going to be lucky not having to do surgery in my career,” he said.“Going into surgery was difficult,” he added. “That’s when it hit me. I just got really disappointed and sad about it because that’s when I really understood what the road was going to look like.”The third-ranked Federer will drop significantly in the rankings by missing several months. He played only seven tournaments this year, compiling a 21-7 record, and failed to win a title for the first time since 2000.Federer reached the final in Brisbane and the semifinals of the Australian Open to begin the season, but after what he described in June as “one stupid move,” everything changed.“The season’s been completely different than what I expected it to be,” he said.Federer has dismissed talk of retirement and struck an optimistic tone in his statement Tuesday, closing by saying, “I am as motivated as ever and plan to put all my energy towards coming back strong, healthy and in shape to play attacking tennis in 2017.”