http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/21/nyregion/silver-longtime-assembly-speaker-faces-new-call-to-quit.html
Silver, Despite Calls to Quit, Maintains Tight Grip on Power in Assembly - The New York Times
Sexual Harassment,Silver  Sheldon,Lopez  Vito J,New York State,Kearns  Michael P
May 20, 2013
6844
ALBANY —  For other politicians, the past week would have been fatal. But not for the New York State Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver.Even after a state ethics report criticized him for covering up allegations of sexual harassment against a powerful assemblyman, even after a prosecutor said his failure to act might have put other women at risk, even after a number of editorial boards called for his ouster, Mr. Silver is still standing strong.On Monday, for the first time in years, a fellow Democrat in the Assembly called for Mr. Silver to step down. Of course, it was an already marginalized critic of the speaker, Michael P. Kearns of Buffalo, who was elected on an anti-Silver platform and has rarely been heard from since. From the other 103 Democrats, barely a peep of criticism has been heard.Mr. Silver, from Manhattan, has consolidated power by rewarding his loyal supporters with higher-paying leadership posts, placing his allies throughout state government and using his considerable campaign war chest and redistricting know-how to assist any endangered Democratic candidates.He has also benefited from an increasingly weakened and fragmented Democratic caucus. The Assembly is divided along a variety of geographic and ethnic lines, and has been abandoned by many promising politicians weary of feeling powerless as rank-and-file members.Mr. Silver on Monday spoke to reporters for the first time since the release last week of two reports criticizing him for approving confidential settlements with women who accused Assemblyman Vito J. Lopez of sexual harassment, and for failing to refer the initial allegations to a legislative ethics committee. Mr. Silver, surrounded by a crowd of assembly members, some of them women, apologized for his mistakes and vowed to set up an independent process for handling future harassment allegations, but said he had not considered stepping down.“The degradation and emotional duress endured by the young women identified in the report who were harassed while they served in the Assembly weighs heavily on me,” Mr. Silver said, adding, “I accept the criticism.”The support for Mr. Silver, at least within the Democratic Party, seemed as unshakable as ever. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat whose relationship with Mr. Silver has had ups and downs, responded to calls for Mr. Silver’s ouster by saying, “I just disagree,” adding, “The Assembly will decide who is the leader of the Assembly.”For Mr. Silver’s critics, the latest scandal reinforced a sense that ethics enforcement in Albany is a rigged game. The state ethics commission’s investigation into the alleged harassment by Mr. Lopez, who resigned on Monday, did not consider whether Mr. Silver or his staff violated state law in its handling of the complaints. Even with that limitation, one of Mr. Silver’s appointees to a separate legislative ethics body made a secret attempt to alter the state commission’s report, seeking unsuccessfully to excise references to Mr. Silver and his staff.For years, Albany watchers have discussed and debated how Mr. Silver, who was elected in 1976 and became speaker in 1994, maintains his grip on power. The administration of Eliot Spitzer, a Democratic governor with a combative relationship with the Legislature, even once prepared a 21-page opposition research report on the speaker — a telling step given that both men were from the same party.The report surveyed criticism of Mr. Silver, citing a Buffalo News editorial that said he “controls everything from the legislation that can be voted on to how his normally docile members vote on it,” and a claim by Bill O’Reilly of Fox News Channel that Mr. Silver was “the worst politician in office today.” It reviewed Mr. Silver’s youth on the Lower East Side as the son of a hardware store owner, noting that the future speaker was a basketball star at Rabbi Jacob Joseph High School.And the report delved into his wealth — Mr. Silver has a vast portfolio of stock holdings and serves as a lawyer at Weitz & Luxenberg, a large personal injury firm, though his duties are shrouded in mystery. (So considerable are his resources that he once even lent money to a company that helps finance small law firms.)Mr. Silver has proved himself a master of wielding the levers of power at the Capitol. He controls where members park, the size and location of their offices and how much money they can spend on their staffs. He also can increase, or decrease, their pay, by offering them myriad leadership posts.Lawmakers have not had a raise since 1999, and Mr. Silver put down a rebellion in 2000, leaving those who remain in the Assembly, or who have been elected since, with diminished prestige and scant influence on the operations of the chamber.But his members are content with him, in part because, while Mr. Silver is a reliable left-of-center Democrat, he is considerably influenced by the caucus on policy matters. And over the last several years, he has won several unexpected victories dear to liberals, persuading Mr. Cuomo to reverse course and support a new tax bracket on high incomes, and persuading a Senate that is partly controlled by Republicans to approve an increase in the minimum wage.“I’ve served under a lot of speakers, and he’s the best of the lot, in terms of allowing members the freedom to do what they want,” said Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat who has served in the Legislature since 1973. “You wanted to see what it is to serve under a tyrant, you should have been here when Stanley Fink and Mel Miller were the speaker.”And Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried, a Democrat from Manhattan who has served under six speakers, said Mr. Silver was “much more a broker and a convener who advances the consensus of the Democratic conference rather than telling us what we ought to be doing.”Some of the more ambitious Assembly members direct their ambition not at leadership in the Legislature, but outside — Assemblyman Keith L. T. Wright, the Manhattan Democratic chairman, is known to covet the Congressional seat now held by Charles B. Rangel, for instance.Members of the Assembly “fear the speaker more than they fear the voters,” said Charmian Neary, a former legislative aide who brought a sexual harassment lawsuit against the Assembly two decades ago. She added, “With a 96 percent re-election rate for incumbents, they don’t have to worry about getting turned out of office.”Outsiders are still mystified. The Lopez scandal is not the first time Mr. Silver has been criticized for his handling of sexual harassment allegations. Almost a decade ago, he was accused of mishandling accusations against one of his former top aides, J. Michael Boxley. The Assembly paid a $500,000 settlement in that case, and the two women who accused Mr. Boxley of assaults subsequently lent their support to one of Mr. Silver’s primary challengers in 2008.“It’s shocking that the members of the Assembly are willing to give him a free pass and not hold him accountable,” said Sonia Ossorio, the president of the New York City chapter of the National Organization for Women. She added that he was guilty of “allowing this environment of sexual harassment to fester over the years.”And Assemblyman Kearns, the one Democrat calling for Mr. Silver’s ouster, said he would now leave the Democratic caucus as long as Mr. Silver remained speaker.“We cannot stand by and let someone stay in power who has let Vito Lopez, through a confidential agreement, stay in office,” he said. “I’m not going to stand for that.”