https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/books/review-t-gertler-elbowing-the-seducer.html
A Tangy Sendup of Literary-World Dalliances - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Gertler  T (1946- ),Elbowing the Seducer (Book)
June 16, 2017
9425
The 1980s, that otherwise deplorable decade, was a fertile era for satire. Spy magazine, which pinned the phrase “short-fingered vulgarian” on Donald J. Trump, was born.In bookstores there was a boomlet in rakishly intelligent literary romans à clef. In 1987 alone there was “The Belle Lettres Papers,” Charles Simmons’s take on a publication not unlike The New York Times Book Review, where he had toiled, and Wilfrid Sheed’s “The Boys of Winter,” about writers and editors tweaking each other’s rumps and reputations in the Hamptons.Part of the pleasure these novels delivered, to quote a snippet of Sheed’s essay “The Writing Condition,” was a sense that one was receiving “heightened, selected, imagined gossip.” And please, can’t we agree to call gossip, as Elizabeth Hardwick once suggested, character analysis?The tangiest literary-world roman à clef to emerge from the ’80s — it is almost certainly the best of the past four decades — is “Elbowing the Seducer” (1984), the first novel from a writer named T. (for Trudy) Gertler.It’s awful that this novel is out of print. It’s more awful that Gertler, who is still with us, has not written a second book. She has a high style, a feel for social comedy and a deadly eye for detail.“Elbowing the Seducer” is the kind of novel in which a lust-bedeviled male editor doesn’t merely watch an attractive assistant walk away. He watches her walk away with (Gertler skewers the era’s abysmal sexual politics while reveling in her Tom Wolfe-like powers of description) “her departing bottom rippling in prewashed, presoftened, preworn, prepatched, presoiled, pretinged-with-vaginal-discharge Levis — she skated out, popping a bubble.”The objectification in “Elbowing the Seducer” cuts both ways. Everyone is on the make; elite publishing is a tragicomic sexual safari park, with Gertler as Jeep-driving guide.The novel is about a determined young writer named Dina, who is trapped in a dull marriage to a failed artist. When she sells her first short story to a new literary magazine, she also falls in love with Howard Ritchie, the magazine’s charismatic, married, womanizing editor.In his recent memoir, “The Accidental Life,” Terry McDonell quotes a well-known remark that an editor is someone who “doesn’t know what he wants but recognizes it instantly.” Howard knows what he wants: to ward off death, boredom and tummy fat by sleeping with every attractive woman who comes within 10 feet of him.“Howard preferred literate sex,” Gertler writes. “Of course, if that wasn’t available, he’d take anything.” Howard sometimes brings women to a downtown bookstore that resembles the Strand, where the owner lets him borrow an upstairs bedroom.He’d once been banned from this “bleached aerie” because he “used a signed first-edition Jack London to elevate the hips of a lover, tall Adrienne the Tarot reader.”As a frontispiece, Gertler’s novel provides a declaration that everything in it is fictional. This hasn’t stopped some observers from suggesting that Howard bears, at least in terms of his aggressive editing methods, a resemblance to the longtime Alfred A. Knopf editor Gordon (“Captain Fiction”) Lish.Another major character in “Elbowing the Seducer” is an oversexed and elegant (his “precisely planed face balanced light like a Buddha’s”) book reviewer named Newman Sykes, in whom some have sought at least distant echoes of the critic and memoirist Anatole Broyard.Come to this novel for its sweat-drenched lunch-hour sex scenes, its daytime martini-imbibing, its ashtrays in the office and its portrait of a 1980s Manhattan in which drug dealers still loiter at the margins of the green market in Union Square.Stay for its intuitive sense of the work behind editing and writing, and for its surprising emotional heft. Feydeau farce bends toward tragedy here, and then bends back again.“He wanted to be disarmed, he wanted to be aroused,” Gertler writes about what Howard needed in a piece of writing for Rosemary, his magazine.“He was searching for something beloved. It wouldn’t arrive in a neat package. He expected bile and bowels, entrails of dismay, false clues, field days for maggots. He was prepared, eager even, to dirty his hands birthing it.”The press begins to pay attention to Howard. “To be written about in The Times was certification,” Gertler observes. “To be written about in The New Yorker was apotheosis.”Dina is tired of her marriage (“poverty required more guile than she could admit to having”) and looks toward Howard not only as an editor but as a redeemer. Howard’s terrified when she leaves her husband and needs a place to stay. He’s even more terrified when her lout of a husband begins to stalk him.In the end, in terms of its plot, this novel goes way over the edge, in a way I found perfectly delightful. Punishments are meted out; revenge is had; strange checks are cashed.The best revenge, for Dina, is that she begins work on a novel — a roman à clef that will push voodoo pins into Howard the editor and Newman the critic. She gets an agent, an advance and possibly a man worthy of her attentions. She is ardently chasing the next draft of herself.Everyone in “Elbowing the Seducer” fishes in other people’s ponds, to borrow Shakespeare’s phrase for adultery. Everyone toddles around, as the title of the Elvis Presley song has it, “wearin’ that loved on look.” No one is very likable, which is why the novel is likable indeed.