https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/25/us/politics/trump-tax-plan-rates-deficits.html
5 Key Questions on Trump’s Plans for ‘Maybe the Biggest Tax Cut’ - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Federal Taxes (US),Law and Legislation,United States Politics and Government
April 25, 2017
3907
President Trump stunned members of Congress, and his own Treasury Department, when he said last week that he would unveil a plan on Wednesday to deliver “maybe the biggest tax cut we’ve ever had.”While Mr. Trump’s plan is expected to be only a broad outline of his vision for overhauling the tax code, lawmakers, lobbyists and investors will be parsing every word. The key questions will be whether Mr. Trump is aligned with House Republicans, whether he is keeping his campaign promises and, of course, whether his proposal has any chance of turning into law.Here’s what to watch for:Veterans of previous tax fights like to say that rewriting the tax code is the most complicated legislative challenge there is, creating winners and losers across the entire economy.During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump called for cutting the top individual tax rate from 39.6 percent to 25 percent. He wanted fewer tax brackets and deductions to simplify the code.He also wanted to cut the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 15 percent, and he proposed a one-time 10 percent repatriation tax to entice companies to bring their overseas cash back home.Many analysts think Mr. Trump will return to this framework so that he can say he kept his campaign promise. The simplicity of it might also help him avoid getting bogged down in Congress.Mr. Trump always says he likes to think big, so nipping a few points off tax rates will not satisfy his ambitions of making history. He proclaimed on Friday in an interview with The Associated Press: “It will be bigger, I believe, than any tax cut ever. Maybe the biggest tax cut we’ve ever had.”Determining the biggest tax cut is a matter of debate over measurement technique. Scott Greenberg of the Tax Foundation argues that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 — which cut the top individual rate by 22 percentage points, to 28 percent from 50 percent — is the largest since 1940. The tax cut under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson was 21 percentage points.Another measure that some tax historians consider is revenue as a share of gross domestic product. By that score, President Ronald Reagan’s 1981 tax cuts, which lowered federal revenue by 2.89 percent of G.D.P. over the first four years, were the deepest.While Mr. Trump regularly contends that America is in dire need of tax relief, the state of taxation pales compared with where it stood in the 1920s. After World War I, the top individual tax rate soared above 70 percent. It was President Warren G. Harding, at the urging of Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, who cut it from 73 percent to 58 percent: 15 percentage points.But Calvin Coolidge followed up with a further 33 percentage point cut.Mr. Coolidge is the president to beat.Mr. Trump is advising his staff to cut the corporate tax rate to 15 percent even if that means jettisoning his promise to reduce the budget deficit. Many Republicans in Congress would be unwilling to go along with a plan that piled on debt. According to the Tax Policy Center, a liberal-leaning research group, Mr. Trump’s campaign plan would add at least $7 trillion to the federal debt over a decade.Mr. Trump’s Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, has said the administration is confident that it can create a plan that “pays for itself” with economic growth.Analysts will be watching the growth estimates the White House provides. Mr. Trump has said he can envision growth as high as 6 percent. Economists scoff at that, but Mr. Mnuchin said Monday that 3 percent growth was attainable.Both Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress have said they want to pass tax legislation that does not add to the deficit. That would allow them to pass a bill with only Republican support in the Senate through a procedure called the reconciliation process, which requires only 51 votes.If Mr. Trump does produce a tax plan that adds to the deficit, and no Democrats get on board, the cuts would have to expire after 10 years. While this might be the easiest situation for Mr. Trump to put a win on the board, it would mean scaling back the ambitions of his tax plan and agitating business leaders, who like to be able to make longer-term investment plans.The biggest debate surrounding tax discussions has been about the “border adjustment” tax that is at the heart of the Republican plan drafted by Speaker Paul D. Ryan and Representative Kevin Brady of Texas, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. The concept of taxing imports while letting exports go tax-free has divided American industries and drawn a fierce response from lobbyists of companies that rely on imported goods.Mr. Trump has generally been cool to the idea, saying in recent interviews that it sounds like a bad deal. His economic advisers have also expressed concern about how taxing imports could affect consumer prices and the dollar, which would rise in value.The president has said he is more in favor of a “reciprocal” tax that matches the tariffs other countries impose on American goods. But if Mr. Trump breaks with House Republicans on the border adjustment tax, which could raise about $1.2 trillion in revenue, it would essentially send tax negotiations with Congress back to square one.Bipartisanship has gone out of style in Washington, and it does not appear that a tax overhaul is going to change that.Democratic leaders in Congress lament regularly that they have been shut out of tax talks with their Republican counterparts and Mr. Trump. Democratic aides on the Senate Finance Committee said they were not invited to meet with the president’s economic team when they go to the Capitol for a briefing on the White House tax plan on Tuesday.Thus far, Democrats have assailed Mr. Trump’s tax ideas, arguing that they would help only him and his rich friends.