http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/09/nyregion/officer-peter-liang-in-emotional-testimony-describes-the-night-of-a-fatal-shooting.html
Officer Peter Liang, on Stand, Breaks Down as He Recalls Brooklyn Killing - The New York Times
Liang  Peter (1987- ),Gurley  Akai,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,East New York (Brooklyn  NY),New York City
Feb. 8, 2016
4655
As a rookie New York City police officer recounted the night a bullet fired from his gun had ricocheted down a stairwell in a Brooklyn housing project, it seemed as if he was reliving the moment he realized a man had been hit, his heart pierced by the shot. The officer had gone searching for the bullet, he said. Over the ringing in his ears, he could hear someone wailing. He ran down the stairs. On the fifth-floor landing, a man lay sprawled in blood.“I bent over and looked at him,” the officer, Peter Liang, said on Monday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, where his manslaughter trial in the death of the man, Akai Gurley, 28, entered its third week. “And it looked that he was seriously injured; his eyes were rolled back.”The officer stopped speaking. He twisted his body to the courtroom wall and turned his back to the audience, where Mr. Gurley’s family has packed the benches every day of the trial. He began to cry.“I was panicking,” Officer Liang continued after a pause.He struggled to keep his composure during two hours of testimony that offered a rare glimpse into the dread and confusion of a routine police patrol gone wrong, and the emotions that appeared to fuel subsequent missteps as Mr. Gurley lay dying. “I was shocked,” he said, raggedly. “I was in disbelief that someone was actually hit.”Monday was the first time Officer Liang, 28, spoke publicly of the night Mr. Gurley was killed in the Louis H. Pink Houses in the East New York section of Brooklyn, an event that Rae Downes Koshetz, a lawyer for the officer, described in opening arguments as a “tragedy” and “a million-to-one shot.”In addition to manslaughter, Officer Liang faces charges of official misconduct for failing to aid Mr. Gurley, a father to two young girls. Mr. Gurley had spent the evening at his girlfriend’s apartment on the seventh floor of 2724 Linden Boulevard with her family while she plaited cornrows in his hair.In emotional gatherings outside the courthouse throughout the trial, the victim’s parents and other relatives have denounced the officer, who is Chinese-American, and what they say is a culture of police violence against black men like Mr. Gurley.Officer Liang testified that after he and his partner, Shaun Landau, arrived on the eighth floor of the Pink Houses on Nov. 20, 2014, he opened the door to the stairwell, which was pitch black, and he heard a noise.Officer Liang said he flinched.“I heard something on my left side; it was a quick sound and it just startled me,” he said. “And the gun just went off after I tensed up.”He said he had no idea anyone had been hurt. Immediately after the shot was fired, he returned to the hallway, where he and his partner debated who would call their supervisor to report that a shot had been fired, as officers are required to do. Neither did.It was only after Officer Liang went into the stairwell to look for the bullet, he testified, that he heard someone crying, went down the stairs and realized that a man had been shot.Throughout the trial, the prosecution has drubbed Officer Liang for having his gun unholstered when he opened the stairwell door that night, characterizing him as reckless for doing so in a place full of families going about their lives.But in his testimony, Officer Liang said he believed it was warranted. He and his partner were headed to the roof of the building when the gun, which he said he pointed downward for safety, went off. “There are bullet holes in the roof, there is evidence of drugs, there is drug dealing, people get assaulted and raped in these areas,” he said. In the unlighted stairwell, it felt necessary.Under direct questioning and under cross-examination, Officer Liang seemed to blame a lack of Police Academy training in CPR for why he did not help Mr. Gurley, as is required of officers. At the academy, from which he graduated in 2013 with top scores, CPR training was only cursory, Officer Liang said.The statements echoed the testimony of Officer Landau, his partner and academy classmate, who received immunity for his grand jury testimony. Last week on the stand, Officer Landau described being fed answers during the CPR test at the academy and practicing compressions for just two minutes on a dummy.Also last week, Mr. Gurley’s girlfriend, Melissa Butler, described how Officer Liang continued past her as she tried to revive Mr. Gurley, kneeling over him “in a puddle of blood and urine,” she said. Ms. Butler was coached in CPR by a 911 operator who had been called by a neighbor.“I thought,” Officer Liang said on Monday, “she was more qualified than me.”The prosecution has argued that in the moments after the shooting, the officer neglected his duties and focused instead on whether his mistake would cost him his job.Officer Liang said he did try to help. “I said, ‘Oh my god, someone is hit!’” he said. “I went over the radio, ‘Pink Post One, male shot, call a bus,” he added, referring to the slang term for an ambulance.Transcripts from radio calls that night that have been introduced into evidence do not show he called for an ambulance. His defense has argued that police radio reception is spotty, particularly in stairwells.Officer Liang described struggling in the subsequent moments. He collapsed in a hallway after other officers arrived on the scene. A lieutenant relieved him of his gun, as is police protocol following a weapons discharge.“I got to the hallway of that floor,” he said. “Everything just sunk in. I was thinking about everything that happened. I just couldn’t believe someone was hit. I just broke down.”The dangers of the kind of stairwell patrol Officer Liang was on, called a vertical patrol, were underscored last week when two other officers, Diara E. Cruz and Patrick Espeut, were shot by a man in a housing project in the Bronx following an encounter in a stairwell.Officer Liang was the final person to testify before closing arguments, which are set for Tuesday. Both sides have spent considerable time on what might have made the officer’s gun go off. Last week, jurors even tested the officer’s gun themselves, firing the empty weapon at the courtroom wall. It was in working order, several experts testified.Outside the Brooklyn Heights courthouse after Officer Liang’s testimony, Mr. Gurley’s extended family gathered to call for the officer’s conviction.“It was not an accident!” Mr. Gurley’s mother, Sylvia Palmer said, brimming with emotion. “He murdered my son!”