http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/04/nyregion/experts-see-risks-and-logic-in-skeloses-appeal-for-no-prison-time.html
Experts See Risks, and Logic, in Skeloses’ Appeal for No Prison Time - The New York Times
New York State,Skelos  Adam B (1982- ),Skelos  Dean G,Bribery and Kickbacks,Sentences (Criminal)
April 3, 2016
6867
The requests, at once, seemed obvious and yet somewhat counterintuitive: Lawyers for Dean G. Skelos and his son, Adam B. Skelos, suggested that their clients should avoid prison time, despite their convictions on corruption charges.Naturally, the Skeloses would rather not spend a day behind bars. And because they have maintained their innocence and are expected to appeal, it seems logical for them to resist overt statements of contrition.But their requests for no prison time — they have asked instead to perform substantial amounts of community service — could run the risk of backfiring, particularly in a corruption case in which both men were convicted of all eight counts they faced; some lawyers believe that asking to avoid prison in such circumstances is tantamount to thumbing your nose at the judge, the jury and justice.When a federal judge decides this month on the appropriate sentences for Dean Skelos, the former majority leader of the New York State Senate, and Adam, the choice could be stark. Prosecutors are expected to seek stiff prison sentences for each man; they are expected to file a sentencing memorandum on Monday.Probation requests in public corruption cases are not unprecedented; lawyers sought it for former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia, who in 2014 was convicted in a corruption case and ultimately received a two-year sentence.In New York, probation may be harder to obtain, given that prosecutors have portrayed the State Capitol in Albany as riddled with corruption and may argue that any sentence should send a message that such activity will not be tolerated.“There’s already a perception that political insiders get all sorts of benefits,” said Douglas A. Berman, a sentencing expert at Ohio State University. As for the Skeloses, he said, prosecutors will probably argue that “we should not aggravate that perception by now giving them a slap on the wrist, especially given that they’ve been found guilty.”The Skeloses’ requests prompted varying reactions from lawyers and others in the criminal justice system.“Unfortunately for Dean Skelos,” the veteran defense lawyer Benjamin Brafman said, “if he were not a high-profile public official, it would be easier to ask for, and possibly even get, a sentence of probation.“But the argument the government always makes in cases like this,” Mr. Brafman continued, “is that the court should focus on the issue of general deterrence above all of the other factors, even those that may be compelling in an ordinary case.”Federal judges typically rely on sentencing guidelines, along with a recommended sentence by the trial court’s probation office after it investigates a defendant and the circumstances of the offense. Judges are not bound by the guidelines but must consider them.Jessica A. Roth, a former federal prosecutor who teaches at Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, said that because the recommendations of the probation office, the prosecution and the defense can have “an anchoring effect” on a judge, there may be “a strategic benefit” for the defense to seek probation, to try to “set that anchor low.”John S. Martin, a former federal judge and United States attorney in Manhattan, concurred. However unlikely a probationary sentence may seem, he said, “it doesn’t mean necessarily that it’s wrong to ask for it.”“You may be trying to soften the judge up,” he said, “so he or she imposes a sentence of three years rather than five.”Still, lawyers do not want to make a request that is so off base that a judge disregards their other arguments for leniency, Paul Shechtman, a defense lawyer, said.“It’s not for you to paint a negative picture of your client,” Mr. Shechtman said, “but if you paint too rosy a picture, the judge knows she’s in the wrong gallery.”Guideline determinations in the Skeloses’ case are not yet public, but Adam Skelos’s lawyer, Christopher P. Conniff, wrote to Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan that the defense had calculated the son’s guideline range to be six and a half to eight years in prison.Prosecutors are likely to argue for greater sentences, for both Adam Skelos, 33, and his 68-year-old father, a Republican from Long Island, who were each convicted in December of charges including bribery, conspiracy and extortion.Mr. Conniff, in seeking probation for Adam, said in a submission to the court that a lengthy sentence would have a “significant and potentially long-term detrimental effect on” his client’s two young sons, who are both autistic.Dean Skelos’s lawyers, G. Robert Gage Jr. and Joseph B. Evans, wrote that they were not trying to “minimize the seriousness” of their client’s crimes, but they wanted Judge Wood to balance Mr. Skelos’s “lifetime of good works against the aberrational conduct that resulted in the conviction.”Both men’s filings included letters from family members and other supporters, like the lawyer David L. Lewis, a friend of the family, who wrote that Dean Skelos’s conviction had been “the raw equivalent of a death in the family,” and asked for leniency in the case.In another letter, Charles P. Silverstein, a nephew of the former senator, said the public would benefit more if the elder Mr. Skelos received probation and community service. “After all, he has dedicated his whole career to serving the public,” Mr. Silverstein said.Lawyers who sought probation or relatively short sentences in other corruption cases have had varying degrees of success.Carl Kruger, a former Democratic state senator from Brooklyn who prosecutors had called “one of the most influential power brokers in Albany,” pleaded guilty in 2011 in a bribery case, for which prosecutors sought a sentence within the guideline range of about nine to 11 years.Mr. Kruger’s lawyer, Mr. Brafman, writing to the judge, did not request a specific number of years but asked for “a short period of incarceration,” well below the guideline range. Mr. Kruger was sentenced to seven years.The lawyers for former State Senator Malcolm A. Smith, a Democrat from Queens convicted in a bribery case, asked for a sentence of one year plus one day. (Only inmates who receive more than one year are eligible for a reduction of their sentence based on good behavior, whereas a one-year sentence must be served in its entirety.) He received seven years.Gerald L. Shargel, who represented Mr. Smith, said the defense gave much thought to the request for a short sentence. “Obviously, the judge’s view of the case was substantially different from ours,” Mr. Shargel said, “but that’s what litigation is all about.”In seeking probation in the case of Mr. McDonnell, the former governor of Virginia, his lawyers proposed he also perform 6,000 hours of “rigorous” community service, like working and living in spartan conditions in Virginia’s impoverished Appalachian region.Mr. McDonnell’s lead lawyer, Henry W. Asbill, said he believed that “under the facts of this case,” the decision to seek probation and community service for the former governor “was very reasonable.”“I don’t make a habit of making ridiculous requests to judges that I know are going to lose me credibility,” Mr. Asbill said. Mr. McDonnell’s wife, Maureen, who was also convicted and had sought probation, received a sentence of a year and a day.