https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/05/us/us-details-a-persistent-pattern-of-police-discrimination-in-a-small-missouri-city.html
A City Where Policing, Discrimination and Raising Revenue Went Hand in Hand - The New York Times
Ferguson (Mo),Blacks,Discrimination,Police,Justice Department,Fines (Penalties),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings
March 4, 2015
4819
A 32-year-old black man was sitting in his car, cooling off after playing basketball in a public park in the city of Ferguson, Mo. Then a police officer pulled up.The officer approached him and demanded his identification. He then accused the man of being a pedophile, since there were children in the park, and ordered him out of his car. When the man objected, the officer arrested him and charged him with eight violations of Ferguson’s municipal code, including a charge for not wearing a seatbelt, even though he was in a parked car.This encounter in summer 2012 in some ways appeared to be exactly how the criminal justice system in Ferguson had been designed to work, according to an investigation of the Ferguson Police Department released on Wednesday by the United States Justice Department. As described in the report, Ferguson, which is a majority black city but where nearly all city officials are white, acts less like a municipality and more like a self-perpetuating business enterprise, extracting money from poor blacks that it uses as revenue to sustain the city’s budget.The efficiency of Ferguson’s system was as striking in the report as the bluntness with which officials acknowledged it.“Unless ticket writing ramps up significantly before the end of the year, it will be hard to significantly raise collections,” wrote the city’s finance director to the Ferguson police chief in March 2010. “What are your thoughts?”Three years later, the finance director wrote to the city manager, saying that he had asked “the Chief if he thought the PD could deliver 10% increase. He indicated they could try.”The revenue-generating enterprise described in the report begins with the police, who, under pressure to “fill the revenue pipeline,” compete with one another to see how many citations they can issue in a single traffic stop. Those cited are then summoned before a court to face fines that city officials boast are among the highest in the region, with hundreds of dollars levied for such violations as “peace disturbance,” “failure to comply” and “manner of walking.” For all three violations, more than nine out of 10 of those cited were black.For people caught up in this system, the consequences could be devastating. The man arrested in 2012 after sitting in his car told investigators that as a result of the charges against him, he lost a job as a government contractor. An African-American woman who had been periodically homeless was cited once for parking her car illegally. From that ticket, she was twice arrested and spent six days in jail, all while trying to make partial payments on the original fine of $151 and the fees and penalties that accrued. More than seven years and $550 worth of payments later, she still owes $541.In early 2013, according to one account in the report, a patrol sergeant saw a black man talk briefly to someone in a truck and walk away. The sergeant suspected some type of criminal activity and questioned the man. When the man refused to submit to a frisk, the sergeant shocked him with a Taser repeatedly, at one point for 20 continuous seconds. In the end, the man was charged with “failure to comply” and “resisting arrest,” the report said, “but no independent criminal violation.”The report lists one example after another of arrests of African-Americans without apparent justification. In another instance from 2013, a group of black youths were listening to music in a car. Suspecting that they had been using marijuana, an officer arrested them, and some went to jail, for “gathering in a group for the purposes of committing illegal activity.” No evidence of marijuana was found, even after a search of the car.The report describes a reflexive and gratuitous hostility toward black residents that goes beyond arrests into routine uses of force. Several cases are described in which officers used Tasers against black people for no apparent reason of public safety, including one time when an officer shocked a man for urinating on the prison floor. Every instance in which a police dog bite was reported, the person bitten was black, including, in one case mentioned in the report, an unarmed 14-year-old boy.But as unforgiving as this system is to the poor black residents, it appears to be far more flexible for the officials who run it, and their friends and family.Federal investigators found that the judge, the court clerk, the mayor, police supervisors and officials from Ferguson and other neighboring cities — some of whom, the report pointed out, were quick to assert that black residents of Ferguson lacked a sense of personal responsibility — routinely had tickets dismissed for themselves and their friends, pleading “an honest mistake” or suggesting that having a ticket dismissed “would be a blessing.”“Your ticket of $200 has magically disappeared!” read one email from the court clerk to one friend. “It’s gone baby!” she wrote to another.Though the federal authorities were shocked by what they found in Ferguson, this system, and the profound distrust it engendered, was not new to those who lived there. One black woman, who was cited for a permit violation after she had called police for help on a domestic disturbance, declared that she would not call the Ferguson police ever again, “even if she is being killed.”In one instance in the report, a city official expressed unease about the injustice that kept the city afloat. In 2012, a City Council member wrote to other city officials opposing the reappointment of the municipal court judge, arguing that he “does not listen to the testimony, does not review the reports or the criminal history of defendants, and doesn’t let all the pertinent witnesses testify before rendering a verdict.”The city manager acknowledged the judge’s shortcomings. But, according to the report, he said, “the City cannot afford to lose any efficiency in our Courts, nor experience any decrease in our Fines and Forfeitures.” The judge was reappointed.