https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/us/california-today-john-singleton-snowfall-creator.html
California Today: Talking to the Creator of ‘Snowfall’ - The New York Times
California Today
July 13, 2017
56
Good morning.(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Hollywood depictions of the drug trade have commonly focused on the East Coast — think “Scarface” in Miami or “The Wire” in Baltimore.Now comes a television drama created by John Singleton, best known for “Boyz N the Hood,” that explores crack cocaine’s infiltration of South Central Los Angeles in the 1980s.His show, “Snowfall,” had its series premiere last week on FX and airs Wednesday nights.We caught up with Mr. Singleton, 49, who grew up in South Central, by phone. Some excerpts:Q. What was South Central like before crack hit?A. No bars on the windows. Not a lot of people fenced in their homes. A lot more kids played in the street. You could go to different neighborhoods, make friends in different neighborhoods. Then once this went down, it was just totally different. It wasn’t about going into Watts and hanging out with some friends because, you know, they were in business. It became about business.What misconceptions do people have about the crack epidemic?The biggest misconception is that the urban population came up with the idea for crack. It wasn’t something that started in the urban community. But they were the most affected by it.How do those effects linger today?A whole generation of people went to prison. A whole generation of people died chasing money. The trade was basically a war on the streets for many, many years.There’s been a lot of talk about sentencing reform. What more needs to be done?Yeah, there needs to be a full rollback on that. Some people are coming home, but you look at what’s happening with this guy [Attorney General] Jeff Sessions and he’s trying to make it back to the ’80s.You’ve talked about obstacles facing black filmmakers. Has that gotten any better?Yeah, I mean look at the Academy Awards last year. There were all kinds of different pictures that were made, different visions. It’s getting better. I think film is becoming more reflective of what the country is.Is TV where it’s at now?TV’s more innovative now than film. Film is so conformist. Television is more voyeuristic. It’s more, “Let’s go for broke and whatever we can do to get people to watch from week to week let’s do.”Anything else you’re working on?I’m trying to figure what I’m going to do feature-wise, but I’m hitting it on all sides.This interview has been edited and condensed. (Please note: We regularly highlight articles on sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)• Representative Brad Sherman, of greater Los Angeles, introduced articles of impeachment against President Trump. [Los Angeles Times]• Representative Dana Rohrabacher, of Orange County, said a meeting between Donald Trump Jr. and a Russian lawyer was “a nothingburger.” [San Francisco Chronicle]• A Republican candidate for governor said California has among the nation’s highest taxes. He’s mostly right. [PolitiFact]• Evacuees were returning home as firefighters beat back three major California fires. [The Associated Press]• Robert Grodt, a Californian, became a symbol of Occupy Wall Street. Later, his activism took him to Syria, where he died last week. [The New York Times]• A confrontation broke out between skateboarders and the police in San Francisco. It escalated after a collision that was caught on video. [San Francisco Chronicle]• The state’s largest hepatitis A outbreak in decades left a fifth victim dead in San Diego County. [San Diego Union-Tribune]• Life has been a blur for Danielle Kang, the 24-year-old Californian who won her first L.P.G.A. victory this month. [The New York Times]• The three California men who stopped a 2015 terror attack on a French train will play themselves in a Clint Eastwood movie. [The Associated Press]• Quentin Tarantino’s next project will reportedly tackle real-life crime: the Manson family murders. [The New York Times]• New locally owned art galleries, breweries and restaurants are popping up in San Diego’s Barrio Logan neighborhood. [The New York Times]Lux, one of the two peregrine falcon chicks that hatched atop the University of California, Berkeley, bell tower, died on Tuesday after flying into a window pane on campus.“Even though we knew it could happen, it’s always hard when it does,” said Mary Malec, the retired medical researcher who set up a program to monitor the chicks.Lux’s remains will be kept at the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at Berkeley.A highlight of any visit to Point Reyes, the windswept cape north of San Francisco, is a glimpse of the tule elk.The California native animals can weigh up to 800 pounds and sport magnificent antlers.More than 400 tule elk — pronounced “too-lee” — live on the seashore, some in a fenced off area and the rest roaming freely. But their presence is not without conflict.Sharing the 110 square-mile seashore are about two dozen ranches, whose own heritage there goes back generations.The Point Reyes National Seashore was established in 1962. In the years that followed, ranchers agreed to sell their land to the National Park Service in exchange for leases that let them continue to graze cattle there.The ranchers complain that the free-roaming elk trample their fences and feed on forage meant for livestock. They want the wild animals to be penned up or removed.Conservationists want the elk to be able to roam freely.A lawsuit filed by a coalition of environmental groups that challenged cattle ranching at the park has been in the courts since 2016.On Wednesday, a settlement was announced that requires the park service to study the impacts of ranching and create a new management plan for the seashore, with public input, by 2021.Both sides declared it a victory. What that means for the elk — and the cows — remains to be seen.California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.