https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/arts/television/stephen-colbert-monologue-apology.html
Stephen Colbert ‘Would Change a Few Words’ in That Monologue - The New York Times
Colbert  Stephen,Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),Jimmy Kimmel Live (TV Program),Kimmel  Jimmy,Comey  James B,Meyers  Seth,Bell  Kristen,O'Brien  Conan,Weiner  Anthony D,Full Frontal With Samantha Bee (TV Program),Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
May 4, 2017
3765
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.Stephen Colbert led off “The Late Show” by addressing the controversy over his Monday monologue, in which he used an unprintable phrase to describe how President Trump, ahem, interacts with Vladimir Putin. Some found it homophobic, and there were calls for Mr. Colbert to be fired.His remarks on Wednesday were brief and slightly arch, and the audience didn’t seem entirely sure how to react. Mr. Colbert said he didn’t regret insulting the president. But if he were to do it over, he said, he “would change a few words that were cruder than they needed to be.” He added:On “Late Night,” Seth Meyers took on James Comey’s testimony to Congress on Wednesday, in which Mr. Comey, the F.B.I. director, said he did not regret announcing a reopened investigation into Hillary Clinton’s emails just days before the election.Samantha Bee’s weekly show has been off the air for the past month, but she did release this video — which was nixed from her “Not the White House Correspondents’ Dinner” special last weekend — on YouTube on Wednesday night.“Get your game on” — and try not to get too dizzy watching this.Kristen Bell is tomorrow’s guest host on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” (Mr. Kimmel has been off since Tuesday, spending time with his newborn son and the rest of his family.)And the always-acerbic fashionista Fran Lebowitz talks to Jimmy Fallon on “The Tonight Show.”Is Kumail Nanjiani the new Hugh Grant? The breakout star is tackling the lead role in an autobiographical romance comedy that he wrote with his wife, Emily V. Gordon.