https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/dining/wine-school-assignment-thirst-quenchers-vin-de-soif-quaffer.html
Your Next Lesson: Thirst Quenchers - The New York Times
Wines
June 1, 2017
6135
Wine can do a lot of things. It can entice, it can seduce. It can reward contemplation and facilitate conviviality and romance. It can make joyous occasions even more festive, and it can offer comfort amid sadness.Above all else, wine must always refresh.Quenching thirst is the single most important function of a wine. If it fails at that, little else matters.Most fine wines are intended to do much more. But the primary ambition for some wines is just to quench thirst, and sometimes that’s exactly what you want.As simple as these wines may be, they still warrant thought and consideration. So we will look at thirst quenchers, or, as the French say, vins de soif, which essentially means unpretentious wines that are measured not by their complexity, length or ageability but by the joy and refreshment they provide. The English have a word for them, too — quaffers — though I prefer vins de soif.We’ll focus on reds, though these wines can come in any color. They can be sparkling or still. Generally, they are relatively low in alcohol and high in acidity, so you can “glou-glou,” another French term, an onomatopoetic rendering of the English “glug-glug” that works for me.These sorts of wines can come from anywhere. The French natural wine world has been a hotbed, possibly because Beaujolais, which inspired so many natural wine producers, is the original vin de soif. They should be relatively inexpensive.The three I suggest are:Matthiasson California Tendu 2015, $20 a literLapierre Vin de France Raisins Gaulois 2015 (Kermit Lynch Wine Merchants, Berkeley, Calif.), $16Éric Texier Côtes du Rhône Chat Fou 2014 (Louis/Dressner Selections, New York), $16Do not despair if you can’t find these wines. Many other wines will fill the bill, and good wine shops ought to stock bottles in this category. Other good examples: Trollinger from Andi Knauss or Jochen Beurer from southwestern Germany; Soif from Wind Gap and Love from Broc Cellars in California; any number of wines from the Loire Valley, though I hesitate to identify specific examples because they are often produced in small quantity. Passetoutgrains from Burgundy, a blend of pinot noir and gamay, falls into this category. So does simple Beaujolais.Don’t serve these wines with fancy culinary school experiments. Toss some burgers or sausages on the grill, get a rotisserie chicken, make a sandwich, that sort of thing. Lightly chill the wine before pouring, and glou-glou.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.