https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/25/fashion/mens-style/michael-smith-obama-white-house-decorator.html
What the White House Decorator Likes About His Study in Madrid - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Smith  Michael S,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates
Aug. 24, 2016
3807
Name Michael S. SmithAge 52Occupation Interior designer, White House decorator for the Obamas.Location Residence of the United States ambassador in Madrid.His Favorite Room Mr. Smith’s partner, James Costos, is the ambassador to Spain and Andorra, and when not at home in California, Mr. Smith spends “a sliding week” each month in Madrid. His favorite room is a study where he can retreat from the embassy’s packed social calendar.How does this embassy residence stack up? Is Spain a good posting? A lot of residences in the world are separate from the actual embassy. Here, the embassy is connected to the house, which is great. European embassies tend to be super, superactive. A lot of people come through town. We’ve had everyone from John Kerry to Martha Stewart to Gwyneth Paltrow. It makes it superconvenient and very dynamic.How often do you slip away to the study? It’s very quiet, very unto itself. I utilize it as an office. My office in L.A. opens at 6 p.m., Madrid time, and closes at 3 a.m. When everyone else is asleep, I’m up.The red phone looks very official, like in the movies.It’s our own line that people can call from the States. I’m the only one who has the number. It really is like the Bat phone.What did you bring to make this institutional space feel personal? Funny photos of friends, books, DVDs. Personal stuff close to us is mostly in this room. It’s like we have a little one-bedroom apartment.You brought a lot of sneakers. It’s a way of keeping my California-ness alive. But, also, we’re aware that people perceive us as slightly young and wacky. I don’t think people look at us and see the TV image of an ambassador.Your time in Spain ends with the Obama presidency.What will you miss most? The thing I never anticipated is how much I’d fall in love with Madrid. It’s an incredible walking city. I will start by La Latina, the old part of the city, and walk the several miles it takes to get back to the embassy. I never get sick of it.