http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/18/sports/basketball/report-questions-actions-of-nba-union-chief-billy-hunter.html
Report Questions Actions of N.B.A. Union Chief Billy Hunter - The New York Times
Hunter  Billy,Basketball,Conflicts of Interest,Appointments and Executive Changes,National Basketball Assn,National Basketball Players Assn
Jan. 17, 2013
3572
A nine-month independent investigation determined that Billy Hunter failed in his fiduciary responsibilities as the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association and that the union’s executive board should consider replacing him.The inquiry, which focused on allegations of nepotism, conflicts of interest and potential misuse of funds, concluded that Hunter did not embezzle or steal from the union. But it found that Hunter’s current contract was not properly approved by union leadership, and that he failed to inform the committee of this fact; that he was paid $1.3 million for unused vacation time without independent review; and that he failed to disclose conflicts of interest when hiring family and friends.The investigation also found that Hunter made decisions that “call into question his stewardship of union resources” when he considered investing millions of dollars in a failing bank without disclosing that his son, Todd, was a director. Hunter also pursued “speculative” business ventures; bought luxury gifts with union funds, including a $22,000 watch that he gave to Derek Fisher, the union’s president; and spent about $28,000 on personal legal fees for Charles Smith, the former executive of the National Basketball Retired Players Association.In a statement, Hunter defended his record and asserted that his contract, which is worth up to $18 million, was properly ratified by the executive committee and signed by Fisher.“While I strongly disagree with some of the findings contained in the report, I am pleased it recognized that I have not engaged in criminal acts, nor was I involved in misappropriation of union funds,” Hunter said.Hunter said the union had begun implementing a new anti-nepotism policy. “Through the benefit of hindsight, as with any executive, there are always things that could have been done better,” Hunter said. “But on the major issue, I am pleased that this report has confirmed what I have always known and said, I did nothing illegal.”The inquiry was led by Theodore V. Wells Jr., who defended I. Lewis Libby Jr., Dick Cheney’s chief of staff when he was vice president; Eliot Spitzer, the former New York governor; and other high-profile clients. Wells was appointed by the union’s executive committee last year after Fisher — in a move that rankled Hunter — demanded a far-ranging audit of the union’s finances, staffing procedures and hiring of third-party vendors.Wells’s firm, Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, was retained by the union to assist in responding to a subpoena from prosecutors from the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York. That investigation continues.The findings of the investigation largely vindicate Fisher, a 17-year N.B.A. veteran who was central in representing the union during the five-month lockout in 2011. Fisher’s call for a review last year was viewed by some as a direct assault on Hunter, who has led the union since 1996. In response, the other eight players on the union’s executive board, in a unanimous vote, asked Fisher to resign. Fisher refused and remains president.The public showdown was an embarrassment to the union and the players, who were forced to take sides in the midst of the season. Fisher, who has been union president since 2006, finished last season with the Oklahoma City Thunder. He played briefly for the Dallas Mavericks this season but is now a free agent.In a statement, Fisher said he hoped that the review “addressed the concerns of the countless players, staff and myself. As there is an ongoing investigation by the government as well, I hope that this is a chance for us to become an upstanding, strong organization with the sole purpose of serving the best interests of current and future players.”Wells said he led a “truly independent investigation” and the “report has not been made available to anyone” before its release on Thursday. The executive committee’s decision to appoint Wells raised eyebrows among legal experts because his firm is also helping the union comply with federal investigators.The union was sent a copy of the investigation at the same time it was released to the public, presumably to prevent Hunter or anyone inside the union from influencing its conclusions.While Wells did not directly call on Hunter to step down as executive director, he suggested that if the union decided to keep him, it “may wish to retain independent counsel” to negotiate a new contract “in light of the tainted negotiation process that resulted in the agreement signed in 2010.”The executive committee, though, could “decide for any reason that the union deserves a fresh start, they are free to do so” because Hunter’s contract, which is worth up to $18 million through 2017, is not “valid or enforceable.”Hunter “discouraged challenges to his authority,” according to the investigation. It cited an incident in 2009, when Hunter tried to stop the former secretary-treasurer, Pat Garrity, from raising concerns with the executive committee about Hunter’s hiring of two family members. Hunter also made “questionable choices” when using union funds to travel.When Hunter negotiated a new contract in 2010 that raised his salary by 30 percent, to $3 million a year, he did so without an unbiased review. Instead, Gary Hall, the union’s general counsel and Hunter’s close friend, was the only lawyer involved in the negotiations, according to the report.The investigation noted that Fisher could have hired an outside lawyer to monitor Hunter’s contract negotiations. An outside lawyer, Wells wrote, might have suggested that Hunter be given a one-year deal so the players could evaluate his contract after a new collective bargaining agreement was signed.Assuming Hunter remains in his post, the executive committee could reconsider his role when it meets during All-Star weekend in Houston next month. The committee hardly exists at this point. Only Fisher and Matt Bonner, who plays for the Spurs, are still valid members. The other seven are either out of the N.B.A., had their terms expire, or both. The union must first hold an election at All-Star weekend to fill those seven slots before the committee can respond to the report and, perhaps, decide Hunter’s fate.