http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/24/nyregion/more-delays-for-no-7-subway-line-extension.html
More Delays for No. 7 Subway Line Extension - The New York Times
Subways,Metropolitan Transportation Authority,New York City,Stations and Terminals (Passenger),New York City Transit Authority,Manhattan (NYC)
March 23, 2015
2936
Subway riders who have been waiting for a new No. 7 line station on the Far West Side of Manhattan for years will have to wait at least a little longer.The opening of the station, once planned for the end of 2013, is now likely to be pushed back until July, officials said on Monday at a board meeting for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Already delayed by the complexities of the station’s custom-made diagonal elevator, officials say their biggest remaining obstacle is to finish testing of the communications system and fire alarm.Most of the construction work for the station, at 34th Street and 11th Avenue, is done, the vice president for the authority’s capital construction company, Anthony D’Amico, said as he showed board members glossy new images of the station’s lobby with a colorful mosaic overhead.“If you walk through the station today, you will encounter a massive three-level structure beautifully done with the utmost attention to quality and detail,” he said.But riders still cannot use the station more than a year after Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg took a ceremonial first ride to it shortly before leaving office. The latest delay comes as the authority lobbies state and city officials for more money to pay for its $32 billion five-year capital plan.Repeated delays on major projects like the No. 7 line extension hurt the authority’s credibility, said Gene Russianoff, the staff lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a rider advocacy group.“When they start doing the project, they say they discover all sorts of problems they didn’t anticipate,” Mr. Russianoff said. “Maybe they should do a better job of anticipating.”In November, the gleaming Fulton Center opened in Lower Manhattan, years late and over budget. The first phase of the perpetually delayed Second Avenue subway line is scheduled to open at the end of 2016, and the East Side Access project, which would bring the Long Island Rail Road to Grand Central Terminal, is supposed to arrive in 2022.The No. 7 extension will take the line farther west from its current end point, at Times Square. The $2.4 billion project was approved by the Bloomberg administration as part of the Hudson Yards development, and construction began in 2007.Officials had said the new station would open in the second quarter of this year, but on Monday conceded it would probably occur in the third quarter. They are still working to complete “integrated testing” of ventilation fans, third-rail power, a public address system and elevators and escalators, among other components, Mr. D’Amico said.The authority has also received criticism over increased subway delays as a new fare  took effect over the weekend.Carmen Bianco, the president of New York City Transit, addressed the complaints at the transportation authority board meeting, saying he understood that service is “not where we need it to be and not necessarily meeting customers’ expectations.”Mr. Bianco attributed recent problems to increased ridership and a particularly “brutal” winter. He told the board he would update it in the next month or two on plans to address service problems. “We can do better than where we are today,” he said.