https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/opinion/calls-for-gun-control-after-oregon-college-shooting.html
Calls for Gun Control After Oregon College Shooting - The New York Times
School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Gun Control,National Rifle Assn
Oct. 2, 2015
2481
To the Editor:Re “Gunman Attacks Oregon College; 10 Reported Dead” (front page, Oct. 2):President Obama’s heartfelt address to the nation was not enough. That he expressed sadness, anger and frustration was not enough. The repetitive pattern that follows all mass shootings is a travesty.What seems terribly disturbing is that people may feel abandoned by a government that is expected to protect them but instead does nothing to reduce gun violence. It is indeed a national tragedy.HAROLD LANGUSStaatsburg, N.Y.To the Editor:As a college professor, I woke up in a cold sweat at 2 a.m., hours after our most recent mass school shooting at Umpqua Community College, imagining a young man with a big gun and a bad attitude standing at the door to my classroom. I asked myself what I would do: Flash a prearranged signal to Eric, an Army veteran who always sits in the front row, to try to take out the shooter, and hope that the class survives our attempt at heroics? Freeze in fear as the scene plays out in a hail of bullets? Get down on my knees and pray for mercy?Tell me again that we live in a civilized country, even as such scenes have become numbingly familiar. Tell me that guns don’t kill people, people kill people. The truth is that people with guns kill people. Tell me I may someday be released from this fear.BRUCE E. JOHANSENOmahaTo the Editor:Re “ ‘Save These Lives and Let These People Grow Up’ ” (front page, Oct. 2):No, Mr. President, we are not “numb” — we are terrified. We are the human shields used by politicians too afraid to face the National Rifle Association without cover. We are hostages caught in the crossfire, helplessly watching our friends and family members mowed down while they go to classes or the movies.Yes, Mr. President, the politics of this issue is too hard, and sadly will remain so as long as our elected officials grovel before the N.R.A. and other gun lobbies. Who among our representatives will stand and resist?ELLEN LUBELLBrooklynTo the Editor:The gun debate would change dramatically if crime scene photographs of homicide victims, including small children, were made public. Those in the right wing have done this for decades with pictures of aborted fetuses to very good effect, so it would seem logical to follow suit.Oh, wait, that would mean Democrats would have to grow backbone to support such a move. Well, it was a thought anyway. If someone could implement such a plan, the gun control debate would swing dramatically, because the majority in this country are decent, reasonable people.MICHAL BETZWichita, Kan.To the Editor:Fifty years ago, one of my brothers was shot in the head by one of his friends. Somehow he survived. Our father took me and my younger brother to my brother’s hospital room because he wanted us to see the damage caused by a gun and human rage. We were both under 10, and our knees wobbled.Decades later, almost 300 Americans are shot every day. Members of Congress should be required to visit an emergency room to get a close look at the faces of victims of our gun laws. Maybe their knees will wobble a bit and they’ll decide that America needs lifesaving guidelines for gun ownership.JAMES NEUPERTAtherton, Calif.To the Editor:After a shoe bomb attempt in 2001, shoes often have to be removed at airports. A failed liquid bomb attempt meant restrictions on liquids being taken onto planes. Could the United States please explain why after almost daily mass shootings in your country, no action is taken? Are shoes and shampoos really more dangerous than guns?MALCOLM BYRNEGorey, Ireland