https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/business/dealbook/morgan-stanley-james-gorman-goldman-sachs.html
Morgan Stanley Gives Goldman Sachs a Lesson in Diversity - The New York Times
Morgan Stanley,Goldman Sachs Group Inc,Gorman  James P,Banking and Financial Institutions
July 19, 2017
204
James P. Gorman, the chief executive of Morgan Stanley, is teaching his rival Wall Street boss Lloyd C. Blankfein the benefits of diversity.Stabilizing the fixed-income trading unit isn’t the only way Mr. Gorman’s Morgan Stanley showed Goldman Sachs its tail for the second quarter in a row. His growing capital-light wealth unit helped, too.Morgan Stanley said on Wednesday that it earned $1.6 billion for shareholders in the three months to the end of June, equating to an annualized return on equity of 9.1 percent. That may not sound like such a big victory over Goldman, its longstanding competitor, which on Tuesday reported an 8.7 percent annualized return.But Goldman had the benefit of a tax rate that, at 27 percent, was five percentage points lower. Apply that to Morgan Stanley’s earnings and strip out a roughly $80 million one-off British tax charge, and annualized return on equity jumps to 10.2 percent.Morgan Stanley’s recent overhaul of fixed-income trading to slash costs and reallocate resources is a big part of the success. The unit’s revenue fell just 4 percent from the same period last year — better than any of its peers and far ahead of laggard Goldman’s 40 percent drop.The difference is even starker considering that the two firms’ client footprints are far more similar to each other than they are to those of JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup or Bank of America; the two investment banks rely more heavily on traditional asset managers and hedge funds than the universal banks, which have many corporate clients.Wealth management provides the best juice, though. It now accounts for 43 percent of Morgan Stanley’s revenue but uses just a quarter of its capital. The investment bank, by contrast, soaks up 57 percent of it to produce half the top line. And wealth’s pretax margin in the second quarter breached Mr. Gorman’s full-year target of 25 percent. As a result, the division’s net income jumped by nearly a third from a year earlier on a 9 percent revenue increase.Mr. Gorman’s actions to fix trading and bulk up wealth management have created a firm more flexible, diversified and profitable than Goldman. Shareholders rewarded Mr. Gorman on Wednesday morning by pushing his firm’s stock price just above 1.2 times book value — and, strikingly, ahead of Goldman’s.If he can keep earnings stable and consistent, Mr. Gorman may be wearing the valuation crown for some time to come.