https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/05/arts/television/house-of-cards-recap-season-5.html
‘House of Cards’ Season 5: Watched It All? Let’s Discuss - The New York Times
Television,House of Cards (TV Program)
June 5, 2017
3359
The republic is in crisis, the good guys are dead or disempowered, and the bad guys just keep winning. Netflix’s “House of Cards” has always distinguished itself among political thrillers by a worldview so cynical it’s practically cartoonish, but the show’s fifth season was perhaps its darkest yet. Now that we’ve watched all 13 episodes, it’s time to assess the damage.Season 4 ended just three weeks before an election that pitted Frank Underwood against a young, charming Republican upstart, Will Conway. At the time, it seemed likely that the contest would be resolved in just a few more episodes, but when considering that real American presidential campaigns stretch across two years and rarely feel settled, even after a winner is determined, it’s hard to begrudge “House of Cards” for devoting nearly two seasons to a single election. After three episodes of Frank’s manipulations and Will’s publicity stunts, culminating in a 24-hour Skype chat that gives the Underwood camp an opportunity to cast aspersions on Conway’s war-hero reputation, America finally votes in Episode 4.Voter turnout hits record lows and Will’s victory seems inevitable. Frank even goes so far as to call his opponent and concede — but, of course, he isn’t actually surrendering. He simply fabricates a terror plot targeting voting centers, strong arms a few swing-state governors into shutting down the polls and watches as the entire election grinds to a halt. Nine weeks later, Ohio and Pennsylvania still haven’t certified their results and neither candidate has enough electoral votes to win.In one of the season’s most convincing twists, Will unravels as he watches the presidency slip out of reach. He turns out to be a fragile character, and it’s that weakness more than Frank’s scheming that undoes him. When Frank invites himself to an all-male billionaires’ retreat in a vague effort to influence the nation’s kingmakers, he lucks into a recording of Will, who’s having a temper tantrum on an airplane because the pilots won’t let him fly it. It’s no “Access Hollywood” tape, but it’s enough to get Frank a second term.The Underwoods aren’t out of trouble yet, though. Tom Hammerschmidt and his team at the Herald are getting closer and closer to connecting Frank with the murder of Zoe Barnes, way back in Season 2, and Rachel Posner’s old flame Lisa Williams resurfaces and urges them to look into whether Doug Stamper killed her.But the biggest threat to Frank and Claire’s reign is Congressman Alex Romero, a young fellow Democrat who gets sick of their manipulations and reopens an investigation that is bound to end with impeachment. This story line dominates the final third of the season, and resolves with a left turn that feels absurd even for “House of Cards.” Instead of fighting to stay in the Oval Office, Frank suddenly resigns. Vice President Claire, somehow unsullied by her husband’s many scandals, is promoted to Leader of the Free World. Frank explains that he’s been planning since the billionaires’ camp-out to “give” her the presidency while he tackles the private sector, where the real power lies. Plenty of things that happen between the retreat and the finale — like that time Frank pushes Cathy Durant down the stairs to keep her from testifying against him — suggest that he didn’t plan as far in advance as he’d like his wife to believe. Still, when she barks “My turn” at the camera in the season’s closing shot, it feels like yet another Underwood victory.“House of Cards” still delivers an addictive binge-viewing fix, but five seasons in, its weaknesses have never been more apparent. Because the Underwoods and practically everyone else in their world have no core beliefs or values, topical story lines about Russian interference in American democracy, about Syria and about the ISIS-like terrorist organization “ICO” have no emotional impact. A show that was once shocking in its depiction of a federal government that wasn’t just corrupt, but was bloodthirsty, has to keep upping the body count to maintain our attention because its bleak view of American politics no longer feels fresh.What makes the show worth watching now is the constantly evolving relationship between Frank and Claire. The contrast between Kevin Spacey’s broad performance and Robin Wright’s not-quite-naturalistic but controlled one mirrors the marriage. For all his misanthropy, Frank loves Claire. When an old lover dies, he shrugs it off because he’s only ever had feelings for Claire. They both have affairs, but he insists on keeping his fling with a personal trainer purely sexual. And, although he initially sanctioned it, Claire’s relationship with Tom Yates visibly grates on him.A Few More Thoughts on Season 5:• How did you feel about the way “House of Cards” resolved the election? Personally, I was hoping to see Congress give Will the White House and Claire the vice presidency. It would have forced Frank to start scheming as an outsider again, after two seasons on top.• We need to talk about Doug. Oh, how I wish he’d been killed off in the finale instead of LeAnn. He’s become an entirely predictable character. He does the Underwoods’ bidding, takes enormous falls for Frank and has some immensely creepy relationships on the side. Could he resurface to haunt Claire? Sure, but I can’t imagine the ensuing drama will be worth sitting through the sheer misery of this character’s existence.• So much of “House of Cards” is set in the White House that a change of scenery can be refreshing. Maybe that’s why I enjoyed Frank’s billionaire camping trip so much, or maybe it’s because the secret society’s red cloaks reminded me of “The Handmaid’s Tale.” Anyway, did you know that a retreat like Elysian Fields really does exist?• Who was your favorite new character this season? Sean Jeffries, the Herald reporter who quickly talks his way into a White House position, felt a bit underdeveloped. Alex Romero was more a plot device than a character. Thanks heavens for Jane Davis, a mysterious power player who’s intelligent enough to disturb the Underwoods’ domestic bliss. It certainly doesn’t hurt that she’s played by a poker-faced Patricia Clarkson.• This season, it struck me that “House of Cards” — Netflix’s first blockbuster original series — feels much more like a traditional TV drama than most newer shows released on streaming platforms. From “The Crown” and “Orange Is the New Black” to “Transparent” and “Master of None,” the best streaming series tend to switch up their formats every once in a while, with stand-alone or flashback or bottle episodes that prevent binge-viewing fatigue. Part of the reason “House of Cards” can feel exhausting is that every episode has a similar structure.• Which over-the-top Frank Underwood bon mot did you love the most? “One nation, Underwood” and “Welcome to the death of the Age of Reason” were strong contenders. “The proverbial walk in the woods is not for me” was my favorite understatement. But there’s really no competing with “Meet your new daddy” for sheer ridiculousness.• Assuming it happens, will you stick around for “House of Cards” Season 6? If so, what do you hope to see now that there’s a new President Underwood in town?Please share your thoughts in the comments.