https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/world/americas/trump-administration-sanctions-venezuela.html
Trump Administration Is Weighing New Sanctions Against Venezuela - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Venezuela,Embargoes and Sanctions,Maduro  Nicolas,Trump  Donald J
July 18, 2017
61
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is considering imposing sanctions on additional Venezuelan officials, one of several options under discussion as a rebuke to President Nicolás Maduro’s government and his efforts to consolidate authority.Administration officials said they were using a number of tactics to persuade Mr. Maduro to hold off on constituent assembly elections seen by critics as a power grab, and more broadly to ease the authoritarian tilt of his government.They stressed that the Trump administration was talking to other governments about how best to proceed. But they said they reserved the right to engage in unilateral actions, if need be.A senior Trump administration official declined in a conference call with reporters on Tuesday to name the potential targets of sanctions. But the announcement came two days after an unusual election organized by opposition parties in Venezuela, in which more than seven million people cast votes to express their disapproval of Mr. Maduro. The government says that vote is illegitimate.“The Venezuelan people again made clear that they stand for democracy, freedom and rule of law,” President Trump said in a statement on Monday. “Yet their strong and courageous actions continue to be ignored by a bad leader who dreams of becoming a dictator.”Mr. Trump went on to preview the new actions against Venezuela and warned against the election scheduled for the end of the month.“The United States will not stand by as Venezuela crumbles,” he said. “If the Maduro regime imposes its constituent assembly on July 30, the United States will take strong and swift economic actions.”Mr. Maduro said in a post on Twitter on Tuesday afternoon that he had activated his National Defense Council to respond “comprehensively to this imperial threat.” It was not clear what, if any, new steps the government would take. In previous periods of heightened tension, it has increased the arrests of critics and shut down borders.“Our nation does not take orders from any foreign government,” Mr. Maduro said in another tweet. “The people rule here.”The Obama administration first imposed sanctions against a handful of Venezuelan officials in 2015, which triggered a backlash from Latin American governments and appear to have had little practical effect.The Trump administration added Venezuela’s vice president, Tareck El Aissami, to its sanctions list in February, accusing him of playing a “significant role in international narcotics trafficking.”As human rights abuses and unrest in Venezuela have worsened in recent months, some leaders in the region have voiced support for multilateral sanctions. But having the United States lead such an effort carries significant risk, said Michael Camilleri, who worked on Latin America policy for the State Department during the Obama administration and is now a legal expert at the Inter-American Dialogue policy center.“It risks playing into Maduro’s hands by vindicating his far-fetched claims of a U.S. ‘economic war’ against Venezuela and allowing him to rally or divide Latin America by raising the specter of U.S. interventionism,” Mr. Camilleri said.This month, Tarek Fahmy, a senior State Department official who works on sanctions policy, traveled to European capitals to urge support for multilateral measures.“When we act alone, we can only act under our jurisdiction, but if allies back our sanctions, they’re more effective,” he told reporters in Madrid, according to a report in El País, the Spanish newspaper.Venezuelan officials responded defiantly on Monday to news that the Trump administration was planning to impose economic sanctions if Mr. Maduro goes forward with the constituent assembly. In a statement, it sought to rally support from neighbors.“The government of the United States is used to humiliating other nations in its international relations and believes that it will receive as a response the subordination to which they are accustomed,” the statement  said. “We call on the peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as on the free peoples of the world, to understand the magnitude of the brutal threat contained in this imperial statement.”