https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/sports/golf/hideki-matsuyama-often-looks-upset-even-after-a-good-shot.html
Good Shot? You’d Never Know by His Reaction. - The New York Times
Irish Open (Golf),PGA Championship,United States Open (Golf),PGA Tour Inc,Matsuyama  Hideki,Japan
July 4, 2017
9363
Hideki Matsuyama is his own toughest critic.The 25-year-old Japanese golf star has developed a reputation for hanging his head, dropping a hand off his club or drop-kicking the club in disgust — only for the shot in question to be a thing of beauty.“You think, ‘Oh, my, where is this going?’ and it’s always striped down the middle of the fairway or next to the hole,” said Gonzalo Fernández-Castaño, a golf pro from Spain. “When I drop the club, it’s usually off the planet.”Skratch TV, a digital content provider, produced a compilation of various broadcasters falling prey to describing one of Matsuyama’s shots based on his body language. It has required a new rule of thumb: Watch the ball, not Matsuyama.Perhaps there is no better example than Matsuyama’s reaction to his tee shot at the par-3 16th at Riviera Country Club in the first round of the Genesis Open in February. Matsuyama cringed as if he hated his 8-iron shot more than hot sauce on ice cream, but his ball bounced once, kissed off the flagstick and nearly went into the hole for an ace.Check Matsuyama’s results, or his bulging bank account (he has earned nearly $6 million on the PGA Tour this season) and it would seem that he has little reason to complain. He won four times in a span of six starts around the world late last season, and successfully defended his title at the Phoenix Open in a playoff in February to become the first Japanese player to have four career wins on the PGA Tour.At the United States Open in June, Matsuyama shot a closing 66 at Erin Hills, the low round of the day, to finish tied for second with Brian Harman, four strokes behind the champion, Brooks Koepka.That strong finish elevated Matsuyama to No. 2 in the Official World Golf Ranking, higher than any other Asian man has ever ranked.“If I learned anything, you’ve got to put four good rounds together,” Matsuyama said of the Open, his best finish at a major. “I played two good rounds, but it wasn’t enough.”As his world ranking improves, the expectations of his fans back home grow. Whereas other Japanese golfers had trouble dealing with the weight of an entire country hanging on their backswings, Matsuyama (so far) has been able to handle the scrutiny of the media throng that follows his every shot and hangs on his every word.“It’s the pressure of being the No. 1 golfer in the world — only double that,” said Brandel Chamblee, a Golf Channel analyst. “Hideki, to me, has done the best to say, ‘This is about me first, and I’ll get to you later.’ He strikes me — and I say this in the best way — as a mean golfer. He looks to me like a guy trying to stomp on your neck and annihilate you, and I like that.”Matsuyama has knocked on the door at enough majors (he has finished in the top 11 in three consecutive majors, and four of his last six) that he is sometimes mentioned as the “Best Player Never to Win a Major,” a distinction that belonged to Sergio García until his Masters triumph in April.Matsuyama’s rock-star status in Japan would reach new heights if he were to hoist the Claret Jug at Royal Birkdale this month. He is competing this week in his first Irish Open, in part to help him adjust to the intricacies of links golf.“If I was fortunate enough to win a major, I know in Japan it would be big news,” Matsuyama said earlier this year. “And hopefully it would help promote golf in Japan and it would be a good thing.“In America, I don’t know. Again, I don’t speak a lot of English, so I don’t know how the rest of the world would react if I did win a major. Hopefully it would be in a good way.”Matsuyama possesses a sturdy frame, and is the first Japanese player to combine precision and power. His distinctive pause at the top of his swing produces a high ball flight while proving that pretty is not the point.“I don’t know how he has the patience to stop at the top of his swing,” said Brad Faxon, a golf analyst for Fox Sports. “It looks like forever.”Yet Matsuyama’s iron play is admired by most other golfers.“It’s something that I try to copy,” Fernández-Castaño said.Matsuyama’s swing, though far from textbook, is thrilling in its own way. “Hideki hits every shot right at the flag,” Faxon said. “It doesn’t matter where it is. He’s fearless.”Last season, in strokes gained, Matsuyama ranked third in approach-the-green, and sixth in tee-to-green, the two categories that best demonstrate ball-striking prowess.“Hideki owns that spot from about a foot before his backswing ends to a foot into the downswing,” Chamblee said. “It allows him to have great sequencing on the way down and a beautiful lower body movement that allows him to maintain the width he’s created.”Matsuyama is one of two Japanese players to finish in the top 10 in all four majors. Tommy Nakajima, a standout in the 1980s, accomplished the feat at age 32; Matsuyama was 24. All that appears to be holding Matsuyama back is his wooden putting stroke; he ranks No. 178 in strokes gained: putting this season.“If I was putting for him some days, it would be so easy,” said Brandt Snedeker, who is one of the tour’s best putters.Or as Chamblee said: “If Hideki has a tournament where he is just good on the greens, not great, just top 20, he’s going to win. I’ve always said he’ll be the first player from Japan to win a major.”