https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/18/insider/a-text-alert-delivers-a-politics-reporters-aha-moment.html
A Text Alert Delivers a Politics Reporter’s Aha Moment - The New York Times
Text Messaging,Presidential Election of 2016,Sanders  Bernard
Aug. 18, 2015
7375
It came to me, as most things do nowadays, while staring at my phone.I was covering Senator Bernie Sanders’s D.C. house party, the centerpiece of his national organizing day, when I saw a notification that I had a text from my old roommate back in New York City.I couldn’t open it; my phone was being used to record video of Mr. Sanders speaking, and I had to focus on what he was saying for the story. But the text notification, flipping down in the top third of my screen, burned a hole in my subconscious. And when I closed the video to switch to a voice recorder, that little red circle with a “1” on my home screen taunted me, hiding what I figured must be important information that couldn’t wait.Once Mr. Sanders finished, I quickly flipped open my texts, just to see what my old roommate had said. Turned out he had just walked by our old favorite bar on the Bowery, and was texting a picture. Nothing more. Within a second of reading and closing that text, I was back recording at the event, this time as a field organizer for the Sanders campaign was discussing the group’s organizing infrastructure, built around what I had just received, a text.When she finished, I went to make a note to myself via email, and another number in a red circle jumped out at me: 31,105. It was the number of my unread emails at the time, thousands upon thousands of messages with “important information” I was missing out on. But I didn’t feel the pang and torture I felt when I saw that little text notification. I just flipped past some releases, pool reports and donation emails to find my email chain I keep with myself (it’s for saving notes; I’m not crazy...) and opened the most recent message.And at that moment, minutes after Sanders campaign workers announced that they would structure their entire volunteer organization around text messaging, it hit me. They were calling for texts because texts got read. Just as mine had. I had my story.