https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/23/us/politics/health-care-trump-vote.html
Lacking the Votes for Passage, House Calls Off Obamacare Repeal Vote - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J
March 23, 2017
5313
■ President Trump plans to meet Thursday at 5 p.m. with moderate House Republicans in the Tuesday Group, a group of moderate Republicans.■ House Republicans will meet at 7 p.m. to discuss a path forward.■ The vote scheduled Thursday on the House plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act was postponed, possibly until Friday.Members of the hard-line House Freedom Caucus emerged from a negotiating session with President Trump without an agreement on changes to Republican’s health care bill that would satisfy them. But they were closer.“We’re certainly trying to get to ‘yes,’” said Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina and the chairman of the Freedom Caucus. “We’ve made very reasonable requests and we’re hopeful that those reasonable requests will be listened to and ultimately agreed to.”Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said the president had agreed to the conservatives’ demands that the bill strip out a set of “essential benefits” required of insurance policies by the Affordable Care Act. Those include emergency services, ambulance coverage, maternity care and preventive health care.He also confirmed that the latest version of the bill would repeal all tax increases in the Affordable Care Act this year and would add additional restrictions on Medicaid payments.Ahead of his meeting with the House’s most hard-line conservatives, President Trump released a video pitch for the House plan to repeal and partially replace the Affordable Care Act. Bottom line: “Go with our plan. It’s going to be terrific.”But as Mr. Trump and House leaders focus on the Republican Party’s conservatives, they are losing House moderates.The most recent defections came from Representatives Jaime Herrera Beutler of Washington and Mark Amodei of Nevada. Ms. Herrera Beutler’s statement said, “But we can do better than the current House replacement plan, and I cannot support it in its current form.”Mr. Amodei was no less certain.Former President Barack Obama has been remarkably quiet as Republicans in Congress and Mr. Trump work to dismantle his signature domestic achievement.On the seventh anniversary of the Affordable Care Act’s signing, Mr. Obama released a statement.His bottom line: The health care law is working, but it could be improved if Republicans and Democrats work together.A new poll by Quinnipiac University put support for the Republicans’ American Health Care Act at 17 percent, with 56 percent opposed and 26 percent undecided. Even support among self-described Republicans is not terribly high, 41 percent in favor and 24 percent opposed.Only 13 percent of women said they favored the health proposal.As Republicans intensified their arm-twisting, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, panned the health care measure as “a moral monstrosity” on Thursday.She also engaged in a little taunting, criticizing President Trump and Republicans for their 11th-hour efforts to bring party members on board.”May be a great negotiator, Donald Trump,” she said with a smile. “Rookie’s error bringing it up in a day.”Even if the Republicans’ American Health Care Act can find its way through the House, the eye of the Senate needle is even narrower.Forty-three Senate Democrats put Mr. Ryan on notice in a letter that they had no intention of cooperating with Republicans to complete a remake of the American health care system. Mr. Ryan said the Republican remake will come in three “prongs.” The first will be passage of legislation through the budget process that guts the Affordable Care Act, protected by arcane parliamentary rules from a Democratic filibuster.The next “prong” would be regulations issued by the Department of Health and Human Services. And the final “prong” would be substantive changes to the health care system that would require 60 votes in the Senate — and Democratic cooperation.That isn’t happening, Senate Democrats declared in the letter.Specifically, they said they would not tolerate the conservative push to eliminate so-called “Essential Health Benefits” mandated for insurance policies issued under the Affordable Care Act, which include maternity care, emergency services, ambulance services and preventive health care.“We will oppose any efforts to lessen our constituents’ access to basic preventative and primary care,” the senators said. “Undermining the value of insurance and requiring that insurance plans cover rudimentary health care services is simply shifting more costs onto patients and taxpayers.”