http://www.nytimes.com/2000/04/16/travel/the-high-road-to-hunza.html
The High Road to Hunza - The New York Times
KASHGAR (CHINA),PAKISTAN,KARAKORAN HIGHWAY (CHINA-PAKISTAN),CHINA,ROADS AND TRAFFIC,TRAVEL AND VACATIONS
April 16, 2000
2963
WE sat in the Internet cafe of the desert oasis town, mulling over the politics of this Silk Road region. His name was Surkat, and he wanted to make sure that his American guest knew a few things: His people were descendants of Turkic clans who had settled in this arid land 1,200 years ago. They worshiped Allah. Most important, they wanted independence from their Chinese rulers.I met Surkat while I was waiting to check my e-mail in Kashgar, one of the most remote cities in western China. The young man had piercing green eyes that revealed his Central Asian lineage. He and his people were Uighur (pronounced wee-gur), the most populous ethnic group in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region.They had built Kashgar, which seemed little changed from the days when silk and spice caravans plodded through en route to the Roman Empire. Donkey carts trundled past us in the warm summer night. Thick-bearded men wearing skullcaps and sheathed daggers haggled for melons at dusty roadside stands. Marco Polo apparently witnessed such sights, as did spies and mercenaries engaged in the 19th-century Great Game between Britain and Russia.But Kashgar's aura of timelessness was an illusion. The three Internet cafes near my hotel were an obvious sign of modernity. So was my conversation with Surkat, which revealed how 20th-century politics, particularly the clash between nationalism and ethnic loyalties, had imprinted itself on the hinterlands.I should not have been surprised. After all, Kashgar lay at one end of the Karakoram Highway, one of the highest roads in the world and an engineering feat born of modern politics. Built in the 1960's and 70's by thousands of Chinese and Pakistani engineers, the 930-mile road symbolized the close ties between the two nations. More than 400 builders had died carving it out of mountain flanks in this remote corner where peaks in the Pamir, Karakoram and Himalaya ranges soar over 26,000 feet.Near the other end of the highway lay Islamabad, capital of Pakistan. The country was created in 1947 when the departing British declared this part of their colony a Muslim nation separate from India. That violent split down the ''line of control'' still reverberates today, as India and Pakistan battle over the mountain state of Kashmir. In consolidating its territory, Pakistan also annexed once-independent kingdoms now  divided by the Karakoram Highway.Despite fighting in and around Kashmir, I planned to travel last August for two weeks along the highway, catching local buses, jeeps and trucks from Kashgar to Gilgit, a town in northern Pakistan. From there, I would leave the road to head west toward the lawless border with Afghanistan.The journey was one leg of a three-month overland trip I was making from Hong Kong to New Delhi. My motivation was partly to trace the footsteps of my father, who lived in western China for much of the 1950's while serving in the People's Liberation Army. I was producing a documentary film on those years when he embraced Communism under Mao Zedong in hopes of forging a better future for his homeland. (He later became disillusioned with the revolution and left for Hong Kong.)Shortly before he arrived in Xinjiang, my father said, Chinese and Uighur troops had fought together near the border to repel Russian soldiers. But the people of the region had a long history of bucking Chinese imperial rule. In recent years, Uighur separatists have set off bombs in Beijing, more than 2,000 miles away.Kashgar certainly felt closer to Istanbul. The yellow-tiled minarets of the Id Kah Mosque dominated the central square, while kebab grillers huddled in the building's shadow. Women draped head to toe in brown cloth drifted like phantoms through the streets. Alleyways led through a sprawling bazaar where blacksmiths hammered away at horseshoes, and merchants sold everything from gold necklaces to dyed silk cloths to dried reptilian carcasses (for medicinal purposes). On Sundays, thousands of people converge in a frenzied market filled with the cacophony of loud bartering and bleating animals.After witnessing the shopping orgy, three travel companions and I began our journey on the Karakoram Highway. I had met Vanessa, a French expatriate, and Kevin, a British backpacker, in southern China. A friend from home, Dune, was traveling with me for one month. We tied our backpacks to the roof of a bus that ascended to Karakul Lake, nestled high in the Pamirs. Floods had washed away parts of the highway, and our driver was forced onto narrow dirt tracks several times.By the lake, horse-mounted Kirghiz  herdsmen led chains of camels across the windswept plateau. The white crown of  24,760-foot-high Muztagata loomed as the backdrop. A family with three children invited all four of us to sleep in their yurt in exchange for $7 and a cheap Walkman that Dune had brought with him. Our hosts boiled salted tea and cooked up a pot of  warm noodles. Before climbing under thick blankets that served as her bed, the mother kneeled on a wool rug and prayed facing Mecca as a sharp wind whistled beneath the stars.Two days later, Dune and I said goodbye to Vanessa and Kevin, who decided to stay in China. We caught a Pakistan-bound bus from the one-street Tajik town of Tashkurghan, where Pakistani traders regularly stopped to buy pungent Chinese liquor. The bus passed three military checkpoints and slowly climbed up to the Khunjerab Pass, which at 15,500 feet was high enough to induce altitude sickness. In a local dialect, its name translates to Vale of Blood, a reference to the days when bandits plundered merchant caravans. These days, there was a bit more security: a Pakistani guard with rifle and black beret waved our bus into his homeland.We briefly enjoyed a view of snow-capped peaks that stretched away in every direction. Then we descended from the heights of China to one of the most dramatic gorges in the Indian subcontinent. The highway here had been blasted from the side of a sheer cliff wall. A chasm plunged down to the Hunza River, which churned with glacial melt.At the border post of Sust, we squeezed into a minivan for the ride into the legendary Hunza Valley, where glaciers tumbled to the roadside and farmers tended to their apricot orchards. Myths abound about the origins of the valley's fair-skinned, blue-eyed villagers. The wildest rumors claim they were descendants of a lost branch of Alexander the Great's army, and that they live well past 100 years. Some said that the valley was the inspiration for the mythical Shangri-La in James Hilton's novel ''Lost Horizon.''While the men wore the muted knee-length shirts and loose trousers common throughout Pakistan, the women sported  bright pillbox hats and eschewed the face coverings seen in more conservative villages. They sat on rooftops watching over apricots drying on blankets. Children waved to our van as it sped by.We checked into the austere Batura Inn outside the village of Passu, at the valley's northern mouth. The white building stood on a bank of the Hunza River and across from the serrated cathedral peaks of the brown massif called Tupopdan. Our room was not quite as breathtaking: its bare concrete walls resembled those of a monastic cell, and we had to enter other guests' quarters to use their squat toilets.The inn's owner, Izutullah Baig, told me that he built his lodge in 1974 to house Chinese laborers working on the highway. Ali Qurban, a schoolteacher whom I met in the village, also recalled those days with nostalgia: ''I was just a little boy when they came,'' he said. ''They came to us and said Mao this and Mao that. Mao was great. And I believed them.''Passu is known among travelers for its trekking. Our first excursion took Dune and me to overlooks with sweeping vistas of the jagged white ice of Passu and Batura Glaciers. The latter is one of the largest glaciers in the world outside of polar regions, stretching for 35 miles. In 1976, it crept to the edge of the highway and ground up a Chinese-built bridge.The next day, we scrambled over two wooden suspension bridges that crossed high above a roaring river. While we stepped gingerly on the swaying planks, villagers scurried across with bundles of firewood strapped to their backs. The path took us over a ridge and down to the Karakoram Highway, where we spent the night at the Shipsper Inn.As in other budget guest houses throughout the valley, flies buzzed through the spartan rooms. The inn's owner and consummate chef, Azim Shah, proudly declared that he had fought against the Indian army in the state of Punjab in 1965, and in Bangladesh in 1971. Even in the relatively sheltered Hunza Valley, people talked about the ceaseless conflict with India as if it was destiny. Children here played at war by mimicking gunfire and pretending they were mowing down Indian soldiers.The next morning, Dune and I hitched a ride on a brightly painted truck to Karimabad, informal capital of the valley. Houses dotted lush hillsides laced with irrigation channels. From the lofty perch of Baltit Fort, the rulers of Hunza once presided over their domain. Then in 1974, the Pakistan government forced the last ruler of Hunza, called the Mir, to hand over his powers to the modern nation-state, a move that still elicits resentment throughout the valley.Dune rode down to Lahore to fly back to the United States, and I spent the next two days on a punishing trek up to a lookout called Hon Pass, at 15,000 feet. I camped one night in Ultar Meadow, an amphitheater of peaks where shepherds watched over grazing flocks. At night, avalanches roared down white slopes, rumblings from the ice-lined bellies of mountain gods.Beneath blue skies, Hon Pass yielded a panoramic view of the valley. The Hunza River glinted silver in the morning sunlight. Jeeps careered down the highway as it snaked between villages. But it was the pristine white mass of Rakaposhi that dominated views to the south.Villagers said the 25,560-feet peak was one of three mountains in northern Pakistan that spirits of the sky had fashioned into their homes. On this morning, wisps of clouds floated across their lairs, shielding them from human eyes. I decided then that that high kingdom would be my final stop in the Hunza Valley.Three days later, I concluded that  Rakaposhi base camp seemed too glamorous a name for the chilly, wet pasture at the foot of the mountain. There were no international climbing teams. There were no brightly colored expedition tents. There wasn't even a view. Rainclouds had shrouded all the surrounding peaks. The only sight was steaming cow patties along a stream bank.Was this the ''truly special place'' that one Australian traveler had told me about? Was this the same mountain that had left me breathless at Hon Pass?I had hiked up a grueling 4,900 feet from the village of Minapin only to find a stone hut. A man named Muhammed Ali lived there every summer, renting out tents and cooking meals for climbers.We quickly set up my tent as a light shower started. I lay inside reading V. S. Naipaul and listening to raindrops spattering on the canvas.When darkness fell, I pulled on a wool hat, gloves and rain jacket and walked over to the hut for dinner. Muhammed was stirring a pot of dal while six other men sat on blankets around a fire, boiling tea and rolling flat loaves of chapati bread. They had been mining for black quartz for several weeks in the mountains.One of the men tried tuning a small radio to a news broadcast. Between the crackling of static, the announcer informed us of the latest fighting near the Indian border. Muhammed leaned over and told me how his 25-year-old brother had recently joined the army to do honor to his country. But less than two months ago, a single bullet struck him in the head during a battle. He was killed instantly, and now only memories and a village plaque remained to tell of his life.Muhammed's voice trailed off as he dished out the dal. I finished my dinner in silence, staring at the play of our shadows on the wall. After a last round of tea, the miners curled up in their blankets, and I walked outside to my tent.The landscape had been completely transformed during our meal. The clouds had lifted from Rakaposhi. A full moon hung in the sky, bathing the meadow and the peak in an unearthly silver light. The blue face of the mountain gazed down at me.The world up here seemed to exist entirely apart from the roads and villages of my recent travels. From deserts to mountain terraces, the highways that crisscrossed those lands were forged from human motivations like trade and politics and revolution. No matter how astounding, such paths went on until they arrived, inevitably, at conflict. Above it all, Rakaposhi and its sister mountains bear witness.From Kashgar to Hunza, on less than $10 a dayThe BasicsUnited States citizens need visas to enter China and Pakistan. Travelers may contact the Chinese Consulate in New York at 520 12th Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10036; (212) 330-7410, fax (212) 502-0245, www.nyconsulate. prchina.org, and the Consulate of Pakistan, 12 East 65th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021; (212) 879-5800, fax (212) 517-6987, www.paktrade.org.Because I speak some Mandarin, I found it easy to talk with people in China. My companions managed to get by, even though most Chinese do not speak any English. Those in the tourism industry know at least a minimum.In Pakistan, I found that many people could speak English because they are taught it in school. Those working in tourism speak it quite well.The Karakoram Highway is open during the summer and blocked by snow most of the rest of the year. Even in summer, floods and landslides can close off parts of the highway for weeks. Kashgar is hot but bearable in summer, and the Hunza Valley is cool.Food and LodgingOn the average, I spent less than $10 a day on food, board and transportation while traveling the Karakoram Highway. The lodgings were mostly budget guest houses, and I ate at street stalls and small restaurants.In Kashgar, I stayed in a dorm room in the Seman Hotel, once the Russian Consulate. In Tashkurghan, I stayed in the basic Ice Mountain Hotel. Budget guest houses with beds for as little as $1 a night are common in villages in the Hunza Valley. These include the Batura Inn and Shipsper Inn in Passu, Old Hunza Inn in Karimabad, the Hoper Hilton Inn in Hoper and the Diran Guest House in Minapin. I did not have any problems getting a bed on the spot (making reservations can be hard because most villages don't have telephones).In Xinjiang, Uighur food consists mostly of hard bread called nan, lamb shish kebabs and pilau, a sweet rice dish. Chinese restaurants can also be found in towns. In Pakistan, flat bread called chapati and fried lentils called dal are the most common dishes.   EDWARD WONG