http://www.nytimes.com/2003/11/11/international/middleeast/11SAUD.html
Among the Saudis, Attack Has Soured Qaeda Supporters - The New York Times
SAUDI ARABIA,AL QAEDA,BIN LADEN  OSAMA,BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES,TERRORISM
Nov. 11, 2003
5769
The bombing of a housing compound whose residents were almost entirely Arab and Muslim late on Saturday has appalled Saudis far more than other terrorist attacks, evaporating expressions of support for Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network that were vaguely whispered or occasionally even shouted over the last two years.''They lost their support on the street,'' said Ehab al-Khiary, 27, a computer security specialist, standing on a broad avenue packed with cars during the typical 10 P.M. to midnight rush hour of Ramadan. ''They are killing people with no cause.''''The street was divided before,'' he added, talking about similar attacks against three compounds in May that killed 34 people, including 8 Americans, 2 Britons and 9 attackers. ''At that time it was seen as justifiable because there was an invasion of a foreign country, there was frustration.''In the immediate aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, there were reports of a certain celebratory air in some Saudi neighborhoods, of congratulatory messages sent back and forth on mobile phones. In that and subsequent violence, the attackers seemed to be succeeding in reaching a constituency that among other things wants to remove a ruling family it sees as American stooges.But that mood, fueled by the sense that behind it all was some sort of religious endorsement, is diminished, replaced by confusion and the uneasy feeling that the bombings this year are just the opening salvos in a very long fight.''They can no longer say they are more or less raising the banner of jihad,'' said Saad A. Sowayan, a professor specializing in Bedouin poetry at King Saud University, sipping orange juice in a hotel coffee shop. ''Jihad is not against your own people.''The fact that the targets were fellow Muslims lent the sense that the attackers might just be pursuing pure chaos. ''If they were really seeking change they would resort to actions that would win them the support of the people,'' the professor said. ''Before, people could find excuses. It is getting so irrational that you cannot explain it, you cannot defend it, you cannot understand it.''Of the 17 people reported killed in the bombing so far, all 13 identified were Arabs. Most of the 200 town houses in the Muhaya compound were occupied by Arab families.The strong Arab identity, residents said, helped give them a sense of security.''You don't want to stay in a place where Westerners are common because then it would be a major target,'' said Shakib el-Qasim, 40, an electrical engineer who became an American citizen while studying at the University of Texas in the 1980's.''I did not expect them to hit that compound because the culture inside the compound is more Arab than it is Western,'' added Mr. Qasim, whose son, 10, and daughter, 9, were home alone studying when the attack occurred, the children fleeing the house as it collapsed around them. ''It is more like you are in Egypt, you are in Syria, you are in Jordan.''Oddly, Mr. Qasim had moved his wife and three children out of the more luxurious Hamra compound last spring when his American employer who paid for his villa pulled up stakes after its contract ended.At the new compound, there was no alcohol. His wife wears the veil. He especially liked the idea that his children were hearing more Arabic on the playground -- between the American school and their Western friends in Hamra they had been growing up without learning the language. A month after he moved them out of the Hamra, it was bombed.There was no obvious explanation for an attack on a compound full of Arabs, although the assumed security of the Arab population may have made the guards less vigilant.Saudi officials have laid blame for the attack on the Al Qaeda network headed by Mr. bin Laden, who has made no secret of the fact that he would like to overthrow the Saud dynasty. One thing that made him a folk hero to many was that he came right out and called the rulers corrupt, something that can only be whispered inside the kingdom.But killing Muslims shattered the illusion that somehow the violence, however misguided, was vaguely connected to the idea of pushing reform. What gloating there was on Web sites after the attack tended to question the abilities of the interior minister, Prince Nayef, who is the chief law enforcement officer.''For Al Qaeda, reform is not an issue, they want radical change,'' said Mushairy al-Zaidy, a journalist with the newspaper Al Madina who specializes in militant religious groups. ''They want the regime out, they want the Americans out of Saudi Arabia and everywhere, they want to set up a Taliban regime in Saudi Arabia.''To many here, the fact that Al Qaeda grew out of the jihad movement against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan lent it something of the romantic aura of a good cause. Those who joined were often referred to as the youths of jihad, their excesses written off as misguided.What is most alarming now, Mr. Zaidy said, is that there are youths who never went to Afghanistan who have decided the jihad lies at home. He said he believed that the steps toward reform and democratization would dilute some of the feelings that drew a young generation to the idea of jihad in the first place. At least twice over the last few months, small demonstrations, prompted by calls from the opposition in London, have appeared on Saudi streets, an extremely rare occurrence.''Reform, participation, democracy and freedom of speech could help contain the frustrated youth who are potential members of Al Qaeda,'' he said. ''We could make it difficult for Al Qaeda to convince new youth to join if there is more freedom and jobs.''Many Saudis say they recognize that their government has supported some dubious Islamic causes over the years in its zeal to promote itself as the guardian of the faith. Exporting radicals by sending them off to jihad in Afghanistan was also a popular move.''We were supporting all these extremists thinking we were safe from them, and suddenly they turn on you,'' said Mr. Sowayan, the professor.