http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/18/us/freddie-gray-baltimore-william-porter-jury-deadlock.html
Baltimore Wrestles With the Way Forward After a Mistrial - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Mosby  Marilyn J (1980- ),Porter  William G (1989- ),Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Baltimore (Md)
Dec. 17, 2015
4680
BALTIMORE —  Armored National Guard trucks were still rolling through the streets last spring when a tough-talking young African-American prosecutor named Marilyn Mosby marched onto the steps of Baltimore’s grand columned War Memorial, faced a bank of television cameras and vowed to “deliver justice” on behalf of Freddie Gray.Now justice — or at least the courtroom version of it — has taken an awkward twist, with a hung jury in the case of Officer William G. Porter, the first of six Baltimore police officers tried in Mr. Gray’s death. The mistrial has raised questions about how Ms. Mosby, the state’s attorney here, will pursue the remaining five cases, and renewed doubts over whether she can deliver on the promise she made that first day of May.On Thursday, defense lawyers and prosecutors in the Porter case met privately with Judge Barry G. Williams of the Baltimore City Circuit Court to discuss a path forward; no new trial date was set. But in legal circles here and around the country, experts were parsing what the mistrial means and debating whether the cases had been strong enough to bring in the first place.Did it mean that Ms. Mosby had overreached — as her critics have said — in an overzealous rush to prosecute? Did it mean that she had succeeded, against all expectations, in convincing at least some jurors that Officer Porter — who was not even involved in Mr. Gray’s arrest — was guilty of manslaughter, as she had charged? Or did it simply mean 12 people could not agree?“It was a weak enough case that they didn’t win,” said Geoff Alpert, a professor of criminology and expert on police use of force at the University of South Carolina. “You can call it a mistrial, but the prosecution lost.”Not so, said Joanna C. Schwartz, a University of California, Los Angeles, law professor who teaches classes on police accountability. “This wasn’t a loss, this was a hung jury,” she said. “I don’t take from this that it was a baseless prosecution or a waste of time. It was a difficult case with conflicting evidence.”Ms. Mosby did not try the cases herself, but was a frequent presence in the courtroom, accompanied by two imposing security guards. On Thursday, bound by Judge Williams’s order barring lawyers from talking about the cases, she remained out of public view.In an era of intense controversy over whether prosecutors are moving aggressively enough to root out police misconduct in cities like Ferguson, Mo., New York and Chicago, legal experts agree that Ms. Mosby stands out. As David Jaros, an associate professor of law at the University of Baltimore who has been following the trial, said, “I think there can be no question that Marilyn Mosby pursued this case vigorously.”But while Ms. Mosby may win plaudits for trying, she now faces complex questions about how to proceed — and whether it will be necessary to make a deal with Officer Porter to save her other cases.The state considers Officer Porter, who testified in his own defense, a “material witness” in the case of the next officer to be tried, Caesar R. Goodson Jr., who drove the police transport van in which prosecutors say Mr. Gray suffered a spinal cord injury that killed him. But Officer Porter cannot be compelled to testify if there is a pending case against him.“In some respects, it’s a worst-case scenario,” for the state, said Warren S. Alperstein, a defense lawyer and former prosecutor. “If the prosecution is not able to use Porter as a witness, it appears that they are at a significant disadvantage.”Ms. Mosby, 35, became a divisive figure here the moment she announced criminal charges against the six officers. Feelings about her have only hardened since then. Her husband, Nick, a city councilman, is now a candidate for mayor; critics say she has put political ambitions ahead of facts.“They wanted a case, and they wanted to make a name for themselves,” Beth Hawks, a Baltimore businesswoman and supporter of the police, said of the couple.Lawyers for Officer Porter argued unsuccessfully in advance of the trial that Ms. Mosby should be removed from the case. They asserted that her marriage posed a conflict — Judge Williams strongly disagreed — and that her impassioned May 1 statement amounted to prosecutorial misconduct and jeopardized their client’s right to a fair trial.“To the people of Baltimore and demonstrators across America,” Ms. Mosby said then, “I heard your call for ‘No Justice, No Peace. Your peace is sincerely needed as I work to deliver justice on behalf of this young man.”In a black majority city whose Police Department has a long history of aggressive, even brutal treatment of black residents, those were stunning words. So while Ms. Mosby — who won election last year with a pledge to pursue police misconduct cases — did not win a conviction against Officer Porter, she benefits from low expectations. Her backers praise her for bringing a prosecution at all.“Even if it had been an unfavorable verdict, people have seen the process play out,” said A. Dwight Pettit, a lawyer who specializes in police misconduct cases. “I have used the analogy of ‘Star Trek.’ She has moved into areas where others have refused to go, in terms of prosecution.”Officer Porter, who testified in his own defense, was charged with involuntary manslaughter, second-degree assault, reckless endangerment and misconduct in office. His case was seen as a bellwether for — and a preview of the legal theory in — the cases against the other officers. The state accused him of “callous indifference” for failing to call a medic after Mr. Gray asked for one, and for not buckling Mr. Gray into the van.The jury deadlocked Wednesday after just 16 hours of deliberations. The jurors were anonymous; after the judge dismissed them, they were ushered quickly out of the courthouse. None have come forward to explain their thinking.Now, with Officer Goodson scheduled to go on trial Jan. 6 on charges including murder— and the other trials scheduled one after the other through March — Ms. Mosby must consider her strategy.She could try to cut a deal with Officer Porter, dropping charges and offering immunity in exchange for his testimony against Officer Goodson, but that would invariably arouse the ire of those who want him tried again. She could seek to rearrange the schedule, or push back the other trials, but that would likely draw objections from defense lawyers. Or Officer Porter could be tried last, leaving her without her key witness against Officer Goodson.Billy Murphy, a lawyer for the Gray family and political supporter of Ms. Mosby, said Thursday that he felt certain Ms. Mosby would push for a new trial, because her prosecutorial team used its closing argument to tell jurors Officer Porter had lied on the stand. “Usually when a prosecutor believes a defendant has lied, they feel obliged to go after him again,” Mr. Murphy said.Whether the mistrial means juries will not convict the other officers is still unclear. “I think it’s too early to tell, because it’s only one jury,” said Mr. Alperstein, the defense lawyer.As to Ms. Mosby’s own future, Mr. Murphy put this way: “She was brave enough to bring these prosecutions. Only subsequent events will determine how they affect her.”