https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/jonathan-franzen-rachel-kushner-interview.html
Jonathan Franzen’s Crackling Genius - The New York Times
Franzen  Jonathan,Books and Literature,Writing and Writers,Purity (Book)
Oct. 12, 2015
3839
DO YOU WANT to see the redwoods?’’ he asked both me and the photographer, but added, I thought, addressing me, ‘‘You are probably familiar, being from Northern California.’’ And I said to him that we had one in the backyard of my parents’ house in San Francisco, although, I thought later, it wasn’t a tree you could drive a car through, exactly.To be fair, I had mentioned wanting to see trees on a different visit to Jonathan Franzen, coincidentally just prior to this journalistic visit, or whatever it was. The other had been a social call. I was in the area, and had said that I’d like to see some trees, lamenting that down where I live, in Southern California, they were dying by the millions on account of the drought. On that trip, I came from due east, and had been reading his latest novel, ‘‘Purity.’’ I thought it would be right to arrive as his guest in Santa Cruz ready to present my reactions to the book, which is filled with great comedy. (For the record, I would consider Jon principally a comic writer.) But as I traveled west, I regretted that despite having consumed the book quickly, eagerly, in a motel room in Chowchilla (a town that features a large women’s prison, where I was visiting people), I had not managed to read the last eight pages. I was not going to park somewhere and read them in the car before arriving, because that would seem unnatural, to finish a book in a car. For what reason, I asked myself, to rush through instead of savor, in order to say to him I’d read it? No, I’d thought, I’ll finish it on his porch, which was what I did, and closed the book happy to see the little brown towhees that figure in the séance and texture of the novel’s ending, which I later called light and he called dark.The next week, after that visit, came this curious assignment, to write about Jon, who is not a close friend, but a friend, which is what makes it curious. He’s someone I’d first met 18 years ago and had liked right away, a person whose considerable charisma happens up close, as presence. I’ve always felt some kind of warmth toward him, or from him, separate from my admiration for him as a writer. He likes women from California, at least that is what he always says, and he is someone I could telephone in consternation, in need of advice, and have done so. But he would not want to hear from me every day, and this has also strengthened a mutual trust, both of us being people who want brief social engagements and then to return to nurturing a productive alienation or joy and either way conduct life with a limited amount of interaction, at least with other writers.But we had submitted to do this thing together, and then could not agree on where to meet. I wanted Jon to see the filmmaker James Benning’s cabins, one a replica of Thoreau’s, the other of Ted Kaczynski’s, and to perhaps discuss solitude, American transcendentalism and eco-activism, and be in a beautiful but lesser known part of California, the central-southern Sierras. Jon rejected that. A friend jeeringly said to me, ‘‘Why don’t you go birding with him?’’ Which was the very thing Jon suggested, that we go to the Channel Islands in pursuit of the rare island scrub jay, which, I thought, as soon as he suggested it, would never work, because the boats that go there are vomitoriums and the island where this jay lives offers scant shade, and I hate the sun. After that exchange, I thought it would be O.K. to just go ahead and admit something to myself, an opposition: that he, Jon, loves birds, and I love people and come down on their side if we are choosing teams. I could even form a kind of repulsion toward the rare island scrub jay, when I imagined being trapped on a boat in the boiling ocean, in search of the squawking creature that, like every other scrub jay, eats canned sardines.In the end, I simply returned to him in Santa Cruz, with a quick jaunt, first, to a beautiful little town in the San Lorenzo Valley where Jon and his girlfriend, Kathy, used to live, a place with a main-street bar and hardware store, and just off the main street, a swimming hole. Then Jon and the photographer went off to shoot the portrait among some redwood trees in a state park, after which Jon and I sat down to talk at a picnic table over a ravine, where we remained until a plague of mosquitoes and then one human, a Franzen fan, all alighted on Jon and it was time to escape to a restaurant in Santa Cruz, where the fog, which Jon describes with felicity and precision in ‘‘Purity,’’ had rolled in and made us cold.JON WAS THE PERSON who told me to read ‘‘Angels’’ by Denis Johnson, which I still consider a very fine American novel. He once said to me that strawberries are an unnecessary apology for rhubarb, and recommended to me, aptly, the Wim Wenders film ‘‘The American Friend.’’ I met only on one occasion his very famous American friend, the one who killed himself at the age of 46, and that famous friend had said to me that he, meaning Jon, seemed so serious and stern but then it turns out he is the nicest person in the world. Which I had suddenly remembered, and relayed to Jon, back when I had learned that his friend died.The first thing I asked Jon about was Oakland, as Pip, a character in ‘‘Purity’’ (her full name), lives there, in a house that’s something like a squat, where one character reads Gramsci and is connected to the Catholic Worker. Jon himself had spent time hanging out at a Catholic Worker house in Philadelphia, in the mid-’90s. He found their objectives appealing, he said, and even went to Catholic Church. Although it was, he told me, ‘‘partly a matter of a girl.’’ About Catholicism, Jon said, ‘‘If you really take Flannery O’Connor seriously, as I did at that time, you get interested. That was probably the peak of my involvement with Dostoyevsky, and with both of those writers it’s not art and it’s not religion, it’s religious art, although Dostoyevsky is so multivalent that it’s more complicated.’’We moved on to a discussion of Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy, and Jon spoke of their relation as a competition. ‘‘You had two talents of that order working at the same time,’’ he said, ‘‘and in the same way that siblings specialize, they each became more intensely the thing they’d been to begin with — as a way of competing, and a way of saying, ‘I’m not that other sibling, I’m me.’ ’’ And I said, ‘‘but in order to occupy what they nonetheless misperceive as the one spot.’’ To be fair, I know little of Tolstoy’s biography, only that he was a pacifist and revolutionary, had a late-life religious conversion and died in a train station. I mentioned these things and Jon said that what happened to Tolstoy — his conversion, his strange behavior later in life — could have been merely ‘‘TIAs.’’ I asked what that was or those were, and he said, ‘‘Transient ischemic attacks, you know, mini-strokes. The brain isn’t getting enough oxygen and you get weird.’’ And I said, ‘‘Reduce it all to the brain! What a positivist response!’’ And Jon replied, ‘‘Well, he was very old.’’Later we spoke of East Germany, which figures prominently in ‘‘Purity,’’ and, who knows, might even be having some kind of revival — great athletes, milk banks for women who can’t breast-feed, lifetime employment, clunky retro aesthetics. Jon, I thought, is onto something. He’s going to have sparked a honeymoon for East Germany. An Italian friend, a Marxist who had vacationed in the G.D.R. as a teenager, had just been waxing eloquent to me about the Trabant, that beloved jewel of East German automotive engineering, and about the women of the German Democratic Republic, whom he had found ‘‘simple’’ and ‘‘natural,’’ and this friend had said ‘‘simple’’ and ‘‘natural’’ like you’d describe fresh ingredients. The Republic of Bad Taste is how the G.D.R. is cleverly referred to in a section title of ‘‘Purity.’’ ‘‘There was just such dowdiness,’’ Jon said to me. Spiessig, he said, was the German word for it. If there were a magazine about G.D.R. lovelies, I thought, it could be called Spiessig. But really Jon had already covered that territory in ‘‘Purity’’ and more reflexively: In one of my favorite scenes, the East German character’s good-looking mother reclines on a couch drinking white wine, aware that she looks like an advertisement for life in the G.D.R.For the record, Angela Merkel would not be included in my fictional magazine Spiessig. Among other big names from the G.D.R., we discussed Christa Wolf, who was anti-unification — a position, we agreed, that was not insane to take. Jon said that she later wrote a book about having been an unofficial collaborator. ‘‘Until the advent of the Internet,’’ Jon said, ‘‘the G.D.R. was the most perfectly surveilled society in the history of the world.’’ Which presented a natural transition to Andreas, an East German in ‘‘Purity’’ who becomes an Assange-like leaker, except that while Assange seems to focus mostly on the secrecy of governments, Andreas believes in exposure as some kind of generalized goodness, and what he leaks is kept somewhat vague. At a late point in the narrative, Andreas compares the Internet to the Stasi itself, although it seems he feels its encroachment because he has a damning personal secret to protect. Assange, I said to Jon, had also made this comparison of the Stasi and the Internet, and Jon said, ‘‘Good for him.’’ But for Assange, I said, I believe it’s about Google’s relation to the N.S.A. While for Jon, and Andreas, the nature of the Internet itself is totalitarian in its sheer ubiquity. ‘‘I think the dream of radical transparency is a nightmare,’’ Jon said. ‘‘People saying how wonderful technology is and that crime will disappear because everything will be known about everyone.’’ I pictured ISIS beheadings, which are certainly related to a skillful use of social media, or that’s what everyone says, and I asked, but do people really talk that way? And he said, ‘‘Yes, just go to TED talks,’’ and I said I’d never watched a TED talk. The mere name, I thought, sounds so idiotic. A TED talk.Then we were on to the subject of Edward Snowden, and Jon said he could understand both Snowden’s youthful idealism and Obama’s contention that the invasions of privacy are not grievous and are in the interest of fighting terrorism. ‘‘Obama’s position is that it’s just metadata and a rather small amount of metadata,’’ Jon said, ‘‘and that intelligent, patriotic people have talked it over and there are safeguards in place. I can see both sides.’’ I said that my understanding was that the spying by the N.S.A. was both illegal and unconstitutional. Jon said Snowden and Chelsea Manning were heroes in Silicon Valley and that Silicon Valley was suspicious of the government and saw it as the enemy. But this opposition, Silicon Valley versus the government, seemed to obfuscate things for me, as if the example of Judith Miller, to cite only a single emblematic name, did not itself argue emphatically for leakers and data dumps. Could it be possible, I wondered, that the Iraq War might not have happened if a Snowden, an Assange, had arrived on the scene just a few years earlier? But Jon and I didn’t take this path.We moved on to other things, namely the commodification of personal data by the tech giants. ‘‘Capitalism,’’ Jon said, ‘‘hadn’t invaded every pore of your existence until the Internet.’’ He said that privacy invasions and data gathering far outstrip what the government is doing in that regard. ‘‘My character Andreas says that people should be more afraid of what Google can do to you than what the government can do to you.’’ But were the tech companies, I wondered, isolated entities or part of something much larger, the character of so-called neoliberalism? Jon, after all, had cited Evgeny Morozov, who has said that ‘‘no plausible story can emerge unless Silicon Valley itself is situated within some broader historical narrative — of changes in production and consumption, changes in state forms, changes in the surveillance capabilities and needs of the U.S. military.’’ Which to me seems exactly right (I read it after our discussion), and what I tried to say in my own less eloquent way, but Jon was tired and our night was coming to a close. I’ll take it up with him another time, I thought.THE NEXT MORNING, as I drank coffee and ate toast in Jon and Kathy’s kitchen, we discussed Faust and Mephisto, who connect to ‘‘Purity’’ by way of its epigraph. Jon had said, the night before, when I asked him why Mephisto wants Faust’s soul, ‘‘Because that is his nature.’’ I had thought immediately of Wagner, and how such a thing works in Wagner, but I wondered how and if it works in fiction, to have a single fixated desire as a nature, or even to have a fixed nature. I mentioned ‘‘East of Eden’’ by Steinbeck, a book Jon loves, which features a character with a fixed and indivisible nature — a child who is born evil, a bad seed. Jon was quiet, and when he spoke, he told me that his cousin had been recently murdered. ‘‘My Aunt Margo used to call him a bad seed,’’ he said. ‘‘He was an alcoholic, and he was murdered by his best friend after they had spent a day and a half drinking together. You can investigate the psychology of it, but basically my aunt was right: He was a bad seed.’’ But then he went on to investigate not the psychology of bad seeds as types, but the psychology of his cousin, who was not a type, but an individual. ‘‘He and his friend were in a bar, and then they finally ran out of money, so they went home and continued drinking there, and apparently the friend got it in his head,’’ Jon said, ‘‘that my cousin was interested in the friend’s daughter, and that led to violence.’’ The details, Jon said, were horrifying. When his cousin was still conscious he was asked whether he wanted to be taken to the hospital, and the cousin said, ‘‘No, he’s my best friend. I don’t want to get him in trouble.’’‘‘But that’s kind of beautiful,’’ I said. And Jon agreed that it was beautiful. He said his cousin probably thought, I’ll just lie here and suffer, and hopefully I’ll feel better in the morning. ‘‘So if he’d gone to the hospital,’’ I said, ‘‘he might have lived.’’ Jon said he probably would have. But loyalty, he said, was how this cousin made sense of his difficult life. ‘‘I’m a loyal person,’’ Jon said, adopting the subject position of this cousin, or at least his line of reasoning. ‘‘I may be a ne’er do well in all these other ways, but I’m not going to rat out my friend.’’The way Jon described his cousin’s death, I thought, was a perfect illustration of why there is no such thing as a fixed and unshaded nature. It was also a demonstration of Jon’s singular talent to form story, striking narrative, out of life, and tragedy, and in this case honor the real person who was the tragedy’s subject, and victim. Honor, but not sugarcoat. He’d called the cousin bad. But then, almost despite his initial instinct, he had allowed for the cousin’s life to be truly a loss, and depicted to me the cousin’s final moment as a kind of sudden heroism. Whether or not he had intended to treat this cousin with love, to allow him such complexity, it was in Jon’s own unique nature to do so.