https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/world/europe/uk-contaminated-blood-scandal-theresa-may.html
U.K. Orders New Inquiry Into Contaminated-Blood Scandal - The New York Times
Blood Donation,Great Britain,May  Theresa M,Hepatitis,Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
July 11, 2017
3219
LONDON — Prime Minister Theresa May on Tuesday ordered an inquiry into how contaminated blood in the 1970s and 1980s resulted in the deaths of at least 2,400 people and infected thousands more, an episode that members of Parliament have called “one of the worst peacetime disasters in Britain’s history.”Britain’s health minister, Philip Dunne, told Parliament the government would set up an independent public inquiry aimed at getting to the truth of what happened when patients, many of them hemophiliacs, received blood products infected with H.I.V. or hepatitis C, supplied by the tax payer-funded National Health Service.It was not immediately clear what form the inquiry, which comes after decades of campaigning by victims and their families for justice, would take.Diana Johnson, a Labour member of Parliament who has led the cross-party call for an inquiry, told the House of Commons on Tuesday that the blood contamination scandal was a gross injustice, calling it a “cover-up” on an “industrial scale” that extended to the highest levels of the government.She said she had been deeply moved by how the infected blood had devastated victims’ lives. She invoked Glenn Wilkinson, a father of two, who has hemophilia and was infected with hepatitis C when he was 19 after a routine operation in 1983 to remove two teeth.Mr. Wilkinson, one of dozens of people who have been campaigning for an inquiry and compensation, had described how the specter of illness had dominated his life and how for years he lived in fear of passing the virus on to family members.Hemophilia, an inherited disorder that prevents blood from clotting properly, was initially controlled using blood plasma products that encouraged clotting. Later, synthetic clotting factor proteins were developed. But in the 1970s and ’80s, screening procedures were insufficient. Ms. Johnson noted that blood contamination scandals had been investigated in France and Japan, among other countries, and led to some convictions of government health officials. But in Britain, she said, officials had not been held to account.The inquiry comes after leaders of all the main political parties wrote a letter this month to Mrs. May demanding a full investigation amid longstanding concerns. Victims’ advocates have contended for years that, among other things, the decisions that led to the deaths had been covered up, that the Department of Health had evaded responsibility, and that important evidence, including the medical records of those affected, had been tampered with.The letter alluded to accusations that Department of Health officials destroyed documents to hide what had happened, and also said that contaminated blood was “not removed from the blood supply, once the dangers became known.”Also under scrutiny will be how the infected blood products entered Britain and who was responsible. In the 1970s and 1980s, the National Health Service imported commercial blood products from the United States, including from donors in the American prison system. Some, it later emerged, had H.I.V. and hepatitis C.There have been two previous inquiries, but members of Parliament said Tuesday that a new inquest was needed because the previous ones had not gone far enough nor delivered justice to the victims.In 2009, an independent inquiry report concluded that the tragedy may have been prevented if imports of blood from the United States had been halted, and it lamented that both the government and the scientific community had been too slow in recognizing the dangers. However, the report stopped short of blaming individual doctors or companies, and no one from the Department of Health was called to testify.A second inquiry in Scotland in 2015 revisited the blood safety issue. It called what happened “the stuff of nightmares” and prompted an apology from David Cameron, the prime minister at the time, to victims and their families. The report recommended that anyone in Scotland who had a blood transfusion before 1991 should be tested, if they had not been already. But it, too, was deemed unsatisfactory by victims, campaigners and their relatives on the grounds that it was unable to call witnesses outside of Scotland.At the time, Mr. Wilkinson was photographed burning the 2015 report in protest.