http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/21/world/africa/ex-leader-of-chad-goes-on-trial-for-crimes-against-humanity.html
Ex-Leader of Chad Goes on Trial for Crimes Against Humanity - The New York Times
Habre  Hissene,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Chad,African Union,Senegal,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Extraordinary African Chambers
July 20, 2015
4062
PARIS —  Twenty-five years after he was overthrown, Hissène Habré, a former president of Chad, went on trial Monday to face charges of crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture in a special court in Senegal backed by the African Union.The opening session began in chaos as Mr. Habré was forced to enter the courtroom and then, while waiting for the trial to start, stood up and started shouting.As if on cue, Mr. Habré’s relatives and supporters in the public gallery shouted slogans and scuffled with security officers. Video from the court showed guards picking up Mr. Habré, 72, in his long white robes, and carrying him out. Mr. Habré denounced the event as a farce staged by “African traitors” and “servants of America,” witnesses said.Mr. Habré, who led a brutal government from 1982 to 1990, might have expected to live out his days peacefully in exile in Senegal. But he was not forgotten by his victims and the human rights groups that campaigned for nearly two decades to bring him to justice.While African politicians have long complained that they are picked on by the International Criminal Court in The Hague, Mr. Habré’s comfortable life in Dakar, the capital of Senegal, was increasingly shown as an example of Africa’s not wanting to try its own. After years of foot-dragging, a new Senegalese government agreed to create a special tribunal, set up with a political mandate from the African Union, and try him “on behalf of Africa.”The proceedings were expected to throw new light on the career of Mr. Habré, who was born into a family of shepherds and rose to become a rebel leader who overthrew the government with the help of the United States and France. But the funds and weapons Mr. Habré received secretly from Washington to fight his anti-Western neighbor, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi  of Libya, were also used to kill and terrorize uncounted people in Chad.A truth commission created after the overthrow of Mr. Habré said in a 1992 report that more than 40,000 people were killed or left to die, and that about 200,000 were imprisoned, and often tortured, in his network of jails. It also said that he had emptied the national treasury as he fled.Some former prisoners who had traveled from Chad to attend the trial at the Palace of Justice in central Dakar sobbed as they listened to opening statements.Jacqueline Moudeina, a lawyer from Chad who represents a victims’ association, said she was honored to represent 4,445 people at the trial. Ms. Moudeina pleaded with the court to give the victims justice. “The world is watching you, watching us,” she said.Souleymane Guengueng, an accountant who endured two years of torture in prison and nearly died, said that he cried during the session. Reached by phone in Dakar, he said: “It’s a miracle, I saw Habré in court. Today is the day I have been awaiting for years and years. I cried because I’m unbelievably happy, and I cried for all my friends and my cellmates who are dead.”The presiding judge, who is from Burkina Faso, suspended the afternoon session after a few minutes, just long enough to read a message from Mr. Habré, who said he was refusing to return to court. Mr. Habré called the court “illegal and illegitimate” and said he had been “kidnapped.” The judge said that the proceedings would resume Tuesday and that Mr. Habré would be taken to court “by force.”