https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/arts/television/whats-on-tv-sunday-game-of-thrones-and-remember-me.html
What’s on TV Sunday: ‘Game of Thrones’ and ‘Remember Me’ - The New York Times
Television,Movies
July 16, 2017
9421
“Game of Thrones” begins a seventh season with Cersei Lannister wreaking havoc from her perch on the Iron Throne. And Michael Palin of the Monty Python troupe plays the straight man in “Remember Me.”GAME OF THRONES 9 p.m. on HBO. “Apparently winter is really coming, finally,” Lena Headey, who plays Cersei Lannister — now seated on the Iron Throne — said in a New York Times interview about this fantasy epic’s climactic stretch, which includes seven episodes this season and six the next, its final. Season 7 begins as Cersei tries to even the odds, while Jon Snow (Kit Harington) organizes the north’s defense and Daenerys (Emilia Clarke) comes home.WIMBLEDON 2017 9 a.m. on ESPN. Roger Federer takes on Marin Cilic in the men’s final. Pair your viewing with “WIMBLEDON” (2004), about an insecure British tennis pro (Paul Bettany) who resurrects his career on the wings of love with a supercompetitive American (Kirsten Dunst). Then add “MATCH POINT” (2005), starring Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Chris, an Irish tennis pro who climbs the British social ladder after befriending Tom (Matthew Goode), an heir to a business fortune, and wooing his sister, Chloe (Emily Mortimer). But when Chris meets Tom’s fiancée, the scrappy American actress Nola (Scarlett Johansson), the temperature of his life suddenly increases from a polite simmer to a full sexual boil. In The Times, A. O. Scott described this Woody Allen drama as “a Champagne cocktail laced with strychnine.” (Both films on iTunes and Amazon.)SUNDAY NIGHT WITH MEGYN KELLY 7 p.m. on NBC. Six female entrepreneurs, including Kathryn Minshew, founder of the Muse, and Cheryl Yeoh, a former chief executive of MaGIC, discuss sexual harassment by venture capitalists in the tech industry.REMEMBER ME 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Michael Palin portrays Tom Parfitt, an elderly British man who has just fallen down a flight of stairs in his home in the coastal town Scarborough, resulting in his move into an assisted-living facility. But when a social worker plummets to her death from his bedroom window — and he is the only witness — a supernatural thriller emerges, leading to the discovery that Tom is far more dark and devious, maybe even older, than he appears. “I could be really unpleasant,” Mr. Palin, who has a reputation for being likable, said in a Times interview about this mini-series. “Well, I couldn’t — my character could be really unpleasant. Which helped the Palin image, I think, by tarnishing it a bit.”THE CROWN on Netflix. Claire Foy, who won a Golden Globe for portraying Queen Elizabeth II, just captured an Emmy nomination for best actress in a drama, alongside (among others) John Lithgow for supporting actor for his turn as Winston Churchill and the show itself for best drama. Writing in The Times, Neil Genzlinger called it “an orgy of sumptuous scenes and rich performances.”