https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/us/jeronimo-yanez-philando-castile-minnesota-shooting.html
‘I Had No Choice,’ Minnesota Officer Testifies on Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Castile  Philando (1983-2016),Yanez  Jeronimo (1988- ),St Paul (Minn),Reynolds  Diamond (1989- ),Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Falcon Heights (Minn)
June 9, 2017
4646
ST. PAUL — When the world glimpsed Officer Jeronimo Yanez in a Facebook Live video last summer, his gun was pointed through the window of Philando Castile’s Oldsmobile. The patrolman’s voice was elevated. He shouted expletives. He claimed he opened fire because Mr. Castile was reaching for a gun.On Friday, Officer Yanez spoke about the shooting again, this time in a courtroom here where he is on trial for second-degree manslaughter. His voice was more subdued, his vocabulary more refined. He told jurors that he had feared for his life, that the shooting was justified.“I was scared to death. I thought I was going to die,” Officer Yanez said in court, where he cried on the witness stand. “I had no choice.”Two distinct narratives have emerged about the shooting death of Mr. Castile last July in suburban St. Paul, an episode that sparked several days of protests and added to the national debate about how police officers use force and treat African-Americans.The first version of events, advanced by prosecutors and given voice by Diamond Reynolds, Mr. Castile’s girlfriend and the front-seat passenger at the time of the shooting, suggests that Officer Yanez panicked and unreasonably shot Mr. Castile. They claim Mr. Castile, a 32-year-old black man and longtime school cafeteria worker, posed no threat and had been trying to cooperate.The second narrative — Officer Yanez’s — suggests that Mr. Castile was trying to grab a gun, and that the shooting was a reasonable response to imminent danger. “He’s not complying with my directions,” said Officer Yanez, 29, who told jurors he did not want to shoot Mr. Castile.Officer Yanez’s guilt or innocence likely rests on which of those competing narratives jurors believe. Closing arguments and the start of jury deliberations are scheduled for Monday.This week, prosecutors laid out their case against Officer Yanez, leaning heavily on Ms. Reynolds’s eyewitness account, the Facebook footage and newly released images and audio from Officer Yanez’s dashboard camera.Ms. Reynolds claimed, both in the Facebook video and on the witness stand, that Mr. Castile had been trying to comply with Officer Yanez’s request for his driver’s license when he was shot.He was going for his wallet, Ms. Reynolds testified, but was having trouble because of the seatbelt.Officer Yanez told jurors that he stopped Mr. Castile for a broken taillight, but that he was suspicious because he matched the description of a robbery suspect.Mr. Castile, who was licensed to carry a weapon, told Officer Yanez he had a gun after being pulled over. Officer Yanez responded — calmly at first, then more alarmed — that Mr. Castile should not “reach for it.”“Don’t pull it out!” the officer shouted just before shooting seven times. In court, Officer Yanez testified that he saw Mr. Castile’s gun before pulling the trigger.“I was able to see the top of the slide and the back of the tab of the firearm, and that’s when I engaged with Mr. Castile and shot him,” Officer Yanez said on Friday.But prosecutors have expressed doubt about whether Officer Yanez ever saw the gun, which they believe was in Mr. Castile’s pocket. They said Mr. Castile had gone beyond what the law required in telling the officer about his weapon and that Officer Yanez’s subsequent commands were unclear.Prosecutors pressed one witness, an expert on the use of force hired by defense lawyers, about why Officer Yanez did not instruct Mr. Castile clearly to stop moving or put his hands up. Emanuel Kapelsohn, the witness, replied that “officers are not perfect. Many other commands would have been more perfect.” But he said the shooting was justified.Defense lawyers have sought to paint Officer Yanez as a sympathetic figure, a Minnesota native who became the first in his family to graduate from college and who dreamed of becoming a police officer.Officer Yanez, who could be sentenced to 20 years in prison if convicted of manslaughter and two lesser charges, is among several American police officers facing juries this spring.Last month, an officer in Tulsa, Okla., was acquitted of manslaughter in the shooting death of an unarmed black man. Next week in Milwaukee, an officer is scheduled to go on trial for reckless homicide for a shooting that touched off riots last summer. And in Ohio, arguments began this week in the murder trial of Ray Tensing, a former University of Cincinnati police officer who fatally shot a black driver in 2015, in an episode that was also captured on video.