http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/26/world/europe/26britain.html
Brother Beats Brother in Labour Vote - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Labour Party (Great Britain),Miliband  David,Miliband  Edward S,Great Britain
Sept. 25, 2010
9945
LONDON — In a battle of brothers for the leadership of Britain’s Labour Party, the younger of the two, Ed Miliband, 40, was elected on Saturday, beating his brother David, the 45-year-old former foreign minister, by a margin of a little more than 1 percent of the votes in a runoff.With his victory over his brother and three other candidates, Ed Miliband became the successor to the former prime minister, Gordon Brown, at Labour’s helm, and faced the challenge of regenerating the party after its demoralizing defeat by the Conservatives in May’s general election. In his acceptance speech, he acknowledged that the party had “lost the election, and lost it badly,” and spoke of the “scale of the journey” to regain power.“I recognize it will not be easy,” he told delegates to Labour’s five-day annual conference in Manchester.The four-month contest involved five contestants, but it resolved early on into a two-man race between the Miliband brothers, both ministers in the defeated Brown government and both Oxford graduates, though each with roots in a different Labour camp: Ed Miliband broadly identifies with the party’s traditionalist left wing and Mr. Brown, who made him energy and climate change minister in his government, and David Miliband with the reformist movement known as New Labour, which carried Tony Blair to three successive victories before he yielded as prime minister to Mr. Brown in 2007.Ed Miliband’s victory seemed certain to be celebrated, at least privately, by the Conservatives. The political editor of the left-leaning Guardian newspaper, Patrick Wintour, wrote a Website blog item suggesting that Prime Minister David Cameron, the 43-year-old Conservative leader, would be “punching the air” at seeing the win by the Miliband brother favored by Labour’s left wing.Mr. Cameron made a congratulatory phone call to the winner but used an interview in Saturday’s editions of The Daily Telegraph to suggest an indifference as to which brother won. “They’re both part of the team that got us into this mess,” he said, referring to the $240 billion annual deficit the new government inherited from Labour, its causes the main battleground between the two parties. “In this long leadership debate, I haven’t heard a single suggestion about how we might deal with the deficit.”The contest also served as a window on the Milibands’ redoubtable family.Their father, Ralph Miliband, was a Marxist intellectual and writer who reached Britain from Belgium in 1940 after fleeing advancing Nazi forces. Their mother, Marion Kozak, also a left-wing activist, arrived with her family from Poland in the early 1950s. Ralph Miliband is buried beside Karl Marx in London’s Highgate Cemetery, while his widow, Marion, at 76, remains active in Labour.Ultimately, the leadership battle demonstrated the uneasy alliance Labour has become over the last 15 years, between the New Labour reformists, with their centrist emphasis on policies appealing to business and the middle class, and the left-wing loyalists, traditionalists who had sublimated their ideological differences with the Blairites to the common urge to return to power in 1997 after 18 years of Conservative rule.The differing approaches remained unresolved though the party’s years in power, and infused the personal rivalry between Mr. Blair and Mr. Brown, which partly paralyzed the governments of both men, particularly on matters of social and economic policy. Mr. Brown quit the party leadership and the prime ministership simultaneously as the new coalition government of David Cameron’s Conservatives and Nick Clegg’s Liberal Democrats was formed, leaving the Labour leadership contest as a forum for continued skirmishing.In the end, union power decided the contest. The outcome was on a knife’s edge until the final moments because of the complexity of the party’s electoral college, which divides the leadership vote into three equal blocs — members of the British and European parliaments, Labour Party members, and members of affiliated unions.In the final count, Ed Miliband secured a margin of more than 6 percent over David Miliband in the union count, eclipsing the the older brother’s lead among Labour’s Parliament members and its general membership.Before the result was announced, delegates gave an enthusiastic welcome to Mr. Brown, who virtually disappeared from public view after the May defeat, and took a personal pounding from Mr. Blair’s autobiography,  published this month. It offered a detailed chronicle of their personal rivalry, describing Mr. Brown at one point as “weird.” After quitting Downing Street, Mr. Brown, 59, moved to his family home near Edinburgh, and stayed neutral in the leadership battle.For Ed Miliband, a long wait seemed likely. Recent polls show Labour pulling back to parity with the Conservatives in popular support, after trailing them by 7 percent in May’s voting. A turbulent passage for the new government lies ahead, after its  expected Oct. 20 announcement of the details of its austerity plan, amounting to as much as a five-year, 25 percent cut for most government departments. The coalition plans a new law that would give it five years to govern, with the next election set for May 2015.But Labour’s history has been one of long periods of opposition after losing power — 13 years after its defeat by Winston Churchill’s Conservatives in 1951, 18 years after losing to Margaret Thatcher in 1979. And Mr. Miliband faces the challenge of doing something Mr. Blair and Mr. Brown never achieved,uniting the party’s contending wings and ending what David Miliband’s campaign manager, Douglas Alexander, described as the party’s habit of forming “a circular firing squad” after losing elections.After his win in Manchester, Ed Miliband set a modest target. “In time,” he said, “I hope to serve the country.”