https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/06/sports/golf/masters-arnold-palmer.html
It Takes a Small Army to Equal Arnie - The New York Times
Masters Golf Tournament,Palmer  Arnold,Johnson  Dustin,McIlroy  Rory,Mickelson  Phil,Pampling  Rodney,Schwartzel  Charl,Snedeker  Brandt,Spieth  Jordan,Stenson  Henrik,Golf,Watson  Bubba
April 6, 2017
3819
The first major event after a patriarch’s passing can be rough on his family. As the golf community gathers at Augusta National Golf Club for the Masters this week, Arnold Palmer’s absence from the tournament he dearly loved and won four times will be acutely felt.“It will never be the same,” said Curtis Strange, a two-time United States Open winner who attended Wake Forest on a scholarship named after Palmer, the most famous Demon Deacon golfer. “The tournament will go on and players will come and go, but there will be a void.”Palmer played in 50 Masters tournaments and hit the ceremonial first shot nine consecutive years after that. About five and a half months before his death in September at 87, he was an honorary non-hitting starter at the 80th Masters in 2016. Palmer sat at the back of the tee box and watched the drives of Gary Player and Jack Nicklaus.“I think everybody was happy to see Arnold out on the tee,” Nicklaus said, “and I think Arnold was happy to be on the tee.”No single player will ever replace Palmer, who mixed seemingly antithetical qualities to the same pleasing effect as iced tea and lemonade: humility and showmanship; kindness and competitiveness; accessibility and nobility. But many of the qualities that endeared him to royalty and commoners alike live on in the men who will vie for the green jacket that Palmer donned in 1958, 1960, 1962 and 1964.While there will never be another Arnie, this year’s Masters contains many of his kindred spirits. Together they form golf’s composite King.The left-handed Watson plays golf as if he stood in front of Arnold Palmer and mirrored his no-holds-barred style. That’s not a coincidence. Both men were taught the game by their fathers, who encouraged them to hit the ball as hard as they could, even if they sometimes lost their balance.“My father told me, ‘Just hit it hard, and when you get better in the game and grow up, then we’ll learn how to control it,’” Watson said.He nodded in recognition when told that Palmer questioned the logic of playing conservatively, explaining that 80 percent of the time, he could play his way out of trouble.“Exactly,” Watson said. “About 20 percent of the time, you might be in trouble. Most of the time you have a chance to do something.”In 2012, Watson made the most of a hooked drive, saving par with the help of an ingenious second shot from a pine-needle lie to defeat Louis Oosthuizen on the second hole of sudden death for the first of his two Masters victories.“Mr. Palmer said he couldn’t dream of that shot,” Watson said, adding, “I just enjoy the challenge of trying to create something.”Palmer’s well of kindness ran deep, unless the person in need of a little compassion was himself — then it quickly dried up.The perfectionist Palmer did not suffer his failings gladly. On his desk in his Latrobe, Pa., office, he kept a silver cigarette case that his daughter Amy Saunders said was a gift for the wives of the 1961 Masters participants. The case looked as if it had been rescued from a garbage disposal, which was the reason for its prominent display. The damage was done by Palmer, who lost the 1961 title in dispiriting fashion.He arrived at the final hole needing a par to successfully defend his title. He made a double-bogey 6 from the fairway to deliver the championship to Gary Player. In the parking lot afterward, a distraught Palmer threw his golf spikes into the car, where they dinged the cigarette case.Disappointed at having lost his focus on the final hole and then taking out his frustrations on such a beautiful gift, Palmer kept the case on his desk as a reminder of his grievous lapse in comportment.Stenson laughed wryly when the story was relayed to him. Yes, he could relate. Stenson said his silver-cigarette-case moment came at the 2013 United States Open. On the back nine on Sunday, Stenson responded to a three-putt bogey by slamming his putter against his golf bag. After Stenson posted a six-over 76, his highest score of the week, his caddie, Gareth Lord, reached into the bag to retrieve his iPhone.“He took his phone out and it was the shape of a banana,” said Stenson, who had smashed Lord’s smartphone with his piñata swipe at the bag. “I ended up buying him a new iPhone, and rightfully so.”Stenson says he has not kept any of the items that he has sacrificed at the altar of anger, including the club he snapped over his knee after a bad shot on the 15th hole during the second round of the 2015 Masters. “I don’t have room for all the broken stuff.”Stenson, the reigning British Open champion, is one broken club shy of a career Grand Slam, having also rendered clubs unusable at the United States and British Opens.“It’s not something that I’m proud of,” Stenson said of his temper. “But at the same time, I’m not sure if it would have been good to take away that little perfectionist on one shoulder, because it’s what drives me forward. Whatever’s your greatest strength can be your weakness, so I guess you’ve got to take the rough with the smooth.”Palmer’s greatest passion besides golf was aviation. His fascination with flying could be traced to his childhood in Latrobe, where he watched planes trundle down the runway at the small airfield near his house that in 1999 would be renamed Arnold Palmer Regional Airport. After winning the 1958 Masters, Palmer leased a Cessna 175 and logged flying hours while accompanied by a co-pilot.His first plane, bought in 1961, was an Aero Commander 500. His last, a Citation X, had the range to transport him anywhere in the world. In 1976, Palmer set a world record, circumnavigating the globe in a Learjet in 57 hours 25 minutes 42 seconds. He logged nearly 20,000 hours as a pilot, many with Pete Luster as his cockpit mate, before giving up the controls in 2011, at age 81.Palmer said the adrenaline rush from flying was the nearest thing to the feeling of playing championship golf.Schwartzel, a 32-year-old South African, was drawn to the skies more by the hush than by the rush.“You’re sitting up at 20,000 feet in the air, by yourself, you feel like you’re the only person in the world,” said Schwartzel, who caught the flying bug from his father, George.At 23, Schwartzel obtained his pilot’s license and bought a six-seat Cessna 206, which he used for weekend getaways and, less often, to travel to tournaments in his homeland.After winning the 2011 Masters, Schwartzel got his helicopter license. His plan is to one day become certified to fly planes in the United States.“I’m surprised more golfers don’t fly because of what we do,” he said, referring to the physical travel and the precise mental calibrations that are part of a golfer’s day-to-day existence.As a pilot, Schwartzel said, he felt a special connection with Palmer, whom he talked to about flying. Palmer piloted his last flight, from Palm Springs, Calif., to Orlando, Fla., 69 days before Schwartzel’s Masters victory.“He told me they denied his co-pilot clearance through military space,” Schwartzel said. “And then Arnold Palmer got on the radio and identified himself and they said, ‘You’re cleared to go.’”A version more grounded in truth was relayed by Luster, who said that workers in the tower at the Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center, aware that the flight was Palmer’s piloting swan song, arranged for Palmer to be cleared for the most direct route to Orlando.“It was very special,” Luster told Amy Saunders in an email.At Palmer’s tournament at Bay Hill in Orlando in 1993, Nicklaus told a story (one he would repeat often over the years) of the first time he saw Palmer in the flesh. It was at the 1954 Ohio Amateur at Sylvania Country Club. Nicklaus, then 14, was coming off the golf course as a storm played through. As he sought shelter, he noticed a lone figure hitting balls on the range through rain that was falling sideways. For several minutes, Nicklaus looked on, spellbound, as the broad-shouldered man with the big hands beat one ball after another.His interest piqued, Nicklaus asked a man in the pro shop who the guy was with the Popeye forearms getting drenched on the range.“Oh, that’s our defending champion, Arnold Palmer,” he was told.A player likely to be found practicing in the pouring rain is Noren, a 34-year-old Swede who ended 2016 ranked ninth in the world.When Noren, an eight-time winner on the European Tour, extends his right hand in greeting, what strikes you, besides his strong grip, are his blistered fingers. Anyone looking at his calloused hands might guess that Noren, a Masters rookie, is an ironworker, not an irons player.He has been known to pound balls on the range deep into the Wednesday night of a tournament week, long after the last stragglers have given up on finding their games. If ever there was an ideal marriage between a man and a brand, it would be Noren and Band-Aid.“I think the guys that come out after taking a week off and feel as good as always, if I was like that I wouldn’t practice as much,” Noren said. “If I had some of the golf swings out here, I wouldn’t practice as much. But with golf, it’s quite complex. You have to draw, fade, this and that, and it didn’t come as easy to me.“I never had a really good technique, so I had to practice a lot to beat the guys I wanted to beat. My motivation to practice is more like, how am I going to solve this complex problem that is golf?”How does Noren know when to shut down for the day? “Usually, when the sun goes down,” he said.In 1959, any G.I. who showed up at the Masters in his uniform got in free. Because Palmer was the defending champion, the soldiers that year gravitated to his gallery. As Palmer told it, a soldier working the scoreboard on a back-nine hole saw the mass of people, many in uniform, headed his way and, within earshot of Palmer, announced the arrival of “Arnie’s Army.”The following year, Palmer won his second Masters and thanked his “army of supporters.” In the early ’60s, “Arnie’s Army” began appearing in news articles and headlines.Fueling Palmer’s popularity was his go-for-broke style and his habit of flashing a thumb’s-up sign and making eye contact with as many people as possible during his tournament rounds. Mickelson began giving fans the thumb’s-up sign after a conversation with Palmer, who explained to him that it was a simple way to connect with fans without stopping to engage with them.“Arnold used to say never walk past anybody, always acknowledge people,” said Mickelson, who over the years has gained his own fervent following.The first units of Phil’s Foot Soldiers formed after Mickelson won the PGA Tour stop in Tucson in 1991 as a junior at Arizona State. He turned pro in the summer of 1992. A few years later, the PGA Tour designated a single spot at each tournament for autograph gatherings. The tour-wide practice didn’t last, but Mickelson adopted the policy as his own. For the last 20 years, he has faithfully met with fans for at least 20 minutes after each round.“Before, when I was signing before and after every hole, I found myself trying to avoid people after a while, and I didn’t want to feel that way,” Mickelson said. “So now I’m able to look people in the eye and say hello and nicely ask them to wait until after the round. It’s just a built-in part of my routine now.”Brendan Steele described Mickelson’s following as “fiercely loyal” and explained why he has modeled Mickelson’s modeling of Palmer.“If there’s one person he can make a difference with, he does,” Steele said, adding, “The way he treats people off the course, he’s taught me so much.”Golfers do not wear their names on their backs, and they do not have numbers on their fronts, so they can be hard to identify on the course. But Palmer’s raw athleticism and hitch-up-his-trousers panache made him easy to pick out.The sportswriter Tom Callahan, who covered Palmer for The Washington Post, Time and Golf Digest, said Palmer’s bearing was a big part of his appeal.“He carried himself in a way that conveyed, ‘If you thought that shot was good, wait till you see the next one,’” said Callahan, who wrote “Arnie: The Life of Arnold Palmer,” a 2017 biography so rich in anecdotes it begs to be savored like a box of chocolates. Callahan added, “His personality was this mix of true humility and incredible confidence.”Among today’s players, the top-ranked Johnson, the reigning United States Open champion, is the one with the stride that does his bragging for him. David Feherty, an NBC and Golf Channel color commentator, described Johnson’s rolling walk as belonging to a Clint Eastwood character who walks the fairways “like he has a crooked gun belt and a toothpick in his mouth.”Feherty’s colleague, Peter Jacobsen, also looked to the movies to explain Johnson’s Palmer-like strut. “His walk says, ‘Hey, watch me, you’re going to be impressed,’” Jacobsen said. “You can’t take your eyes off him. He’s like Russell Crowe’s character Maximus in ‘Gladiator,’ brandishing his driver like Maximus’s bloody sword after slaying his opponents and saying, ‘Are you not entertained?’”Palmer wrote more letters than St. Paul. Any amateur or pro golfer who achieved a notable success could expect to receive in the mail a congratulatory note from Palmer, either handwritten or at least personally signed. Rory McIlroy said he received a missive from Palmer after every one of his pro victories, including the Deutsche Bank Championship three weeks before Palmer’s death.After Pampling won the Arnold Palmer Invitational in 2006, he received a letter from the tournament host, and the loveliness of the gesture made a lasting impression on him. A few years later, Pampling lost his PGA Tour playing privileges and was reduced to writing letters to tournament directors asking for sponsor exemptions.That was standard operating procedure, but what Pampling did after finishing 124th on the money list in 2011 to regain his Tour card was pure Arnie: He sat down and, with input from his wife, Angela, sent a handwritten letter to every tournament director who had given him an exemption, expressing appreciation for their role in helping him regain his Tour membership.“This day and age, everyone just tends to shoot a text,” Pampling said, adding, “Letter writing’s definitely a lost art, which is a shame, because it doesn’t matter who you are: If you get a letter, it’s always special.”Pampling and his wife have three children whom they prod to write thank-you letters — even the youngest, who is 5. “They look at you like, ‘Why can’t we just text or something?’” Pampling said. “But we tell them the written letter is more appreciated, so that’s what they’re going to do.”The letter that McIlroy received from Palmer after he won the 2011 United States Open for his first major title included this piece of advice: “Just continue to be yourself. Don’t change.”McIlroy interpreted Palmer’s words to mean that he should not change his demeanor, his aggressive play, his comportment. But maybe McIlroy’s honesty also made an impression on Palmer, who was not afraid to speak out when he saw people in the sport he loved behaving badly.In March 1982, Palmer decried the ungentlemanly behavior and selfishness of some of the Tour’s top players in a missive to Deane Beman, then the PGA Tour commissioner. In the correspondence, which Beman circulated among the rest of the membership, Palmer described the actions of a few of the players toward volunteers, spectators and amateurs in the pro-ams as “despicable.”Thirty-five years later, McIlroy had harsh words for the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers, which runs Muirfield, a private club in Scotland, after it required two rounds of voting to summon the three-fourths majority needed to end the club’s all-male membership policy.McIlroy said it was “horrendous” that 123 members still voted against admitting women and added: “In this day and age, where you’ve got women that are the leaders of certain industries and women that are heads of state and not to be able to join a golf course? I mean, it’s obscene.”Woe is the golfer whose target is perfection. When Palmer failed to pull off the shot that sometimes only he could see, he could be his own Greek chorus.In a 1961 article in Sports Illustrated, a writer who followed Palmer reported hearing him mutter, “Come on, stupid!” after an approach fell short, “Fool!” after a putt failed to drop and “You’re nothing but an old maid” — a reference to unpopped kernels of corn — after a hooked tee shot.Spieth described his own self-talk as “straightforward annoyance with an inadequate golf shot.” Like Palmer, he is known for his running commentary when he is struggling. He has his own version of “You’re nothing but an old maid.” It’s “Jordan, are we even thinking today?”During a first-round loss to Hideto Tanihara at last month’s World Golf Championships match-play event in Austin, Tex., Spieth muttered after a wayward drive: “Really? Are you serious right now?”On a different hole in the same match, Spieth’s ball landed behind a tree. As he set up to hit with branches scratching his face, he responded sardonically to a positioning suggestion by his caddie, Michael Greller: “I mean, what do you want me to be? The tree?”Like Palmer, Snedeker came from a modest background. His putting stroke reflects his early exposure to municipal greens that had the consistency of worn carpeting. Snedeker adopted a pop stroke with his putter, the better to propel the ball toward the hole. Even after he graduated to lusher courses, with grasses that roll like linoleum, no one dared to change his stroke.“It was always a strength of mine, so they just let me go with it,” Snedeker said.Early in his pro career, he played a nine-hole practice round at Bay Hill with Palmer, who told Snedeker that he liked his putting rhythm and offered a putting tip that Snedeker leans on whenever he’s dissatisfied with his performance.“I stick the putter in the ground after I putt to see if it’s square where I’m trying to hit it,” he said. “It seems to always get me back in the right frame of mind.”In his biography of Palmer, Callahan told a story from the Masters about a nervous reporter asking Palmer an awkwardly worded question. Rather than unkindly dismissing it, or making a joke at his expense, Palmer reworded the question and answered it expansively. Callahan wrote, “I remember thinking, it’s a natural grace.”“Grace” is a good word to describe Day, who answers reporters’ questions in several paragraphs when, for many of his peers, one sentence would suffice. Ask him for one minute of his time and he’ll gladly talk for a half-hour.In his final tuneup for the Masters, Day pulled out of the World Golf Championships match-play event after completing six holes of his first match. He could have cited personal reasons and left it at that, but Day insisted on visiting the interview room to deliver a tearful statement about his mother’s lung-cancer diagnosis and how the exploratory surgery she was scheduled to undergo later in the week left him unable to concentrate on golf.His mother’s doctors were able to remove the tumor in her left lung during the surgery, and on Monday, Day said he found out that she would not require chemotherapy.He has never shied away from talking about tough subjects. If asked a question about his father’s abusive behavior when he was a child or his mother’s battle with cancer, Day will answer the best he can. As with Palmer, his vulnerability and accessibility draw people close.“I’m in a really good situation being able to sit up here in front of you guys and be able to talk about situations that I’m going through and to be able to tell you honestly and truthfully what’s inside my heart,” Day said. “I feel like that takes a lot of pressure off my shoulders.”