http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/23/nyregion/mta-raises-fares-subways-and-buses.html
M.T.A. Is Raising Fares and Tolls; One Subway or Bus Ride Will Cost $2.75 - The New York Times
Metropolitan Transportation Authority,Subways,Buses,MetroCard (NYC),Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates)
Jan. 22, 2015
9007
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority voted on Thursday to raise the base fare on subways and buses by a quarter, to $2.75, and the cost of a 30-day MetroCard by $4.50, to $116.50.The new fares, which will take effect on March 22, were part of a package of increases approved for the system’s trains, buses, tunnels and bridges.Fare increases have become routine and are scheduled to occur every two years as part of the authority’s long-term revenue plans. The previous increase, in 2013, raised the base fare to $2.50, from $2.25.The subway system has recently seen record use, with more than six million riders on some days, but the authority is facing questions over how to pay for long-term improvements to its infrastructure. The agency’s proposal for a $32 billion, five-year capital plan has a $15 billion funding shortfall, and the board is seeking contributions from the state and the city.Officials have cautioned that if the authority relies on borrowing to close the capital gap, it could increase pressure to raise fares and tolls faster than scheduled.On Tuesday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo outlined his priorities for the state’s infrastructure, and said the state would invest $750 million toward the authority’s capital plan. But he did not address the larger funding gap.Under the increases approved on Thursday, the bonus for pay-per-ride MetroCards will rise to 11 percent, from 5 percent, for anyone who puts at least $5.50 on a card. The cost of a weekly pass will increase to $31, from $30.The authority’s board had considered two proposals for pay-per-ride MetroCards and decided against an option that kept the base fare at $2.50 while eliminating the bonus. Transportation advocates had argued that the bonus served an important function as a discount for low-income riders who cannot afford weekly or monthly passes.The authority’s chairman, Thomas F. Prendergast, has called the fare increases modest, and said they were needed to balance the budget against the rising costs of providing services.“I’ve recommended the fare and toll change options that are most favorable to our customers who use the services the most, our core constituency,” Mr. Prendergast said at the board meeting on Thursday.One board member, Carl V. Wortendyke, who represents Rockland County, voted against the fare increase. Another board member, Allen P. Cappelli, of Staten Island, voted against the toll increase.Because of an improved financial outlook, the adopted 4 percent increase for fares and tolls was lower than the 7.5 percent increase in the original plans. Altogether, the changes are expected to generate $210 million for the authority this year.After the board meeting, Mr. Prendergast said the $750 million proposed by Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, for the capital budget was the start of a dialogue.“I’m very confident that at the end of the day, we will get what we need to be able to run the system and maintain it,” Mr. Prendergast said.Gene Russianoff, the staff lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a rider advocacy group, said the fare increase was a “fair ask for riders to contribute to the system.” The group was more concerned with increased funding for the capital plan, he said.“Our eyes are on the prize,” he said. “We’re really focused on the $15 billion to fix the system.”Another challenge facing the authority is the need to replace the MetroCard with a system that would allow riders to tap a credit card or smartphone on an electronic reader. This week, officials said they hoped to unveil the system in 2020 and phase out MetroCards by the end of 2022.Fares for the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North Railroad will also go up by about 4 percent, depending on the time of day and distance traveled. E-ZPass tolls will increase by 21 cents, to $5.54, at major crossings like the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge, among other toll increases.Several board members acknowledged that higher fares would be difficult for many riders, but that the revenue was needed. One member, Polly Trottenberg, New York City’s transportation commissioner, said the increases were as fair as possible.“I think you all came up with a plan which, frankly, does the least damage to the largest number of folks,” she said.