https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/28/movies/dont-breathe-horror-movies-disabled-characters.html
Physically Disabled. Menaced by Evil. Up for a Fight. - The New York Times
Movies,Don't Breathe (Movie),Alvarez  Fede,Hush (Movie),Flanagan  Mike (1978- ),Monkey Shines (Movie),Romero  George A,Wait Until Dark (Movie),Young  Terence (1915-94),Silver Bullet (Movie),King  Stephen,Misery (Movie),Reiner  Rob,Disabilities
Aug. 23, 2016
6341
The odds are always against the heroes and heroines of horror films, but what if they have an additional challenge, a physical disability? The film “Don’t Breathe” (in theaters Aug. 26) is the latest movie to put disabled characters in peril. Psychopaths, werewolves and other menaces may underestimate their prey, but don’t you do the same. Here is a closer look at a subgenre:THE DISABILITY In this twisty (and twisted) film from Fede Alvarez (“Evil Dead”), Stephen Lang plays a blind Army veteran at home in Detroit when a group of young people breaks in. The veteran won a large settlement when his only daughter was killed in a car accident, and his assailants think it will be easy to rob a blind man. They are quite wrong.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH In an early scene, he senses movement and finds himself in the same room with the intruders. One says he was wasted and wandered in by accident, then the veteran’s foot comes across the broken door lock on the floor. The burglar pulls a gun and yells for him to stop, but he moves, anyway, and with military precision overpowers his foe.THE DISABILITY Kate Siegel, who wrote this film with its director, Mike Flanagan, plays Maddie, a deaf author who lives alone in a house in the woods. Just outside, her neighbor is hunted and murdered by a masked psychopath. Maddie has her back to the window and doesn’t know what has happened. Now she finds herself being stalked in a potentially deadly game of cat and mouse.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH Maddie, who has lost her phone to the killer, sets off a car alarm as a distraction while she tries to retrieve her slain neighbor’s phone. The killer returns, but she keeps him at bay, anyway, and wounds him with a hammer.THE DISABILITY In this strange and creepy George A. Romero movie, Jason Beghe plays Allan, who was left quadriplegic after an accident. A monkey named Ella helps him with tasks, and they develop a bond so close that the monkey, which has been injected with human brain tissue, can sense Allan’s anger at his situation. The monkey becomes a killer, lashing out at others on Allan’s behalf.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH To stop the monkey from killing more people, Allan quite literally uses his head. He manages to get Ella to cuddle with him. That’s when he bites down, thrashing the monkey back and forth in his teeth.THE DISABILITY In this tense thriller from Terence Young, Audrey Hepburn plays Susy Hendrix, a blind woman who must save herself from criminals looking for a doll stuffed with heroin that’s hidden in her New York apartment.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH When Susy discovers the telephone cord has been cut, she realizes she has to fight back. Moving from room to room, she smashes light bulbs so that her adversaries will be just as in the dark as she is. She also retrieves a container of toxic photo-developing chemicals that she plans to use to defend herself.THE DISABILITY Stephen King wrote the screenplay for this horror film, adapted from his novel “Cycle of the Werewolf.” Corey Haim plays Marty, a paraplegic boy who must defend himself and his family from a werewolf. He has a motorcycle-wheelchair combo vehicle called the Silver Bullet.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH On a bridge launching fireworks, Marty sees the werewolf coming for him. He thinks fast and sends one of his rockets right at the werewolf’s eye, allowing him time to escape.THE DISABILITY In another adaptation of a Stephen King novel, this one directed by Rob Reiner, James Caan plays the author of popular romance novels. After a car accident leaves him with fractured legs, he is rescued by Annie Wilkes (Kathy Bates), a particularly enthusiastic fan of his work. She holds him hostage; forces him to write a new novel for her; and, when he tries to escape, sledgehammers his ankles.MOMENT OF TRIUMPH Paul devises an intricate plan to overpower Annie. He completes the novel for her, then manages to use the typewriter in a less orthodox, much more violent way to pay back his obsessive “No. 1 fan.”