https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/12/technology/riot-games-league-of-legends-main-attraction-esports.html
Behind League of Legends, E-Sports’s Main Attraction - The New York Times
Riot Games Inc,Computer and Video Games,Series,E-sports,League of Legends (Video Game),Power Up (Series)
Oct. 10, 2014
9666
When the company behind one of the world’s most popular video games, League of Legends, started organizing tournaments — noisy events where professional players compete under huge screens in arenas packed with fans — it had to design a championship trophy. That proved trickier than it sounds. A trophy should be grand and gleaming — that much seemed obvious. But nobody at Riot Games, which owns League of Legends, focused on a pretty basic question: How much should the trophy weigh?While there are many correct answers, it turns out that “about 70 pounds” isn’t one of them. Seventy pounds is roughly twice as heavy as hockey’s Stanley Cup, and hockey players, if we can generalize for a moment, tend to be brawnier than gamers.“It takes five people to hoist it,” said Dustin Beck, a vice president at Riot Games. He was sitting in the company’s offices in Santa Monica, Calif., and talking about what is officially known as the Summoner’s Cup, an oversize silver-plated chalice that looks like a faintly sinister “Game of Thrones” prop. “We thought we’d be able to send it back to Thomas Lyte” — the British company that fabricated it — “and they shaved like five pounds off. Still not enough.”Though the Summoner’s Cup may be too weighty to lift in victory, it is coveted by the several hundred professionals who play League of Legends full time.Dozens of those players are now in Seoul, at the fourth world championship. On Oct. 19, the finals will be held in a stadium built for soccer’s World Cup, with 40,000 fans expected and many times that number watching online. Last year, Riot Games says, 32 million people around the world saw a South Korean team win the Summoner’s Cup, along with a grand prize of $1 million, in the Staples Center in Los Angeles. That’s an audience larger than the one that tuned in to the last game of the N.B.A. finals that year.Since its debut in 2009, League of Legends has evolved from a small population of desktop-computer warriors into a full-scale phenomenon. In the process, it has become an e-sport. If you are not a male between the ages of 15 and 25, a group that Riot says accounts for 90 percent of all LoL players, the odds are good that you have never heard of e-sports, a catchall term for games that resemble conventional sports insofar as they have superstars, playoffs, fans, uniforms, comebacks and upsets. But all the action in e-sports occurs online, and the contestants hardly move.In the case of League of Legends, players work a keyboard and a mouse, wielding exotic weapons in a virtual forest of turrets and torches, apparently landscaped by refugees of “Lord of the Rings.” The standard match is a mercilessly kinetic and bewilderingly complex battle between two teams of five players; each team tries to destroy the other’s nexus, a gaudy purple structure that glows like a mood ring.Though e-sports were around for about a decade before Riot Games was born, no company has jumped in with the same intensity. Riot controls every aspect of the professional league, right down to the music composed for live events. It runs tournaments worldwide, with its own slick broadcasting operation streaming to various Internet video sites, complete with color commentators and highlight reels — a kind of ESPN for gamers. The company also keeps a few hundred professional players on salary, ensuring that they can spend up to 14 hours a day practicing, the time required to compete at the highest level. Today, according to SuperData, a market research firm, League of Legends has more than eight times the number of active players as Dota 2, its closest rival in the genre known as multiplayer online battle arena.Yet despite ticket prices of $15 to $50 for seats at league events, the league itself is a money loser. The tournaments function as marketing to bring in new players and to inspire loyalty in regulars, says Marc Merrill, a Riot Games co-founder and the company president. The goal is to inspire enthusiasts, doing for LoL what LeBron James and other stars do for basketball.Which is just the first reason that Riot Games’ business model sounds insane, at least initially. The second is that the game is free to play and can be downloaded from the Internet, with no special hardware required. And players can’t buy extra power or skill for their online avatars, known as “champions” in LoL parlance. In other words, you could play League of Legends for years and never spend a nickel.What the company sells to anyone playing the game — and, for the moment, it sells them nothing else — are game enhancements and goodies that cost less than $10 apiece. This may not seem like a path to riches, but if the player base is big and riveted enough, it is. The company says there are now 67 million active monthly players around the world, and in August alone this crowd spent $122 million, according to SuperData.“Whenever I talk to executives at Riot, it’s like a mantra: ‘Revenue is second, the player experience is first,’ ” said Joost van Dreunen, chief executive of SuperData. “The paradox is that by putting revenue second, League will be one of the very few games to bring in $1 billion in 2014.”Riot Games’ offices are spread around three buildings in an industrial park, and in a handful of satellite offices around the world. About 1,500 people work at the company, most of them in the Santa Monica location. The place looks like a snack-filled haven for young slackers, with lots of employees in flip-flops and T-shirts, but attention to detail defines the company. One wall has a list of dos and don’ts for presenting Riot’s logo, a clenched fist. “The fist should never look like it’s passive, retreating or hanging on for dear life,” is among the don’ts.Another sign of mindfulness: The window shades along walls facing east are usually drawn, even on a recent sunny day.“Oh, yeah, security concern,” said Brandon Beck, the company’s chief executive, taking a seat in his office, illuminated mostly by overhead lights at 3:30 in the afternoon. “Occasionally we have confidential stuff on the walls here and we’ve had snoopers outside with, like, telescopic lenses.”Mr. Beck, who is a co-founder of the company with Mr. Merrill and is also Dustin Beck’s older brother, is a slight guy with a dark beard who rarely stops smiling. He and Mr. Merrill got to know each other through gaming circles while attending rival private high schools in the Los Angeles area.As teenagers, both were fans of online, text-based versions of Dungeons & Dragons, and both monopolized the phone lines in their homes back in the dial-up days of the Internet. As game graphics improved, the two moved on to so-called real-time strategy games like Starcraft and Warcraft II. Other games required expensive consoles like Xbox or PlayStation, and in many cases developers had little incentive to fine-tune or expand these games after an initial run of sales. That’s because they made money by offering a $60 sequel on disc or, in other cases, through subscriptions.“It was always disappointing when development teams would rush in to build the next game and neglect communities that were staying engaged with their game well after it launched,” Mr. Beck said. “We wanted a company that paid attention to players like us who wanted to play competitively and cooperatively.”If the ideal game didn’t exist, these two were going to help create it. Both attended the University of Southern California, and after a failed venture with another game maker, they decided to start a company of their own. In 2006, they moved into the cheapest space they could rent, a mechanical engineering lab in West Los Angeles, and opened Riot Games. Eventually, they won over about two dozen angel investors from Benchmark Capital and FirstMark Capital, then severely tried the patience of those investors.“We thought it would cost $3 million to build League of Legends,” Mr. Merrill said. “It ended up costing six times that.”When League of Legends went live, in October 2009, the free-to-play model was little loved in the United States, where it was associated with lame graphics and money cadging. (Players were constantly begged for dollars.) But in Asia, free-to-play companies were raking in so much cash that subscription games were unplugging, temporarily, so they could re-emerge later as giveaways.Four months after League of Legends was introduced, 20,000 people were playing it simultaneously.“Within 90 days you could see the bone structure of a hit,” said Mitch Lasky, then a board member and a Benchmark Capital investor. “It was doing small numbers at first, but if you knew where to look — how many people were coming in, how many games they played, revenue per average user — you could see the first couple hundred million in revenue.”Then as now, Riot collects money when players spend small sums — in the range of $2 to $7.50 — to acquire champions that they control during the game. They can also buy “skins,” which are modifications to those champions. Care for a Halloween-themed version of a champion named Vlad? How about a champion named French Maid Nidalee reimagined as a white tiger? They are for sale.“People told us when we started that if you don’t charge up front, or if you’re not selling extra power or stats, it won’t work,” Mr. Merrill said. “But that fails to account for the coolness factor. If you’re really into cars, you don’t mind spending $50,000 to soup up your Honda. That’s the player we’re tapping into.”The active user base would grow so fast that Riot Games scrambled to expand the infrastructure and keep up with demand. In 2011, a majority stake in the company was acquired by the Chinese gaming giant Tencent for more than $350 million, according to a Bloomberg report. Riot’s e-sport initiative had yet to take off, but when the deal was announced, LoL had more than two million monthly active users and a fan base that skewed Asian. Today, 80 percent of players are in Asia, according to Riot, and in Korea there’s a nightly League of Legends TV show.Mr. Merrill and Mr. Beck had never owned the company, because, as Mr. Merrill put it, they weren’t very savvy deal makers when they started. But they say they have autonomy and a great relationship with Tencent.“They told us, ‘We want to buy you so that nobody else does and messes up the company,’ ” Mr. Merrill said.At its most basic level, League of Legends is a game of capture the flag, though that is a bit like describing brain surgery as “a medical procedure.”Before play begins, the 10 members of two teams each select a champion, each with a distinct personality, back story and powers. Jinx, for example, is a blue-haired vixen who “likes to wreak havoc without a thought for the consequences, leaving a trail of mayhem and panic in her wake,” as it says on the League of Legends website. Jinx has a minigun named Pow-Pow and a rocket launcher named Fishbones, both of which inflict a very specific type of damage.So the first step to LoL expertise is memorizing the abilities of every champion — all 120 of them.And counting. League of Legends has been engineered to be as engrossing as possible; the company prefers the word “engaging” because it insists that “engrossing” has negative connotation. Part of that engineering involves constant tinkering. New champions are issued every month or so, and the powers of longstanding champions can be reduced (“nerfed” in LoL lingo) or enhanced (“buffed”) by Riot Games.“There are regular updates to the game,” said Joedat Esfahani, a professional player who competes under the name Voyboy. “That forces everyone to rethink their strategy and figure out the optimal way to play. It’s a race to innovate. The best teams are the ones that are constantly evolving along with the game.”Riot likes to say LoL is easy to learn but impossible to master. That’s half right. Even the online tutorial that greets you after sign-up will make a neophyte break into a sweat. A woman’s voice explains the basics of LoL mechanics and iconography, a barrage of information that is hard to hear over the foreboding soundtrack. As you zoom around a verdant battleground called Summoner’s Rift as if strapped to an overhead camera, you’re supposed to read a lot of instruction text at the same time.If you don’t do this fast enough, you are ejected from the tutorial and admonished for being pokey. Speed matters. The eye-hand coordination is so tricky that, according to Riot, pros over 25 years old start to age out of the top rungs of the league.Those who manage to digest the language and arcana of LoL will swear that the following sentence, spoken by the panting narrator of a recent plays-of-the-week video, makes perfect sense:“She kites Blitzcrank through the creeps staying perfectly out of range to avoid the Power Fist and take him down as she flashes to make it a double.”Riot Games has bucked one of the most unbuckable trends of the digital age. Instead of chopping stuff into timesaving bits — turning information into listicles, à la BuzzFeed, or limiting videos to six seconds, à la Vine — League of Legends demands dozens of hours to attain even a basic level of competence.Given all the variables of play, it was only a matter of time before fans started developing moves that the game’s creators had never imagined. In game design circles, this is known as “emergent behavior.” Brandon Beck remembers when he first saw it in LoL, in a YouTube video in which a player made an improbable escape, then baited the enemy into a chase that led directly into the clutches of his teammates.“He was leveraging the mechanics of the game in ways that we didn’t even predict,” Mr. Beck said, still marveling. “We actually showed that play to everyone in the company at a weekly meeting we call show and tell, and everyone was left awe-struck.”A professional league wasn’t originally a core part of Riot’s business plan, though the co-founders thought from the start that they had created a game as fun to watch as any sport. The league became a focus in 2011, after Riot held its first championship tournament at DreamHack, a twice-a-year computer festival in Sweden. Several hundred thousand people watched online, via Twitch.tv, far surpassing the company’s expectations.Viewership has since soared, and the league has expanded. Next year, the company will stage multiple matches, every week, in more than a half-dozen countries. There are professional teams with their own managers, sponsors, sports psychologists and increasingly contentious relationships with their star players, many of whom earn six figures through salaries, endorsements and tournaments.“A lot of money is now funneled through e-sports,” said Steve Arhancet, who owns Team Curse, one of the most successful squads based in the United States. “When I negotiate a contract with one of my players now, it’s my lawyer talking to his lawyer. It wasn’t like that two years ago.”In mid-September, six people met in a room at Riot Games. They were members of a corporate division, called Foundations, tasked with fleshing out the history of all the game’s champions, including the climate, landscape, architecture and dress of their place of origin.Little of that information has any effect on game play. The point of Foundations is to lend concreteness to the Legends universe, as it’s depicted for fans on the website and in promotional materials.A new champion, Azir, had just been unveiled. He comes from a place called Shurima, a once-grand empire in a sweltering desert. The Foundations team looked at Shurima images from the art department, projected on a large video screen.“The designs on the sword look great, but I want to think about leather,” said a team member, looking at the leather garb of a Shurima soldier. “In this environment, I think leather is not your friend.”“It’d be minimal,” someone else agreed.“You’d cook in it,” said another.While Foundations spends its days refining aesthetics and narratives, a separate group is devoted to policing online player etiquette. It’s a problem facing just about every video game publisher. When a few million males in their teens and 20s get together and try to slaughter one another online, in an anonymous setting, while able to chat via on-screen texts, slurs are inevitable.A few years ago, Riot Games trawled academia for hard-core gamers to lead a player behavior team. The company hired Jeffrey Lin, who was working on a Ph.D. in cognitive neuroscience at the University of Washington. He and his colleagues set up a kind of community policing system for flagging offensive conduct or speech and voting on whether the flagged player should receive a warning. Warned players who didn’t reform were banned for two weeks, or, if the infractions were numerous or bad enough, permanently.“Online society has developed without consequences,” Mr. Lin said. “If you were homophobic or used a racial slur, nobody punished you for it.”Mr. Lin says 75 percent of players who receive a warning immediately change their behavior. But the rate of recidivism was high enough that in July, he announced tougher sanctions via Twitter. Henceforth, he wrote, “players that show extreme toxicity,” which includes homophobic and racist language, as well as death threats, “will be instantly 14-day or permabanned.”The next day, Mr. Lin reported on Twitter that he had been inundated with racist tweets.While Riot Games is combating noxious talk, critics contend that it all but encourages a type of sexism. A website called League of Sexism critiques, among other things, female champions — who tend to be male fantasies of slim, busty women in extravagantly kinky outfits — and their images as presented in paintings, called splash art, that are posted to the LoL site.A Riot Games producer, Omar Kendall, addressed this issue at the Comic-Con convention in July, by saying, in effect, that the company was working on it. But the splash art for a champion named Shyvana, who has improbable proportions and a lot of bare skin, was posted just a few weeks ago, suggesting that this new body-type strategy isn’t exactly urgent.Or perhaps it’s just low on a list of priorities. Riot Games feels like a company in a full-out sprint. It is now enhancing the production values of its world championship, hoping to make more of the sort of corporate sponsorship deals that could transform the league from loss leader into moneymaker. Coca-Cola and Korean Air are currently on board.The company is also working on an online merchandise store, to open in 2015, which for the first time will sell official League of Legends items — T-shirts, sweaters and track jackets. One million pieces, in 40 to 50 categories, will be offered. When the store opens, Riot expects hundreds of thousands of clicks every second on the LoL site, roughly the traffic whenever champions are introduced.“That’s about what Target sees on its site on Black Friday,” said Dustin Beck, who is also in charge of the e-store.If the past is any indication, traffic on opening day will surpass even these ambitious expectations. At every step, Riot has underestimated the appeal of its game, from how fast it would catch on, to how much people would spend, to the rise of its e-sports league. It is a gaming company run by gamers who constantly ask, “What would I want from this game?” and then provide it, even if it won’t yield immediate profits.At its root, this means fretting over minutiae, like what soldiers wear in Shurima, the power of Jinx’s minigun and, of course, the weight of the Summoner’s Cup. No matter who wins next weekend in Seoul, rest assured that the thing will be sent back to Thomas Lyte again and forced to lose some weight.