http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/08/health/ebola-eye-color-change-mystery.html
The Mystery Behind an Eye That Changed Color - The New York Times
Eyes and Eyesight,Ebola Virus,Viruses,Crozier  Ian,Medicine and Health
May 7, 2015
6331
How can a viral infection change the color of a person’s eye? Months after Dr. Ian Crozier thought he had recovered from Ebola, he was stunned to find himself developing intense eye pain and fading vision. The inside of his left eye was still occupied territory, full of live, replicating virus. And one morning during this siege, he looked in the mirror and saw that his iris had changed from blue to green.Although such color changes are rare, they do occur from time to time during viral infections, eye doctors say. Herpes viruses are the most common cause, but other viruses can do the same thing. The changes in hue are almost always permanent.But in Dr. Crozier’s case, his eye color went back to normal as he recovered. Why only one eye was affected, and how the changes happened are mysteries. His doctors could not explain them, and two outside experts were also stumped, particularly when the blue-green shift reversed itself.“I’ve been doing what I do for 40 years and I’ve never seen such a reversibility,” said Dr. C. Stephen Foster, a clinical professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School and the chief executive officer of the Massachusetts Eye Research and Surgery Institution.Usually, he said, when the eye changes color, it is because a virus has killed pigmented cells in the iris.Before seeing a photograph of Dr. Crozier’s eye, Dr. Foster said, “The only thing I can conceive of in terms of logic, with respect to reversibility, is that the cell, although infected by virus, though not outright killed, is damaged.”The damage may have led to the change, which then went away when the cells recovered, he suggested.But when Dr. Foster saw the picture of Dr. Crozier’s strangely green eye, he called it “impressive” and abandoned his first theory.“I will say that looking at the overall general structure of the iris itself, it looks awfully healthy,” Dr. Foster said. “The green color is perfectly homogeneous.”The evenness of the color, he said, made him suspect that some alteration in metabolism in the iris might have produced a chemical that caused the color changes.“I’m thinking it’s a consequence of the viral infection itself, that has caused a transformation in the metabolism of the iris cells that is uniform everywhere,” Dr. Foster said.Asked what exactly that metabolic change might be, he said, “I would have to beg off.”But he added, that given the number of Ebola cases, “if this is part and parcel to the infection, one is going to see this repeatedly.”Dr. Jennifer E. Thorne, chief of ocular immunology at the Wilmer Eye Institute at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, also ruled out the usual suspects in Dr. Crozier’s case.“I’m left with edema, or swelling of the iris,” Dr. Thorne said. “Maybe it could diffusely affect the iris, and if the edema goes away, the normal structure and color could return.”But she added: “I’m not sure. It’s very fascinating.”Related: Weeks After His Recovery, Ebola Lurked in a Doctor’s Eye