https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/26/us/cellphone-ruling-could-alter-police-methods-experts-say.html
Cellphone Ruling Could Alter Police Methods, Experts Say - The New York Times
Police,Cellular Telephones,Search and Seizure,Supreme Court (US),Privacy
June 25, 2014
8592
The Supreme Court decision making it harder for the police to search cellphones without a warrant could change procedures around the country, police officials and legal experts said Wednesday.In an opinion hailed as a major advance for personal privacy in the digital age, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. wrote that cellphones are tiny computers that can be said to contain “the privacies of life.” And so the opinion concluded that the message for police in most cases is simple: “get a warrant.”That requirement, however, could hinder law enforcement, said Yousry Zakhary, president of the International Association of Chiefs of Police. “I wish it was just as simple as ‘get a warrant’ ” to comply with the law, he said. “It takes time — and key evidence could be lost.”His organization filed an amicus brief with the Supreme Court, asking that the authority to search cellphones after an arrest be preserved. He said Wednesday’s decision was disappointing.Mr. Zakhary, the police chief of Woodway, Tex., a town near Waco, said that when the Supreme Court began requiring Miranda warnings in the 1960s, there were predictions it would impede law enforcement. “With Miranda, you’ll never get confessions,” he said some people predicted. “Well, we routinely get confessions. We worked through that, and we will work through this one.”The unanimous decision on Wednesday, however, will not mean the end of cellphone searches, said Mark Eckenwiler, a former deputy chief of the Justice Department’s computer crime section. He said that Chief Justice Roberts’s opinion allows searches when the owner of the phone gives consent, and that “police will now, as a routine matter, ask for consent.”“And an extraordinary number of arrestees will give that consent,” Mr. Eckenwiler said, “just as people consent today to all sorts of searches of cars and containers, very much against their personal interest.”Mr. Eckenwiler, now a lawyer with the firm of Perkins Coie in Washington, said, “It’s hard to see how this is going to kill some investigations.”“I don’t think there will be difficulty in getting a warrant in appropriate cases,” he said. “It’s certainly going to increase the paperwork load for prosecutors and the courts.”The decision will cause some jurisdictions to change procedures, while not requiring any change from others, Mr. Eckenwiler said. By his count, the law applicable in roughly 20 states does not require a warrant to search a cellphone, while case law already restricts the right of the police to automatically look at cellphones in other parts of the country. Some states have variations among local jurisdictions.Denver requires warrants, for example, while other Colorado cities, like Colorado Springs, do not. Lt. Catherine Buckley, a spokeswoman for the Colorado Springs Police Department, said its legislative unit would review the Supreme Court’s decision and decide how to conform. The New York Police Department expects no change.“The requirements of this ruling are consistent with the current N.Y.P.D. procedure for searching cellphone data,” Stephen P. Davis, the department’s deputy commissioner for public information, said in an email. “Therefore it does not have any added effect in that the N.Y.P.D. has been already operating within the same general guidelines.”Police officials in San Diego — where the plaintiff in the case, David L. Riley, was arrested — are preparing a department order that will detail the new warrant requirements, said Lt. Kevin Mayer, a spokesman. “Obtaining search warrants is an investigative tool and cellphones will simply be incorporated into this process,” he said.The Riley case could curb police excesses in cellphone searches, said John Wesley Hall, a criminal defense lawyer in Little Rock, Ark., and the creator of a blog on constitutional search issues, FourthAmendment.com. Mr. Hall, a former president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said that this year, the wife of a client of his who was facing a possible indictment on drug charges was taken to the police station for questioning. “They took her cellphone away from her,” he said. Later, they returned it to her and said, “You can go now.” He has filed a motion to force the police to give up any information they received from the phone, he said.He added, however, that many police departments had been changing their policies even before the Supreme Court ruling. “Every case file I’ve seen for the last six months or so say there was a search warrant for a cellphone,” he said. “They could see this coming.”