http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/nyregion/trial-begins-for-peter-liang-new-york-officer-charged-in-fatal-shooting-of-akai-gurley.html
New York Officer Charged in Akai Gurley’s Fatal Shooting Goes on Trial - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Gurley  Akai,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Brooklyn (NYC),New York City
Jan. 25, 2016
4653
At about 11 o’clock on the night of Nov. 20, 2014, Melissa Lopez was in her kitchen in the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York. Her partner was getting ready for his workday, which started at midnight, and her two girls were in their rooms.She heard a single gunshot from the stairwell, which was next to her apartment. A couple of minutes later there was a knock at her apartment door.“I paused for a second; me and my husband looked at each other,” she testified Monday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn. When she looked through the peephole, she saw a woman she knew from the building, Melissa Butler.“I saw her standing there, crying, asking for help, her hands all bloody,” Ms. Lopez said, holding her palms up. The woman’s boyfriend, Akai Gurley, had just been shot by Peter Liang, a New York police officer on duty.On Monday, the trial of Officer Liang began before Justice Danny K. Chun, and Ms. Lopez was called as the second witness. Officer Liang, 28, is charged with manslaughter in the fatal shooting of Mr. Gurley, 28, who was walking unarmed with Ms. Butler in the stairwell of the housing project in Brooklyn.“Akai Gurley is dead today because he crossed paths with Peter Liang, who is sitting here,” Marc J. Fliedner, a prosecutor who is the chief of the civil rights bureau at the Brooklyn district attorney’s office, said in his opening statement, which at one point found him on his knees, demonstrating how Ms. Butler had bent over Mr. Gurley’s body.Both sides agree that while Officer Liang was on patrol on Nov. 20, 2014, he fired his gun down an unlit stairwell, and the bullet killed Mr. Gurley.The prosecution argues that Officer Liang was reckless and violated his training by having his gun out, pulling the trigger with no reason, and neglecting to help Mr. Gurley once he realized the man had been shot. The officer was “worried only about himself,” Mr. Fliedner said, adding, “Instead of calling for help he just stood there, whined and moaned about how he would get fired.”The defense says that Officer Liang was working in a dangerous housing project, and that he was already upset when he accidentally fired his gun. When he realized he had hit someone, he was so shocked that he had to be taken to the hospital.It is, however, standard procedure for New York City officers to be taken to the hospital after they fire their guns.Ms. Lopez was one of the few civilians to witness the aftermath of the shooting and observe Officer Liang’s behavior.Ms. Lopez described how after seeing Ms. Butler, she called 911 and hurried to the stairwell. She saw Mr. Gurley lying on the fifth-floor landing, one flight up from her fourth-floor apartment.Following the instructions of an emergency medical operator, Ms. Lopez grabbed a bath towel from her apartment and handed it to Ms. Butler, then relayed instructions to her on how to perform CPR.She saw two police officers arrive on the landing; one was Asian, she said. (Officer Liang is Chinese-American.)Mr. Fliedner asked if Officer Liang was crying or having difficulty standing. Ms. Lopez said, “No.”Mr. Fliedner played a recording of the 911 call, where Ms. Butler can be heard screaming in the background, “He’s not breathing!”“Was the Asian officer there when she said that?” Mr. Fliedner asked.Yes, Ms. Lopez said.“What did he do?” Mr. Fliedner asked.“Nothing. He didn’t do nothing the whole time,” Ms. Lopez said. “I didn’t see neither one of them do anything.” (In opening statements, Mr. Fliedner said that New York police officers are trained in CPR and required to offer it when necessary.)Asked if Officer Liang spoke to or touched either Ms. Butler or Mr. Gurley, she again said, “No.”“He walked around them and came down the stairs,” she said.When other officers arrived, Ms. Lopez said, she saw someone who seemed to be Officer Liang’s superior, and overheard Officer Liang saying, “I shot him accidentally,” she testified.“The cops shot him. The cops shot him,” Ms. Lopez said near the end of the 911 recording played in court. “There’s like a million cops but no ambulance.”“You need to understand, there was nothing threatening,” Mr. Fliedner said in his opening statement. “His partner’s gun stayed in his holster the whole time.”The fact that Officer Liang fired was, according to his lawyer, an accident.Rae Downes Koshetz, a lawyer for Officer Liang, described his work that night as being in “the most crime-ridden public housing project in New York.” She said Officer Liang, who was working overtime after a nearby shooting, headed to the roof, “the most dangerous place in a dangerous place.”Officer Liang was “beside himself” once “the gun accidentally discharges,” Ms. Koshetz said. He and his partner, Officer Shaun Landau spoke for “at most a couple of minutes,” she added, and Officer Liang was “shaken, he’s terrified, he’s totally — and I mean totally — unaware” that he had hit someone.When Officer Liang realized what had happened, he tried to radio for help but could not, his lawyer said: “His ears are ringing, he’s hyperventilating. By the time the first police supervisor arrives, Peter is unable to communicate except to say, ‘I shot Akai Gurley by accident.’ ” An ambulance took Officer Liang to the hospital.Ms. Koshetz added that the crimes he was accused of, which include manslaughter, official misconduct and reckless endangerment, were “horrible crimes.”“This is not a referendum on policing in the United States,” she said.Outside the courthouse Monday, members of Mr. Gurley’s family briefly addressed the press. “Peter Liang, you don’t live in public housing, but other people do. Why would you have your gun out in a place where people live?” said Mesha Joseph, a cousin. “Why were you scared in a place where people live? Scared enough to have your weapon drawn?”