http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/02/fashion/weddings/02vows.html
Gabrielle Giffords and Mark Kelly - The New York Times
Weddings and Engagements
Dec. 2, 2007
7915
“FRANK CAPRA would have had a field day with the life of Gabrielle Giffords,” Robert B. Reich mused as guests began to gather for the wedding on Nov. 10 of Representative Gabrielle Giffords and Cmdr. Mark E. Kelly.Mr. Reich, the former Labor secretary, saw parallels in the breezy down-home sincerity of the films Capra directed and the lives of Ms. Giffords, 38, a Democratic congresswoman from her home state of Arizona, and Mr. Kelly, 43, a NASA astronaut and Navy pilot from New Jersey.So after the ceremony, Mr. Reich was inspired to toast their spirit: “To a bride who moves at a velocity that exceeds that of anyone else in Washington, and a groom who moves at a velocity that exceeds 17,000 miles per hour.”But theirs was not a whirlwind romance.“We met four years ago in China, as young leaders selected by the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations,” said Ms. Giffords. At that time she was an Arizona state senator and was seeing someone else; Mr. Kelly was married, living in Houston and between space shuttle missions.They really got to know each other at the next year’s meeting of the group, in Arizona, when Mr. Kelly, who had divorced, and Ms. Giffords passed up an aerial tour of the Grand Canyon. They hiked instead, “talking about our lives and how really hard it can be to be single,” Ms. Giffords said. “I had dated some big players, but they weren’t really nice men, and I was a little gun-shy. Mark talked about his love for his two daughters, about sharing custody.” As they spoke, Ms. Giffords wondered if this conversation was the start of something more.They began a long-distance phone and e-mail friendship during which she would sometimes coach him on dating other women. (“Call her the next day to say thanks, even if you didn’t have a great time,” she once said.)Then Ms. Giffords, who had broken up with her boyfriend, contacted Mr. Kelly in November 2004 and suggested an unusual get-together. “I invited him to join me on a tour of the Arizona State Prison in Florence,” she said. “I’d been working on legislation dealing with capital punishment. Mark is the son of police officers — well, he just really wanted to sit in ‘the chair.’ ” And he really wanted to know her better. “She had it all,” he said. “Beautiful, smart, hard working, balanced, fun to be with, and she laughed at my jokes.”When she began her Congressional campaign in 2005, he began showing up at her campaign stops. Ms. Giffords showed up for the launching of his shuttle mission on Discovery in 2006, and chose a wake-up song: “Beautiful Day by U2.”“When our relationship just kept getting deeper, I felt a huge sense of relief,” she said. “I had found someone like me. We’re both really curious. We’re focused on the same things.”They were engaged last fall when he was giving a speech at his alma mater, the Merchant Marine Academy in Kings Point, N.Y., and she was in New York for a fund-raiser.The wedding, at which Rabbi Stephanie Aaron officiated, was held in the evening under ancient mesquites at an organic produce farm in Amado, Ariz., called Agua Linda.Insisting that anything that wasn’t biodegradable had to be reusable, the bride wore recycled Vera Wang, a gown borrowed from a family friend. About 300 guests wore yarmulkes, military medals, silver concho studs or designer creations.As the ceremony opened, the wedding canopy was carried down the grassy aisle to the schmaltzy harmonies of live mariachi, accented by the rhythmic, homey slap of tortillas being made in the hacienda courtyard.As the ceremony ended, Mr. Kelly’s shuttle crew formed the traditional military arch of sabers, staunchly assisted by the young ring bearer, Laurier Flynn, the 4-year-old son of a NASA colleague, who brandished a small toy sword.Mr. Reich continued his musings on the Capra-like scene. “Not ‘Capra corn’ exactly,” he said. “Mark and Gabby do embody American values. They thrive on doing the people’s work.”Only days before the wedding, Ms. Giffords, a member of the House Armed Services and Foreign Affairs committees, was in Iraq with a delegation. Mr. Kelly, meanwhile, is in training to be mission commander for the shuttle flight to the International Space Station in April, so the honeymoon will have to wait.“The longest amount of time we’ve spent together is probably a couple of weeks at a stretch,” Mr. Kelly said. “We won’t always live this way, but this is how we started. It’s what we’ve always done. It teaches you not to sweat the small stuff.”