https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/realestate/essay-contest-catskills-cabin-bethel-new-york.html
Lacking Entries, Essay Contest for a Catskills Cabin Is Halted - The New York Times
Contests and Prizes,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Catskills (NYS Area)
June 16, 2017
8851
Someone was supposed to win a vacation home in the Catskills for $149 and a stellar 200-word essay. But when fewer than 600 people entered the Win Lakefront Dream Home essay contest, which began on Nov. 1, 2016, by the April 30 deadline of this year, the organizers canceled it, leaving some very disappointed contestants.For a winner to have been chosen, 5,500 people would have had to enter, according to contest rules, a threshold that would have delivered to the organizers around $820,000 for the two-bedroom cabin, set on five and a half acres of lakefront property in Bethel, N.Y., about two hours north of New York City.But the contest attracted only a fraction of that target, so each entrant will receive a $100 refund by July 15. The organizers, Andrew Bares and Kelly Lavorgna, a couple who live in New Jersey, will keep each entrant’s $49 administrative fee, for a total of around $29,400. The results, or lack thereof, were announced on the contest website on May 30.“I’m disappointed that it didn’t work out,” said Ms. Lavorgna, 57. “You want somebody to be the winner.”Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna set up the contest after unsuccessfully listing the house on the market twice. They had hoped it would allow them to get closer to the price they sought, even after no prospective buyer would meet it. If the contest had succeeded, they planned on repackaging and selling the contest platform to other homeowners seeking to rid themselves of challenging properties.The outcome throws both visions into doubt, and exposes the risks inherent in such contests. If they go awry, organizers can expect not only a failed sales plan, but a backlash, too.“We were looking at doing this as a business model,” said Mr. Bares, 43, who bought the land in 2007 for around $750,000, and spent another $350,000 building the cabin, which has a three-car garage beneath it.Some entrants expressed frustration with the contest, particularly the rule that allowed the organizers to keep the $49 administrative fee. “It is funny that all of that risk gets shifted over to the people who entered,” said Casey Cornwell, 40, a financial consultant and contestant who lives in San Francisco.Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna estimate they spent some $50,000 to set up and administer the contest. They hired judges to read the entries; a lawyer to draft the contest rules; and a publicist to promote it. They also made a polished three-minute video set to inspirational music with aerial shots of the property and clips of vacationers on horseback, practicing yoga and fishing in the lake.Even with the administrative fee, Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna said, they stand to lose around $20,000. And they still own the house. “I understand people don’t know us, they don’t know our intent,” Mr. Bares said. “Our intent was always to sell the house.”On social media, some people doubted the contest’s legitimacy. “Will you be announcing the winner or is this a ploy for free advertising,” Karen Wrenn posted on Facebook.Another user responded, “Bet no one won.”Ms. Wrenn, 62, a retired teacher who lives in Wilmington, N.C., said that the contest appeared on her Facebook feed one day and reminded her of the telephone scams designed to target older people, so she steered clear. “When I saw that house, I had to write something about it,” she said. “I don’t believe this is legit.”But others did enter, like Henry Chamberlain, 54, a cartoonist who lives in Seattle. “I got caught up in the fantasy,” he said. He wrote an essay about how he wanted a quiet retreat and an inheritance to leave to his daughter, who is 21.Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna shut down the contest’s social media accounts on May 30 and sent emails to contestants explaining the outcome and their refund policy. But some, including Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Cornwell, did not receive that first email and only learned of the results from a reporter. They both received the email when it was resent on June 5. The muddled messaging struck Mr. Chamberlain as disorganized. “If you’re going to play with people’s dreams, you need to find a way to do them the courtesy of getting things in order,” he said.Now, Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna are asking themselves why so few people participated. Perhaps the guidelines were too strict, or maybe the taxes gave people pause; property taxes run around $11,000 a year, and a winner would have had to pay substantial income taxes.Sara F. Hawkins, a lawyer who represents the couple, suspects that it might just be hard to draw people to a region without a national reputation. “I think it would be different if we were giving away an apartment in New York City,” she said.