https://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/24/travel/24cairo.html
An Attack in Cairo Hits Close to Home - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Cairo (Egypt),Bombs and Explosives,Terrorism
Feb. 24, 2009
5037
In a surreal moment last Sunday back in London, just as my 17-year-old daughter, Harriet, was showing me a picture of us taken four days earlier at an Egyptian cafe, we learned a bomb had just gone off in Cairo’s Hussein Square. The number of people injured was still unclear then, but one thing was certain — tourists were among them.“Let me see that picture again,”  I said, grabbing her laptop. I looked closely at the image, our faces lit up not just by the sun, but by  the sheer joy of spending a week in Egypt, taking in sights that are thousands of years old and absorbing a culture so completely foreign to our own. I looked past our exuberant expressions, scrutinizing instead the people and things surrounding us — a man smoking a water pipe, a waiter tallying a bill, and an umbrella over a table bearing the slogan “Unlimited Refreshments, Zero Alcohol.”“That square is where the bombing just happened,” I said to Harriet, stunned.Her eyes widened, as she looked back at the photo and then at our television screen, where a correspondent was now relaying the latest news that a second bomb was being defused in the same square. Harriet pulled up two more photos she had taken of the square, her eyes darting between the images on her computer screen to those on the television set.It was a complete visual disconnect. In the square on the television, darkness was punctuated by flashing lights from police cars and ambulances; chaos reigned. The square on her laptop was comparatively serene; we had spent a lazy afternoon eating spicy shwarma sandwiches while admiring the Sayyidna al-Hussein Mosque, just steps away from our table.Harriet’s photos of the square, a prime tourist spot adjacent to the mosque, one of the holiest sites in the city,  showed men reverentially removing their shoes before entering to pray (it is said the mosque contains the head of Hussein, the grandson of the prophet Mohammad).“How disturbing,” Harriet muttered, a phrase she would later repeat upon learning the bomb was placed under a stone bench, visible in one of her photos.We had not entered the mosque that day — it is closed to non-Muslims — and instead had wandered around the square taking photos, alongside several busloads of tourists, before settling into one of the many cafes bordering the square for lunch. We then wandered through the medieval, carved stone gate that marks the entrance to Khan al-Khalili (the site of another bombing in April 2005), one of the biggest markets in the Middle East, where we bought colorful souvenirs for friends back home: silver cartouches, papyrus paintings, pyramid paper weights and, of course, little statues of King Tutankhamun.Like us, the French students  who we later learned were the victims of the bomb had  planned to shop for gifts, as they were to return home the following morning. Afterward, they gathered in front of the mosque to wait for a bus back to the hotel.  Then the bomb went off, wounding 24 people, including 13 French citizens, 3 Saudis and 4 Egyptians, and killing a French girl the same age as Harriet.What is most disconcerting now, oddly, is how safe we felt while we were there. And not just in Hussein Square, but everywhere in Egypt. In Cairo, there seemed to be police carrying machine guns on nearly every corner. No one could enter a hotel without first walking through the kind of security machines found in airports. There were dogs sniffing cars for explosives, and in Luxor, where we visited numerous tombs and temples, bags had to go through X-ray machines before you could even reach the ticket booth.I can’t pretend that concerns of a terrorist attack did not go through my mind, given the recent  events  in Gaza. That much security, everywhere, can’t help but make one wonder about the dangers that make it necessary.And certainly, while walking through the Hatshepsut Temple in Luxor — the scene of a horrific terrorist attack in 1997 that left  58 tourists dead — it was impossible not to imagine the devastation of that day.But the Egyptians we met were so accommodating to us, and so appreciative of our presence with the global economy in such disrepair, that we felt nothing but welcome in their country. Sure, we were hassled at times by guides and merchants desperate for us to part with our money, which we often complied with out of sympathy.“Obama! Obama!” they would shout to get our attention. “Happy New Year,” said one scarf merchant, randomly. They were probably the only English words he knew — but it was more than I could say in Arabic.After shopping in the souk we visited another mosque near the square that allows non-Muslims to enter — the Mosque of al-Azhar, which dates back to 970 A.D. Wearing headscarves provided at the entrance, we followed one of the custodians as he led us up some back stairs and onto the rooftop. There, under the minaret, we heard the voice of the muezzin starting the sunset call to prayer — a  sound echoed back at us from other mosques, including the one in Hussein Square.“You like Egypt?” our guide asked. “You will come back?”We told him we would by all means and  we meant it. My husband is working there for the moment. And though the bomb has certainly made me feel more nervous about visiting, we will indeed return. Of that I am sure.