http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/21/theater/21orangeburg.html
A Play About the Orangeburg Massacre Opens - The New York Times
South Carolina State University,Theater,Civil Rights and Liberties,Blacks,Taking a Stand (Play),South Carolina,University of South Carolina
Oct. 20, 2010
6810
COLUMBIA, S.C. — Even many South Carolinians barely remember the night when two unarmed black college students and a high school senior were killed, and 28 others injured, after state troopers opened fire at a civil-rights demonstration on Feb. 8, 1968. It was the first incident of its kind on an American campus, but the news was swamped by the Tet Offensive a week earlier and the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. two months later.There was no heavy news coverage like the Jackson State killings in Mississippi received in 1970, no unforgettable photograph like the image that burned the Kent State shootings into the American consciousness that same year.Among those unaware of the incident, in spite of growing up two miles from where it happened at South Carolina State University in Orangeburg, was Calhoun Cornwell, a budding student playwright there. But he was gripped by classroom lectures on the ’68 shootings that had become known as the Orangeburg Massacre, and in 2009, at the urging of classmates, he wrote a play about the event.That drama, “Taking a Stand,” was first performed at South Carolina State last February and included Zachary Delano Middleton, then a senior, playing  his own great-uncle, who was one of those killed. Now Mr. Cornwell and his acting troupe — a mix of university alumni and current students —  hope to tour the show to other historically black colleges, and also influence South Carolina state legislators this winter when they are expected to consider a bill to conduct the first state investigation of the shooting. South Carolina’s governor in 1968, Robert E. McNair, asserted incorrectly that students and patrolmen had exchanged gunfire.Efforts to bring the play to a wider audience began Friday on the main stage here at the University of South Carolina, at the invitation of university officials. It was an inevitably resonant production: black students playing an earlier generation struggling for civil rights, performing at a campus that did not admit black students until 1963 and is only a few blocks from the State Capitol grounds, where the Confederate flag still flies.“This was such a divisive incident that even using the word ‘massacre’ to describe the shooting could provoke anger and arguments among white and black people for years,” said Jack Bass, a professor of humanities and social sciences at the College of Charleston and co-author of “The Orangeburg Massacre” (Mercer University Press), a widely accepted history of the events. “But Calhoun’s play is important because it’s a way in to talking about those involved as human beings, to try to bring a story to life rather than arguing over it.”The shootings grew out of a showdown two nights earlier when black students tried to integrate the nearby All-Star Bowling Lanes, whose white owner refused to let them play, a position that came to draw support from many white people in town. On Feb. 8 students lighted a bonfire on campus, and as some of them watched it burn and others demonstrated, the troopers opened fire with pistols and shotguns loaded, contrary to crowd-control manuals, with lethal buckshot. Some officers claimed later that they had heard gunshots that apparently came from the crowd, but no evidence of that was found, and several people contradicted the officers’ accounts.At the time the shootings were connected to the urban riots and campus unrest across the nation; the headline of the Orangeburg paper on Feb. 9 referred to “Rioting Negroes.” But if the play confronts racism directly — with the owner of the bowling alley using racial epithets frequently — Mr. Cornwell also includes a few sympathetic white characters who stick up for the students, including a pained highway patrolman who expresses regret to another officer for opening fire.“It doesn’t do anyone any good, and it certainly doesn’t do the play’s dramatic integrity any good, if this is just one big indictment of white people or white South Carolina,” said Mr. Cornwell, 23, who graduated in the spring of 2010. “I spent a lot of time in the campus archives reading clippings and histories trying to understand the feelings of the white people involved. The play will only be credible if we’re trying to be fair to everyone and hear everyone’s side.”Drawing on archival records and oral histories with survivors and others, Mr. Cornwell imagined scenes of the young men — the college students Samuel Hammond and Henry Smith, and the high school student Delano Middleton — lighting up with laughter, falling in love and awakening to new ideas. The play follows the college students to the bowling alley and, joined by Mr. Middleton, to the campus rally, where their fates would change irrevocably.“What a play can do, more than a photograph or old newspaper clippings, is give you a full story about how these young men were full of spirit and how their concerns were about their lives ahead, not about picking a fight with police,” said Zachary Middleton, who was among those who asked Mr. Cornwell to write the play.Mr. Middleton, who had never acted in a play before assuming the role of his great-uncle last February, said he particularly enjoyed the casual scenes in the dorms because they portrayed people with full personalities and real hopes, not just names on a memorial like the one in a campus courtyard at South Carolina State.Backstage on Friday night the actors were full of the usual jitters; some said silent prayers for a good performance, and at least one said a prayer for the three men killed. Despite having only a few rehearsals since February, the actors — who included Mr. Cornwell — appeared to deliver their lines spot-on and drew frequent applause from the mostly black audience of about 300.The theatergoers included two married members of South Carolina State’s class of 1954, Lewis J. Wallace and Gladys W. Wallace, who said afterward that the play captured the tense era of Jim Crow segregation better than most representations of the 1960s that they had seen.They recalled the old bowling alley and how they had never even thought to enter there. It closed a few years ago, though a worn sign remains, and few dusty bowling balls sit in a glass case next to the locked entrance.“In your dorm room you could say anything or do anything you wanted, you felt fully free to be yourself,” said Mr. Wallace, 82. “Then you’d step outside and had to be careful at all times, because you didn’t feel the law protected you, that you could be subject to the whims of the police at any moment.“And to think you could be shot on your own campus, because you were standing up for yourself? You’d think it was hard to believe, that it’d only be a story in a book or a play. But it was real in 1968.”