https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/04/nyregion/pier-55-diller-island-performance-venues.html
Question in Battle Over ‘Diller Island’: Which Billionaire Blinks First? - The New York Times
Nonprofit Organizations,Army Corps of Engineers,Hudson River Park Trust,City Club of New York,Diller  Barry,Hudson River,Manhattan (NYC),Durst  Douglas
June 4, 2017
7681
The billionaire slugfest over a planned $250 million performance center on a new pier in the Hudson River in Manhattan continues unabated.Last Wednesday, the Army Corps of Engineers issued a permit for a revised plan for what is known as Pier 55, or, unofficially, Diller Island, that was designed to overcome a successful legal challenge by opponents of the project.Barry Diller, the chairman of IAC/InterActiveCorp, and the Hudson River Park Trust, with the support of Mayor Bill de Blasio, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the local community board want to replace a crumbling pier at the foot of West 13th Street with an undulating platform featuring pathways, lush lawns and three venues for dance, theater and musical performances.Richard Emery, a lawyer for opponents of the project, including the nonprofit City Club of New York, said on Sunday that the new permit would prompt another lawsuit to stop the construction of the new pier on procedural and environmental grounds.“I had a feeling they were going to rush the permit, given all the political forces behind it,” Mr. Emery said. “It will undoubtedly result in a new challenge.”The dispute has become a war of attrition between two very wealthy men: Mr. Diller and Douglas Durst, a prominent developer whose family owns more than a dozen residential and commercial towers in Manhattan.Mr. Diller, and his wife, Diane von Furstenberg, have agreed to pay the cost of building the 2.4-acre Pier 55 and have established a nonprofit to operate and maintain the structure for the next 20 years under a lease with the Hudson River Park Trust.Mr. Durst, who has served as chairman of a related fund-raising group, Friends of Hudson River Park, and has donated $1 million to it, stepped in to finance a series of lawsuits against the Pier 55 project after Riverkeeper, an environmental group that had been financing the litigation, dropped out.Mr. Durst has said that he does not like Mr. Diller’s project or what he calls the “secretive” process through which it was initially approved. But he has tried to remain in the background of the dispute.Neither Mr. Durst nor Mr. Diller responded to requests for comment.The question now is, who will give in first?Mr. Diller said in an interview in May that he had grown “ambivalent” about a project that he has been involved in for nearly five years. In that time, the estimated cost of building and operating the new pier has jumped to $250 million from $130 million, according to Mr. Diller and the park trust.Mr. Diller said that the only opposition is coming from the City Club, Mr. Durst and two other people.Mr. Durst has borne the financial cost of multiple lawsuits, but he could also pay a political price for opposing a project that is supported by Mr. de Blasio, Mr. Cuomo, Senator Chuck Schumer and Councilman Corey Johnson, all of whom are Democrats.“It has been a bumpy road,” Mr. de Blasio said in a statement on Friday, “but I look forward to the day when New Yorkers from across the city can come and enjoy this remarkable open space, and all the cultural and community programming it will offer.”Mr. Cuomo said he “applauded” the Army Corps’ decision to issue a modified permit for Pier 55.In March, Judge Lorna G. Schofield of Federal District Court in Manhattan, citing the federal Clean Water Act, ruled that the Army Corps had failed to properly consider the project’s effect on a protected fish and wildlife sanctuary.The park trust and the Army Corps filed notices last month indicating that they planned to appeal Judge Schofield’s ruling. But the trust also filed an amended application with the Army Corps that it hoped would assuage the judge’s objections. The application calls for eliminating the concrete filling that was to be used in a small number of the pilings that would support the pier and for removing a barge that was to be docked next to the structure.The Army Corps accepted the revisions and issued the new permit. The state Department of Environmental Conservation also issued a permit, according to the trust.Construction will move forward “expeditiously,” James Yolles, a spokesman for the trust, said.But Mr. Emery said the trust’s move to replace concrete filling with pre-cast concrete was an attempt to circumvent the Clean Water Act. The number of pilings, he said, would still greatly disturb the riverbed and aquatic life in the Hudson.