http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/01/sports/ncaabasketball/ncaa-may-act-more-forcefully-against-laws-seen-as-discriminatory.html
N.C.A.A. May Act More Forcefully Against Laws Seen as Discriminatory  - The New York Times
National Collegiate Athletic Assn,Discrimination,Basketball (College),Texas,Football (College),North Carolina,NCAA Basketball Championships (Men),Homosexuality and Bisexuality
March 31, 2016
3555
HOUSTON —  The N.C.A.A. may soon take a more proactive role in using its power to withhold athletic events from states whose laws are seen as discriminatory, the chairman of the Division I board of directors said Thursday.Voters in Houston, the site of the Final Four, repealed an equal rights law last November. North Carolina passed a law in March eliminating discrimination protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender citizens. Greensboro and Charlotte are both scheduled to host N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament games over the next two years.Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.’s president, on Thursday echoed what he said last year, when a law that allowed businesses to decline to serve L.G.B.T. people because of religious beliefs was passed in Indiana and became a hot topic at the Final Four played in Indianapolis, a few blocks from the N.C.A.A.’s headquarters.“For higher education, for the universities and colleges that are members of the N.C.A.A, diversity and inclusion is one of the benchmark values,” Emmert said at a news conference.Harris Pastides, the president of the University of South Carolina and the chairman of the Division I board of directors, went a step further. “I think the membership is inching toward a more proactive stand on this issue,” he said.Pastides added, “I’m sensing among the membership and the board a greater interest in making our viewpoints and values more widely known.”The N.C.A.A. has dealt with other contentious topics in the days leading up to the Final Four. In 2014, the then-Connecticut star Shabazz Napier caused a stir when he complained of “hungry nights” brought on by strict N.C.A.A. restrictions on how many meals teams could provide athletes — a comment that helped prompt a subsequent loosening of those restrictions.By contrast, last year saw the N.C.A.A. widely praised for its stance on Indiana’s law, while issues such as the amateur model and the infractions process were somewhat shunted aside.This year, Saturday night’s matchup between Syracuse and North Carolina in one semifinal has highlighted questions about the N.C.A.A.’s disciplinary processes. The Syracuse men’s basketball program was hit with several sanctions for violations, including outsiders paying former players and former staffers doing former players’ homework. North Carolina is under N.C.A.A. investigation for a long-running scandal in which, according to a report commissioned by the university, numerous football and men’s basketball players were steered toward fraudulent “paper classes” that helped keep them academically eligible.“I understand why optically people have a lot of questions around all that,” Emmert said of Syracuse’s inclusion in the Final Four one year after it served a self-imposed postseason ban.But he defended both the Committee on Infractions, which metes out sanctions, and the men’s basketball committee, whose job, he said, “is not to determine who is eligible or not.”Emmert declined to comment on the North Carolina inquiry except to say that the university has been “very cooperative” and that he expects his staff to be able to issue allegations “in the very near future.”Other topics in the news conference included athletes’ time demands, which the Power 5 conferences plan to limit at the annual N.C.A.A. convention next January, and transfer rules, in which restrictions on athletes’ opportunities have drawn criticism.Returning to the site of the first Final Four he presided over five years ago, Emmert touted the advances since then, including athletes’ louder voice in governance and the ability of colleges to provide more resources, such as scholarships that include the “full cost of attendance” calculation.Athletes, Emmert said, are better off now than they were five years ago, and “that’s a very, very good thing.”He also reiterated his opposition to unionization — which was dealt a significant blow in the past year when the National Labor Relations Board overturned a regional director’s finding that Northwestern’s football players were employees under federal law — and to paying players.Last month, the plaintiffs in the O’Bannon case, an antitrust lawsuit targeting the N.C.A.A.’s scholarship restrictions, appealed to the Supreme Court.“It may well be we wind up with a case in front of the Supreme Court to ascertain what the ultimate state of the law is and what the Supreme Court thinks that collegiate sports should look like in America,” Emmert said. “Then we’ll see where that goes.”