https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/realestate/making-the-most-of-a-hamptons-rental-home.html
Making the Most of a Hamptons Rental Home - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Summer (Season),Renting and Leasing (Real Estate),Westhampton (NY)
July 14, 2017
2852
After spending several summers making regular day trips to a beach club in Atlantic Beach on Long Island with their two young children, Jon and Michelle Wolk decided it was time to consider a vacation house in the Hamptons.They quickly found, however, that properties in their price range — $600,000 to $800,000 — looked more likely to cause headaches than provide relief from them.Instead, they opted for a summer rental.“We thought: ‘Let’s test the waters and get a better sense of what the expenses of owning a second home would be,’” said Mr. Wolk, a senior vice president of finance at a global investment firm. (The family owns a two-bedroom, two-bath co-op in the East 50s.) “If something breaks I can send the owner a text. I like the fixed-expense aspect.”Of course, renting for the summer in the Hamptons isn’t cheap either. Their three-bedroom, two-bath house, which lies on a quiet cul-de-sac in Westhampton, cost them $35,000 for the season between Memorial and Labor Days. Under the terms of their lease, they are also responsible for pool maintenance, weekly house cleaning, lawn care and garbage pick up, which comes to an additional $1,000 a month.Believe it or not, the house is “actually on the lower end of the Hamptons rental market, it’s not facing the ocean or anything like that,” Mr. Wolk said. “And we got something of a deal in the grand scheme of things because they had the listing price wrong — it was actually supposed to be $40,000 for the summer.” (Their real estate agent, Elizabeth Capozzoli, an associate broker with Douglas Elliman, helped talk the owner into sticking with the lower price since the Wolks signed the lease before April.)All the rent was due up front, and they decided to pay the other costs up front as well. “So I’m not reminded of the amount,” Mr. Wolk said. “The point is to enjoy it and spend more time with family and friends.”But even as they had steeled themselves for the steep price of a summer rental, one cost caught them off guard: $825 for a seasonal permit at nearby Rogers Beach.“Now we have to go as much as possible,” said Ms. Wolk, looking not especially perturbed by that outcome.Fortunately, the house is only about a 10-minute drive from the beach. They also liked that it wasn’t on a main road and that the landlord replaced the air conditioner and pool heater right before they moved in. The pool heater was high priority, Ms. Wolk said, because they wanted to take full advantage of the rental during the entire season and were worried that their children, Holden, 6, and Harlow, 3, wouldn’t swim in June if the water was too cold.There’s another nice perk about having rented the house. “I brought out Holden’s iPad and Nintendo, but he never uses it,” Ms. Wolk said. “In the city it’s hard to get him off them.”The property was renovated by the owner to function as a gathering place for extended family and friends. The main part of the house has three bedrooms, but there are two extra bedrooms in the basement, and the garage is set up as a separate two-bedroom, one-and-a-half-bath.“Every weekend we have designated for family or friends,” Mr. Wolk said.Ms. Wolk’s younger cousins, for example, were happily availing themselves of the garage house over the Fourth of July weekend.Perhaps best of all, Westhampton is about a two-hour drive from New York and doesn’t require taking Route 27, the quaint but often clogged road that funnels vacationers farther east.In part because of the comparatively easy trip, they have been able to come out every weekend except Father’s Day. They made a firm decision not to be laissez-faire about using the house after calculating the per-weekend cost to be slightly under $3,000.To avoid having to skip a weekend in the Hamptons in July when Harlow turned three, they hosted a birthday party with her friends in the city in June and planned a family celebration out east on her actual birthday. “She shouldn’t miss out on her birthday” with friends, Ms. Wolk said. ”But we didn’t want to miss out on a weekend,” adding that Harlow thinks having a double birthday is the greatest thing in the world.Their commitment to using the house does not, however, extend to spending weekdays there. Ms. Wolk, a pediatric occupational therapist who’s now a stay-at-home mom, explained that while schedules would allow her and the kids to spend some weeks there, she doesn’t feel the same way as her husband about the seclusion of semirural life.“I’m chicken to stay alone here at night,” she said, shaking her head. “I like having a doorman and I find it comforting when I can hear the neighbors. Besides, all these sliding glass doors?”