https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/nyregion/in-lopsided-money-race-cuomo-campaign-is-awash-in-cash.html
Awash in Campaign Cash, Cuomo Benefited From Big Donors and Loopholes  - The New York Times
New York State,Cuomo  Andrew M,Campaign Finance,Political Advertising,Astorino  Robert P,Midterm Elections (2014),Advertising and Marketing,New York Public Interest Research Group,Elections  Governors
Nov. 4, 2014
7760
Even as he confronted a federal investigation and sagging poll numbers, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo always possessed one source of comfort: No matter the adversity he faced, he could pay for enough television advertising to try to wash his problems away.Of the many advantages Mr. Cuomo had enjoyed heading into his re-election campaign — the heavy Democratic enrollment edge in New York, the visible stage that incumbency provides — few have proved more important than his bank account.He raised more than $45 million over the past four years, according to an analysis by the New York Public Interest Research Group. His Republican opponent, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, had raised only $4.8 million as of last month.Mr. Cuomo has raised so much money that his campaign reported earning $104,000 from interest and dividends this year alone.The huge difference in financial resources allowed Mr. Cuomo to flood the airwaves and voters’ mailboxes with messages promoting himself and portraying Mr. Astorino as reckless about gun policy, intolerant of minorities and callous to older people who rely on Medicaid.The governor has been flush from the day he took office, and his campaign spending has been supplemented by the spending of generous friends.During his first two years in office, a group of business interests called the Committee to Save New York spent more than $16 million to support Mr. Cuomo’s agenda, while declining to identify its donors.The governor focused his own fund-raising almost entirely on donors making large contributions. Individuals in New York can give up to $60,800, far more than donors can contribute in most states.As of last month, Mr. Cuomo received 81 percent of his contributions from donors who gave him at least $10,000, according to the Nypirg analysis. Donors giving less than $1,000 accounted for only seven-tenths of 1 percent of his total haul.Mr. Cuomo has raised money from many businesses and individuals who have a stake in the activities of state government, including real estate interests like Extell Development and the Related Companies, as well as big corporations like Cablevision and Comcast.New York also has some of the most porous campaign fund-raising laws in the nation, and Mr. Cuomo has proved a master at availing himself of those openings.In particular, he exploited a loophole that allows donors to sidestep contribution limits by giving donations through a series of limited liability companies. The real estate magnate Leonard Litwin has given $1 million to Mr. Cuomo through limited liability companies tied to his firm, Glenwood Management, according to Nypirg.In addition, Mr. Cuomo used the State Democratic Party’s “housekeeping account” — meant to pay for expenses like office rent, though it can accept unlimited donations — to finance television commercials in 2013.“New York’s governors have long occupied a dual role of being both the most vociferous critics of the state’s campaign finance laws and the biggest beneficiaries of the same loopholes they assail,” said Bill Mahoney, the research coordinator at Nypirg. “Governor Cuomo is no exception.”With many large donors backing the governor, a sizable portion of Mr. Astorino’s money came from small donations.And Mr. Astorino has argued, without much success, that the governor caters his policies to the rich and powerful.“He has milked dry every special interest group and corporation that he can,” Mr. Astorino said in an interview. “It’s funny how many people who have written out $25,000 and $50,000 checks because they had to have come up to me and said, ‘I had to give Cuomo a check, but I’m voting for you.’ ”Mr. Cuomo bristled when asked about his fund-raising at campaign stops over the weekend.“Fund-raising is a vital function of political campaigns, and the amount of money that the current system allows people to raise, legally, is excessive,” he said.In his policy platform for a second term, he detailed a number of goals relating to campaign finance, including closing the L.L.C. loophole, lowering contribution limits and setting up a system of public financing for state political campaigns.Speaking with reporters, Mr. Cuomo rejected the idea that he could model good behavior by voluntarily refraining from exploiting the weaknesses in the campaign fund-raising laws that he supports changing.“That is a wholly unworkable route if one wants to stay in public service,” he said, “because then you would lose, and you would get nothing done.”Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York, said she was hopeful that Mr. Cuomo would focus on campaign finance reforms in his second term, while expressing concern about how much he raised from huge donors.“At the same time,” she said, “this makes the governor a particularly effective advocate for changing the system, because he’s so successful at it.”