https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/27/movies/noah-baumbach-discusses-a-scene-from-while-were-young.html
‘While We’re Young’ (With Movie Trailer): Noah Baumbach Discusses a Scene - The New York Times
Movies,Baumbach  Noah,Driver  Adam,Roth  Ann,Stiller  Ben,While We're Young (Movie)
March 26, 2015
8794
In “While We’re Young,” the latest comedy from the writer and director Noah Baumbach, Ben Stiller and Naomi Watts play Josh and Cornelia, a middle-aged married couple restless for a change. As they grapple with growing older, they develop a relationship with a younger Brooklyn couple, Jamie and Darby (Adam Driver and Amanda Seyfried), and are invigorated by the couple’s fresh look on life. Much of the film’s comedy comes out of how the two couples relate to each other, appropriating elements from one another’s lives.This video features a scene between Josh and Jamie, shot on Park Avenue during a weekday. In a recent interview in New York, Mr. Baumbach discussed his process in crafting the scene and the film. Here are excerpts from that conversation.Q. What was the genesis of “While We’re Young?”A. I wanted to do a comedy about a marriage, and one at a particular point. In this case, a couple that has thought about having kids, tried to have kids, not had kids. And what that means going forward in your marriage. In doing that, I came up with this intergenerational idea of what this younger couple means for this 40-something couple, how they’re both a romantic projection of what they could be or what they once were.Much of the film’s comedy comes from culture clash moments between the two couples. How did you decide what to reference?The comedy was essentially a timeless idea of, once people hit a certain age, how youth feels when they run into younger people. But because it was in the present, I had to engage how technology has changed and influenced things. Because it was in Brooklyn, I had to engage in the culture here and now. But I also was aware that I couldn’t ever keep up with the changing youth culture in Brooklyn, that I would be behind the curve no matter what.In a way, Ann Roth, my costume designer, and Adam Stockhausen, the production designer, we kind of invented our own visual ideas. We took from stuff that was interesting to us, old French movies. Adam Driver’s outfits were inspired by this Eric Rohmer movie “La Collectionneuse.” I felt like if this stuff isn’t happening right now, it will be.Would you tell me a little about the scene you’ve chosen to discuss?Adam Driver’s character, Jamie, is walking Ben Stiller’s character, Josh, to a pitch meeting with a hedge-fund manager. Josh is looking for some finishing money for his documentary, which he’s been working on now for close to 10 years. And he’s been inspired by Jamie to finish it. Josh is uncomfortable asking for things, pitching, engaging in the commerce of art, as he would see it. Jamie has been encouraging Josh to go for it and not to be so proud.What I love about this scene is we were staging our little fiction in the midst of a very real New York City. Everything around them is really going on. The city going on its day, except for the bicyclist, who we staged. These scenes can be extremely frustrating to shoot because for every good take that ends up in the movie, you have many that have people jumping in front of the camera flashing the “Spinal Tap” heavy metal symbol. Somehow that’s the most common one you get. You also get people identifying the actors and pointing. And if you even look closely here, you can see people discovering something is going on and watching. But that doesn’t bother me. I feel like there’s a tradition, you see it a lot in ’70s movies in New York City, of stuff that was shot on location without permission. You look at “Midnight Cowboy,” you see people looking at the camera all the time and it doesn’t take away. In some ways I feel like it almost adds an energy to the scene.Are you shooting this somewhat covertly?In this case, we’ve broken down to a smaller crew so we’re less conspicuous. We’re also, as you can see, far enough away from the action that even if people discover something is happening, they don’t necessarily know where the camera is. We’ve done this over the years with different degrees of covertness. We’ve been in a van hiding behind a curtain. We actually shot Ben in “Greenberg” in L.A. a lot that way. Here, you can find us if you know where to look. The song “Eye of the Tiger” comes into play at the end. Tell me about using that.This was an instance where Jamie is playing something back from Josh’s adolescence. Somehow now that Josh can see it through the eyes of someone in their 20s, it suddenly seems cool again. I’ve definitely had this experience with “Eye of the Tiger,” having been a kid when I saw “Rocky III” and discovered the song then and liked it then. It got you psyched. But a few years later, when I got a little older, I felt like “Eye of the Tiger” was a pretty silly song. Ben has a great reaction to it when he puts the headphones on. First he has this expression like, oh really, you’re playing me “Eye of the Tiger”? But then, as he keeps listening to it, he’s like, this is actually great. It is getting me pumped. Ben’s performance is great here. You get to see him go from bemusement to a pumped-up, energized person.The scene does call to mind other movie street scenes.Part of the reason I shot the scene as wide as I did was that I love Ben and Adam’s physicality. They’re both such physical actors, but they’re different in height. It actually did evoke “Midnight Cowboy” or “Tootsie” when Bill Murray and Dustin Hoffman are walking down the street. Even if you couldn’t hear what they’re saying, it says a lot visually.Below is a trailer for “While We’re Young.”