https://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/16/movies/16lim.html
Tarantino’s Secret Weapon: Christoph Waltz in ‘Inglourious Basterds’ - The New York Times
Movies,Tarantino  Quentin,Waltz  Christoph,Inglourious Basterds (Movie)
Aug. 12, 2009
3833
AT the Cannes Film Festival in May, when the Austrian actor Christoph Waltz stepped up to the podium to accept his best-actor prize for playing an SS colonel in “Inglourious Basterds,” he cut through the usual bluster of the ceremony with a direct and touching declaration. His voice choked with emotion, Mr. Waltz addressed his director, Quentin Tarantino. “You gave me my vocation back,” he said.From Mr. Tarantino’s point of view it was a fair trade. “He gave us our movie back,” Mr. Tarantino said, speaking by telephone from Australia recently.At his Cannes news conference earlier, Mr. Tarantino insisted that he would not have made “Inglourious Basterds” (opening Friday) had he not found the right actor to play the pivotal part of Hans Landa. He elaborated on the phone, “I knew Landa was one of the best characters I’ve ever written and probably one of the best characters I will ever write.” He auditioned numerous actors for the role (which calls for fluency in German, English and French), but while most of them were perfectly  competent, “they didn’t get my poetry,” he said. “I literally had to consider I might have written an unplayable part.”This may sound like the bravado of a garrulous auteur who’s not known for understatement. But there is a good case to be made for Colonel Landa as the ultimate Tarantino creation. More than a quotable motormouth, this is one surprisingly multifaceted cartoon villain: a genial sadist, an oppressively polite interrogator, a hyper-articulate polyglot whose verbal dexterity is his scariest weapon. Brad Pitt, as the leader of an American Nazi-killing brigade, is the head “basterd” and the marquee name, but it’s Mr. Waltz, as many critics noted at Cannes, who owns the film.Mr. Tarantino’s track record for reviving stalled acting careers is unmatched among contemporary directors. Most of his casting choices have been a matter of putting familiar faces in a new light: John Travolta in “Pulp Fiction,” Pam Grier in “Jackie Brown.” But at 52, Mr. Waltz, who auditioned mere hours after Mr. Tarantino told his producers he was ready to pull the plug on the project, is a true discovery, an actor who had long been overlooked within the German-speaking world and was a total unknown outside.As far as Mr. Waltz is concerned, middle age is not a bad time for a career breakthrough. “It helps to have done time,” he said over dinner at the Standard Hotel in Manhattan recently, referring to his long, busy, but not especially fulfilling career as a journeyman character actor, mostly in German television. He is taking in stride his newly raised profile and the talk of a possible Oscar nomination that started at Cannes and is likely to intensify in the coming months. “It hasn’t burdened me at all,” he said.Mr. Waltz admitted to being initially bewildered by Mr. Tarantino’s script, a five-chapter behemoth filled with lengthy, sinuous conversations that snake their way through an intricate series of bluffs, reversals and mind games. “I was completely thrown by it, having been conditioned to these formulaic three-act structures,” he said. “And in front of me I had this thing that blows that all to smithereens.” After a pause, he added: “I love that word: smithereens.” (No less than Colonel Landa, Mr. Waltz seems to relish wordplay and the musicality of words.)He soon figured out the key to the Tarantino worldview. “I was asking myself: How does this man get through so many layers of reality?” Mr. Waltz said. And so he came up with a helpful analogy (in the form of a Landa-esque pun, no less): “It’s like a light quantum, how he jumps from one reality to the next, so I termed it the Quentin leap. It’s Quentin physics.”In person Mr. Waltz is wryly funny and notably devoid of actorly pretensions. It doesn’t take long for him to reveal a deep skepticism about the profession that comes from his years as an industry foot soldier (and that may serve him well as he enters the big leagues). Asked when he knew he wanted to act, he had a ready rejoinder: “Still don’t.”“The basic reason why anyone wants to become an actor is arrested development,” he continued. “Which is great when you’re 18. Becoming an actor is like becoming a father. It’s not hard to become one. Making a life of it is the challenge.”The Vienna-born Mr. Waltz belongs to the fourth generation of a theater family (his parents were set designers, his grandparents actors), and his early training was “very traditional Viennese”: he studied singing and opera at the University of Music and Performing Arts in Austria. In the late ’70s he moved to New York for a spell and was exposed to the teachings of Lee Strasberg and Stella Adler. (He credits Adler’s technique of script interpretation as the basis for his analytical approach.)Back in Europe he found steady theater work in Zurich and in Germany — in Cologne and Hamburg — before moving to London in the late ’80s with his wife at the time, a New Yorker, and their children. (He now lives mainly in Berlin.) In  need of a regular paycheck he focused on television work. “You have to make a living, support a family,” he said. “But in a way you’re still striving for excellence, and your frustration only increases.”He appeared in several features by respected directors, like the Pole Krzysztof Zanussi and the German Oskar Roehler. But much of the work was routine  and unrewarding. “Villain was sort of the flavor of the past few years,” he said. “Before that there were a lot of comedies.” He added matter-of-factly, “There are a few films I’m not ashamed of.”At Cannes some questioned the tastefulness of “Inglourious Basterds,” a violent revenge fantasy that, as Mr. Tarantino excitedly put it at his news conference, uses the power of cinema (and the flammable properties of celluloid) to “bring down the Third Reich.”Mr. Waltz said, “I think he’s doing exactly what an artist should do, which is offer an alternative perspective on our world.”A proudly bonkers parallel history, “Inglourious Basterds” opens with the fairy-tale invocation “Once upon a time ... in Nazi-occupied France.”But Mr. Waltz said, “ ‘Once upon a time’ doesn’t mean don’t take it seriously, if you’ve ever read ‘The Uses of Enchantment,’ ” the classic study of children’s stories by the Austrian psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim. “The point is not to transport the world of the Nazis to the realm of the untrue,” he added, “but to the realm of our unconscious wishes and fears.”Mr. Waltz had nothing but praise for Mr. Tarantino’s way with actors. “I’ve tried to analyze why actors are often better in Quentin’s films than in other films, and I think it’s because he doesn’t expose them to the necessity of bad acting,” he said. “He doesn’t specify the intended effect or ask you to show motivations. And he makes it easy for you to be on the character’s side.”Mr. Tarantino said that with the exception of Uma Thurman, the star of “Pulp Fiction” and his two “Kill Bill” movies, he had never before worked so closely with an actor. Mr. Waltz was an unknown quantity to most of the other actors, and Mr. Tarantino exploited the element of surprise, rehearsing with him in private and even instructing him to play down the part during group read-throughs.Mr. Tarantino said some European journalists have asked him to “protect Christoph”:  “One of them told me, ‘Don’t let him be the bad guy in the “Die Hard” movies.’ ”If he wants it, Mr. Waltz could probably go on to a lucrative career playing Euro-villains in Hollywood thrillers. But as he put it, “I’m open to working anywhere, but not on anything.” He now has an American agent and is currently deciding among three scripts. “That’s the great thing about all of this: having choices,” he said.At the same time he realizes that he’s been spoiled by his experience on “Basterds,” the rare combination of a generous director and a juicy role. “That’s Quentin physics for you,” Mr. Waltz said. “It’ll be hard to return to regular solid-body physics.”