https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/arts/music/popcast-kpop-kcon.html
Can K-pop Conquer America? - The New York Times
Pop and Rock Music,Newark (NJ),KCON,K-pop,CNBLUE (Music Group),NCT 127 (Music Group)
June 30, 2017
4183
The Popcast is hosted by Jon Caramanica, a pop music critic for The New York Times. It covers the latest in pop music criticism, trends and news.Last week, the annual K-pop convention and concert called KCON came to Newark for its third straight year, bringing superfans into close — but not too close — contact with some of their favorite artists, both established (CNBLUE) and new (NCT 127).KCON’s growth reflects consistently increasing fanaticism in this country about K-pop, which is popular the world over, and has loads of devotees here, but hasn’t quite cracked the mainstream of American pop culture.On this week’s Popcast, Mr. Caramanica talks about K-pop’s history and the current scene with Jeff Benjamin, Fuse’s senior digital editor and the K-pop columnist for Billboard.As we approach the five-year anniversary of Psy’s “Gangnam Style,” which became a viral hit thanks to its flashy video, K-pop is in a very different place.“A lot of K-pop fans would argue that doesn’t exactly represent the K-pop world in general, but that was a huge breakout moment in terms of the last five years,” Mr. Benjamin said about the song. “It had an effect, whether you realize it or not.” Today, we don’t have a chart-topper like Psy, but touring figures and album sales demonstrate the scene is growing internationally. Mr. Benjamin cited the success of BTS, a boy band that appeared at the Billboard Music Awards and showed up on the American album chart. “This was all based on YouTube and people talking,” he said.But is K-pop a genre? “I really don’t think people are just fans of the music itself,” Mr. Benjamin said (he votes no).Talking about “Despacito,” the Spanish-language song that recently topped the Billboard singles chart with an assist from Justin Bieber, Mr. Caramanica said, “I think there’s more sympatico with Korean pop music and American pop and hip-hop music, that I’m surprised that you do not see collaborations of that nature on American releases.”What’s holding this back? Mr. Benjamin said such team-ups have been awkward so far. “There needs to be that very smart collaboration where it just is natural and it feels right. And I think it’s coming.”But he did point back to the success of the group BTS, who have reached the next level “strictly by doing what they do well in Korea.”Email your questions, thoughts and ideas about what’s happening in pop music to popcast@nytimes.com.