http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/07/nyregion/domenic-recchia-steps-up-to-unseat-michael-grimm.html
Domenic Recchia Answers Call to Unseat Representative Michael Grimm - The New York Times
Recchia  Domenic M Jr,Grimm  Michael G,Elections  House of Representatives,New York State
July 6, 2014
7749
Domenic Recchia thinks there’s something for everyone to loathe about the man he wants to unseat in Congress, Michael G. Grimm.There is that 20-count federal indictment, for starters, that accuses Mr. Grimm, a two-term Republican from Staten Island, of employing illegal immigrants and hiding around $1 million in sales and wages at his Manhattan health-food restaurant, Healthalicious. Not the kind of work history, Mr. Recchia says, that is likely to impress the many union members who live in the neighborhoods of the 11th District, encompassing Staten Island and a slice of southern Brooklyn.And then there are the district’s mothers and fathers, who Mr. Recchia, a Democrat, says ought to be appalled by Mr. Grimm for threatening, on camera, to toss a diminutive television reporter off a United States Capitol balcony — with the parting promise: “I’ll break you in half. Like a boy.”“Michael Grimm should pick on someone his own size. You know?” said Mr. Recchia, who is a large and lumbering trial lawyer, whereas Mr. Grimm is a taut and stocky former Marine. “I know how to fight,” he said, recalling his college years playing outside linebacker. For good measure, he added, “Let’s get somethin’ straight.”It is precisely Mr. Recchia’s old-school Brooklyn bearing — his thinning hair gelled into something resembling gray tubes, his one-two-tree accent — that the city’s Democratic power brokers are banking on to neutralize Mr. Grimm’s own outer borough credentials.Democrats had for years sought to recruit Mr. Recchia, a former City Council finance chairman, top lieutenant for former Speaker Christine C. Quinn and, not unimportant for the district, an Italian-American. And they are optimistic that the political conditions now are more favorable than last time around, when Mr. Grimm, already the subject of an F.B.I. investigation, defeated a little-known Democratic opponent.Redistricting moved roughly 60,000 votes into the district from that of Representative Jerrold Nadler, a Democrat who once shared an office with Mr. Recchia in Coney Island. Democrats also point to Mr. Recchia’s better relationship with unions than others who have challenged Mr. Grimm, the influx to Bay Ridge of liberals priced out of Park Slope and the expectation that his Brooklyn roots will help him run up the score there.But Democrats acknowledge that the election will ultimately be determined on Staten Island, which cast the overwhelming percentage of votes in 2012, and which traditionally prefers tough-guy Republicans, most notably former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani. Here, Mr. Grimm’s aggressiveness and allegations of tax cheating seem far from politically fatal. He is still a war hero and a former undercover agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Recchia is a foreigner from across the bay.On a recent afternoon, workers returning from Manhattan on the Staten Island Ferry complained about unnamed forces “persecuting” and “railroading” Mr. Grimm. They shrugged off the charges against him, to which he has pleaded not guilty; he is free on a $400,000 bond. They were equally unbothered by accusations that Mr. Grimm also skirted campaign-finance laws, associated with criminals, flashed a butter knife at a Democratic congressman and waved a gun during a 1999 fight at a nightclub in Queens, where The New Yorker reported he shouted, “All the white people get out of here.”“He has a no-nonsense approach,” Anthony Vitale, a 44-year-old banker, said as he watched the skyline from the ferry’s stern. He chalked the indictment up to “political propaganda.”That embattled attitude pervades the Grimm campaign, or what remains of it. The Republican establishment — from Speaker John A. Boehner to Mr. Grimm’s own campaign manager, Bill Cortese — has abandoned Mr. Grimm, who left his seat on the House Financial Services Committee after his indictment in April, but not his seat in Congress.One day last month, Mr. Grimm walked onto the House floor for votes, asked a clerk for gum and had a long conversation with Mark Sanford, a Republican who won his seat after a seemingly career-destroying extramarital affair when he was governor of South Carolina.Mr. Grimm has had a hard time holding onto donors. But he does have Guy V. Molinari, the former Staten Island borough president and congressman, his mentor and de facto campaign manager, who, like Mr. Grimm, considers the government’s case a frivolous witch hunt. “Tell me the merchant who doesn’t hire illegal immigrants,” Mr. Molinari said.“Schumer is behind it,” Mr. Molinari added, referring to Charles E. Schumer, New York’s senior senator. “He is from New York and knows how to get things like this done.” (“Laughable,” said a Schumer spokesman, Matt House.)But Mr. Molinari expressed confidence in his candidate, who is much better known on Staten Island than Mr. Recchia and who, he said, is working hard.“He’s single,” Mr. Molinari said. “So he can afford to be out every night going to functions.”Mr. Grimm spent a recent weekend on Staten Island, though he declined to be interviewed and would not divulge which functions, if any, he attended. Mr. Recchia, on the other hand, was eager to be seen and heard.During an interview at his Staten Island headquarters, he spoke over thudding stomps through the ceiling, as girls practiced at a dance studio upstairs. Wearing a striped shirt and pleated khakis, Mr. Recchia talked emotionally about how the damage from “Superstorm Sandy” motivated him to run for Congress.He insisted his bid was “not at all” because Mr. Nadler and the labor unions had forced him out of the race for city comptroller to make room for Scott M. Stringer. (“The new bosses of New York just decided that Recchia wasn’t the right guy,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a political consultant who worked with Mr. Recchia on that aborted run.)Mr. Recchia also sought to blunt the notion that he was himself a blunt Democratic instrument to remove Mr. Grimm, recalling his successes as “the cultural czar of New York City.”“People say, ‘Why’re you so into the arts and the drama and everything?’ ” Mr. Recchia said of his time as chairman of the Council’s Cultural Affairs Committee. “And I say” — here he dropped his voice to a near whisper — “it was because when I went to school, I played the saxophone. It was important.”He dropped the name of Agnes Gund, a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art (“Aggie,” he called her), and said that the city’s cultural arbiters “understand that I understood what they were saying.”After arguing — apparently in earnest — that working with Michael R. Bloomberg proved he could work with Tea Party Republicans, Mr. Recchia rose and checked his iPhone, its display a spider’s web of shattered glass. (“My daughter gets my upgrades,” he explained.)He walked into a small adjacent phone bank, greeted a dozen volunteers, and sat down under a sign reading “Smile While You Dial.” He dialed, smiled and introduced himself as “Domenic M. Recchia Jr.” to a woman he called Roseanna. “See you soon, all right?” he signed off. “Go back to your pedicure.”As the sun set over the Staten Island Expressway, an aide drove Mr. Recchia to the swing neighborhood of Concord. In the front passenger seat, Mr. Recchia pointed out the cemetery where his father was buried, and the streets on which his mother, aunt and three sisters live. Blue Recchia signs papered their windows. Mr. Grimm, he said, used to live in Queens.“How you doing?” he said to men sitting on Concord’s porches. “Hello, ladies,” he said to women walking their dogs.Some residents told him what he hoped to hear.“We need change, definitely not somebody who’s living under F.B.I. eyes,” Jacclyn Rock, 33, told a delighted Mr. Recchia. “Grimm? You see when he threatened that reporter? He was like, ‘I’ll end you.’ ”But Mr. Recchia, whose greatest challenge is name recognition, also ran into informed opposition.“I know who you are,” said Robert Koeth, 84, who wore a T-shirt of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge that read “Staten Island, Gateway to New York.”“I’ve been a Grimm supporter since he was born,” Mr. Koeth added, shooing Mr. Recchia away. “So enjoooy!”With an audible sigh, Mr. Recchia climbed back into the car and instructed the driver to return to Brooklyn.There, he proudly pointed out the new rides he helped bring to Coney Island, and lamented that Democratic stronghold’s exclusion from his congressional district. “See those high-rises?” he said dreamily. “Thousands of votes out here.” Asked about the votes he picked up from Mr. Nadler’s district, he twisted to the back seat, grinned widely, and repeated “Marlboro Houses, Marlboro Houses” like an incantation.The car drove down Ocean Avenue and into Gravesend — to the childhood home that Mr. Recchia said his father built, and then, a few blocks away, to the modest brick house where he lives now with his wife and three daughters.“Michael Grimm did very well in this area,” Mr. Recchia said, staring through the windshield. “And we are going to take it away from him.”