http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/nyregion/testimony-at-trial-details-no-show-job-of-dean-skeloss-son.html
Testimony at Trial Details No-Show Job of Dean Skelos’s Son - The New York Times
Skelos  Dean G,Skelos  Adam B (1982- ),New York State,Physicians' Reciprocal Insurers,Bonomo  Anthony,State Legislatures
Dec. 3, 2015
6868
Writing a performance review can be a tricky, thankless task, but few posed the quandary that senior management at Physicians’ Reciprocal Insurers faced in June 2013: What should they say about Adam Skelos?He was hired by P.R.I. that year, and evidence offered Thursday at the political corruption trial of Mr. Skelos and his father, State Senator Dean G. Skelos, a Long Island Republican, showed he rarely appeared for work. Adam Skelos’s former supervisor has previously testified that the senator’s son threatened to “smash” in his head after he questioned his work habits.But Anthony Bonomo, the company’s chief executive and owner, testified on Thursday that he was afraid to fire Mr. Skelos, 33, from his $78,000-a-year job because it might upset the senator, whose influence as the Senate majority leader could sway legislation that could directly affect P.R.I., a medical malpractice insurer on Long Island that is licensed by the state.While all employees at the company typically receive annual performance reviews, an exception was made for Adam Skelos, Mr. Bonomo said. Emails shown to the jury on Thursday indicated that Mr. Bonomo told his brother Carl, who also works at P.R.I., to “do nothing” about Mr. Skelos’s review.“I just felt that it was best to do nothing and to avoid the chance in Albany that, you know, that we would run into a problem with any legislation,” Mr. Bonomo explained.Senator Skelos and his son face charges related to three separate schemes. In the scheme involving Mr. Bonomo, the senator is accused of using his office to get his son a no-show job at P.R.I. The trial, which is being heard in Federal District Court in Manhattan in front of Judge Kimba M. Wood, is in its third week; the prosecution indicated it could rest its case as early as Monday.Mr. Bonomo, 57, acknowledged that he and Senator Skelos, 67, have known each other for years. The two met in 1980 when Mr. Bonomo was a law clerk at a firm the senator worked for. Over the years, they stayed in touch, meeting at political fund-raisers and charity events.Mr. Bonomo would go on to run P.R.I., which has significant business before the state. For a time he was chairman of the New York Racing Association.Mr. Bonomo said he never missed an opportunity to talk to the senator about things in the medical malpractice world, including legislation affecting the company. They also talked about their families, and at Christmastime the two men would socialize along with their wives, Mr. Bonomo said.In 2010, at a party hosted by Park Strategies, a lobbying and corporate strategy firm founded by former United States Senator Alfonse M. D’Amato, a New York Republican, a conversation between the two men turned to what Mr. Bonomo could do for Adam Skelos.Senator Skelos explained that Adam Skelos’s girlfriend worked at a court reporting firm, and he asked if P.R.I. could send any work to this company. Mr. Bonomo testified that he received an email from the senator’s son several weeks later, which included his girlfriend’s name and a link to the company she worked for.Mr. Bonomo found work for the company, but the requests for help did not stop, he testified. In 2012, at a Republican fund-raiser at the Saratoga Race Course, Mr. Bonomo said that the senator asked him if he had more work for his son, possibly something with health benefits. This discussion led to the job at P.R.I., the court heard.“Any time I saw the senator, he was always thankful that I was trying to help Adam,” Mr. Bonomo said.Adam Skelos started at P.R.I. in early January 2013. Although he was expected to appear for work every day, Mr. Skelos logged just a few hours in the first week and often did not show up for days on end, Mr. Bonomo said.In mid-January, 10 days after Adam Skelos began working at P.R.I., the senator called Mr. Bonomo. “It didn’t start out with ‘Hey, how are you doing?’ ” Mr. Bonomo said. The senator was upset, and told Mr. Bonomo that he had heard from his son that the younger Mr. Skelos’s supervisor was “picking on him.”This was news to Mr. Bonomo, who promised the senator he would look into it. “Well, just work this out,” Mr. Bonomo recalled Senator Skelos telling him.Mr. Bonomo, who testified under a nonprosecution agreement, said he did not think he could fire Adam Skelos. “I did not want to have a problem in Albany,” he said.The situation between Mr. Skelos and his supervisor at P.R.I. continued to deteriorate, and Mr. Bonomo offered the senator’s son a job that paid less, but did not require him to be in the office. Mr. Skelos accepted the offer, which paid $36,000 and came without health benefits. Mr. Skelos was required to make 100 sales calls a week, but Mr. Bonomo said that as far as he knew, the senator’s son did not do that.In cross-examination, G. Robert Gage Jr., a lawyer for Senator Skelos, asked Mr. Bonomo if the senator had ever linked the executive’s treatment of Adam Skelos to the senator’s positions on legislation that could affect P.R.I.“No, he did not,” Mr. Bonomo replied.