https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/politics/ivanka-trump-conflict-of-interest.html
As Trump Heads to White House, His Face Recedes From Other Properties - The New York Times
Conflicts of Interest,Trump Organization,Trump  Donald J,Trump  Ivanka
Jan. 18, 2017
2220
WASHINGTON — The photo of Donald J. Trump has disappeared from the website of Trump Tower Philippines, as has the link to Ivanka Trump’s jewelry line.The same is true of the photo of members of the Trump family — including Ms. Trump in the back of a limousine — that was once featured on the website of Trump Towers Pune, a city outside Mumbai, India. And on the website of Trump International Realty, the biographies and photos of Mr. Trump and his daughter also have, in recent days, been taken down.These and other moves reflect a series of changes to how the Trump Organization intends to promote the most famous members of the Trump family, as the company and the president-elect take further steps to avoid potential conflicts of interest before Mr. Trump moves into the White House on Friday.While Mr. Trump has decided not to divest his holdings in his namesake company, he is turning over its management to his two adult sons and to an internal compliance officer — a step that is now becoming more visible around the world with changes to how the Trump Organization properties are promoted.In a statement, Amanda Miller, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump’s company, said that it will “no longer actively utilize Donald Trump’s image or likeness for the marketing or promotion of the Trump Organization and its portfolio of properties.”“This applies to both owned and licensed properties in both the United States and abroad,” the statement continued.It is a process, company officials said, that will take some time to resolve, given how frequently his name is used — as images of Mr. Trump still appear in certain locations, such as Trump International Golf Club in Dubai, whose website as of Wednesday still featured a “welcome from Donald J. Trump.”Some of the changes include the use of Ms. Trump’s name in connection with the Trump Organization. She is not taking an official White House position — for the moment — and is not required to make such changes under the law. Ms. Trump intends to serve informally as an outside adviser to her father, including lobbying members of Congress on issues such as child-care payments.In an attempt to avoid criticism, Ms. Trump is stepping down from the Trump Organization and has left her management role at her self-named apparel and licensing business, hiring someone else to take over operations.Ms. Trump has also decided against moving ahead with an agreement with a Japanese company, Sanei International, to open stores with her brand in Japan, a spokesman said. The Development Bank of Japan has an ownership stake in Sanei’s parent firm, and Ms. Trump’s decision to sit in on her father’s first meeting with the prime minister of Japan spurred widespread criticism.Ms. Trump will donate the net proceeds as well as the advance from her upcoming book, “Women Who Work: Rewriting the Rules for Success,” to charities, according to a statement from he book’s publisher, Portfolio.But Ms. Trump’s name will remain on her brand, which sells products targeting working women, such as clothing, jewelry and handbags.Ms. Trump’s allies, and the lawyer who represents her and her husband, Jamie S. Gorelick, argue that she is going above and beyond what she needs to do.“Ivanka has taken several steps, not required by the law, to avoid potential conflicts of interest,” Ms. Gorelick said in a statement. “She is in a unique position and is committed to putting appropriate measures in place.”Critics say these moves are superficial changes that, without full divestiture, will not prevent the family from benefiting financially from Mr. Trump’s presidency.For instance, Ms. Trump’s presence in the White House could still boost sales of her apparel business. Similarly, Mr. Trump’s presence will benefit the Trump Organization in general, said Robert Weissman, president of Public Citizen, a nonprofit group.“This will do nothing to address the underlying conflict-of-interest issues,” Mr. Weissman said. “Those conflicts are related to the ownership interests. They will be still profiting. This does little more than marginally affecting the optics.”