http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/15/nyregion/democratic-donor-is-known-for-short-temper-and-big-heart.html
Democratic Donor Is Known For Short Temper and Big Heart - The New York Times
NEW JERSEY,MCGREEVEY  JAMES E,KUSHNER  CHARLES,SCHULDER  ESTHER,SCHULDER  WILLIAM,PROSTITUTION,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,ETHICS,NEW JERSEY
July 15, 2004
7584
A New Jersey developer who was charged Tuesday with hiring prostitutes to compromise potential witnesses in a federal investigation of his business and political contributions is known as a successful and generous man who has left his mark on the real estate, political and social landscape.At the same time, as a businessman and political player, the developer, Charles Kushner, has a reputation for sharp elbows, a short temper and an eye to expansion, friends and associates say.Whether it was the brusque dismissal of a request from a powerful Republican state legislator in 2002 or allegations of punitive treatment of former and disgruntled employees he deemed disloyal, his reactions were granite-like and harsh, according to interviews with people who know him.But there was another side. Charles, his brother Murray and sisters Linda and Esther were pillars of the Jewish community in New Jersey and flowing fountains of philanthropy for hospitals and Israel and schools and social programs.The philanthropic streak was sustained through even the titanic and public feuds that had sprung up in recent years among family members. One Jewish leader in the state said, to get along with him, friends just had to remember who was feuding with whom and avoid bringing up that name.''I know it is a cliché, but he is a pillar of the community,'' said Dave Twersky, a former editor of The New Jersey Jewish Press.On Tuesday, Mr. Kushner was charged with obstructing a federal investigation into his business dealings and political contributions by hiring prostitutes to try to seduce two men he believed were cooperating with federal prosecutors in the case.One of the prostitutes succeeded in the seduction plan and the result was a videotape, which federal investigators said Mr. Kushner and his co-conspirators secretly made, then mailed to the man's wife -- Mr. Kushner's sister Esther. According to the complaint, the act was in retaliation for his brother-in-law's actions and to discourage further cooperation into the continuing investigation into campaign contributions that Mr. Kushner had made to Gov. James E. McGreevey and other prominent Democrats. The developer, 50, was released on a $5 million bond and, according to his lawyer, plans to plead not guilty to the charges.Yesterday the lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, said he would not comment on any aspect of the case. But when asked about Mr. Kushner's family and business disputes, he said: ''I think it would be inappropriate to comment on the personalities involved in these allegations. Suffice it to say, however, that when the dust settles, Charlie Kushner will emerge with his honor and good name intact, whereas those who have tried so hard to destroy him will be exposed for the selfish, venal people that the evidence suggests them to be.''Mr. Kushner's wealth and prominence was built on the foundation of a small construction business started by his father, Joseph, a Holocaust survivor from eastern Poland.But what the father bequeathed as a real estate management and construction business with about 4,000 apartment units was built by Charles and Murray into an estimated $1 billion amalgamation of limited partnerships and limited liability companies that own 22,000 apartments in northern New Jersey.In recent years, on his own, Charles has expanded to commercial real estate, a different and perhaps more competitive world. Among the Kushner Companies properties are the 18-story IDT Building in Newark, the Puck Building in Lower Manhattan and 7.5 million square feet of other commercial space. Mr. Kushner also owns a bank and an insurer.But when he had focused on the more public arena, like politics, and even the high-stakes business of sports franchises, as he did this year with a bid to buy the New Jersey Nets, Mr. Kushner has not always had such a golden touch and has been seen by some as overreaching.He failed in his attempt to become chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey in 2003, even with the aggressive support of Governor McGreevey; Mr. McGreevey and his committees had received $1.5 million in campaign contributions from Mr. Kushner and his companies over the years.''I think he made a mistake getting involved in the public sector,'' said George Zoffinger, president and chief executive of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority and a key adviser to Mr. McGreevey. ''He's a great businessman and tough negotiator. But he has too many business interests that could conflict and a lot of people were suspicious of his motives.''Democratic officials said that since the mid-1990's, as he became more politically active, Mr. Kushner had made no secret of his desire to become chairman of the Port Authority, a post that would offer prestige and influence over billions of dollars in contracts. He was a hard-driving figure who wore his ambition on his sleeve and was well known to state political figures, from local county leaders to Senators Jon S. Corzine, Robert G. Torricelli and Frank Lautenberg.Tom Giblin, state Democratic chairman from 1997 and to early 2001, said Mr. Kushner made moderate donations during that period. While Mr. Kushner was deeply involved in charities involving New Jersey's Jewish community and the Holocaust Memorial, his interest in Democratic Party politics and candidates seemed to be based more on pragmatism than ideology, Mr. Giblin said.''In the late 1990's, looking up and down the turnpike, all those counties were becoming Democratic,'' Mr. Giblin said. ''So for a businessman, it made perfect sense to devote more of your resources to the Democratic Party.''But while his contributions to political figures and party leaders gave him access, it also began to cause him trouble. While Mr. McGreevey was pushing him for the chairmanship of the Port Authority, questions about his contributions were raised.State Senator William L. Gormley, then a power in the State Senate Republican leadership, asked him to come to Trenton to answer questions and resolve the matter, before the Senate voted on his nomination to the Port Authority board. But Mr. Kushner refused and instead withdrew his name from consideration in a move that many saw as temperamental and impolitic.The issue of the campaign contributions never went away, and last month Mr. Kushner was ordered to pay $508,900 in penalties for violating campaign finance laws with donations he made to campaigns from December 1997 to August 2000. Those contributions were among the issues raised by family members in a contentious legal battle stemming from disagreements over business and how proceeds were distributed. The feuds between Charles and Murray in the 90's led to suits and countersuits in state court.That dispute ended and all lawsuits were dropped in January after mediation. But more recently, Mr. Kushner and his sister Esther Schulder and her husband, William Schulder, were feuding and, according to the criminal complaint, Mr. Kushner believed they were cooperating with federal investigators.Asked at a public appearance yesterday about the charges against Mr. Kushner, Mr. McGreevey said, ''I just pray for him and his family.''