http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/16/dining/reviews/16brie.html
Dining Briefs - The New York Times
Restaurants,Manhattan (NYC)
Jan. 16, 2008
8896
NEW PLACESCooper’s Tavern481 Eighth Avenue (35th Street), cooperstavern.com, (212) 268-8460I’ve read that in some cases making highways wider merely spurs additional traffic, and I’m starting to wonder if a similar dynamic exists for restaurants that specialize in steaks. Has their multiplication in Manhattan over recent years set up the demand for still more?Cooper’s Tavern, a handsome new restaurant that’s part of the renovation of the New Yorker Hotel, presents four hefty cuts with a choice of five sauces, allowing for the game of mix-and-match that’s the prevailing steakhouse formula these days. I tried the rib steak ($35) and the porterhouse for two ($75), sufficiently flavorful and juicy to keep me from mixing and matching. Good steaks don’t need saucing.The evening menu branches out to include many salads, a few pasta dishes and many main courses of other meats or fish, including coriander-dusted tuna ($29) and falafel-crusted salmon ($24). Lunchtime sandwich options include a seafood melt ($17) and the “skyscraper burger” ($15), its many stories built from 12 ounces of beef, grilled Portobello, smoked Gouda and crispy onions.My one dinner didn’t give me huge confidence that Cooper’s handles all of this terrain as ably as it does its steaks. But the area around Penn Station isn’t a culinary wonderland, so it could come in handy.Just know that the view isn’t grand. I spent my meal staring across Eighth Avenue at brightly glowing fast-food signs. FRANK BRUNIMermaid Inn Uptown 568 Amsterdam Avenue (87th Street), (212) 799-7400.Could it be something in the water? The Mermaid Inn, a reasonably good seafood restaurant in the East Village, is a frustratingly mediocre one in its new location on the Upper West Side.Frustrating because a few dishes show signs of life: a savory puréed fish soup ($9), crisp roasted whole fish ($23 —  it was brook trout each time I was there) with chunks of fried potato and parsley. Oysters are reliably good.The front room, done in a Nantucket nautical style sharpened by a urban black-and-white color scheme, is pleasant until the bar fills with the next round of reservations. (The back room, with its low ceiling, has the cozy-claustrophobic feeling of a rec room.)But skate wing and spaghetti entrees both swam in pools of grease; the seafood platter was tooth-achingly cold, giving razor clams the texture of pencil erasers and stiffening the aioli to a tasteless mass.Blackened nubbins of pork sausage did not improve grilled oysters, forced to slosh around in a warm bath of their own brine. And what is the point of a fish joint that can’t even make likable fried calamari?The only dessert is a cup of free chocolate pudding.It arrived with a fortune-telling toy, a red plastic fish that, sadly, was the best thing about the meal. JULIA MOSKIN Bacaro 136 Division Street (Ludlow Street); (212) 941-5060.It happened every time. I’d offer friends a choice: either a meal I promised they’d love or one at Bacaro — a new restaurant from Frank DeCarlo, one of the people behind the NoLIta institution Peasant.I’d warn them that Bacaro’s food was so-so and the restaurant had routinely been closed when I’d tried to go. (They rarely answer the phone, so there’s little advantage in calling ahead.)My friends would always pick Bacaro.Why would a basement in the nether-neighborhood beneath the Lowerest East Side, serving expensive wine and tiny balls of lukewarm fried meat, have such allure?Because weird spaces like the private dining room under the sidewalk are like Kryptonite to the better judgment of New Yorkers.And because the restaurant serves Italianate food, which based on my exceedingly unscientific survey appeals to everyone, even if it’s not a distinguished facsimile of the real thing.Crostini ($9) at Bacaro are shatteringly crisp wafers, stingily anointed with indifferent toppings. The fritto misto was more like a giant fritter, a breaded torpedo from which I mined nuggets of decent seafood and bits of bitter and flavorless midwinter zucchini.Regardless of the food (all of it under $15), the lure of its dark wood, chandeliers, marble-top bar upstairs and cozy grotto below is likely  to continue to draw in the young and attractive set that’s opening galleries left and right in the neighborhood.In that light — a warm glow where everybody looks good — Bacaro’s got a formula that works.Just don’t go hungry.PETER MEEHAN 