http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/04/nyregion/04shooting.html
9 Reported Dead in Workplace Shooting - The New York Times
Connecticut,Hartford Distributors,Murders and Attempted Murders,Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Thornton  Omar S
Aug. 3, 2010
7967
It was the busiest time of the day at Hartford Distributors, the morning shift change. And among the dozens of warehouse workers, sales representatives and executives inside the sprawling building in Manchester, Conn., was the company’s newest truck driver, about to lose his job.The driver, Omar S. Thornton, 34, came in at 7 a.m. on Tuesday for a disciplinary hearing. Mr. Thornton had been with the company for two years, still new in a family-run workplace where others had been on the payroll for decades. He had reason to be worried: his bosses said they had video showing him stealing beer from the company. He might also have had cause to be angry: he had complained to his girlfriend of being racially harassed at work, the woman’s mother said, and lamented that his grievances had gone unaddressed.His bosses gave him a stark choice: resign or be fired. Mr. Thornton, according to the authorities, instead drew a handgun, opened fire and moved through the warehouse as his toll mounted. He shot fellow drivers, a company executive and a local union president, the authorities said.When he was done, eight people lay fatally shot, two more were wounded, and Mr. Thornton, following the blueprint of so many other mass shootings, had killed himself, the authorities said.“He came in to meet with the company, and after that all hell broke loose,” said John Hollis, a legislative affairs representative for the Connecticut Teamsters. “He pulled the gun and ran through the warehouse.”The rampage, the latest in a series of American workplace tragedies, lasted just minutes and set off a response from as many as a half-dozen police agencies. The authorities cordoned off the warehouse and entered it to discover one victim after another, ultimately finding Mr. Thornton in an office area, said Chief Marc Montminy of the Manchester Police Department.“He was alive when police responded,” Chief Montminy said. “Police began clearing the building. He was funneled into an office area and took his own life.”The chief said it was unclear whether Mr. Thornton had fired more than one gun in the attack. One law enforcement official said Mr. Thornton used a 9-millimeter Ruger in the attack. Another official, Lt. Christopher Davis of the Manchester police, said numerous guns were registered to Mr. Thornton, a tall, heavyset man with significant debts, a career as a truck driver for a number of companies in the state and a girlfriend who could not make sense of the slaughter.The identities of some of the dead and wounded trickled out on Tuesday, as the authorities sought to notify family members. Among those killed was Bryan Cirigliano, 51, president of Teamsters Local 1035, which represents drivers at Hartford Distributors. Mr. Cirigliano had been present for the disciplinary hearing, a union official said.Another victim, Steve Hollander, an executive with the company and the grandson of the company’s founder, was shot, but he was treated at Hartford Hospital and released. In addition, one victim was still at Hartford Hospital in critical condition, a spokeswoman said.“We don’t know if he walked around randomly shooting,” Chief Montminy said at a news conference, “but we do know we found victims throughout the building.”Joanne Hannah said that her daughter Kristi had been dating Mr. Thornton for parts of the last eight years and that Mr. Thornton, who was black, had been having problems with co-workers. “Things were being put on the bathroom walls,” including a “hangman noose,” Ms. Hannah said.Union officials said Mr. Thornton never registered a complaint. “He never filed anything with the union,” said Christopher Roos, an official with Teamsters Local 1035. “As far as I know, there was never a state claim or a federal claim. Mr. Thornton was brought into the office about a disciplinary issue, and that was it.”Details about the disciplinary proceeding were sketchy, including how much beer Mr. Thornton was accused of stealing. Mr. Thornton, who  graduated from East Hartford High School in 1996, had no criminal history outside of driving infractions, records indicate.“He was a quiet person, not a mean bone in his body,” said Clayton Mack, 53, who shared a house with Mr. Thornton and Kristi Hannah for several years in Enfield, north of Hartford.It was the nation’s deadliest rampage since 13 people were gunned down at Fort Hood, Tex., last November. Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, an Army psychiatrist, has been charged in that case.The attack on Tuesday was Connecticut’s deadliest shooting since a state lottery worker fatally shot four supervisors in 1998 before committing suicide.In a statement, Gov. M. Jodi Rell called the latest shootings a “senseless act of violence.”“In the wake of this tragedy,” Ms. Rell said, “we are all left asking the same questions: How could someone do this? Why did they do this?”The authorities said they would investigate the possibility that Mr. Thornton had in fact been harassed at the workplace over his race.Joanne Hannah, the mother of Mr. Thornton’s girlfriend, said he had shown her daughter cellphone pictures of the walls of the bathroom at the warehouse, where slurs had been written and a stick figure hanging from a noose had been drawn.Ms. Hannah also said Mr. Thornton had once called her daughter from a bathroom at the warehouse and held the phone up so she could hear his supervisor and another employee talking disparagingly about blacks.Ms. Hannah said that after Mr. Thornton shot his victims, he called his mother and said he “wanted to say goodbye, to tell everyone he loved them and that he had shot five people.”Mr. Thornton’s cousin Annette Levine described his final phone call to his mother as more incendiary, saying he had told her that he had shot “the five racists.”“Those were his last words to her,” Ms. Levine said. “He loved her, and they pushed him over the edge.”The disciplinary hearing appears to have lasted about a half-hour and to have involved Mr. Thornton, a union representative and one or more management officials, including Steve Hollander.Mr. Hollander told The Associated Press that Mr. Thornton “didn’t argue. He didn’t admit or deny anything. He just agreed to resign.”One person familiar with details of the hearing said that Mr. Thornton  then went to get a glass of water. His back to Mr. Hollander, he reached into what appeared to be a lunch bag, turned and opened fire, the person said.Mr. Hollander said two people standing near him were shot in the head and killed, but he was only grazed in the jaw and the arm. “By just the grace of God, I don’t know how he missed me,” he said.After the initial police response, buses took the employees from the warehouse to Manchester High School, where union representatives and Ross Hollander, the president of Hartford Distributors, were comforting families of the victims, Mr. Hollis, the Teamsters official, said.Hartford Distributors, one of the state’s largest wholesalers of beer and wine, was founded in 1944 and has been owned and operated by the Hollander family since the 1960s. The company moved from East Hartford to Manchester 16 years ago.Bill Bartlett, who retired from the company, was at the high school comforting his former colleagues on Tuesday. “I lost a lot of friends today,” he said.The victims included Louis Felder, 50, a father of three from Stamford, Conn., who worked at the company as director of operations. Among the others identified were Victor James and Craig Peppin, who, like many at Hartford Distributors, had worked there for years.Mr. James, who was 60 and lived in Windsor, Conn., had driven a Budweiser truck for 30 years and was looking forward to retiring, his mother, Gloria Wilson, 86, said. He had two daughters and four grandchildren.“I know a lot of people say that about their families, but this fellow loved children, and he took such good care of his grandchildren,” Mrs. Wilson said.Mr. Peppin, 60, had worked at the company for more than 30 years, said his brother, Ron Peppin. Mr. Peppin, 49, said he heard about the shootings on the radio  and knew right away that it was the time when Craig, who lived in South Windsor, would have been at the warehouse.