http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/03/us/politics/lebron-hillary-clinton.html
LeBron James, Calling for Hope and Unity, Endorses Hillary Clinton - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,James  LeBron,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Endorsements,Trump  Donald J,Blacks,Race and Ethnicity,Cleveland Cavaliers
Oct. 2, 2016
3628
LeBron James, who last season led the Cleveland Cavaliers to their first N.B.A. championship, endorsed Hillary Clinton for president on Sunday.Mr. James announced his decision in an op-ed article in Business Insider, saying that Mrs. Clinton understands the struggles of childhood poverty and as president would enact policies that would build on the legacy of President Obama.He also said he believed Mrs. Clinton would champion causes for children, provide more educational opportunities and “address the violence, of every kind, the African-American community is experiencing.”“Only one person running truly understands the struggles of an Akron child born into poverty,” wrote Mr. James, who grew up in Akron and who praised his own foundation’s efforts to help at-risk young people. “And when I think about the kinds of policies and ideas the kids in my foundation need from our government, the choice is clear. That candidate is Hillary Clinton.”Mr. James is popular across the country and particularly in Ohio, but it is unclear how much his endorsement of Mrs. Clinton will influence the race with her opponent Donald J. Trump.Most recent surveys show Mr. Trump with a slight edge among voters in Ohio. A Suffolk University poll from September put him at 42 percent, compared to 39 percent for Mrs. Clinton. His double-digit leads among men and white voters are crucial to his standing in the state.Mr. James, who has been outspoken about recent police killings of black men and women, wrote that Mrs. Clinton would seek to improve life for African-Americans.“Finally, we must address the violence, of every kind, the African-American community is experiencing in our streets and seeing on our TVs,” he wrote. “However, I am not a politician, I don’t know everything it will take finally to end the violence. But I do know we need a president who brings us together and keeps us unified.”“Policies and ideas that divide us more are not the solution,” he continued. “We must all stand together — no matter where we are from or the color of our skin. And Hillary is running on the message of hope and unity that we need.”Mr. James is one of several athletes who have weighed in on the presidential race.The golfer John Daly, the former football star Herschel Walker and the former basketball coach Bob Knight have endorsed Mr. Trump, according to Sports Illustrated. The magazine also said that the former professional wrestler Hulk Hogan and the former N.B.A. player Dennis Rodman have expressed support for Mr. Trump.