http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/14/nyregion/list-of-names-in-sex-assaults-roils-columbia.html
List of Names in Sex Assaults Roils Columbia - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Sex Crimes,Columbia University
May 13, 2014
6428
The list of names first appeared last Wednesday, each scrawled in a different hand, on the wall of a women’s bathroom in Hamilton Hall, an academic building at Columbia University.“Sexual assault violators on campus,” it alleged, followed by the names of four male undergraduates.The list was quickly scrubbed away, but by early this week it had reappeared on the walls of several other women’s bathrooms around campus. On Tuesday, stacks of fliers also appeared, with the same four names beneath the words “Rapists on Campus.” The fliers, left in bathrooms, asserted that three of the men had been found “responsible” by the university for sexual assault and described the fourth as a “serial rapist.”When asked about the list, the university said it did not discuss the particulars of disciplinary proceedings regarding sexual misconduct.The vigilantelike actions have divided the student body at Columbia, where 23 students recently filed a federal complaint accusing the university of having an inadequate and insensitive process for adjudicating sexual assault cases.The graffiti has also created a logistical challenge for the administration. It is reported and wiped away, but quickly reappears elsewhere. The Columbia Spectator, the student newspaper, and two student blogs, The Columbia Lion and Bwog, have documented the new appearances on an almost hourly basis.Leila, a sophomore, said that making the list public was counterproductive. “I think it’s really hurting the people that actually want to help the victims and get policy changed across campus,” she said. She asked to be identified by only her first name because she did not want to antagonize the people behind the fliers.Jon E. Hanford, a university employee at Butler Library, where fliers have been left in bathroom stalls, said he understood the desperation behind the postings. “If due process isn’t getting results, something more needs to be done,” he said. But, he added, “I don’t know if that justifies it, if you’re publicly shaming someone.”Emma Sulkowicz, a junior who is a participant in the federal complaint, said she was glad that the names were now public.“I think that it’s important for people to know the names, because it’s a matter of safety,” Ms. Sulkowicz said.She said that she did not know who was behind the graffiti, but that the list included the name of the man who had assaulted her.