https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/world/asia/myanmar-cabinet-nominees.html
Myanmar Approves Cabinet Nominees, but Some Face Questions Over Credentials - The New York Times
Myanmar,Aung San Suu Kyi,Htin Kyaw,National League for Democracy (Myanmar),Yangon (Myanmar),Legislatures and Parliaments,Kyaw Win,Appointments and Executive Changes
March 24, 2016
8224
YANGON, Myanmar — Myanmar’s Parliament approved a slate of cabinet nominees on Thursday, including two officials with dubious academic degrees on their résumés, raising questions about the credibility of the country’s new government before it comes to power next week.Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the nation’s pro-democracy movement, was the only woman among the 18 nominees. She is expected to take four cabinet posts, including that of foreign minister, ensuring that she will have a powerful role in governing the country, despite being unable to assume the presidency.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, the National League for Democracy, won a landslide victory in November in elections that were the freest in decades. She is barred from the presidency by a clause in the Constitution that prohibits people with foreign relatives from holding the post; her two sons are British.But she has carved out broad responsibilities as the likely head of the ministries of foreign affairs, education, energy and the presidential office. The president-elect, U Htin Kyaw, is an ally of Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, and she has said her authority will supersede his.The credentials of some of the likely cabinet members have come under fire since Mr. Htin Kyaw released the names of his nominees on Tuesday. Which ministries each nominee will head has yet to be announced, although The New York Times saw a preliminary list this week.U Kyaw Win, who is expected to be the new minister of finance and planning, has claimed to have a master’s degree and a doctorate from an institution called Brooklyn Park University, according to a résumé released by the National League for Democracy. The university was identified last year by The Times as being merely part of a network of websites run by Axact, a Pakistan-based company that brought in millions of dollars by selling fake diplomas.Mr. Kyaw Win is an economic adviser to the National League for Democracy who was formerly a longtime employee of the Ministry of National Planning and Finance. Despite the revelations about his academic background, his nomination was approved on Thursday.He now acknowledges that the degrees were not legitimate. “Now I am ashamed to call myself a Ph.D.,” he has said. “Everything I have tried has now become water in the desert” — a mirage.Another likely cabinet member, U Than Myint, has said he has a master’s and a doctorate from Pacific Western University, an unaccredited correspondence school. Mr. Than Myint, who worked with the Ministry of National Planning and Finance before serving with the United Nations, has said subsequently that he does not believe he did anything wrong. He is expected to become the minister of commerce.The questions about these likely new ministers have provoked criticism from some of the same voters who overwhelmingly supported Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s party at the polls last year.“To be frank, it’s embarrassing,” said Daw Sandi Sein Thein, 27, a technology entrepreneur in Yangon. “I think the leaders don’t need to lie just to impress people.”U Yan Myo Thein, a well-known political commentator in Yangon, said he thought the nominees whose academic records had been questioned should step away from the process “to save the image of the new government” during the delicate transition period.“The scandals indicate the lack of transparency and accountability in forming a new government led by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,” he said.The National League for Democracy holds about 60 percent of the votes in both houses of Parliament, which approved all 18 nominees without objection on Thursday.U Zaw Myint Maung, a spokesman for the National League for Democracy, defended Mr. Kyaw Win and Mr. Than Myint.“I want to say my men are honest,” he said.