https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/30/arts/design/playing-chicken-with-the-art-world.html
Playing Chicken With the Art World - The New York Times
Art,Chickens,Museums,Fine Arts Exhibits,Hanotte  Olivier,Vanmechelen  Koen,Wasserman  Gary,Wasserman Projects (Detroit  Mich),Detroit (Mich)
Oct. 26, 2016
3455
Visit the exhibition by the Belgian artist Koen Vanmechelen in Detroit this fall and you may never think about chickens the same way again — if you think about them much at all.You may never think about art the same way, either.During the past 20 years, Mr. Vanmechelen has gained attention with his Cosmopolitan Chicken Project. He has continually crossbred chickens from different nations to create a hybrid that is ever more robust in health and spectacular in physical attributes. This was not just for the sake of the chickens, though they do roam on a farm in Meeuwen, near the artist’s studio in Hasselt, Belgium. He shows his chickens in museums and galleries as living art, alongside paintings, photographs, sculpture, video and installations that explore ideas of cultural, biological and aesthetic diversity.His chicken art project has been seen worldwide, including in Shanghai, Beirut and Havana; he has participated in three Venice Biennales, most recently in 2015.Now, in his largest exhibition in the United States, Mr. Vanmechelen has teamed with Wasserman Projects  in Detroit to showcase his art and also to take the concept much further (in a way that will become clear in just a moment). In the high-end world of fine art, this is definitely fringe. But he and his admirers view it as a crucial crossroads where art meets life.“The chicken is such a strong metaphor,” said Mr. Vanmechelen, 51, who developed a rapport with the bird at 5, when his uncle gave him chicks and an incubator. “Anthropologically, it tells something about humans and mirrors how humans spread all over the world,” he said. “This work opens up discussions about globalization, multiculturalism and genetics.”In “Energy/Mass,” on view through Dec. 17, a chicken coop installation hosts a Mechelse Cemani rooster — what the artist calls the 19th generation of his Cosmopolitan Chicken, and that he created by sequential matings of 18 international breeds. The Mechelse Cemani is commingling in one section with American Wyandotte hens, named for a Native American tribe that once populated the lower Great Lakes.Their offspring make up the 20th generation of the Cosmopolitan Chicken, what Mr. Vanmechelen calls the Mechelse Wyandotte, on view in another part of the coop. Surrounding the animals are mixed-media works by the artist, including a family tree of the Cosmopolitan Chicken.Until now, Mr. Vanmechelen’s chickens have been raised solely as art. They die natural deaths, and then some are transformed by taxidermy into sculptural objects, as in the rooster poised at the hilt of a 12-foot-long steel sword at the entrance to the Detroit show. But the artist and the gallery’s founder, Gary Wasserman, wondered how they could justify taking chickens only as art to Detroit, a city of such enormous economic and nutritional need.Addressing these real-life issues, they have started a collaboration, the Planetary Community Chicken, a mating of the 20th-generation Cosmopolitan Chicken with an industrial hen to produce food for sale.Some of their chicks are running around a pen in the backroom of the gallery and will start producing eggs next spring in their future home at the nearby Oakland Avenue Urban Farm. It is one of some 1,400 agricultural ventures that have sprung up in the empty lots of Detroit, where foreclosed homes have been torn down. “We’re taking the installation project and delivering it into the hands of the community, where we’re actually doing something that is not a token activity,” Mr. Wasserman said. “It is art meeting agriculture meeting science meeting social science meeting economy.”William and Jerry Hebron, the married couple who run the farm and sell food to their neighbors from their backyard, as well as at farmers’ markets, have never dealt with livestock but were game to try. “It’s another way of making money for us, and the community is going to love it,” said Mr. Hebron, who helped his wife start the farm in 2008 because the area “didn’t have a place to buy a tomato or cucumber.”Will the Planetary Chicken lay good eggs? Olivier Hanotte, a livestock geneticist and professor at the University of Nottingham in England, said, “It will, of course, and I hope Koen will give me some to taste.”For several years, Mr. Hanotte has used genetic samples from the artist’s birds for his research into the diversity of local chickens versus wild ones. With the Cosmopolitan Chicken’s more diverse immune system, “we can predict they will be better fit to respond to a large spectrum of pathogens,” he said. “Inbreeding is never good when you’re talking about disease resistance.”Mr. Vanmechelen has achieved what scientists have not, he added. “This continuous experiment, doing years and years of breeding, would have been impossible to put into practice in a world where scientific grants run from three to five years at the most,” he said. “Koen wasn’t constrained by those things.” In 2011, Mr. Vanmechelen founded the Open University of Diversity, which invites specialists from different fields to exchange ideas.Jill Silverman van Coenegrachts, former managing director of the Lisson Gallery in London, discovered Mr. Vanmechelen during his first living art installation in 2000 at Storm Centers in Watou, Belgium, for which he crossbred the Mechelse Koekoek, native to Belgium, with the French Poulet de Bresse. She then arranged for him to breed this first-generation Cosmopolitan Chicken with the English Redcap in an exhibition at her gallery that year. “Koen doesn’t see the borders between anything,” she said.In 2014, Ms. van Coenegrachts, now an independent curator, took Mr. Vanmechelen’s work back to London in “Darwin’s Dream” at St. Pancras Church. There, along one corridor, she installed a kind of fashion show of blown-up portraits of generations of the Cosmopolitan Chicken. “You were confronted with very beautiful six-foot-tall chickens looking at you in the eye, the way a chicken looks at another chicken,” she said. “Koen’s work creates a big shift in your head, in how we position ourselves with other things that are alive around us.”