https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/bernie-sanders-supporters-dnc-reaction.html
Party Leader’s Resignation a Sign of Bernie Sanders’s Influence, His Backers Say - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Democratic National Convention,United States Politics and Government,Democratic National Committee,Democratic Party,Sanders  Bernard,Schultz  Debbie Wasserman,Canova  Timothy A,Florida,Philadelphia (Pa)
July 24, 2016
7527
PHILADELPHIA — The announcement that Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz would step down as the Democratic National Committee chairwoman not only rocked the party on the eve of its convention, but also energized Senator Bernie Sanders and his supporters, who have long argued that Ms. Wasserman Schultz and others tried to undermine his campaign.Moments after Ms. Wasserman Schultz said in a statement that she would step down, Mr. Sanders and others welcomed the change in interviews and statements, saying her resignation would help the party unify after a tough primary campaign. Many also said that Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s decision illustrates that Mr. Sanders’s campaign, and the platform he pushed, has had a lasting effect on the progressive direction of the party.Mr. Sanders had called on Ms. Wasserman Schultz to resign after a breach of the committee’s internal email system revealed that she and some of her top aides had actively tried to undermine Mr. Sanders’s presidential bid. On Sunday, he said he looked forward to the party being under new leadership.“Debbie Wasserman Schultz has made the right decision for the future of the Democratic Party,” Mr. Sanders said in a statement. “While she deserves thanks for her years of service, the party now needs new leadership that will open the doors of the party and welcome in working people and young people. The party leadership must also always remain impartial in the presidential nominating process, something which did not occur in the 2016 race.”Throughout the primaries, Mr. Sanders argued that Ms. Wasserman Schultz and the national committee were biased toward Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, and pointed to a number of examples — including a debate schedule his campaign said favored Mrs. Clinton; a fund-raising arrangement between the party and Mrs. Clinton’s campaign; the appointments of staunch Clinton supporters to leadership positions on important convention committees; and the party’s rebuke of Mr. Sanders in May for not clearly condemning a melee at the Nevada Democratic convention.Mr. Sanders had said, if he had won the nomination, that he would replace Ms. Wasserman Schultz. The senator from Vermont also endorsed Tim Canova, a law professor who is running against Ms. Wasserman Schultz for her Florida congressional seat.Moments after Ms. Wasserman Schultz said she planned to resign, Mr. Canova said in an interview that Mr. Sanders was transforming the party, and that the move was “a sign of the times, that things are really changing.”“Bernie Sanders accomplished an awful lot in this campaign, and the movement only continues to grow around the country and in down ballot races,” Mr. Canova said. “The grass-roots base has had it with corporate dominated politics of triangulation. The grass-roots base is very hungry for a return to genuine progressive values and agendas.”Benjamin T. Jealous, who was a frequent surrogate for Mr. Sanders and a former president of the N.A.A.C.P., added that the move would help the party push forward in its fight to defeat Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee. “This allows us to heal and move on,” he said in an interview.Yet, not every Sanders supporter saw Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s move as significant. Cornel West, a scholar and a frequent surrogate for Mr. Sanders, said the resignation was a “very small step.” He also lamented that, while Mr. Sanders had won some victories with the party platform, the document does not include a ban on fracking, a push for Medicare for all, a change in the country’s stance on Israeli-Palestinian politics, or a condemnation of the Trans-Pacific Partnership — all issues that Mr. Sanders made important parts of his campaign.“The resignation of one Wall Street Democrat doesn’t mean a transformation of the party. It’s still a Wall Street party,” said Mr. West, who is now supporting Jill Stein, the Green Party nominee. “The problem is whether, in fact, the Democratic Party can ever be a vehicle for the kind of progressive politics we really need in the country, so I’m not that excited.”