https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/us/immigration-ban-locations.html
Where Immigrants From Banned Nations Live in the U.S. - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Trump  Donald J,Detroit (Mich),Los Angeles (Calif),Minneapolis (Minn),New Jersey,San Diego (Calif)
Jan. 30, 2017
1214
When President Trump signed a sweeping order shutting the borders to refugees and others from seven largely Muslim nations, the shock waves hit with particular force in those countries’ immigrant communities here.Here’s a look at some of the areas where immigrants from those seven countries are highly concentrated.The roots of the Syrian community here were woven from silk more than a century ago.The first Syrians arrived in the late 1800s, arriving first in Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn and then migrating to New Jersey, drawn by the silk mills in Paterson. Since then, they have established thriving communities in northern New Jersey, spreading from the supermarkets on Paterson’s Main Street to the doctors’ offices in Short Hills and more recently to the apartments in Elizabeth.“This is the welcoming street, it’s easy to spot,” said Albert Nouri, 62, one of the owners of the Nouri Brothers Shopping Center on Main Street in Paterson. His market has been there for 40 years, on a street with shops selling shawarma and sweets, bearing signs in English, Arabic and Turkish.He arrived in Paterson in 1976, trained as an engineer and part of a large family of seven brothers and one sister. Businessmen and doctors, especially in demand after the Vietnam War, left Damascus to be with other family already located near Paterson.The latest census figures from 2015 show 10,116 foreign-born Syrians living in the New York-New Jersey area, with the most in Brooklyn and in Passaic County, N.J. The older, largely professional immigrants are in contrast to the most recent refugees fleeing from smaller cities of Homs and Daraa, refugee officials say.Avigail Ziv, the International Rescue Committee’s executive director for New York and New Jersey, said that the newest Syrians were growing better connected to other Arab and Muslim groups there, and had been embraced by church and synagogue volunteers.“In the past year, that has grown and become rich and deep,” Ms. Ziv said. “We’ve seen such an outpouring of support for the Syrian families that have come in.”Liz Robbins_____Alaaeldin M. Ahmed’s grocery store in the nation’s capital is about a 10-minute drive from the White House, and it sometimes seems that he could not have picked a better spot to sell halal meats, rice and spices to Sudanese expatriates.“They love to be in capitals,” Mr. Ahmed, who came to the United States from Sudan in the early 1990s, said of his countrymen on Monday. “I don’t know exactly why.”Perhaps, Mr. Ahmed added with a chuckle, it is because the Washington area can feel “exactly like Khartoum.” (Khartoum is the capital of Sudan, which is covered by Mr. Trump’s order; South Sudan, which became independent in 2011, was not affected.)Washington and its suburbs have a larger Sudanese population than any other metro area in the United States, which has long drawn Sudanese seeking to escape their native country’s political strife. Still, census figures show a population of only 4,621 foreign-born Sudanese in Washington and its suburbs and exurbs. The population is dispersed with many living in suburbs like Alexandria, Va. But it is a close-knit community in times of crisis.“If somebody passes away in the Sudanese community, you’ll find hundreds of Sudanese going to the funeral,” said Ahmed M. Elhillali, a Sudanese lawyer who has practiced in Washington for more than 20 years.But Mr. Ahmed, whose grocery in the Adams Morgan neighborhood of Washington is a hub of Sudanese culture in the region, cautioned that the community’s social life was limited.“They work a lot, so they don’t have time,” he said. “They may see each other on the holy days. Nobody meets anyone on weekends or weekdays; they work seven days a week.”In the wake of Mr. Trump’s order, there were measures of disappointment and defensiveness, with different reactions across the generational divide. Younger Sudanese have joined protests. Some older people are searching for a way forward.“We’re not going to be angry because we know the rules and how this country is running, and this new president told people who elected him what he’s going to do,” said Mr. Ahmed, who, like many Sudanese immigrants, said he supported Mrs. Clinton over Mr. Trump.He added, “They just care about working hard because they came from a tough country and they came here for the American dream.”Alan Blinder and Isma’il Kushkush_____The nation’s biggest concentration of Iranians is in Southern California, clustered in Los Angeles. Some live in big, ostentatious mansions rising in Beverly Hills, a testament to the wealth of much of this community. But they also work and shop in modest stores along Westwood Boulevard in Brentwood, or in quiet enclaves in the San Fernando Valley.Many Iranians, like Kazem Alamdari, a retired college professor who lives in Porter Ranch, came after the fall of the Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi after the Islamic uprising of 1979. “I enjoy my life here,” Mr. Alamdari, 69, said on Monday. “A free society.”According to census data, there were 147,597 foreign-born Iranians in the Los Angeles-Long Beach area in 2015. Iranian community members say that the number is far higher, but that many Iranians resist reporting their whereabouts to the government.Whatever their numbers, their influence here stands out. Signs scribbled in Farsi can be spotted along Westwood Boulevard. Los Angeles has an all-Iranian radio station. And on Saturday mornings, Persian Jewish families crowd into Sinai Temple for festive bar and bat mitzvahs.President Trump lost California to Hillary Clinton by four million votes, and Mr. Alamdari said that most Iranians voted Democratic. That said, there is a strong Republican streak, particularly among Persian Jews. David Wolpe, the rabbi at Sinai Temple, came under fire in 2013 for conducting same-sex marriages. Mr. Wolpe said that many Iranians in his congregation supported Mr. Trump.Adam Nagourney and Caitlin Dickerson_____Naima Ali, a Somali-American caseworker, folds up her hijab to look like a hat while driving with her young daughter. “I don’t want to be harassed,” she said.Residents of the Cedar-Riverside neighborhood here, at the center of a Somali-American diaspora, have long battled public mistrust as their youth have been targeted by the Shabab and then ISIS, insisting that the actions of a few do not represent many. There were 24,476 foreign-born Somalis in the Minneapolis metro area in 2015, according to census figures.The Somali-Americans here claimed a major victory this month when one of their own, Ilhan Omar, took office as a state representative, becoming the nation’s first Somali-American legislator. But the political landscape under President Trump has them feeling threatened anew, they say, bringing more than 1,000 people to a rally on Sunday led by Ms. Omar at the Brian Coyle Center to protest the president’s travel ban.“It’s been traumatizing,” said Amano Dube, director of the bustling community center, where discarded protest signs were stacked on Monday behind the front desk.Two 6-year-old girls — one in a pink hijab, the other in a purple hijab — laughed as they jumped rope side by side in the gym that housed the Trump protest. The community center provides a variety of programming, including tutoring, after-school care, diabetes workshops, college-prep training and a food pantry.“It’s like home,” said Ms. Ali, 31. Families are desperately seeking support under the new president, said Ms. Ali, whose cousin lives in Minnesota with two young children, now separated from her husband in Somalia. “Families are being ripped apart. It’s heartbreaking.”Christina Capecchi_____In El Cajon, a city about 15 miles east of downtown San Diego, local businesses offer an efficient overview of how the community has changed since becoming an Iraqi refugee hub. Liquor stores, markets and barber shops with Arabic letters have sprouted around the Starbucks, gun shops and car dealerships.In the San Diego area, there were 27,827 immigrants born in Iraq, according to census figures, which are among the highest concentrations in the country. Most are in the eastern part of the county, and the vast majority are Chaldean, a type of Christian. Many of them resettled in and around inland El Cajon, because San Diego’s high cost of living makes it difficult for them to live in pricier coastal neighborhoods.Many arrived during the Iraq War, and another wave came as ISIS persecuted Christians in Iraq.In November, part of the city, along with much of San Diego’s inland, rural and conservative East County, voted for Mr. Trump. A cluster in the center of El Cajon voted for Mrs. Clinton.Chaldeans were not among them. They tended to support Mr. Trump, said Noori Barka, a businessman who moved to San Diego from Iraq in the 1980s. Mr. Barka, a community leader who runs a Chaldean-language news outlet and heads a Chaldean-focused nongovernmental organization, said that Chaldeans felt neglected by President Barack Obama’s response to the humanitarian crisis caused by ISIS. They wished more refugee spots had been allotted to Christians, he said.Mr. Barka, who owns a biotechnology firm that employs 45 people, supports Mr. Trump’s temporary ban on refugees.“I think it’s a good idea to stop the program and look at it more carefully,” he said.The ban on visas, however, will hurt businesses, he said. He was supposed to meet with a distributor from the Middle East who will no longer be able to come.“I hope our president understands, because he’s a businessman, that we cannot stop doing business,” Mr. Barka said.Roxana Popescu_____In the Detroit area, there are 11,247 foreign-born Yemenis, one of the highest concentrations in the United States. Many are working-class, building cars at the nearby Ford Rouge complex or working as clerks at gas stations. Some are merchants who own convenience stores and cafes.It is unknown when Yemenis began arriving here, but it is believed to have been in the late 1880s. Some gained citizenship by fighting in World War I or II, then traveled to cities like Dearborn, Mich., to work in factories or set up shop.Anees Aljahmi, 38, co-owns a popular Yemeni eatery in Dearborn, Sheeba Restaurant. He is following the path of his father, a restaurateur who came to the United States from Yemen in 1976.Right now, he said, the community is “terrified.” They are commiserating in places like hookah cafes and the Yemen American Cultural Center. They are also flocking to his restaurant, picking at dishes like lamb haneeth and seltah, served in a traditional stone bowl.“They came here for a better life and to escape conditions in Yemen, which have never been worse,” Mr. Aljahmi said. “Now, they’re worried about being able to go over there and visit their families, because if they leave, they don’t know if they can get back.”A close friend, he said, is very upset about having to cancel his plane ticket.“And families in Yemen have kids here, and suddenly they can’t come,” Mr. Aljahmi added. “And we cannot send for them. We don’t know if we’ll ever see them.”Many Yemeni business owners voted for Mr. Trump, he said. Now, they feel betrayed.“I support my president and my country,” he said, “but I don’t agree with what he did.”Mary Chapman_____The first waves of immigrants from Libya came here in the early 1970s, after the rise of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the 27-year-old junior military officer who took power in a bloodless coup in 1969. Their numbers have grown, largely because of political uncertainty and instability at home, but there is no dominant center for the relatively small diaspora.Many of these first immigrants were pursuing advanced degrees, said Aiman Tarsin, a member of the board of directors of the Libyan American Organization. But as Qaddafi’s grip tightened, Mr. Tarsin said, “student visas, for many Libyans, turned into political asylum visas.”He said that over the decades, as the human rights situation in the country deteriorated, more Libyans began to flee.From 2008 to 2012, according to a census report, there were about 9,000 people living in the United States who were born in Libya. But the Arab Spring, which swept into Libya in 2011 and ended in the killing of Qaddafi by his own countrymen, sent the country spiraling into civil war and significantly increased the number of people leaving for the United States. Mr. Tarsin added that the largest populations lived in the greater metropolitan areas of Los Angeles and Washington.Jonah Bromwich