https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/29/nyregion/grimm-and-recchia-spar-in-final-debate-of-a-bitter-campaign.html
Grimm and Recchia Spar in Final Debate of a Bitter Campaign - The New York Times
New York State,Grimm  Michael G,Recchia  Domenic M Jr,Debates (Political),United States Politics and Government,Midterm Elections (2014),Brooklyn (NYC),Staten Island (NYC),Elections  House of Representatives
Oct. 28, 2014
7756
The candidates tussled over who would have greater influence in the House of Representatives: a member of the Democratic minority or a congressman facing a 20-count federal indictment.They sparred over accusations of skinny-dipping in the Sea of Galilee.They struggled to name the last book they had read.“It’s been a while,” Representative Michael G. Grimm of Staten Island said.“These are not supposed to be stumpers,” the moderator, Errol Louis of NY1, replied.In the televised debate of a fractious campaign in New York’s 11th Congressional District, a live audience at the College of Staten Island got the final glimpse on Tuesday night at its choices: a two-term Republican facing federal fraud charges and a former city councilman, Domenic M. Recchia Jr., whose meandering comments on the campaign trail have worried Democrats who viewed the district as a golden chance to flip a congressional seat. (The debate was hosted by NY1 and The Staten Island Advance.)Though there were missteps from Mr. Recchia, including apparently shifting answers on whether he supports a minimum wage of $10.10 — he said he does, in the end — he performed more steadily and sounded more comfortable than he had in his last debate, appearing to feed off an often sympathetic crowd.In a WABC-TV debate less than two weeks ago, Mr. Recchia began his closing statement by alluding to Mr. Grimm’s threat in January to throw a reporter off a Capitol balcony and discussing his legal troubles. Mr. Grimm, a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent, is accused of underreporting wages at his Manhattan health food restaurant, resulting in tax and health care fraud charges, and employing undocumented immigrants, before lying about it under oath.This time, Mr. Recchia, from Gravesend, Brooklyn, focused more on his own story. He spoke often of his daughters, drawing a conspicuous contrast to Mr. Grimm, who is single. And he seemed to acknowledge the perception that he was not always quick on his feet. “I’m not the swift talker like my opponent,” he said, adding, “I get results.”Among those results, Mr. Recchia said, was a revitalization of Coney Island. Speaking to reporters later, he marveled at the changes in recent years. “Who would think that an Applebee’s would open on Coney Island?” he said.But in a district with a heavy a concentration of Staten Island voters, Mr. Recchia’s South Brooklyn address has been viewed as a potential liability.“I do not want Staten Island to be the next Coney Island,” Mr. Grimm said at one point, to raucous applause.One issue, also raised in the last debate, was which candidate would be more likely to find legislative partners in Washington, particularly in a district where voters are still smarting over the pace of relief funding after Hurricane Sandy.Mr. Recchia called Mr. Grimm “a minority of one,” an allusion to Republican leaders’ efforts to distance themselves from his legal troubles.“In the minority, he won’t even be in the room,” Mr. Grimm countered, referring to Democrats’ standing in the House.The congressman, still the more polished public speaker, remained on the offensive for much of the evening, criticizing Mr. Recchia’s vote in the City Council for congestion pricing and suggesting that he was too cozy with Democrats like Mayor Bill de Blasio.Asked if the trial would affect his performance in Congress, Mr. Grimm suggested he was unconcerned with missing votes. “Many members of Congress have to take time off for myriad reasons,” he said, adding that he often worked 12- to 14-hour days and did not take time off.At one point, Mr. Recchia made note of a past congressional trip to Israel, which included Mr. Grimm, and revelations of skinny-dipping among attendees.“I did not go skinny-dipping in the Sea of Galilee,” Mr. Grimm said. “It was a member from Kansas, who apologized for it.”Then there was the run-in with the NY1 reporter in January. Mr. Grimm acknowledged that it was “inappropriate” to threaten him and noted that he had apologized. But he did not pass up an opportunity to trumpet his past.“At the end of the day, yes, I’m a United States Marine and I’m tenacious,” he said.He suggested that everyone in the audience had surely said something they regretted in their lives.“Not on national TV,” one attendee muttered.