https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/us/politics/tensions-between-police-and-blacks-are-likely-to-worsen-obama-says.html
Obama Urges Civil Rights Activists and Police to Bridge Divide - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Blacks,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Attacks on Police,Civil Rights and Liberties
July 13, 2016
7840
Washington — President Obama said on Wednesday that the profound tensions between the police and African-American communities were likely to worsen “for quite some time” after the series of wrenching shooting deaths this month, urging law enforcement officials and civil rights activists at a lengthy and at times tense White House gathering to keep pressing to bridge their differences.“Not only are there very real problems but there are still deep divisions about how to solve these problems,” Mr. Obama said at the White House, after meeting for over four hours all afternoon and into the evening with the group.“There is no doubt that police departments still feel embattled and unjustly accused, and there is no doubt that minority communities, communities of color, still feel like it just takes too long to do what’s right,” Mr. Obama added. “We have to, as a country, sit down and just grind it out — solve these problems.”During a session that lasted for more than four hours in a large conference room across from the West Wing and included administration officials and community activists from the Black Lives Matter movement among the 40 or so in attendance, Mr. Obama led what he later called an “excellent” and “encouraging” session about building trust between law enforcement and communities of color.“We’re not even close to being there yet,” the president said, adding that it will take time to achieve such trust.“Sadly, because this is a huge country that is very diverse, and we have a lot of police departments, I think it is fair to say that we will see more tension between police and communities this month, next month, next year, for quite some time,” he said.That hostility flared at times behind closed doors at the session, particularly as those representing police organizations clashed with people who had been arrested at protests, said Rashad Robinson, the executive director of the online civil rights group Color of Change, who was at the meeting.“We still need many in law enforcement to recognize that action needs happen,” Mr. Robinson said in an interview. “We can’t mistake dialogue for actual change, and in the absence of action, nothing changes.”“What we heard was a willingness to listen, which means that we need to continue to raise everyday people’s voices,” he added.The hastily arranged meeting came a day after Mr. Obama traveled to Dallas to memorialize five police officers slain last week by an African-American man who said he wanted to kill white people. That attack unfolded during a peaceful protest of the killings just days earlier of two black men, in Baton Rouge, La., and outside St. Paul at the hands of the police. Both police shootings were captured on videotape.The deaths have opened the latest chapter in what has become an increasingly passionate debate in America over racial justice, discrimination and violence. Mr. Obama has conceded in recent days that he has felt powerless to shift the conversation or the realities driving it, whether by legislation or by persuasion, a cruel conundrum for the first African-American president, who campaigned for the White House arguing that there was no such thing as “black America” and “white America.”Returning early from a European trip on Sunday, Mr. Obama scrapped his schedule for this week and has devoted much of his time to finding ways to address the crisis of race and law enforcement. On Monday, he stopped by a meeting of police officials and civil rights leaders convened by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. On Thursday, he will attend a town hall meeting devoted to the issue that ABC and ESPN will broadcast, at which the White House said Mr. Obama expected to hear from a diverse set of voices.Mr. Obama held a similar series of meetings two years ago after tensions boiled over following a police shooting in Ferguson, Mo., that sparked protests and rioting. Those meetings prompted the president to provide federal funding for community policing and anti-bias efforts, including for the purchase of body-worn cameras. He also created a policing task force that released recommendations last year on how to build trust between law enforcement and the communities they protect.The president is walking a difficult line as he seeks to make progress on stubbornly entrenched divisions and build trust between constituencies that have only grown more suspicious of each other.Some law enforcement officials have bristled at Mr. Obama’s readiness to condemn racial bias in policing after fatal confrontations between officers and African-American men. At the same time, racial justice activists, including those involved in Black Lives Matter, have expressed frustration with Mr. Obama for his expressions of sympathy with police serving in African-American communities ravaged by poverty and violence.Before the meeting on Wednesday, some of them called on his administration to eliminate federal grants for police forces that fail to make changes.Mr. Robinson said the president mentioned the proposal during Wednesday’s meeting as “one of the levers they need to be able to use for both the carrot and the stick” to promote better policing.Later, in a Facebook post in which he asked Americans to reach out in their communities to heal divisions, the president said of Wednesday’s meeting: “I’ll admit, it was a candid discussion — challenging at times. But it couldn’t have been more important.”“I want to ask you — no matter who you are or where you live — to do whatever you can to foster these conversations and find solutions for your community,” Mr. Obama wrote. “I know it’s possible — I saw it happen this afternoon.”