https://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/10/theater/reviews/10mane.html
Sailing Off, Wheelchairs at the Prow, in Tina Howe’s New Play - The New York Times
Theater,Howe  Tina,Alexander  Jane,Chasing Manet (Play)
April 9, 2009
9313
If you have ever wondered how Katharine Hepburn might have been as King Lear, Jane Alexander offers a few lively suggestions in her performance in “Chasing Manet,” the whimsy-clotted new play by Tina Howe that opened on Thursday night in a Primary Stages production at 59E59 Theaters.Ms. Alexander, a Tony-winning actress (and four-time Oscar nominee) of daunting authority, plays Catherine Sargent, an imperious  artist who has been consigned to an old-age  home. And when she stands angry and barefoot in her white nightgown, long, snowy hair tumbling around her naked patrician face, raging in a Brahmin accent against those who brought her to this sad point.  ... Well, just squint a little, and you can imagine Catherine morphing into Katharine, shouting down the thunder on the blasted heath.That’s it for flashes of divine madness in this latest work from the author of “Coastal Disturbances” and “Pride’s Crossing.” Like many of Ms. Howe’s plays, “Chasing Manet” celebrates human (and particularly female) eccentricity and willfulness, even in the shadow of death. But the quirks assigned to the characters here all feel preowned (as the car vendors say), as does the gimmick-driven plot.But you decide. You can determine whether “Chasing Manet” is your kind of play  from a single-sentence synopsis, the kind script writers pitch to studio executives: Two ladies in a nursing home — one Jewish, one high WASP; one in a wheelchair, the other legally blind — come up with the idea of combining their resources and running away to Paris on the QE2.Still with me? I wish I could report that “Chasing Manet” is much more than my studio sales pitch. This production, directed by Michael Wilson and also starring Lynn Cohen, does occasionally stick its toes into the dark and icy waters of what it means to feel old and abandoned. But more often it just glides across the surface, trailing a twinkly string of cultural references and slender psychological insights.The play is set in a nursing home in Riverdale in the Bronx in the mid-1980s, and it is made clear from the first scene that it is no place to live. Shadows of wheelchairs, suspended from the ceiling, loom menacingly over the institutional sterility of Room 312. (Tony Straiges designed the set, and Howell Binkley the lighting.) And voices of senility rise in discord as unhappy residents wheel themselves through the hallways.You can’t blame Catherine for staying in bed, her face to the wall. Catherine, after all, is a famous modernist painter, a cousin of John Singer Sargent’s, a former lover of André Malraux’s and a firebrand aristocrat. Her sight may be nearly gone, but her mind is as acute as ever. And if you’re a follower of Ms. Howe’s career, you will have met someone much like Catherine in, say, “Pride’s Crossing,” “Approaching Zanzibar” or “Painting Churches.”To freshen up what has become her default heroine, Ms. Howe has provided Catherine with a roommate, Rennie (Ms. Cohen), a frisky, smiley, hat-wearing widow who stays cheerful by conducting conversations with her dead husband. At first, Catherine snubs Rennie, who is always being visited by (living) members of her affectionate  family. But then the idea comes to Catherine that, with Rennie’s assistance, she can finally make her escape to Paris, where she will revisit her favorite painting, Manet’s “Déjeuner sur l’Herbe,” in the Louvre.Though their characters are sketchily drawn, Ms. Alexander and Ms. Cohen inject them with a poignant charge of real desperation, which Mr. Wilson (“Dividing the Estate”) enriches with sly stagecraft. Rennie’s happy reminiscence of a summer swim ends abjectly, as the darkness swallows her, and she says, mouth askew, “Last one in’s a rotten egg.” And Ms. Alexander’s Catherine, who fulminates majestically, memorably shows up for a physical therapy class attired as an artificially bloodied Oedipus Rex.But the feyness that saturates this play is mostly of a lighter variety, which mixes queasily with the underlying bleakness. And once the old gals set their minds to running away — whoopee! —  they become life-affirming examples for those who have always longed, but never dared, to reach for their dreams, including that charming young physical therapist (Robert Christopher Riley) who sings show tunes, flies planes and secretly loves the resident art therapist (Vanessa Aspillaga).The fine supporting cast also includes Julie Halston, David Margulies and Jack Gilpin, who double as visiting relatives and bewildered old patients. Mr. Gilpin’s roles include that of Royal Lowell, Catherine’s browbeaten son, an English professor who recites Yeats and Shakespeare while looking uncomfortable. And Mr. Margulies appears as a resident    who seemingly has nothing to say except “help me,” until he erupts into a lyrical monologue about a vision of flying dinosaurs he was vouchsafed as an archaeologist on a Middle Eastern dig.Such detours into unexpected poetry have long been a specialty of Ms. Howe’s, and this one hints at what she may have been trying to achieve here: a sense of a transcendent world beyond the quotidian that everyone harbors within, regardless of age and infirmity. That’s the world summoned in “Sailing to Byzantium,” by the poet Catherine calls “good old Yeats.”It is an act of generosity for this playwright to allow two forlorn characters to run after that vision. But the form this pursuit takes finally seems more Disneyesque than Yeatsian, especially when Catherine delivers a bit of dialogue that sounds just like an advertising tagline: “You, me and Manet. It’s brilliant, just brilliant.”CHASING MANETBy Tina Howe; directed by Michael Wilson; sets by Tony Straiges; costumes by David C. Woolard; lighting by Howell Binkley; original music and sound by John Gromada; wig and hair design by Mark Adam Rampmeyer; associate director, Maxwell Williams; production stage manager, Susie Cordon; production supervisor, PRF Productions; general manager, Reuben Saunders; associate artistic director, Michelle Bossy. Presented by Primary Stages, Casey Childs, executive producer; Andrew Leynse, artistic director; Elliot Fox, managing director; in association with Scott M. Delman, Alan D. Marks, Ted Snowdon and Jamie deRoy. At the 59E59 Theaters, 59 East 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 279-4200. Through May 2. Running time: 2 hours.WITH: Jane Alexander (Catherine Sargent), Vanessa Aspillaga (Esperanza/Saviana/Angelica/Marie-Claire/Sibyl), Lynn Cohen (Rennie Waltzer), Jack Gilpin (Royal Lowell/Sherwood/ Marvin/Rob), Julie Halston (Iris/Rita/Charlotte), David Margulies (Henry/Maurice/Reginald Allen Pointer III) and Robert Christopher Riley (Charles/Gabe/Rémy Bonaparte).