https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/17/realestate/suburban-just-dont-call-her-a-jersey-girl.html
Suburban? Just Don’t Call Her a ‘Jersey Girl’ - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Suburbs,Children and Childhood,Montclair (NJ),Brooklyn (NYC)
March 17, 2017
8799
In the quarter century since I moved out of my parents’ house in Newton, Mass., I have spent approximately zero seconds thinking I’d like to move back to such a suburban idyll.I began my adult life, instead, in the Fairfax district of Los Angeles and the Adams Morgan neighborhood of Washington, D.C. I bought my first apartment at the corner of West 108th Street and Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan; my second in the West Loop of Chicago. Then I moved to a loft in a converted newspaper printing plant in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, and later, to a two-flat in Jerusalem’s Old Katamon.Sure I grew up in the suburbs, but I was a city person. I talked fast and walked fast and, especially when I was in a faraway place like Israel, or Kansas, everyone seemed to think my sarcasm and sass spelled New Yorker. I have never used a lawn mower. My twins, like many Brooklyn babies of their particular demographic moment, began their cultural education at Music for Aardvarks, where their favorite lyric was, “Good thing I’m a city kid, ’cause I can hail a cab!”Then, one day in December 2015, I found myself being ferried by a real estate broker through shady streets that looked faintly familiar. We were house-hunting in Montclair, N.J., 13 miles from Manhattan rather than seven west of Boston, but it might as well have been my hometown.Half the homes seemed to be center-hall colonials with a narrow, window-filled addition, similar to the one where I had spent so many hours watching “The Brady Bunch” and “The Love Boat.”The restaurants and shops on Church Street were only slightly less twee than those on Newton’s Piccadilly Square. There was a sign for a church that was a carbon copy of the one on my childhood walk to school.And I was loving every bit of it.Moving around so much during my career as a journalist has meant a constant re-evaluation of both “real estate” and “community.” My Long Island-bred husband and I knew we were drawn to buildings with character, and to neighborhoods filled with people of different backgrounds. We had both loved Brooklyn, but our Prospect Heights place was too small, so we sold it in 2014; as we prepared to leave Jerusalem about 18 months later, we felt priced out of the entire borough.And though I was reluctant to acknowledge it, even to myself, when we had stayed at a friend’s Park Slope apartment the summer before, it had just felt difficult: all that whining about the walk to the subway or the wait for a restaurant. I remembered how relieved I had been when I was appointed Jerusalem bureau chief of The New York Times, and realized it meant I could drop out of the city’s kindergarten rat race.Now, the prospect of fighting to get my third-graders into good New York City public schools was terrifying. My daughter kept saying she wanted to live in a real house. The kind with a yard.So: Montclair, a town long popular with Times friends and colleagues. We bought a Victorian, not a colonial, to avoid, at least in part, completely becoming my parents. It has a lovely if not particularly large yard, which we reseeded last fall, and which we plan on mowing ourselves. I am a little embarrassed to admit how easy the readjustment to a suburban idyll has been.I love having a driveway rather than endlessly circling the block for a parking spot. I love hearing the sound of my kids’ feet creaking on our steps rather than the movements of strangers in surrounding apartments. Of course I love the expansive parks and lovely library my high property taxes pay for. I was flooded with warmth the other day, when my son saw some boys he knew kicking a ball in an adjacent yard, ran outside and jumped the fence to join them.I do miss having a trash chute. And there is no replacement for the rich ethnic tapestry of Brooklyn’s Atlantic Avenue; the sounds and smells of Coney Island; the awesome playgrounds along the Dumbo waterfront. (My son would add street-cart hot dogs.)And I did cringe when my brother-in-law, who raised his children in quintessentially suburban Short Hills, N.J., referred to my daughter as a “Jersey Girl.” When people ask where we’re from and the children answer “New Jersey,” I find myself correcting them: “Montclair.”Maybe I’m just kidding myself, but I see Montclair as a city person’s suburb. It is filled with some 85 restaurants, ethnic and cheffy and twee. Fast-food chains are banned, and the Saturday farmers’ market goes year-round. We have an art museum (where my daughter went to digital photography and green-screen camp) and a film festival (through which my husband teaches improv). There are no cul-de-sacs or cookie-cutter developments; Montclair became a township in 1868, so our hundred-year-old home is in good company.Nearly everyone we meet, starting with that real estate broker, seems to have moved here from Brooklyn. At Rosh Hashana services we reconnected with a family we faintly recognized from Tot Shabbat singalongs in Park Slope circa 2010. The guy who ran Music for Aardvarks? His wife is on the PTA with my husband.With 38,000 people, Montclair is about half the size of Newton, where my parents still live, but bigger than most suburbs. It’s also, famously, more racially diverse: 23 percent of the residents are black, 9 percent Hispanic, 4 percent Asian, 59 percent white.I think the most crucial difference is that there are seven train stations sprinkled throughout town, and a magnet school and school choice system with free busing. The typical bedroom community configuration — with the best school, the fanciest houses and the little shopping strip with one white-tablecloth restaurant, one coffee shop, one slice joint and one drugstore, all within a mile of the station — does not apply.Instead, there are at least three distinct, equally adorable commercial districts, at least a dozen places to have brunch and probably twice that many nail salons, plenty of restaurants that deliver — though not 24 hours a day — and, for the past few months, one of those Thai-inspired ice cream places where you pay $7 a cup to watch the servers spend four full minutes scraping ingredients on a subzero platter until they become five little rollups that are astonishingly creamy and come with unlimited free toppings. Sounds a lot like the gentrified precincts of Brooklyn, right?Shortly after we moved to Montclair, my husband and I drove back to the old neighborhood to celebrate a friend’s birthday at a bar. As he circled for a parking spot, I noticed smells and noises along Flatbush Avenue that I didn’t remember being quite so strong. We had a fine time, but didn’t wish for a minute that we still lived there, despite the two-river drive home.Months later, we went to a movie, on a weeknight, back in Montclair. (Did I mention that there are two first-run theaters?) With the babysitter all booked, we figured we’d grab a bite to eat afterward. But when we got out, after 9 p.m., most of the storefronts were shuttered.We ended up at a sushi bar where we were the only customers, and we definitely felt like we were doing it wrong. Until we went home, and parked in our driveway, and looked at the yard and heard our own footsteps creaking on the stairs as we went up to kiss the kids good night.