https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/07/fashion/how-target-and-joseph-altuzarra-collaborated-on-a-fashion-line.html
Target’s Newest Dance Partner? Joseph Altuzarra - The New York Times
Target Corporation,Altuzarra  Joseph,Fashion and Apparel,Shopping and Retail
Aug. 6, 2014
9051
Eva Herzigova, creamy skinned and curvy, strides to her closet and slides apart its contents to make way for her latest fashion trophies. Moments later, she is assessing their impact in a full-length mirror, caressing their outlines, clearly enjoying their feel on her skin. The scene fades, and what looms on the screen is Target’s familiar bull’s-eye logo, beneath itthe message, “Altuzarra September 14.” This steamily sophisticated mini-feature, to be made public later this summer, was being screened the other week at Spring Studios, a light-saturated, stripped-down loft that was home last year to a number of well-attended runway shows.“Awesome,” murmured Joseph Altuzarra, 31, who created Ms. Herzigova’s video wardrobe, a camera-worthy distillation of the collection he had whipped up expressly for the discount chain, its debut in Target stores, on the retailer’s website and, globally, on Net-a-Porter.com just weeks away.Yet, sitting at a table with members of Target’s design and creative team, he wasn’t entirely knocked off his chair.“Will there be a voice-over,” he asked, his voice rising, “so that people will know how to say my name?”His concern seemed well founded. Mr. Altuzarra, an A-list personality in fashion spheres (in June, the Council of Fashion Designers of America bestowed on him its Women’s Wear Designer of the Year award) remains something of a cipher to the garden-variety Target “guest,” who stops by the store to stock up on kitty treats, foldaway lawn chairs and pencil cases for school-bound youngsters.Scott Swartz, Target’s creative director, sighed perceptibly. “Let us take that one away for a bit and think about it,” he said. The exchange was nothing if not courteous, betraying nary a whiff of tension between the genteelly sparring parties: Mr. Altuzarra and Karis Durmer, his chief executive, on one side; and on the other, team Target, led by Mr. Swartz, and Laura Cashill, who heads the retailer’s marketing efforts. And it offered an unprecedented glimpse into the inner workings of a collaboration between a luxury fashion label and the famously buttoned-up chain, whose headquarters are in Minneapolis.That seeming transparency was a departure for the discounter. But the stakes are high. Target stands to add a fresh coat of gloss to its reputation as champion of low-cost design, a pioneer of fashion for the masses whose collaborations, inaugurated in 2002 with Isaac Mizrahi, have included unlikely alliances with luxury leaders including Missoni and Liberty of London and partnerships with the once little-known likes of Luella Bartley, Jason Wu and Peter Pilotto.Such unions are widely perceived to have scant immediate impact on the store’s bottom line.“What the merchant is really seeking is to connect itself with talent,” said Imran Amed, the editor of The Business of Fashion, an industry website. “Designer partnerships help bring customers into the store who otherwise might not have considered it.”Those partnerships may go some way, as well, toward restoring consumers’ good will, which eroded after a series of company setbacks, most glaringly a security breach last year, when hackers stole the personal and payment information of tens of millions of customers.As Faye Landes, an analyst at Cowen & Company, a financial services company, told The New York Times last week, Target needs to revive the sheen that once earned it the affectionately Gallicized sobriquet “Tar-Jay.”Mr. Altuzarra has as much to gain.“Being invited to a collaboration means that in some sense your brand stands for something,” he had said over breakfast in Chelsea that morning. In contrast to the days of Halston, whose collaboration with J. C. Penney in the 1980s tarnished his name and his brand, such high-low alliances are now thought to add luster on both sides. “It enhances my image,” Mr. Altuzarra said, “and brings my name out there in a way that, on my own, I never could.”He was quick to acknowledge that a fledgling label (one that employs a few dozen people) rarely has the budget for the widely rolled-out broadcast, magazine and billboard advertising that can herald one’s arrival in the fashion firmament.Kering, the fashion conglomerate, recently bought a stake in Altuzarra. That apart, he stands to benefit significantly from Target’s financial support, estimated by retail analysts to vary from about $500,000 to $1 million.“If you’re a young designer, a sum like that can really help finance the cash-flow needs of your business,” Mr. Amed said.When the partners embarked on their venture last January, Mr. Altuzarra anticipated some skepticism.“I think there is this assumption that you’re going to do jerseys and T-shirts,” he said. Certainly there were fabric restrictions. When he learned he could not work with the furs, silks and leathers that denote luxury in his runway collections, he compensated with elaborate prints, embroideries and beading. “In the customer’s eye,” he said, “those things give a lot of value to the piece.”The collaboration functioned as a laboratory. Mr. Altuzarra was free to adopt, or reject, he said, a wealth of prints stamped out at the manufacturer’s studio in New York.“You could try a shirt with six different types of embroideries,” he said. “A week later you would get six different types back in sample form.”At Spring Studios later that morning, he grew expansive, showing off an inspiration board propped along a wall. It served as a launchpad for the collection, which was meant to convey an urbane look, a strikingly moody deviation from Target’s customarily cheap-and-cheerful offerings.Fashion adepts might have recognized such Altuzarra mascots as Carine Roitfeld, snapped on the fly, sheathed in a cream-colored coat and matching thigh-high boots. Among the potpourri of images rattling around in the designer’s consciousness and finding their way to the board were shots of a Claude Lalanne rhinoceros, a slab of malachite, a Romanian peasant blouse and one of Richard Serra’s monumental sculptures, “very masculine in shape but sensual,” Mr. Altuzarra said. “I’m not really a sharp-angles kind of guy.”Those apparently disparate visual cues posed a particular challenge.Noria Morales, Target’s director of design partnerships, said, “The question was how do you take a designer that seductive and sexy and meld it with a brand that needs to be upbeat and happy?”Trish Adams, Target’s executive vice president for apparel and home merchandising, greets such dilemmas with practiced equanimity. Target has, after all, teamed in the past with Alexander McQueen in a collection with a somber, decidedly rock ’n’ roll edge (she is a 13-year veteran of Target’s fashion collaborations, which she initiated). Her more pressing concern, she said, was to maintain a productive dialogue with the designer, ironing out potential kinks.“Target might say, you have too many pants,” she said. (Dresses, with their more-forgiving fit, tend to sell more briskly.) If a designer asks for pearl buttons, which would increase the cost of a blazer, “We might say, ‘Fine, is that what’s important to you?’ ” Ms. Adams said. “In the end, the designer makes choices.”She was seated late last month in a conference room at Target’s spare headquarters in downtown Minneapolis, its brightly lighted corridors and public spaces punctuated by bull’s-eye logos, splashy artwork and replicas of the company’s mascot bull terrier. The meeting room was embellished with little more than a rack bearing some of Target’s greatest collaborative hits, a Luella leather biker jacket, a Liberty peacock-feather-printed dress and a Missoni zigzag-patterned maxi dress, to name but a handful.In the past, the company focused on designers who were familiar chiefly to a fashion-educated niche.“With Joseph we were more into that person really hitting his stride at that moment,” Ms. Adams said.Mr. Altuzarra’s high profile sends a signal to the marketplace that Target does not intend to cede leadership in the turf it pioneered to competitors like H & M, which recently announced a partnership with Alexander Wang.On view at the Spring Studios showroom were Parisian-tinctured Altuzarra signatures, the line conceived to be playfully flirtatious but emphatically adult. It would offer any number of the designer’s touchstones, among them a Romanian inspired peasant dress with skirt and shirt attached, several kimono dresses embellished with photo realist orchids, wildcat-patterned pussy-bow blouses reminiscent of early Yves Saint Laurent and a python-printed pencil skirt.“We though this aesthetic would resonate with our guests, whether they know the Altuzarra name or not,” Ms. Morales said. “Nobody knew who Peter Pilotto was. But they know the Pilotto colors and prints.”There was give and take throughout the collaborative process.“It’s our job to guide the designer, but we don’t want to direct the designer,” she explained. “We might say, for example: ‘Hey, we know you love the romper, so let’s keep the romper. But make sure you design a top and shorts for everyone who can’t wear the romper.’ ”Mr. Altuzarra found flaws in the initial kimono samples.“I didn’t like the construction, it felt too fussy,” he said. He objected to the print quality of a mauve-on-black variation.A stickler, he had Oxford Collections, a partner for production and sourcing, rework the elastic of his peasant blouse to ensure that the neckline would always be evenly gathered. He asked for and got refinements, including fabric-covered buttons, French seaming in the garment’s underside as well as strategically placed darts, and the elaborately asymmetrical construction that would give his skirts their swing.Despite such labor-intensive dressmaker details, prices remain within shoppers’ reach: $18 to $90 for clothing and lingerie, $30 to $80 for shoes and accessories.No corners were visibly cut in Target’s print campaign. Shot by Peter Lindbergh, it zeros in on Ms. Herzigova, a model who, vamping in a corset-belted black trench coat, might be a modern-day Mata Hari or an ebullient tycoon enjoying the fruits of a mad shopping spree.Mr. Altuzarra was impressed. He was less certain, though, about the video, played in one version to the strains of Alice Russell, and in another, Janis Joplin belting her emblematic “Piece of My Heart.”Ms. Russell’s version “feels optimistic but lacks sensuality,” the designer said, suggesting, with a show of tact, “we might have something on the rock side — you know, there’s this band Falun ... ”He will likely approve of at least one element in the latest cut: It opens with a voice-over. “Altuzarra,” the speaker announces, every syllable distinct.