https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/01/arts/design/isabel-lewis-offers-an-immersive-experience-at-dia-art.html
Isabel Lewis Offers an Immersive Experience at Dia Art Foundation - The New York Times
Art,Lewis  Isabel,Alexopoulos  Yorgo,Pape  Lygia,Dia Art Foundation (NYS),Wolkowitz  Bryce  Gallery,Hauser & Wirth
March 31, 2016
9185
It’s hard to know what to call installations that you cannot only see, but also hear, feel, taste — even smell.The artist and choreographer Isabel Lewis — born in the Dominican Republic and now based in Berlin — calls them “occasions.”She has presented them at places like Kunsthalle Basel, Frieze London and Fondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo in Turin, Italy. And she is creating one for the Dia Art Foundation this summer.The piece is ambitious — spanning four weekends between June 24 and July 17; starting Friday nights at Dia’s Chelsea gallery on West 22nd Street and continuing Saturday and Sunday afternoons at an outdoor park near Dia’s site in Beacon, N.Y.Reservations, to be taken as of May 2, are suggested (Dia’s Chelsea space can hold up to 250) and Ms. Lewis wants visitors to come and go as they please, to participate without pressure in events that resemble social gatherings and recruit every sensory perception.“Whether you’re there for 10 minutes, 30 minutes or two hours, you can leave with something,” she said. “You’ve had a kind of complete experience in my definition, which means all of your senses have been addressed.”The Manhattan portion invites visitors to settle into comfortable furniture as Ms. Lewis serves as D.J. and host, speaking through a microphone on various subjects, like Renaissance and medieval art.The content asks, “Is there something that could be recovered from the moment in time when we thought about things as a Western culture before the scientific worldview,” she said, “before we started to look at the world in terms of categorization and quantities?”Dancers will pair up for the Angolan Kizomba, food from chefs will be served and a scent — designed by the Norwegian smell expert Sissel Tolaas — will waft up from the floor.“She’s merging these different experiences from a static audience to one that’s more participatory,” said Jessica Morgan, Dia’s director, “but also questioning the boundaries of these media themselves.”The piece continues into the weekend on one of the trains to Beacon, during which Ms. Lewis said she hopes to replace the conductor’s voice with her own so that she can narrate the trip up the Hudson — the details are still being worked out with Metro North — “focusing attention to particular moments along the ride as you’re seeing this landscape through your window.”Once upstate, people can lounge on furniture Ms. Lewis has designed in Long Dock Park, next to Dia; watch dancers scattered through the verdant landscape; and listen to music.“There is a kind of flow, there’s a dramaturgy,” Ms. Lewis said, “ranging from high-intensity, more show moments to where this very ambient kind of music is going but your intellectual capacity isn’t being engaged all the time.”“I don’t have a big demand of the visitor,” she added. “I hope that it’s a pleasurable experience in the address of all of these senses, that it does draw people to linger.”The guy has come a long way from graffiti.Though first recognized for his tagging of Los Angeles streets in the late 1980s, Yorgo Alexopoulos is now among those leading the way in combining art and technology.Yes, he still works with painting and drawing. But he is also using 4K video, translucent LCD video screens, Kuka robots, 3-D printers, motorized dollies and multiple cameras to create multimedia installations.A solo exhibition of these cutting-edge creations is coming to the Bryce Wolkowitz Gallery on April 20.“Creative synthesis for Yorgo is really finding its footing in unimagined new ways,” Mr. Wolkowitz said. “The innovative approaches that Yorgo has developed really could be a watershed moment in the very brief history — 50-plus odd years — of video art.”The show, “Act of Nature,” includes footage from Mr. Alexopoulos’s travels from the mountains of Greece to the deserts of Peru. He is not just offering up pretty images of the environment; he’s interested in the symbolism behind them.“If you look at mythology or religion or any of the cross-cultural folklore we’re all aware of, a lot of these stories are really about personifying nature — the way ancient civilizations understood what the sun was or what a storm meant,” Mr. Alexopoulos said. “So I think of the forest as subconsciously grappling with something, while a garden is nature tamed. The ocean is about leaving a place and going to a different place. It’s about not being grounded on land.”When Hauser & Wirth featured international abstract artists at its Zurich gallery in 2014, Lygia Pape was one of them.Now the gallery has decided to represent Ms. Pape, a Brazilian artist central to the Neo-Concrete movement, who died in 2004 at age 77. The gallery’s first show devoted to her will open in London on Sept. 23.“In Brazil, she is an absolute giant, but she’s not really represented in the U.S.,” said Marc Payot, Hauser & Wirth’s partner and vice president, adding that the gallery “realized how important the work is.”Ms. Pape was among those in South America who moved European abstraction into three dimensions, Mr. Payot said, creating installations and, in some instances, stage designs — pushing the notion of Concrete art to new levels and “adding Brazilian soul.”“When you think of what the political conditions were in the ’60s and how repressed it was,” he said, “to then form a group and do that kind of art is quite radical.”