https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/reince-preibus-holocaust-remembrance-day.html
Reince Priebus Defends Holocaust Statement That Failed to Mention Jews - The New York Times
Holocaust and the Nazi Era,Trump  Donald J,Jews and Judaism,Anti-Semitism,Priebus  Reince R,United States Politics and Government
Jan. 29, 2017
8286
Amid protests and legal challenges over President Trump’s immigration order, the White House also found itself on the defensive this weekend about a normally routine statement about International Holocaust Remembrance Day that drew criticism and scorn.The statement released on Friday failed to mention Jews or anti-Semitism, something that past presidential statements had done without fail.Reince Priebus, the White House chief of staff, defended the language in a Sunday interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” telling the host, Chuck Todd, “I don’t regret the words.”Mr. Priebus continued, “I mean, everyone’s suffering in the Holocaust including obviously, all of the Jewish people affected and the miserable genocide that occurred — it’s something that we consider to be extraordinarily sad.”He added: “If we could wipe it off of the history books, we would. But we can’t.”The original statement, released on Friday, was dedicated to the “victims, survivors, heroes of the Holocaust,” but did not specifically mention the approximately six million Jews who were exterminated by the German regime.The statement also failed to specifically mention the Roma, the disabled, the gay people and other groups that were targeted on political and ideological grounds, including communists and socialists.On Saturday, Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for the president, had told a CNN reporter that the wording was intentional because the administration is “an incredibly inclusive group and we took into account all of those who suffered.”She called the issuance of the statement “an honor.”During the interview with Mr. Priebus, Mr. Todd read aloud from a column by John Podhoretz, the editor of the conservative magazine Commentary and a former Reagan speechwriter, who called the comments by Ms. Hicks “abominable.”“The Final Solution was aimed solely at the Jews,” Mr. Podhoretz wrote, while acknowledging other groups were also killed by the Nazis. “To universalize it to ‘all those who suffered’ is to scrub the Holocaust of its meaning.”The White House statement also drew strong criticism from Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, Hillary Clinton’s running mate.“This is what Holocaust denial is,” Mr. Kaine said on “Meet the Press.” “Many Holocaust deniers acknowledge: ‘Oh yeah, people were killed, but it was a lot of innocent people. Jews weren’t targets.’”