https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/02/us/politics/with-trump-in-town-washington-restaurants-await-a-visit-from-ivanka.html
With Trump in Town, Washington Restaurants Await a Visit (From Ivanka) - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Restaurants,Trump  Ivanka,Trump  Donald J,Kushner  Jared
Feb. 2, 2017
7304
WASHINGTON — President George Bush liked Peking duck from a restaurant in a Virginia strip mall. President Bill Clinton liked Indian food from the Bombay Club and the occasional run to McDonald’s. President Barack Obama spent eight years dining all over town, eating everything from upscale Italian at Fiola Mare to truffle macaroni and cheese at Equinox.President Trump, a culinary creature of habit and junk food aficionado, seems content, for now, to ensconce himself in the White House rather than partake of the dining options in increasingly foodie Washington. But in this overwhelmingly Democratic city, where  even a local hoagie chain owner faced a storm of criticism for attending a meeting on small businesses with Mr. Trump at the White House, restaurateurs are hoping that Ivanka Trump, and not necessarily her father, turns up.“I can’t see him sitting down and having a bowl of gumbo,” said Gus DiMillo, whose restaurant group owns Acadiana, which specializes in Cajun-Creole fare. “I’m more curious about Ivanka.”A precisely put-together entrepreneur, mother of three and wife to Jared Kushner, a top White House adviser, Ms. Trump will most likely continue the work she did on the campaign trail to humanize her father and promote the family brand in Washington. But many residents are still smarting from the results of the election and wondering what will happen to an urban renaissance and an explosion of restaurants, bars and nightclubs that coincided with Mr. Obama’s time in office.Nicholas Stefanelli, the head chef and owner of Masseria, a restaurant frequently visited by the former first lady, Michelle Obama, said that Washington took on the characteristics of each administration in power — but that the Trumps would probably have to adapt to the dining and night-life culture of the city, not the other way around.“There’s something very unique happening in D.C.,” he said. “That movement is not going to stop. The energy of the government has shifted, but I don’t think the energy of the city has.”Mr. Stefanelli did note that the newly arrived band of Goldman Sachs alumni with close ties to the president might drive business in certain parts of the city. “Those guys go out,” he said. “They eat and drink well.”Ms. Trump offers a softer view into an administration that, so far, has been defined by its chaos. Last Wednesday, when Mr. Trump was railing against the news media and announcing his desire to open a widespread investigation into voter fraud, Ms. Trump posted a video of her infant son crawling on the White House carpet.Restaurateurs said her engagement with life here could have the same effect. She is viewed as the most approachable of the Trump clan, and perhaps the one most likely to solve political differences across the lunch table, or at least heal some rifts.“There seems to be maybe a little more of a groundedness with her,” Joseph Cerione, the general manager of Blue Duck Tavern, said in an interview. “She was very friendly with Chelsea Clinton, so I don’t know. Maybe we’ll see her.”Ashok Bajaj, who owns the Bombay Club, Rasika and the Oval Room, has paid attention to the food the new president eats. A recent photo taken at Jean-Georges, a three-Michelin-star restaurant on the first floor of Mr. Trump’s namesake hotel in New York, made Mr. Bajaj hopeful that the president, who has expressed a fondness for well-done steaks, may be a fan of seafood. But he thinks the Trump children will be the bigger story.“Who’s going to set the tone in the city is not President Trump,” Mr. Bajaj said. “I think it’s going to be Ivanka and Jared, and I think it’s going to be his other family members.”Warren Rojas, the editor of the Washington edition of the food website Eater, said in an interview that Ms. Trump might be the “guiding light” to how the Trump administration engages with the city and its restaurant scene. Mr. Rojas said that Eater, which maintains a map of Mrs. Obama’s favorite restaurants, could focus more on Ms. Trump’s habits than her father’s.“If we did a map of where Donald Trump is dining,” he said, “I don’t know that it would get much further than BLT Prime inside of his hotel.”As they settle their family into a new home in the Kalorama neighborhood, just around the corner from the Obamas, Ms. Trump and Mr. Kushner, who are Jewish and keep kosher, are beginning to venture out. Their first stops have not been Michelin-starred hot spots or establishment restaurants, but low-key eateries that tend to draw families.During his first week in the West Wing — where he is working as an unpaid adviser tasked with, among other things, bringing peace to the Middle East — Mr. Kushner found time to visit the bar at Founding Farmers. With another man and a Secret Service agent in tow, Mr. Kushner drank a beer and ordered a plate of deviled eggs last Tuesday, according to a bartender on duty that night.A day earlier, Ms. Trump went to Open City, a diner in the Woodley Park neighborhood, and had smoked salmon and bagels with a small group of friends.Kristen Schaefer, who works at the cafe, said in an interview that Ms. Trump was “very gracious” and “very lovely” to several people who approached to welcome her to town.But the couple have already tested the limits of the mollifying effects their presence has on this administration: As protests erupted around the country last weekend, another Instagram photo, taken of Ms. Trump and her husband on their way to the exclusive Alfalfa Club Dinner, did not go over as well. It was quickly dubbed the “let them eat cake” photograph.The two have kept a low profile since.