https://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/17/garden/son-of-carwash-the-self-cleaning-house.html
Son of Carwash, the Self-Cleaning House - The New York Times
NEWBERG (OREGON),GABE  FRANCES,HOUSEWORK,INVENTIONS AND PATENTS
Jan. 17, 2002
33
LET history record that here, in a living room with soap and water-dispensing nozzles on the ceiling, a decisive battle in the war on household drudgery was fought.''I asked God to give me a big job,'' said Frances Gabe, 86, the inventor and occupant of the self-cleaning house. ''He gave me a lollapalooza.''Some dream of verdant lawns, tennis courts and swimming pools. Ms. Gabe, who in 1984 received United States patent No. 4,428,085, now expired, fantasized about a house that could rid itself of dirt and then, over a 12-year period, she actually built it.Visitors to the modest cinder-block house, down a rural dirt road beside a pine-wooded canyon, are greeted by a sign that reads ''Please Don't Trample the Poison Oak or Feed the Bull.'' Inside, the house is tidy, but it has not cleaned itself lately. Ms. Gabe's ceilings were damaged in a flood five years ago and again in an earthquake last spring, and only the kitchen mechanisms are working. Molly, a Great Dane, clicks across the water-resistant floors.Ms. Gabe's real name is Frances Grace Arnholtz Bateson. She invented the name Gabe, mining her initials, years ago. In her unpublished autobiography, she writes: ''I'm not eliminating homemaking, mothering, wifehood, only dirt grubbing. Scrub-a-dub ladies, enjoy your janitoring.''The house, which has fascinated Harvard researchers and appeared on ''Ripley's Believe It or Not,'' is an offbeat American monument to perseverance. Rotating nozzles are fixed to the ceilings, designed to spray soap and water in a circular motion like an indoor carwash. After the rinse cycle, hot air blows everything dry.The floors are slanted imperceptibly toward corner drains. In the living room, where the sprinklers are not at the moment operating, paintings are coated in plastic. The dining table is topped in semiprecious stones embedded in water-repelling resin. Knickknacks are on display in a window wall made of cinder block and ingenious transparent plastic compartments, which keep out dust and let in light.A bouncy living room banquette is made from waterproof materials Ms. Gabe will not disclose, possibly a cross between leather and Flubber.Before the earthquake damage, Ms. Gabe activated her house's self-cleaning mechanisms about twice a year. The concept, she explained,  ''was never intended to scrub a dirty house, but to keep a clean house clean.''The devices still work in the kitchen, where dishes are washed in their places on mesh shelves, and the prison-green walls are waterproof. ''The problem with houses is that they are designed by men,'' she said as she showed off the room. ''They put in far too much space and then you have to take care of it.''Ms. Gabe's patent for Self-Cleaning Building Construction, which hangs on the living room wall, shrouded in plastic wrap, contains 68 separate components. Among them is the Gabe Waterless Self-Cleaning Toilet and the Gabe Self-Cleaning Book Jacket. The most intriguing notion may be the Gabe Washer-Dryer Closet, which washes and dries clothes while they are still on hangers.An intricate model of the house is on display through 2003 at the new Women's Museum in Dallas, where Ms. Gabe takes her place alongside mothers of invention like Bette Nesmith Graham, the inventor of Liquid Paper. ''It is one of the museum's most popular exhibits,'' said Victoria Montelongo, director of exhibitions.Her patent, said Fred Amran, a professor of creativity at the University of Minnesota, who specializes in inventors who are women, is ''incredibly complex, the longest I've ever read.''Over the years, Ms. Gabe said she had been approached by manufacturers, who then ''disappeared.'' She sees conspiracy at work in her house's singularity: if it has not taken off, she said, it may be because of the ''doggone worms'' -- vacuum and washing machine makers.She worshiped her father, Frederick Arnholtz, a building contractor and architect, and as a tiny child rode up scaffolds on his shoulders. ''Daddy was everything to me,'' she said. ''He said, 'the world belongs to you, reach out and grab it.' ''At 17, she married Herbert Grant Bateson, an electrical engineer, whom she divorced 35 years later. ''From the time I was 13, there was no getting rid of him,'' she explained, still looking irritated.They started a small construction company in Portland, Ore. Ms. Gabe ran it. ''I was his boss,'' she explained. ''It was awfully hard on him.'' They had two children, Grant, who died four years ago at 50, and Lourene, 67, who lives in Bend, Ore. There are five grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.After the divorce, she recalled, ''I was sitting here alone, crying as hard as I could cry. Then, I prayed. I said, 'Father, give me something to do so big, so all-consuming, so useful, that it would use all of me.' So I could keep going.''As she sank into despondency, she said, two angels appeared, one on each shoulder. ''I picked up a pencil and began scribbling,'' she said. ''I thought I was just doodling. Then I stopped and looked, and there was the self-cleaning house.''She spent the next 12 years honing the concept, setting up a glass shower stall in the yard to study the behavior of water. She was inspired partly by ''back abuse,'' the endless bending that occurs with housework. She recalled a moment during her marriage when fig jam dribbled down a wall. ''I thought, darn it, this is more than I can handle,'' she said. ''So I brought out the hose.''Today, she spends most of her time in the studio she converted from a toolshed in a burst of postdivorce emancipation. It is a no-nonsense space filled with power tools, with a large drafting table and a trolley for lifting sculpture. Carpentry and sculpture are pursuits she enjoyed until recently. A picture window looks into a forest of fir, pine and chestnut trees. The door jamb is low, ''so when people come in, they have to bow in my direction,'' she said.She shows the house by appointment, charging a sliding rate -- $25 for the first visitor and $5 for each additional person. She does not care for her neighbors (''the stinkers'') and can sometimes resemble the painting on her living room wall of a hawk about to pounce on a pigeon. ''I'm me,'' she said. ''I do things. They want to be entertained.''The ultimate fate of her novel creation is unclear. She has talked with the Chehalem Parks and Recreation District about donating the house and the property with the intent of preserving it, said Allyn Brown, a lawyer for the parks district who has known Ms. Gabe for 30 years.Landmark or no, not even a self-cleaning house can do everything, as was evident one afternoon as Ms. Gabe puttered around her kitchen. She frowned, her brows knit like darning needles. Then she squinted knowingly.''Mice in the butter dish, darn it,'' she said.