https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/magazine/can-north-carolina-get-away-with-rolling-back-lgbt-rights.html
Can North Carolina Get Away With Rolling Back L.G.B.T. Rights? - The New York Times
Law and Legislation,State Legislatures,Transgender and Transsexuals,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Discrimination,Gender,Human Rights Campaign,Supreme Court (US),Kennedy  Anthony M,North Carolina
March 25, 2016
3586
In a bill that zoomed through with head-spinning speed, the North Carolina legislature rushed Wednesday to strip rights from L.G.B.T. people. The excuse for the bill was to restrict transgender people to using the public restroom that matches the gender on their birth certificates. But the Republican-led Legislature went far beyond bathrooms. Lawmakers also blocked cities and counties from protecting people from discrimination, based on sexual orientation or gender identity, in restaurants, hotels, taxis or any form of public accommodation. It’s a sweeping law — and it represents a backlash against the strides L.G.B.T. people have made in other arenas this year, one that yanks North Carolina back in time.Will the state pay a price? Last spring, Indiana and Arkansas were rocked by the national reaction to laws that did less. Each state passed a religious-freedom bill that appeared to shield business that didn’t want to serve gay couples. The sound bite we remember from this particular news cycle came from Crystal O’Connor, a co-owner of Memories Pizza in Walkerton, Ind., who told a local news station that “if a gay couple came in and wanted us to provide pizzas for their wedding, we would have to say no.” That generated a wave of indignation on behalf of gay people. Major companies threatened to leave the state. The president of the N.C.A.A., looking ahead to the men’s basketball Final Four in Indianapolis, expressed concern for student-athletes and the organization’s employees. Indiana and Arkansas were embarrassed into retreating, changing the laws they had just passed to avoid being tarred as reactionary.This time, in North Carolina, the sound bite at the State Assembly came from Chloe Jefferson, a student at Greenville Christian Academy, who said, “Girls like me should never be made to shower and undress in front of boys” — referring to transgender girls. She echoes the T-shirt slogan that led Houston voters to reject a broad equal rights ordinance in November: “No Men in Women’s Bathrooms.” This is painfully at odds with how transgender people see themselves. A trans woman feels she is a woman and may well appear that way to the world, whether or not she has gone through the official process of changing her birth certificate. “It feels just as natural to be in there with girls as it does to be in the classroom with boys and girls,” a 12-year-old transgender girl in Connecticut said to me about her school locker room last fall.But policing the bathroom taps into fears and discomfort that swirl around an intimate space, a place where we undress and make ourselves vulnerable. And for a lot of people, the conversation about transgender access feels like it’s happening fast. It’s also playing out differently in different places: Last month, Charlotte, N.C., passed the kind of equal rights ordinance that Houston rejected. Charlotte’s decision to allow transgender people to use the public restroom that comports with their gender identity was the catalyst for the state bill that took away that protection and many more, from lesbians, gays and bisexuals as well as trans people.North Carolina has plenty of company. The Human Rights Campaign, an L.G.B.T. advocacy group, is tracking more than 175 bills in 32 states, 44 of which focus on transgender people — more than double the number considered last year. This isn’t a regional issue, either. The bills are popping up all over the country, in a variety of forms. The Human Rights Campaign calls them a “reminder of how much work remains to be done in educating Americans about who transgender people are.”The bills are also a reminder of what the Supreme Court calls animus: the mix of bias, dislike and fear that can overtake communities. Lt. Gov. Dan Forest said Charlotte’s ordinance “would have given pedophiles, sex offenders and perverts free rein to watch women, boys and girls undress and use the bathroom,” cruel characterizations that have no relationship to being transgender. The court has been clear for years that animus is not a constitutionally permissible basis for legislation. It’s actually the 20th anniversary of the court’s recognition of that principle, in another case in which a state tried to undo local efforts to protect L.G.B.T. people from discrimination. In the 1996 case Romer v. Evans, the court ruled that Colorado could not amend its state Constitution to block cities and counties from passing ordinances that throw up a legal shield on the basis of sexual orientation.In other words, Colorado wanted to stop local anti-discrimination efforts much like the one in Charlotte that North Carolina just stopped. “We probably haven’t seen something as sweeping as the Colorado amendment until now,” says Sarah Preston, acting executive director of the North Carolina office of the A.C.L.U.Colorado justified its amendment by arguing that landlords who found homosexuality morally offensive had a right to evict gay tenants. But Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for a six-justice majority, said that Colorado’s amendment was “born of animosity” and “seems inexplicable by anything but animus toward the class it affects.” Kennedy also said Colorado was disqualifying gay people from “the right to seek specific protection from the law” — a right that everyone else enjoyed.The A.C.L.U. and other groups are exploring legal challenges. But the fate of this law is not only in the hands of the courts. On Wednesday, as legislators sprinted to vote after only 30 minutes of public comment, Dow Chemical, Biogen and Red Hat — three North Carolina employers — spoke out in opposition. On Thursday, the NBA expressed concern about the law and “what impact it will have on our ability to successfully host the 2017 All-Star Game in Charlotte,” and American Airlines, which uses the Charlotte airport as a hub, warned that laws like this are “bad for the economies of the states in which they are enacted.” How bad? Georgia has been debating another religious freedom bill, and Disney, which has produced movies like “Ant-Man” there, has threatened to pull out of the state. It has become the mainstream majority position in corporate America to side with L.G.B.T. rights, and that means intolerance really is bad business.