http://www.nytimes.com/2000/06/25/sports/boxing-tyson-wins-in-38-seconds-then-issues-challenge-to-lewis.html
BOXING; Tyson Wins in 38 Seconds, Then Issues Challenge to Lewis - The New York Times
LEWIS  LENNOX,COYLE  JOHN,TYSON  MIKE,SAVARESE  LOU,BOXING
June 25, 2000
1108
The circus that has enveloped Mike Tyson's boxing career played a new town tonight, leaving behind another bizarre episode as well as an act that will most likely spawn new controversy.Tyson knocked Lou Savarese down with his first punch tonight and then went on to score a technical knockout 38 seconds into the first round -- after briefly decking Referee John Coyle, too.It was a characteristic modern-day Tyson performance -- brutally businesslike with a touch of mindless mayhem. Tyson won easily in this mismatch at Scotland's national soccer stadium, Hampden Park, and yet Tyson managed to look out of control at the same time.Afterward Tyson said that he wanted to fight the recognized world heavyweight champion, Lennox Lewis.''I'm coming after you, Lennox,'' he said.Tyson hit Savarese with a stinging left hook just 12 seconds into the fight, stepping aside a feeble jab to strike Savarese on the top of the head at the hairline. Savarese fell onto his back with his legs tangled beneath him. He rose at the count of 6 but was clearly stunned and dazed.Tyson swarmed on Savarese, hitting him with another left hook that buckled Savarese's knees and sent Savarese's arms sagging to his sides. Tyson followed with several uppercuts and Savarese wobbled. Coyle jumped between the fighters and shouted for Tyson to stop punching, because Coyle intended to stop the fight.But Coyle could not get Tyson away from Savarese, and Tyson continued to throw a series of wild, furious punches.With Coyle trying to drape himself on Savarese, Tyson sidestepped the referee and threw another left hook. That punch glanced off Coyle, and a pawing right hand from Tyson pushed Coyle to the canvas.Coyle was not hurt, and when he got up and finally separated the fighters, Coyle informed Savarese that he was stopping the fight and awarded Tyson the victory. Savarese protested as Tyson, whose treatment of Coyle will probably generate another controversy, celebrated.''Savarese wasn't throwing punches back, and his eyes weren't focusing on the task any longer,'' Coyle said. ''It would have been unsafe to let him continue. I was surprised but not hurt when I was knocked down.''Tyson said he dedicated the fight to his longtime friend Darryl Baum, who was murdered on a New York street corner two weeks ago. Tyson also confirmed what many suspected, that he had not trained rigorously for tonight's fight.''I only trained about two weeks; I was too upset,'' Tyson said. ''But I laid it on the line. I wanted to rip his heart out.''Tyson, 33, said he was confident he could defeat Lewis, who holds two championship belts, but he said he would need time to improve his conditioning.''Lennox has no chance against me,'' Tyson said. ''I'm not ready for him right now because I'm rusty. I need more training. But when I am ready, he'll be no match for me.''Tyson's victory keeps him on the path to a title fight, although the television alliances of Lewis and Tyson may make it difficult for them to come together in the ring soon. Lewis is tied to Home Box Office, while Tyson has signed to fight on Showtime.Tyson's next title shot may more likely be for the vacant World Boxing Association title. Evander Holyfield and John Ruiz will fight for the W.B.A. title in August.The crowd for tonight's fight was considerably smaller than the predicted sellout of 51,000. Frank Warren, the promoter, said the attendance was about 20,000, adding that 18,000 tickets had been returned by distributors in the last week.For Tyson, it was his third consecutive victory since his two losses to Holyfield in 1996 and 1997. In the last two years, Tyson, who now has a 48-3 record with 42 knockouts, has defeated Francois Botha, Julius Francis and Savarese. His bout last year with Orlin Norris was declared a no contest after Tyson hit Norris after the bell ended the first round.It was the second successive defeat for Savarese, whose record fell to 39-4. He was soundly beaten during 10 rounds of what became a unanimous decision for Michael Grant almost a year ago. Savarese, who will soon turn 35, had talked about retirement after the Grant fight. His payday to fight Tyson, about $800,000, coaxed him back into the ring.PUNCH LINESFRANK WARREN, the fight's promoter, made his first appearance in a week when he arrived ringside. Some of the British press reported last week that MIKE TYSON had scuffled with Warren in a dispute over money Tyson believes Warren owes him.Tyson denied he hit Warren. Warren did not act injured, though his right eye was red. He said he injured his eye last week before Tyson arrived in London.On Friday, a British judge announced he was withholding about $700,000 of Tyson's $8 million purse until a dispute with a London jeweler over merchandise allegedly charged to Tyson was settled.There were protesters outside Hampden Park before the fight, though heavy rains seemed to subdue the scene considerably. Several protesters held placards denouncing the decision of Home Secretary JACK STRAW to allow Tyson into Britain since recent changes to immigration laws would normally prohibit someone like Tyson, who was convicted of rape in the United States, from being granted a visa.