https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/13/technology/personaltech/new-entrants-join-consoles-in-the-gaming-arena.html
Challengers Take On the Big Three in Gaming’s Arena - The New York Times
Computer and Video Games,Nintendo Co Ltd,Apple Inc,Google Inc,Ouya Inc,OnLive Inc,Sony Corporation
Feb. 12, 2014
9557
Here is a question with a surprisingly complex answer: What is the best option for playing video games these days?Gamers have three big-name game consoles to choose from. The Microsoft Xbox One and Sony PlayStation 4 were released in November of last year, joining the Nintendo Wii U, released in 2012.But the three consoles made their debuts in a world that has, in some ways, moved on: Mobile gaming is on the rise; crowdfunding sites have given us new, innovative console ideas; and live-streaming gameplay sites like Twitch.tv are breathing new life into that old gaming standby, the PC.What’s a gamer to do? If you are ready to break the mold of the Big Three console options, here are some alternatives ranging from cheaper to simpler to far more cutting-edge.IPAD MINI AND NEXUS 7 TABLETS Apple’s iPad Mini and Google’s Nexus 7 tablets are both capable and powerful devices, and a Goldilocks size for playing games: just right. Both have powerful processors and can run graphically intense games on high-resolution screens that look almost as good as console games (just smaller).Both Apple and Google have spent time and money wooing game developers to release great titles for tablets: Mass Effect Infiltrator, several variations of Grand Theft Auto, and the fantasy role-playing game Shadowrun Returns, as well as many others that range in price from $5 to $10 in the iTunes store.The Nexus 7 is by far the cheaper of the two, starting at just $230. (You will want the $270 model with 32 gigabytes of storage, though, and that might feel tight if you download a lot of games.) The low-end iPad Mini costs $400, or as much as a PlayStation 4. Again, if you want more storage for games, a 64-gigabyte model is $600. That’s a lot, but the iPad Mini is a versatile device and requires no yearly subscription fees, and games do not cost $60 a pop.NINTENDO 2DS If you are shopping for a young gamer, consider the bare-bones Nintendo 2DS hand-held console, which costs just $130. It has a collection of games aimed at children, like Pokemon and Donkey Kong, and it will entertain them in cars, on airplanes and on the bus.You can step up to the $170 3DS for Internet connectivity, a bigger game library and glasses-free 3-D gaming. The Nintendo 3DS is a strong seller, even as Nintendo’s Wii U console is floundering; the price, portability and fun game collection have made the DS line a winner for years.Sony also makes a hand-held gaming console, the PlayStation Vita, which sells for $200 and offers excellent graphics, a large library of games, Wi-Fi and a stylish, premium-feeling design. A new version, the PS Vita Slim, is due out this spring at the same price.ALTERNATIVE CONSOLES The cost and inflexibility of consoles have annoyed gamers for years. Thanks to crowdfunding sites like Kickstarter, inventors have been able to raise money and develop new types of devices that are a major challenge to the old guard.The standout in that field is the Ouya, a tiny $99 console that comes with a controller and can stream Android games to a television, as well as original games developed just for Ouya. The console has about 500 games available, as well as various apps for streaming radio or broadcasting live gameplay.CLOUD GAMING You may not need any new hardware to play console-style games. Game-streaming services like OnLive and Steam let users play games on computers or mobile devices (or a certain few Internet-connected TVs, in the case of OnLive).Steam charges by the game, with many free games available. The platform is best known for its frequent bargain-basement sales, at which full-fledged PC games can be downloaded for tablet-app prices. Games range from free to about $30.OnLive, on the other hand, is billed as a “Netflix for gaming.” You can rent games, buy them outright, or sign up for a $10 monthly plan that offers unlimited access to streaming games. OnLive also sells a $100 “microconsole” similar to the Ouya, which allows games to be streamed to a TV.