https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/30/us/north-carolina-governor-attacks-critics-of-law-curbing-protections-from-bias.html
Major Companies Press North Carolina on Law Curbing Protections From Bias - The New York Times
Transgender and Transsexuals,Discrimination,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,McCrory  Pat,North Carolina,Cooper  Roy A,Bathrooms and Toilets,Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund,American Civil Liberties Union
March 29, 2016
3542
DURHAM, N.C. —  The onslaught of criticism, economic sanctions and a lawsuit being leveled at Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina grew on Tuesday, as the largest corporation in his state joined the fight against a new law that eliminated anti-discrimination protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.Bank of America, which has its headquarters in Charlotte, N.C., announced late Tuesday on Twitter that its leadership was joining over 80 chief executives, including Timothy D. Cook of Apple and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, in objecting to the new law. Earlier in the day, the chief executives published a letter, addressed to Mr. McCrory, on the Human Rights Campaign website, saying, “Such laws are bad for our employees and bad for business.”Mr. McCrory, a Republican, signed the law last Wednesday to create a mandatory statewide anti-discrimination policy that excludes protections based on sexual orientation and gender identity. The bill, created by Republican legislators in an emergency session that same day, was intended to overrule a new municipal ordinance in Charlotte, the state’s largest city, that provided such protections, including allowing transgender people to use bathrooms according to the gender they identify with. It was set to take effect Friday.Condemnation rained down in response. The governors of New York, Washington and Vermont issued bans on most official state travel to North Carolina, as did the mayors of San Francisco, Seattle and New York. The National Basketball Association implied it might move the 2017 All-Star Game from Charlotte. The White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, called the law “meanspirited.”On Monday, Lambda Legal, the American Civil Liberties Union, the A.C.L.U. of North Carolina and Equality North Carolina filed a federal lawsuit against Mr. McCrory; the state’s attorney general, Roy Cooper; and the University of North Carolina, challenging the law on behalf of two transgender North Carolinians.Mr. McCrory defended his signature in a testy news conference on Monday, insisting that the new law did not take away existing protections. Fact-checkers at Raleigh’s WRAL-TV rated that statement false.Then on Tuesday, Mr. Cooper, a Democrat who plans to run for governor against Mr. McCrory this fall, held a news conference saying he refused to defend the new law in court, despite being named in the case. “Not only is this new law a national embarrassment, it will set North Carolina’s economy back,” he said.Mr. McCrory accused Mr. Cooper and other critics, including the White House, of taking part in a “vicious nationwide smear campaign” against his state.In a video released by his press office on Tuesday, Mr. McCrory accused the critics of “disregarding the facts.”“Other politicians, from the White House to mayors and City Council members and, yes, our attorney general, have initiated and promoted conflict to advance their political agenda,” he said.In a separate statement provided to The New York Times, Mr. McCrory’s communications director, Josh Ellis, lashed out at Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, accusing him of hypocrisy.“Syracuse is playing the Final Four in Houston, where voters overwhelmingly rejected a bathroom ordinance that was also rejected by the State of North Carolina. Is Governor Cuomo going to ask the Syracuse team to boycott the game in Houston? It’s total hypocrisy and demagoguery.”Mr. Cuomo’s chief counsel, Alphonso David, rejected that comparison, noting that Syracuse University is private and that the Houston measure was rejected in a referendum, not voided by a state legislature.“They cannot hide behind what we perceive as nothing more than sheer discrimination and bigotry,” Mr. David said by phone from Albany.Mr. McCrory ran for office as a pro-business moderate but has often gone along with a staunchly conservative Republican legislature whose supporters he needs to win a second term.Bank of America was one of the largest contributors to Mr. McCrory’s 2012 campaign and is a major supporter of North Carolina’s Republican and Democratic Parties, according to the National Institute on Money in State Politics.In the video, Mr. McCrory said the law was meant to “protect men, women and children when they use a public restroom, shower or locker room.” That is a reference to its best-known requirement: that people use bathrooms that correspond with the gender on their birth certificate, rather than their gender identity. Lawmakers had focused their opposition to Charlotte’s anti-discrimination ordinance on the contention that it might allow men dressed as women to enter bathrooms and commit assaults.The law’s critics say there is no evidence that has happened elsewhere.Threats of boycotts stemming from discriminatory laws have forced governors in Indiana and, this week, Georgia to reject similar laws in those states.The economic pressure is building on North Carolina as well.Another of the signatories on the letter signed by Bank of America was the president and chief executive of PayPal, Dan Schulman, who had announced plans for a $3.6 million global operations center in Charlotte this month.