https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/us/politics/justice-department-civil-asset-forfeiture.html
Justice Dept. Revives Criticized Policy Allowing Assets to Be Seized - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Search and Seizure,Justice Department,Sessions  Jefferson B III
July 19, 2017
13
WASHINGTON — The Justice Department revived a widely criticized practice on Wednesday that allows state and local law enforcement officials to use federal law to seize the cash, cars or other personal property of people suspected of crimes but not charged.The department issued new guidance expanding the federal government’s use of so-called civil asset forfeiture, labeling it a necessary tool to fight crime. But civil rights advocates say it can be abused by law enforcement officials and deprive people who have done nothing wrong of their right to due process, a charge that Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, contested.“This is not about taking assets from innocent people,” Mr. Rosenstein told reporters. “It’s about taking assets that are the proceeds of, or the tools of, criminal activity, and primarily drug dealing.”In amending the policy, created during the war on drugs in the 1980s and restricted in 2015 under the attorney general at the time, Eric H. Holder Jr., as part of a broad check on police power, Attorney General Jeff Sessions marked a further undoing of the Obama administration’s legacy while advancing his law-and-order agenda.The new policy revives so-called federally adopted forfeitures, which empower state and local law enforcement to use federal law to bypass more restrictive state laws to seize the proceeds from crimes and to share the profits with federal authorities. That money may then be repurposed, the Justice Department said, for training or equipment, such as bulletproof vests or bomb-disposal equipment.The Justice Department also added new safeguards: requiring local authorities to provide additional detail justifying the probable cause for seizure; mandating new training of state and local law enforcement; and stipulating that federal prosecutors approve certain seizures, including those of cash under $10,000, to curb fraud and abuse.Law enforcement groups gathered at the Justice Department with Mr. Sessions for the announcement on Wednesday were enthusiastic about what some saw as a chance to supplement thin budgets.“D.O.J. all but stopped working with local police in this process, and this is a critical tool that we all need,” J. Thomas Manger, president of the Major Cities Chiefs Association and the chief of police in Montgomery County, Md., told Mr. Sessions. “I’m really encouraged by the fact that you saw the public’s concern with this program and you strengthened the accountability measures for local police.”Under the Obama administration, seizures of money or other assets by state and local authorities who used federal law brought in several billion dollars, but critics pointed to what they saw as an outsize impact on innocent people. In eliminating the policy in January 2015, Mr. Holder called asset forfeiture “a critical law enforcement tool when used appropriately” but said he was ending the more limited policy to protect civil liberties.Ben Ruddell, a staff attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, said Mr. Sessions was re-establishing a policy with little mainstream support.“There’s bipartisan consensus in states all over the country that forfeiture has gone too far and needs to be constrained,” Mr. Ruddell said. “Now you have the attorney general of the United States saying, ‘We have to double down and do more of this.’ He’s completely swimming against the tide of current thinking.”In Illinois, legislation passed this year would require a higher level of proof for the government to seize someone’s property — not simply probable cause — and create an option for innocent parties seeking to recover their assets to have their claims expedited. That bill awaits the governor’s signature.A host of other states have in recent years enacted restrictions on civil asset forfeiture, including California, Connecticut, Michigan, Maryland and Nebraska.Mr. Ruddell called New Mexico’s law “the gold standard.” It requires that a person be criminally convicted before his or her property is seized and stipulates that forfeiture proceeds go to a general state revenue fund rather than directly to the law enforcement agency that seized the assets, aiming to eliminate any profit incentive.But with the change in federal policy, the impact of some state laws could be limited, allowing local authorities a workaround.Mr. Rosenstein said that the policy was not intended to deliver on any promises to police or to “please a particular constituency,” and that he thought it was critical to “return this tool to the hands of local law enforcement” in the face of rising drug overdose deaths in America.“If you look at any federal program, any program is going to be used improperly,” Mr. Rosenstein said. “When we get a credible allegation there has been some abuse, we’re going to look into it and make sure that people are held accountable.”