http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/12/your-money/for-children-dumbed-down-phones-may-be-smartest-option.html
For Children, Dumbed-Down Phones May Be Smartest Option - The New York Times
Children and Childhood,Smartphones,Computers and the Internet,Mobile Applications
Dec. 11, 2015
9489
The logic seems simple, impeccable even.When children put a smartphone at the top of their wish list, remind them that they don’t need any such thing. Talking and texting may be necessary, but roving Internet access is not. So a dumbphone it is, with voice service and unlimited texting — just to show you care and are no Scrooge. Throw in a nice Qwerty keyboard as a sign of parental generosity, but no, repeat, no data plan at all.If only it were that easy.Whether parents like it or not, most new phones these days come with the ability to access the Internet. Perhaps not enough mothers and fathers are holding their ground to make a market for manufacturers of stripped-down hardware. Or maybe the device makers and service providers want Instagram, Snapchat and the various app stores within every new user’s reach.Whatever the reason, parents picking out a child’s first phone will need to plan carefully if they want it to be both modest and teach a few money lessons.First, those of you seeking that holy grail of voice plus texting and a full Qwerty keyboard (but no option for Internet service) will find few readily available choices for sale. T-Mobile doesn’t sell dumbphones at all, in fact.One good hardware option (aside from reactivating an older phone of your own and hoping it will work on today’s networks) is the Alcatel Onetouch flip phone. Sprint offers that one (as do prepaid wireless services like Boost Mobile and Virgin Mobile). The phone can text, but it lacks a physical keyboard beyond the numbers.Just to remind you of your stubbornness — and to give your children a new name to call you — Sprint and Virgin call this device the Retro. Boost refers to its Onetouch as the Fling, which might describe the relationship between an entitled teenager’s arm and the nearest wall Christmas morning.One possibility for avoiding long faces is the text- and voice-only Punkt phone, which is cool enough to have become an object of lust on design blogs this year. The voice-only Light Phone that should arrive in 2016 should offer an even more stripped-down experience.Parents who are already in the game know that if you’re willing to set strict hardware boundaries aside, you can often use the carriers’ parental controls to render a smartphone permanently dumb (by blocking all Internet access via a data plan, say), or at least temporarily so (by blocking the Internet at certain times each day or after incidents of wretched behavior). So perhaps you start by agreeing to buy the cheapest smartphone or handing down your old one.Then, you can restrict usage in all sorts of ways, though the carriers will often charge you a small monthly fee for the privilege of reining in your children. Smart Limits from AT&T, Mobile Controls from Sprint (Android only), FamilyWhere and Family Allowances from T-Mobile, and FamilyBase from Verizon (not available with Android Marshmallow) are the services.The offerings may include alerts when children travel outside certain areas, the ability to turn text and Internet data service off during certain hours of the day or designated sleeping hours, overall monthly limits on usage of various sorts and approved (and disapproved) contacts.But if you’re convinced, as I am, that a child’s first phone ought to be a financial exercise, too, check out a service called Ting. It does not offer any texting-only phones; the company finds that, believe it or not, they now cost more than smartphones, when it can find them at all.What sets Ting apart is its unique gridlike rate sheet. For every set of minutes, messages and megabytes you use, you pay accordingly at the end of the month. It’s a classic budgeting task and should cause most teenagers to figure out very quickly the difference between mobile phone wants and actual needs.Parents might start in this context by defining “need” in terms of a reasonable number of calls or texts each month, and then letting their child pay for any overages (and perhaps all of the Internet time that doesn’t happen via household Wi-Fi). Similar services that offer prepaid wireless plans, like Boost, Virgin and the child-centered Kajeet, can teach similar lessons.You’ll also want to put in place rules for replacement in case of damaged, lost or stolen phones. Grown-ups shouldn’t buy mobile phone insurance in most cases. The monthly fee and the deductibles generally make it a bad bet. For children, however, the insurance purchase decision becomes a real lesson in risk and responsibility. Make them liable for losses and let them decide whether to pay for insurance or not, just so they can see how the system works.Speaking of rules, you’re the one who sets the etiquette and safety ones, no matter how much of the phone or service your children are paying for. I still like the contract that Janell Burley Hofmann, the author of the book “iRules,” wrote when she and her husband declared their 13-year-old son phone-ready. It went viral, deservedly so.Now that their second child is clamoring for a phone, I was wondering whether she regretted letting the older one start with an iPhone. Was it too much? Too soon?Not the way the family handled it, Ms. Burley Hoffman said. First, it was clear that a phone was a privilege and not a right, and it came with certain levels of required baseline behavior. Then, they allowed ever more use of the phone as if they were erecting a scaffold.Any phone, for instance, can be turned off entirely during the school day and set for only Wi-Fi use at home. Perhaps social media doesn’t start for a year or more, with in-app purchases coming sometime after that. “If we want to teach them to cook, we don’t throw a bunch of knives on the table and turn the stove on and say, ‘Be careful, that gets hot,’ and have them make dinner,” she said.The iPhone that son No. 1 got was free from the carrier. When son No. 2 is ready, however, the no-cost option won’t be available, and for now, the family is wary of having him possess the nicest mobile hardware in the house, no matter who pays for it.But they are not against smartphones by any stretch. “Just because it can fully access the Internet doesn’t mean we have to use it that way,” she said. “There are controls. There are settings. And it can be as smart or dumb as we want it to be.”