http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/nyregion/what-trump-clinton-and-voters-agreed-on-better-infrastructure.html
What Trump, Clinton and Voters Agreed On: Better Infrastructure - The New York Times
Infrastructure (Public Works),Presidential Election of 2016,Transit Systems,Referendums,States (US),Los Angeles (Calif),Seattle (Wash),Atlanta (Ga),New Jersey
Nov. 9, 2016
4442
At the end of a stunning and divisive election that left many Americans feeling further apart than ever, there was perhaps one area of common ground: infrastructure.In a triumphant victory speech early Wednesday, President-elect Donald J. Trump cited the issue as a top priority for his administration.“We are going to fix our inner cities and rebuild our highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals,” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to rebuild our infrastructure, which will become, by the way, second to none.”The sentiment was echoed across the country on Election Day as voters supported dozens of local ballot measures intended to improve public transportation. In Los Angeles, Seattle and Atlanta, voters were poised to approve spending billions of dollars on buses, rail lines and other projects.During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to spend nearly $1 trillion on infrastructure, seeking to outshine Hillary Clinton on an issue that is a growing concern for many Americans.But with little support from Washington in recent years, many communities have moved forward with their own plans to improve public transportation through local ballot measures. In Los Angeles County on Tuesday, voters approved a half-cent increase in the sales tax to raise nearly $120 billion for the transportation system.In the Seattle region, voters appeared likely to have approved a $54 billion proposal that would include building 62 new miles of light rail. The proposition was winning on Wednesday with about 55 percent of the vote.“Local regions with some vision are taking matters into their own hands and going directly to the voters to try to tackle real local problems,” said Peter Rogoff, the chief executive of Sound Transit, the transportation agency serving multiple counties in the Seattle region.While Mr. Trump did not specifically mention trains or buses during his brief victory speech, he said during the campaign that he supported spending money on transit. As a resident of New York City and a real estate developer, Mr. Trump appears to understand how important public transit is for cities, said Art Guzzetti, the vice president of policy for the American Public Transportation Association.“The magnitude of the need is such that you’re going to need all the partners chipping in to the solution,” Mr. Guzzetti said of the country’s vast infrastructure needs.Mr. Trump’s campaign released a proposal last month to pay for infrastructure projects that included giving tax credits to private investors. This year, Mr. Trump suggested he might create a federal infrastructure fund supported by government bonds that investors and citizens could purchase.On Wednesday, transit supporters celebrated the success of the local ballot measures, which consoled some who were disappointed by Mrs. Clinton’s loss. A proposal in Atlanta to increase the sales tax to pay for transit improvements received about 72 percent support.New funding will help pay for light rail along the Atlanta BeltLine, a popular pedestrian and bike project, said Keith Parker, the chief executive of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority.“The customers are telling us that they really believe in mass transit,” he said.Of 49 measures on local or state ballots, at least 33 appear to have passed, said Jason Jordan, the executive director of the Center for Transportation Excellence, a research center that backed the ballot measures.“We expected a historic year going into Election Day, and we got it in terms of the largest number of measures we’ve ever tracked and the largest dollar amount invested,” Mr. Jordan said.Many of the ballot measures were concentrated in the West, where leaders are pressing for new transit options. On the East Coast, older systems like the century-old subway networks in New York and Boston are struggling to both maintain aging equipment and expand to meet rising ridership.In New Jersey, voters approved a constitutional amendment that would dedicate all the state’s gas tax revenue to transportation. Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican who is overseeing Mr. Trump’s presidential transition team, had agreed to a deal to raise the state’s gas tax this month by 23 cents per gallon to pay for improvements to roads, bridges and public transit, but the amendment ensures the money would not be diverted to other budget needs.One of the country’s largest infrastructure proposals is a plan supported by the Obama administration to build a new rail tunnel under the Hudson River from New Jersey to New York, part of a larger project known as the Gateway program that could cost more than $20 billion. The current century-old tunnel used by Amtrak and New Jersey Transit trains was damaged during Hurricane Sandy.On Wednesday, supporters of the project praised Mr. Trump’s comments, adding that the tunnel was “precisely the kind of infrastructure program that warrants continued and increased public investment,” according to John D. Porcari, the interim executive director of the Gateway Development Corporation, which is being created to oversee the project. Mr. Christie canceled an earlier plan to build a tunnel under the river, but he supports the new proposal.In Los Angeles County, a place known for its reliance on cars, nearly 70 percent of voters approved a transportation proposal, known as Measure M, which required two-thirds of the vote to pass. The financing will allow the region to expand on recent projects like the new Expo Line light rail connecting downtown Los Angeles and Santa Monica, and to improve bus service and repave local streets.Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles, who supported the transportation measure, called it a “new day” for his city and other American cities. Many people who live in Los Angeles do not have a car, he said, and the new rail line there has surpassed expectations for ridership.“A lot of people are looking for a place they can read the paper, check their emails and not worry about the headaches of a traffic jam,” he said.