https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/04/upshot/election-results-2014-the-vote-count.html
Election Results 2014: The Vote Count - The New York Times
United States,Midterm Elections (2014),Presidential Election of 2012,United States Politics and Government,Elections  Senate,Polls and Public Opinion
Nov. 3, 2014
7783
On election night, knowing who is ahead isn’t enough.In states like Virginia, Georgia and elsewhere, cities have traditionally been among the last to report their votes. Because cities lean Democratic, this pattern means that returns for Democratic candidates will appear weaker than they actually are for a few hours after the polls close. Similarly, in states with slow-counting Republican areas, Republican candidates will seem weaker than they actually are.The worst election analysts use these changes to tell comeback stories, asserting that a candidate was trailing early in the night but made up ground.More sophisticated analysts interpret leads through the lens of the outstanding votes. “There’s a lot of votes left to be counted in heavily Democratic Cuyahoga County,” Jeff Greenfield said on CNN in 2004. “Remember, some of the votes outstanding are down here in Marion County where Obama is winning,” John King said on the same network in 2008.This year, The Upshot will aim to let you be your own John King. In about a dozen of the closest Senate races, we, like many others, will track the leads reported by The Associated Press. But we will also adjust those leads based on what we know about where the votes have come from. Our adjusted leads will be based solely on current and historical returns. They will not use data from exit polls, or any forecasts from Senate models. You’ll be able to find a link to the tracker on The Times’s midterm page and The Upshot’s home page.Here’s what The Upshot’s adjustment would have looked like in the contest between President Obama and Mitt Romney in Virginia in 2012.At 10 p.m., with about 75 percent of precincts reporting, Mr. Obama trailed Mr. Romney by a few percentage points. Some people following only the raw vote totals came to believe that Mr. Romney had a good chance to win the state. In truth, it was unlikely that Mr. Romney’s lead would hold, because counties like Alexandria, Arlington and Fairfax — containing Democratic-leaning Washington suburbs — had many votes outstanding. The Upshot’s adjusted lead would have anticipated these votes, and would have been relatively stable by that time. (If our adjusted lead were perfectly clairvoyant, the line would have been flat.)To create the adjusted series, we need to estimate two things: the number of votes left and their partisan split. For the votes left, we make an educated guess based on neighboring counties where vote counting is complete. If turnout in a region is down 10 percent from an initial baseline, we assume turnout in a county in that region will be down by the same amount, until it proves otherwise. When the county finishes reporting, we update our prediction for the region as a whole.We perform a similar calculation for how the votes will be split. If a region has shifted a few percentage points toward the Republicans relative to a previous election in the state, we assume the county will, too. In addition to the shift since the previous election, our baseline guesses are adjusted for demographic changes since that election.This method will not be perfect. In the Republican primary runoff in Mississippi in June, we were surprised by turnout in a series of counties that reported results about 10 p.m. With around 80 percent of the vote reported, our estimate of the difference between Senator Thad Cochran and his opponent, Chris McDaniel, shifted by a percentage point, toward Mr. McDaniel — a sizable amount that late in the night.You can expect our adjusted returns to move, because no one has perfect information about the size or makeup of the outstanding vote. We are particularly concerned this year about early voters in states like Iowa and North Carolina. (Counties report early votes in various ways: early or late, together or separate.)We are also concerned about turnout efforts isolated in particular parts of a state and about contests without an obvious historical baseline, like a contest in Kentucky in an era when Democrats are increasingly unpopular in coal country, as well as a race in Kansas involving an independent candidate.For these reasons, and others, adjusted leads can’t and shouldn’t be used to make projections. In a very close race, there are too many unknown factors. For example, the margin in the 2012 presidential race in Colorado changed more than half a point between the day after the election and the final certified results.But adjusted leads should provide a clearer guide than raw vote counts, which are often heavily influenced by which areas have reported vote totals and which have not.If you prefer to look only at unadjusted vote totals, we’ve found it’s best to ignore the results entirely until around 50 percent of the vote is in. Until that point, you’d be better off spending a little more time with a Senate model, like ours, nicknamed Leo, based on polls and other pre-Election Day information.We expect adjusted leads will do better than Leo and do it faster. And we hope you’ll join us.