https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/18/sports/wives-in-domestic-abuse-cases-say-nfl-culture-made-them-feel-trapped.html
N.F.L. Was Family, Until Wives Reported Domestic Abuse - The New York Times
Football,Domestic Violence,National Football League,Series,Sands  Mercedes,Underwood  Brandie,Cincinnati Bengals,Green Bay Packers,McCarthy  Brian,Lewis  Marvin,Sands  Robert (1989- ),Underwood  Brandon (1986- ),Nowhere to Turn (Series)
Nov. 17, 2014
9374
CINCINNATI — Mercedes Sands and her husband, Robert, a safety for the Cincinnati Bengals, started fighting early, just a few months after they were married. But when Ms. Sands drove her car into a neighbor’s house while trying to flee, knocking herself unconscious and prompting a visit from the police, the Bengals became alarmed.Within days of the episode, in January 2012, the team’s head coach, Marvin Lewis, called a meeting at Paul Brown Stadium to try to help the couple work through their problems.He offered encouragement, Ms. Sands said in an interview, telling them that young couples often fought and that they should seek counseling. He also advised them to reach out to the Bengals first if there were further problems because a call to the police could attract attention from the news media and cause an embarrassing distraction.“They made it seem like we are a family,” Ms. Sands recalled. “ ‘Anything you need, you come to us. We are here to help you.’ ”As outrage has mounted this fall over the National Football League’s handling of domestic abuse cases, the primary focus has been on questions of policy and punishment. Little has been heard from the victims, in part because they often recant their accusations and stay with their partners.But in interviews with The New York Times, two women who left their husbands — Ms. Sands and Brandie Underwood, who was married to a Green Bay Packers player — described abusive relationships in which they felt trapped, in part because of each team’s close-knit culture and a protocol that emphasized avoiding disruptions.It was better to endure indignities like infidelity, other wives told them, and to keep quiet even if the hostility in their marriages seemed unbearable than to cause a ruckus that could upend the success and harmony of the team.“You feel like that’s all you have,” said Ms. Underwood, 28, who left her husband, Brandon Underwood, in 2011. “Other than them, I knew nobody. You come to this town when your husband is drafted, and you get kind of pushed into this group. It is how you get your friends — your support system.”For a time, Ms. Sands said, she heeded the team’s advice and refrained from calling 911. Instead she phoned the Bengals’ player relations coordinator, who took her calls at all hours, sometimes heading to the couple’s house in the middle of the night to help defuse confrontations.Her husband had gained leverage in the relationship, she said, reminding her that if she reported him for domestic violence, it could imperil his status with the team and threaten their livelihood.Mr. Sands, now with the Edmonton Eskimos in the Canadian Football League, said in a phone interview that he had not physically abused Ms. Sands. “My hands were never put on her,” he said. “The only thing was restraining her from hitting me and pulling my hair.”Like his former wife, he recalled Mr. Lewis urging them to keep their problems “in house.”In a statement, the Bengals said that “neither the club nor Coach Lewis advised the Sandses not to talk to law enforcement; instead, the club encouraged them to work on their problems and to utilize counseling to improve their relationship.” The team said the couple “did not take full advantage of the services available to them” and missed counseling sessions.Ms. Sands, then 22 and far from her home in Miami, discovered early on that the Bengals were her second family. As she dealt with the turmoil in her marriage, she came to rely on other wives, girlfriends and team employees.She had received a warm welcome when she arrived in Cincinnati. Teammates hosted the couple for Thanksgiving. In December 2012, when Ms. Sands was seven months pregnant, the Bengals threw a baby shower for her and two other wives. They shared a cake decorated with their husbands’ uniform numbers.But the acrimony and physical confrontations between Ms. Sands and her husband had been escalating. Less than a week after the baby shower, Ms. Sands found that she had become the outcast in the Bengals’ family.On Jan. 4, 2013, she called the police to report that her husband had assaulted her, choking her with his hand while putting his weight on her stomach. Mr. Sands was arrested, one day before a first-round playoff game.Ms. Sands expected support and concern, but she was met with silence, she said. “No one was there,” said Ms. Sands, now 25. “The wives weren’t there. No one answered my phone calls.”She was calling them to ask for help. Her husband had cleared out their joint checking account and canceled her credit card, leaving her alone in their home with no money. During the final weeks of her pregnancy, she said, she relied on food stamps and church handouts.Happiness and TurmoilMs. Underwood experienced the highs and lows of being married to a professional athlete — sometimes on the same day.On June 16, 2011, she and her husband attended a ring ceremony to celebrate the Packers’ Super Bowl victory that year, and each of the players’ wives received a necklace. But the Underwoods’ marriage was tumultuous, and the celebratory mood soon gave way to more fighting. Later that day, Ms. Underwood called the police to report that her husband had ripped off her necklace and thrown her out of his parked car and onto the ground before driving away.When the police in Green Bay, Wis., responded, Ms. Underwood began to recant her story, telling officers that she did not want her husband arrested. According to a police report, when an officer asked why she had called, she said, “I wanted to put my foot down this time so he would know that he cannot keep doing this to me.” The police arrested Mr. Underwood nevertheless.Her experience is not unusual. A review of recent domestic violence cases involving N.F.L. players showed that in many cases, the women stood by their partners after accusations of abuse, even as the men were being prosecuted.Employment in the N.F.L. is precarious; a career lasts just over three years on average. Ms. Underwood said she was afraid to involve law enforcement authorities — or even talk to team officials — for fear of jeopardizing her husband’s standing with the Packers.“There were many times that I wanted to call the police and I did not,” she said. “You feel a little stuck.”The Underwoods met when they were freshman athletes at Ohio State in 2004. She played volleyball; he played football. She later followed him to the University of Cincinnati, where he transferred.The Packers chose Mr. Underwood in the sixth round of the 2009 draft. Ms. Underwood said they were unprepared for what came next. Women lavished attention on the players. Then there was the money: Mr. Underwood had received a four-year, $1.8 million contract.“It is amazing how your life can change overnight,” Ms. Underwood said.She quickly found a community of players’ wives in Green Bay that made her feel at home. Before the 2009 season, the team hosted a luncheon for the women and gave them access to a special family lounge at Lambeau Field, with a play area for children.“You get to know all the girls,” Ms. Underwood said.But in June 2010, a week after the birth of the couple’s third son, Ms. Underwood received a jarring phone call from her husband: He was being investigated over accusations — false ones, he said — that he had sexually assaulted two women after a team charity event. (He later pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor prostitution charge, according to online court records.)Amid the humiliation, Ms. Underwood began hearing from the wives of other players and coaches. They encouraged her to stand by Mr. Underwood.One wife emailed her: “Nobody is perfect. Not u or me. We might not cheat or do dumb stuff like guys, but we do have flaws. Who is to say that ours are better than theirs?”Ms. Underwood found the reaction confusing. The attitude, she said, was that “we have to be strong for our men.” She said she felt she had nowhere to turn. “You don’t really know who to call,” she said. “They are more worried about protecting a team’s name or player than a wife.”Still, she found it too daunting to leave, especially because Mr. Underwood controlled the money.It was not until the next year that she began making plans to divorce her husband; she left him about two months after his arrest on the night of the ring ceremony. (Mr. Underwood pleaded no contest to a disorderly conduct charge in that case, paying $767.50 in court costs.)After settling in her hometown, near Dayton, Ohio, she began waiting tables to pay the bills.Neither the N.F.L. nor the Packers contacted her after she called the police, she said. The Packers, asked to discuss the Underwoods’ situation, declined to comment.Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said teams had offered a variety of resources to players or family members for years, including referrals for counseling services. In 2012 the league started the N.F.L. Life Line, a free, confidential phone consultation service to assist current and former players, as well as coaches and family members.Mr. Underwood was suspended for two games under the N.F.L.'s personal conduct policy, although it was unclear whether it was for the prostitution charge or the episode with Ms. Underwood. He was cut by the Packers before the 2011 season and has not played in the N.F.L. since.Mr. Underwood has been on the practice squad of the Calgary Stampeders of the C.F.L. A team spokesman, Jonathan Anderson, said Mr. Underwood declined to comment.A Team Steps InIn 2011, as Mr. Sands began his rookie season with the Bengals, he contacted Mercedes Smith, an old friend from Miami Carol City Senior High School. She had become a junior paralegal and was competing in Miss Florida USA competitions.Soon after they reconnected, Mr. Sands asked her to move to Cincinnati and marry him.They did not know each other well, and turmoil started early. He was verbally abusive, she said, and there was infidelity. One mistress sent Ms. Sands a picture of herself kissing his neck.Mr. Sands described his wife as immature and prone to temper tantrums, sometimes in front of his teammates.The Bengals learned of the trouble and told Mr. Sands that he needed to resolve his marital problems. But in January 2012, Ms. Sands called the police, saying her husband had choked her, a police report shows, although she declined to press charges. Three days later, during another argument, she drove her car into a neighbor’s house, leading to the meeting with Coach Lewis.“He listened, and he wasn’t judgmental,” Ms. Sands said. “He was more looking for a solution.”Ms. Sands and her husband said in separate interviews that the message from the Bengals was that calls to the police would make the organization look bad.As the fighting continued, Ms. Sands said, her husband used Mr. Lewis’s guidance — that they should go to the Bengals first — as a way to keep her from calling the police.“I didn’t want to really say anything because I knew how bad it could get for our family,” Ms. Sands said.Three months later, it was Mr. Sands who called the police, reporting that his wife had come after him with knives and saying he was going to leave the house before he hurt her. Ms. Sands denied threatening him.All along, Eric Ball, the Bengals’ director of player relations, was taking calls from the Sandses and spending hours with them. Ms. Sands said he told her in the fall of 2012, “If you feel in danger, you need to get out of harm’s way.”It was not so easy, she said. “To me, how do I leave?” she said. “I can’t just pack my bags. If I move money out of the bank account, he’s going to know.”The Bengals declined to make Mr. Lewis or Mr. Ball available for interviews.On the day of Mr. Sands’s arrest, in January 2013, Ms. Sands fled in her car to a nearby park to call 911. The police found her shaken and in pain, dry-heaving, with a small, bloody scratch on her face. She said Mr. Sands had choked her and put pressure on her stomach, and she told the arresting officer that there had been a pattern of verbal and physical abuse. The officer wrote in his report that he found her credible.Mr. Sands told the police that he had not harmed his wife, and he repeated that in his interview with The Times. He said of the police report, “Everything in the doggone statement was false.”Mr. Sands’s case has been expunged; he said the charges were dismissed in exchange for his agreeing to undergo counseling. After the arrest, Ms. Sands filed for an order of protection, which was granted.The N.F.L. said in a statement to The Times that it had suspended Mr. Sands for two games; he said he was not aware of the suspension. The Bengals released him during the off-season “based upon his overall performance,” the team said.Moving On With LifeIn the aftermath of their criminal cases, both players blamed their former wives for derailing their careers — a point of contention that continues. Ms. Sands said her reaction was: “I’m not the cause of that; your actions were.”Mr. Sands said he hoped to get another chance in the N.F.L. He said that if people searched online for his name, “I look like a bad guy, and she looks like Miss Goody Two Shoes.”He added, “People know this whole thing should be in reverse.”Both women said they were constantly battling to get child support. They have had to scrape to get by, they said, but they have moved on. Ms. Sands, who still lives in the Cincinnati area, is modeling and acting while running an online business. Ms. Underwood has a home with her three sons near Dayton. She is a personal trainer and the assistant manager of a gym.“I wish I could tell that scared little girl that three years on, I’d be happy with a good job and a house,” Ms. Underwood said. “I would have thought that was crazy.”She sometimes hears from women she met around the N.F.L., she said. They want to know how she broke away — and if they can do it, too. “The girls forget how strong they are,” she said.This year, one player’s wife texted her: “I am so unhappy and want to file for divorce but the thought of doing this all on my own scares the crap out of me! I look at you and am blown away at how strong of a woman you are. You are such a great role model for all of us.”Ms. Underwood wrote back, “I would love to talk to you.”