https://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/25/world/asia/25korea.ready.html
North Korean Defectors Take a Crash Course in Coping - The New York Times
North Korea,South Korea,Immigration and Refugees
June 25, 2006
3034
ANSEONG, South Korea  — On a sprawling campus hidden in farmland here, about 300 North Koreans are learning that, no, actually, it was not the South that started the Korean War.And, yes, America is an ally, their re-education goes, before broaching the A B C's of capitalism, human rights and democracy. Field trips focus on how to apply for a job or use an automated teller machine. Women are shown the finer points of home decorating; men, the basic skills to fix the home boiler.Soon after landing in South Korea, all North Korean defectors come here to the South Korean government's main resettlement center, called Hanawon, or to an annex, for a three-month crash course on life south of the demilitarized zone.It is the first step in a long and often bewildering process of adapting to a South Korean society that has regarded them, over time, as cold war enemies, long-lost cousins or pitiable objects of curiosity. Born and reared in one of the most isolated nations, they are taught everything from the theoretical to the mundane before plunging headlong into the real world."When they arrive here," said the center's director general, Lee Choong Won, "they realize they've been living like frogs in a well."Thousands have found their way into South Korea in the past half-decade — there were a total of 8,428 North Korean defectors in the South by the end of May — and they have started carving out a space for themselves in this society, though often as second-class citizens.For South Koreans, the defectors and the resettlement center, which is about 50 miles south of Seoul, provide an indication of the enormous task ahead if they are to reunite one day with 23 million North Koreans.To hear North Koreans tell it, South Korea is bewildering precisely because it is at once familiar and alien. The South and North share a common language, but in half a century of division, South Koreans have adopted so many foreign words that the newcomers spend hours learning the language spoken in the South."Only after 10 years did I understand how the South Korean society works," said Lee Joon Ho, 41, who arrived in South Korea in 1993, before the current wave of defectors."In North Korea, if you were loyal to the system, you were provided a job and housing, and your needs were met," added Mr. Lee, who has held so many jobs in the South that his friends have nicknamed him MacGyver, after the resourceful television character. "But here in South Korea, individuals have to take responsibility and create their own system."The North Koreans arrive at the center here after a month in the custody of the National Intelligence Service. No road signs point to the center, which is surrounded by fences and is well guarded. Center officials tend to shun publicity, partly for security reasons, partly because South Korea does not want to be seen helping people the North considers traitors.Officials provided a rare glimpse of the center, though they did not allow current students or teachers to be interviewed. Graduates interviewed separately in Seoul, however, said that not even such an intense course could prepare them for the gap between the northern and southern sides of the Korean peninsula.Here in his office, Mr. Lee, the center's director, recalled ancient times when the Korean peninsula was divided into three kingdoms."There were exchanges among the three kingdoms, but in the last 50 years, there was no interaction between the South and North, and the North developed its own unique culture," he said, glancing occasionally at a closed-circuit television that showed a classroom of women, dressed in red uniforms, learning about psychology and the differences between logical and intuitive people.About 6,900 North Koreans have graduated from the center since it was established in 1999. To accommodate the increasing number of arrivals, new dormitories and classrooms are scheduled to be built next to the seven redbrick buildings.Very few defectors came to South Korea until the mid-1990's, when famine in the North sent many refugees into China. Since then, as a network of South Korean evangelical Christian missionaries and smugglers has established itself in China, the numbers have sharply risen, with more than 1,000 defectors coming to South Korea every year since 2002. Today, defectors already in the South routinely get their relatives out of the North, provided they have the money.Although China is a stopping point for defectors, South Korea is still the only country to have taken in large numbers of North Koreans; the United States, for example, began accepting its first refugees from the North only in May.Graduates of the three-month resettlement program receive a $20,000 stipend and are provided with low-cost public housing. They are also entitled to welfare benefits in case of unemployment and cash incentives for job training.Out in the real world, many defectors who have come here with unrealistically high expectations find out that they are prepared for only the most menial of jobs. Many move from one part-time job to another.Many companies say they simply do not hire North Koreans, said Lee Chul Min, a defector who is an official at NKD,  the Association of North Korean Defectors, a private organization in Seoul that helps defectors."If a North Korean worker makes a mistake, it's generalized to all North Koreans," Mr. Lee said, adding that the North Korean identity itself becomes a handicap here.Even defectors who have succeeded professionally in the South say the realization that they were considered second-class citizens was a psychological blow.For Joo Sung Ha, 31, a reporter for Dong-A Ilbo, a major daily newspaper, the realization came soon after he fled the North and entered China. A South Korean businessman there, he said, treated him with contempt after learning that he was from the North."He was just a small businessman without even a university degree," said Mr. Joo, who said he had graduated from Kim Il Sung University in Pyongyang, North Korea's capital, with a degree in Chinese and English. "Back in North Korea, I was an elite. So it was difficult to be condescended to by someone like him.""A South Korean university professor may go to the United States and work in a grocery store," he said, explaining that North Koreans find it hard to accept such a fall in status here. "It's probably easier to face discrimination from someone who has round eyes and who is of a different race."More often, the discrimination or offense is unintentional, North Koreans acknowledge. South Koreans will offer them copious amounts of food on the assumption they must be hungry or ask them whether they have ever tried a basic food."Even my co-workers ask me questions like whether we're allowed to date in North Korea," said a 36-year-old defector employed in food delivery. The defector, who asked that his name not be used, arrived in South Korea last year and was able to get his wife and two children out of the North and to South Korea in April after paying smugglers $10,000.Like many defectors, he felt complex, sometimes contradictory, desires to assert his roots and to be considered part of South Korea."When people ask me whether I'm an ethnic Korean from China because of my accent, not only do I feel discriminated against, I feel disillusioned," he said, repeating a common complaint.Kim Sun Hwa, a South Korean who is director of the government-sponsored Gong Neung Welfare Center  in northeast Seoul, a district where more than 700 defectors live, said many defectors, especially the young, coped with discrimination by trying to hide their North Korean roots.One 37-year-old defector who had lost his North Korean accent did not hide his origins at work, a large auto parts maker. In fact, the Chinese he had learned during his three years of hiding in China now helped him in doing business with Chinese partners.But his South Korean wife's parents had initially objected to their marriage because he is North Korean. They relented  only after her father had a stroke and then decided that he wanted to see his daughter settled in a marriage as soon as possible.  Today, his wife still hides his roots from their friends."One part of me says it's convenient," he said of his wife's decision. "Another part of me is sad. I know there's no advantage in telling everyone I'm North Korean, but it's who I am."