https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/03/nyregion/in-new-jersey-only-a-few-media-watchdogs-are-left.html
In New Jersey, Only a Few Media Watchdogs Are Left - The New York Times
Newspapers,News and News Media,New Jersey,Layoffs and Job Reductions
Jan. 3, 2017
8679
TRENTON — When New Jersey lawmakers blocked a vote last month on a bill backed by Gov. Chris Christie that would have ended the requirement that legal notices be published in newspapers, it was a rare good news story for the state’s press corps.Publishers said the bill, which would have let the notices move online, would have cost newspapers $20 million in revenue and perhaps hundreds of journalists’ jobs.That was in addition to the cutbacks and layoffs that have left the industry feeling as if it were “running up a down escalator,” as Tom Moran, editorial page editor of The Star-Ledger, the state’s largest newspaper, put it.The Star-Ledger, which almost halved its newsroom eight years ago, has mutated into a digital media company requiring most reporters to reach an ever-increasing quota of page views as part of their compensation. The state’s second-largest paper, The Record, which focuses on its most populous county, Bergen, said it would lay off more than 400 people after it was purchased in July by the Gannett Company (although some were expected to be rehired if they reapplied for their jobs). And that was after it endured a 20 percent cut to the newsroom in 2008.The Wall Street Journal, which built upon Bridgegate, a political scandal uncovered by The Record, now has one New Jersey beat reporter churning out shorter articles. And after operating bureaus in Trenton, Newark and Hackensack as recently as 10 years ago, The New York Times does not have a New Jersey beat reporter.The declining fortunes of the state’s newspapers are part of a retrenchment in newspaper publishing across the country, but they have been acutely felt because of New Jersey newspapers’ role in holding powerful institutions and people accountable in a state that lacks a major independent television station.The timing also could not be worse, given all the news in the past year related to Mr. Christie, terrorism, crumbling infrastructure and the sizable local presence of President-elect Donald J. Trump.“If Bridgegate happened today, would someone have covered it?” said Richard A. Lee, an associate professor at St. Bonaventure University, who researched the New Jersey media in a 2013 dissertation. “Because it was really a local reporter doing old-fashioned investigative reporting.”It was The Record that first published an article linking Mr. Christie’s staff to the lane closings on the George Washington Bridge, and another exposing “the chairman’s flight” involving the former head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, who later pleaded guilty to bribery. But since the sale, The Record has altered its design to comport with Gannett’s other newspapers, like USA Today, which tend to feature more white space and fewer front-page articles. The Record’s archives are also much harder to find now, and readers find the print version’s coverage sparse.“It feels like an abridged newspaper,” said Anna Marie Fanelli, an interior designer and co-owner of Floor and Decor in downtown Tenafly. “Everything is dying a slow death.”The Record’s portfolio of weeklies has also been affected. Several, including ones in Tenafly and Cresskill, have merged into a regional paper called The Northern Valley Suburbanite. And in Montclair, there was palpable anger when a new and thinner version of The Montclair Times contained mostly news from other towns.“On the masthead it states ‘Serving Our Community Since 1877,’” one commenter wrote on a Montclair community website. “Apparently that stopped on Nov. 17, 2016.”When asked about the changes, Rick Green, The Record’s new editor and vice president for content, said that the company would not have any comment.But Martin Gottlieb, who retired in January as the editor of The Record, before the paper was sold by the Borg family, said that financial pressures always loomed.“New Jersey is a microcosm of the whole country,” Mr. Gottlieb said. “We were always coming up with ways to economize, and you couldn’t expect the paper to continue to exist the way it did. It was like Wile E. Coyote running halfway across the canyon and realizing that his footing was a little suspect.”The Record’s reputation for aggressive local reporting may have helped to retain readers. From 2006 to 2016, average daily circulation, including print and digital subscribers, dropped by 30 percent, according to the Alliance for Audited Media. By contrast, The Star-Ledger lost 65 percent of its print subscribers, and The Asbury Park Press lost 58 percent.Going back to the 1990s, Mr. Lee wrote in his dissertation, “the drive to turn a profit became a higher priority for media companies and their corporate owners,” leading to mergers and cost-cutting. So when the financial downturn hit in 2008, Gannett’s New Jersey dailies, then numbering six, suffered through what Bob Ingle, a former senior political columnist for Gannett NJ, called a “massacre,” shedding more than 400 jobs in 2008 and 2009. The Trenton bureau became a two-person operation, down from nine.The Star-Ledger’s parent company, Advance Publications, presided over a 45 percent paring of the newsroom in 2008, and cut an additional 167 jobs in 2014.Another Advance paper, The Times of Trenton, slashed its newsroom to 30 from 90 between 2007 and 2009, and closed its statehouse bureau, according to Mr. Lee.These days, most Star-Ledger reporters and editors are employed by a new corporate entity, NJ Advance Media, and work out of an office park in Woodbridge. Supervisors’ titles reflect a digital orientation that management says is crucial to the company’s long-term viability, with terms like producers and directors replacing ones like editors and bureau chiefs.Current and former reporters and editors, most of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity to avoid damaging relationships and future job prospects, said that their salaries had generally been cut by 10 percent in the past year or so, but that they earned bonuses if they met a quota for online page views. As a result, slide shows, surveys and brief stories with alluring teasers, like the 20 most famous people  to attend Princeton, a quiz on Santa Claus, and polls on a “Lion King” remake and a “must-win” game for the Jets, have become legion.“I was a content hamster, basically,” said one reporter who recently left the paper. “I didn’t feel like I was contributing anything of value, so when I had a review, I expected my producer to be harsh. But there was no critique. It was like, ‘Your numbers are good, keep doing a great job.’”Then again, many reporters and editors say the transformation has forced complacent journalists to work faster, use social media and interact more with readers.Kevin Whitmer, who was The Star-Ledger’s editor but is now called the vice president for content, said he understood that “the idea of growing your digital audience comes with a lot of adjustments for everyone.” He also said the company was “consistently looking at our incentives and reviewing ways to make it better.”But he expressed pride that its journalism was reaching far more people through its website than it ever did with its newspapers, with a million daily visitors and 100 million page views a month.“Our business is about growing audience,” he said. “That we can do that and still deliver the level of journalism we do is why I’m quite bullish on our future.”In December, Montclair State University’s Center for Cooperative Media convened a panel called “Life After the Newsroom.” One part group therapy and one part survival strategy session, it attracted a few dozen laid-off or underemployed journalists, including many from The Record.A theme was the growth of local online journalism, like Politico New Jersey, which has aggressively covered state politics; NJ Spotlight, which explores policy issues; and NJ Arts, which covers cultural news. There was also discussion about successful hyperlocal blogs like Baristanet, which covers the Montclair area, and TapInto.net, which started in 2008 and has now expanded to 60 towns with a franchise model, said Michael M. Shapiro, the chief executive and publisher.Even so, with fewer beat reporters working for major publications, topics like education, transportation and the environment are not being covered as rigorously, Mr. Lee said.Reporters may also lack institutional muscle when fighting for access to public records.“With fewer well-financed organizations, it becomes more likely that the government withholds documents and other information, knowing that it’s less likely to be challenged,” said Ed Barocas, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey.On a recent Friday, the second floor of the New Jersey statehouse in Trenton, where most of the press corps was stationed, was eerily still. Every door was closed, making press row resemble a corridor of storage or janitorial closets. As The Times’s last Trenton bureau chief, I worked here until 2008, and the bureau closed not long afterward. The office once occupied by The Times is now home to PolitickerNJ, among others, but the news releases in the overflowing plastic inbox go back to an August announcement from the Motor Vehicle Commission.During my stint in Trenton, as many as 30 newspaper, wire service, television and radio journalists would be working on press row. This time, I counted six: two Bloomberg reporters, three for The Record and one from New Jersey 101.5 FM.Actually, seven. Around 1:30 p.m., Joseph Albright, a columnist for The Jersey Journal, which covers Hudson County, reported for duty. Now into his sixth journalistic decade — “Oct. 12, 1964,” he notes — Mr. Albright, 87, still composes his weekly column on his Smith Corona manual typewriter.When finished, Mr. Albright typically hands his copy to a reporter down the hall. She converts it into a PDF on her phone, then emails it to his editors.