https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/nyregion/new-york-city-rat-problem.html
Mayor Offers $32 Million Plan to Ice Some Rats. Hopefully. - The New York Times
Rats,Waste Materials and Disposal,de Blasio  Bill,New York City
July 12, 2017
2786
As long as rats have roamed the underbelly of New York City, mayor after mayor has seized the opportunity to act the general in a long-running war to turn back the rat armies.And yet the rats remain.On Wednesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio became the latest city leader to pick up his sword in earnest. Saying the city wanted “more rat corpses,” he declared a $32 million assault on the most problematic rat strongholds — parts of Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood and along the Grand Concourse in the Bronx — and promised to reduce the number of rats in those areas by 70 percent by the end of next year.“I don’t know any New Yorker who likes rats,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference filled with rat puns, references to rat history and mayoral praise for a rodent whose affinity for pizza made him a social media star.The plan involves covering dirt floors at scores of public housing buildings and deploying 336 new rat-proof garbage bins that compact trash using solar power and cost $7,000 a piece. (The city already has 1,100 such bins around the city.)It also calls for the City Council to pass legislation requiring medium and large buildings in the targeted areas to put out their trash for pickup early in the morning, ridding sidewalks of the overnight trash mounds that attract vermin.And it includes a new process to kill rats in their burrows using dry ice, a method only recently approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and tested to promising effect in some areas of the city last year. (In one Chinatown park, packing burrows with dry ice resulted in the deaths of 1,200 rats — suffocated by the release of carbon dioxide — and a reduction of rat burrows from 60 to two, officials said.)“It is something that we were doing a few years ago and we were told to stop, because dry ice was not deemed a pesticide,” Laura Anglin, a City Hall official who helped create the rat plan, said at a news conference with Mr. de Blasio. “We petitioned the state and asked them if we could do this again, and very quickly they worked with us to get federal approval to do this.”Last month, the E.P.A. registered Bell Laboratories’ dry ice product, Rat Ice, allowing cities and states across the country to use it as a pesticide, said Mary Mears, a spokeswoman for the agency. New York State did the same last week.Rats are a common complaint among New Yorkers, who logged more than 17,200 sightings via the 311 system last year, up from 12,600 in 2014, the mayor’s first year in office. Mr. de Blasio, who is running for re-election, said he had seen the vermin running around the public park outside Gracie Mansion. More than 10,000 complaints have come in so far this year.For city leaders past and present, rats have presented a Sisyphean challenge.“It’s a never-ending battle, but it’s the right thing to do,” said Joseph J. Lhota, whose door was labeled with the title of rat czar during his time as a deputy mayor in the Giuliani administration, and who now faces the equally daunting task of reforming the city’s subway service.Mr. Lhota, who lost the 2013 mayoral election to Mr. de Blasio, said that now, as then, rats were more prevalent in the city’s parks than they were in the subway despite efforts to eradicate them with poisons and, in one notable experiment, a kind of birth control.“Never, never, never give up,” Mr. Lhota said was his advice to the mayor. “People are disgusted by rats.”But while few would defend the rights of rats, the proposal to change rules for when garbage can be put on the street — from 4 p.m. the day before pickup, to 4 a.m. the day of — was met with some resistance from building owners and landlords, who were not told of the plan in advance.“The concept is not a bad concept, but the rats will change their work rules to accommodate,” said Joseph Strasburg, the president of the Rent Stabilization Association, a landlord group, who added that it could affect some union workers. “We’re not trashing it. But we’re raising concerns.”A spokeswoman for Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union, which represents some building workers who take out trash and has endorsed Mr. de Blasio for re-election, said the union was reviewing the proposal.Besides curbing the ickiness factor of rats running rampant in parks, the plan offers a number of health benefits, officials said, including preventing diseases such as leptospirosis, a bacterial infection spread by rat urine, which killed one and sickened others in the Bronx this year.