https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/theater/pity-in-history-review-howard-barker.html
Review: Surviving War With a Sense of Humor in ‘Pity in History’ - The New York Times
Theater,Potomac Theater Project/NYC,Pity in History (Play),Howard Barker
July 19, 2017
4571
“I tell you a funny thing about dying,” a cook named Murgatroyd says, waggling a bloody hand. He is propped up on a gurney, red seeping copiously from his abdomen, yet the squad of soldiers pays him no mind. “Listen, will yer,” he exhorts them. “It’s a dead man talking!”Murgatroyd (Jonathan Tindle) is not dead yet, but give him time. In Howard Barker’s “Pity in History,” the only sure things are death, destruction and a mordant sense of humor. A 1985 BBC teleplay getting its professional stage debut, thanks to Potomac Theater Project, this 17th-century British civil war tale is a little like “Mother Courage and Her Children,” if Mother Courage were a beefy mason named Gaukroger (Steven Dykes) who enjoys a nice pickle with his lunch.“Good battle, gentlemen,” he says cheerily, chatting up the military in the hope of making sales. “I understand the casualties were suitably high?” Perhaps some monuments to the valorous dead are in order.Gaukroger is the artist as ordinary man in this modern-dress production, directed by Richard Romagnoli and running in repertory with Tom Stoppard’s “Arcadia,” at Atlantic Stage 2. Amid the brutality that tromps through “Pity in History,” the mason is both a creator of beauty and a survivor. He knows that what is smashed to bits in battle will need replacing afterward.“You have all the sculpture in the world stored in your fingertips if you watch,” Gaukroger tells his apprentice (Matt Ball), entreating him to pay close attention in learning how to carve. “And if they do not crush your fingers, you can make it all again.”Solidly anchored by Mr. Dykes and Mr. Tindle in comic performances veined with sympathy, this production proves the piece’s merit for the stage. The soldier-dominated scenes could use more concentrated energy, though, and the play’s villainous rich widow (Kathleen Wise) seems anomalous in Mr. Romagnoli’s grand scheme.Mr. Barker’s plays are a fixture at Potomac, which appears to have chosen this one for its resonance at a moment, in the United States and the playwright’s native Britain, when the populace is intensely — and, yes, pitilessly — polarized.At the bedside of the bloodied Murgatroyd, an officer (Jay Dunn) proclaims: “We build a new country here, a new freedom, very sweet, out of our labor and your pain.”The cook replies: “Don’t tell a dead man about the future. Have you got no tact?”