https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/world/middleeast/3-americans-kidnapped-in-baghdad-are-released.html
3 Americans Kidnapped in Baghdad Are Released - The New York Times
Iraq,Kidnapping and Hostages,Shiite Muslims,Baghdad (Iraq),United States,United States International Relations
Feb. 16, 2016
5845
BAGHDAD —  Three Americans who were kidnapped from a Baghdad apartment by Shiite militiamen last month were released unharmed on Tuesday after the Iraqi authorities negotiated their freedom, State Department officials confirmed. After showers, medical checkups and a meal at the American Embassy, they were quickly put on a plane out of the country.The exact circumstances of their release were not immediately clear, including whether any money was paid or prisoners were released in exchange. Officials stressed that there had been no direct negotiations between the United States and the group that abducted the men.Throughout their captivity, American officials leaned on the Iraqi National Intelligence Service and the Iraqi military, which in turn leaned on Moktada al-Sadr, the Shiite cleric whose militia once fought against the Americans, officials said. The abductors were not believed to be under Mr. Sadr’s control, but the cleric was able to use his contacts to mediate and win their release.The State Department issued a statement on Tuesday saying it welcomed the news. “We sincerely appreciate the assistance provided by the government of Iraq, and its whole-of-government effort to bring about the safe release of these individuals,” the statement said.As Iraq’s security has deteriorated in recent years, with the extremists of the Islamic State seizing territories in the north and west, there has been a rise in abductions in Baghdad. Officials have said the Shiite militias that rose to defend the capital were to blame. Many of these groups are backed by Iran and operate largely beyond the control of the central government.The three Americans were abducted around the time of a prisoner exchange between the United States and Iran, which included the release of Jason Rezaian, the Tehran bureau chief of The Washington Post.There has been no clear evidence to suggest that Iran was involved in the seizure of the three men. Even so, Secretary of State John Kerry raised the matter with Mohammad Javad Zarif, the Iranian foreign minister.The way the Americans were released and the way they were taken — opportunistically, officials said, after they attended a party in a Baghdad neighborhood where militias are prevalent — indicated local motives rather than direct Iranian involvement. Still, American officials believe the kidnappers were affiliated with a militia supported by Iran, even if the abductions were not planned by Tehran.The three Americans were said to be contractors working for the United States military at the Baghdad airport. They had attended a party at the apartment of their interpreter in Dora, a neighborhood in southern Baghdad.The three men violated protocol when they left their accommodations at the airport, where they were involved in the American effort to train Iraq’s counterterrorism forces to fight the Islamic State, officials said. The officials added that at least two of the men were dual nationals, one an Iraqi-American and the other an Egyptian-American.Shiite militias with ties to Iran have been behind two recent major kidnapping operations in Iraq, officials say. The first was in September, when masked gunmen kidnapped 17 Turkish construction workers and their Iraqi translator from a construction site in the Shiite slum of Sadr City. All were released unharmed four weeks later. A senior Iraqi official said the Turks were exchanged for prisoners who were held by Sunni rebel groups in Syria.Then, in December, more than two dozen Qataris, including members of the royal family, were kidnapped from the desert in southern Iraq, where they were on safari hunting rare birds. The Qataris are still being held, and Iraqi officials believe they were taken for the same purpose as the Turks.