https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/19/insider/fashion-statement-what-will-melania-trump-wear-to-the-ball-and-why-does-it-matter.html
Why Melania Trump’s Inaugural Ball Gown Matters - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Inaugurations,First Ladies (US),Trump  Melania
Jan. 19, 2017
8924
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insight into stories that appear in The New York Times. Here, Vanessa Friedman, fashion director and chief fashion critic of The New York Times, considers questions about Melania Trump’s Inaugural Dress. Who’s watching?Everyone. Whether we admit it or not, and whether we realize it or not. What the first lady wears during the inauguration of a president becomes part of the visual narrative of the day. It paints a picture of the image the new administration wants to project, which might be independent, glamorous, aspirational, sparkly or multicultural. We have to wait and see.There’s a reason John F. Kennedy took off his top hat for his swearing-in and address: he wanted to project youth and change and a new leadership. A reason 39 Presidents have been Brooks Brothers customers, and many of them — including Lincoln, Woodrow Wilson and Obama — have worn Brooks Brothers to their swearing-in ceremonies. It denotes an understanding of history and tradition.There’s a reason Michelle Obama wore a coat and dress by an independent Cuban-American designer for the inauguration in 2008 and a gown by a young, up-and-coming Asian-American designer. They were elegant, but they also said: I know this is a diverse country, and we are going to represent it in all its plurality, and we value entrepreneurship and creativity. Thanks to social media, we all see that choice immediately, and we all judge it. If a first couple is smart, they use that moment. Plus, the inaugural gown ends up in the Smithsonian. So you are literally dressing for history. And you are giving a brand a huge promotional boost, which should not be underestimated.And why do we care?There’s a lot of debate over whether it is demeaning to discuss what a first lady and president wear; whether it takes valuable time away from serious issues. I would never put clothes on the same level as the myriad crucial issues facing a president every day, like taxes, international relations and climate change. But you can’t ignore the fact that in an increasingly visual world, there is an the opportunity to underscore an impression or a message via clothing, to connect all those people watching with the one normal thing that happens during that whole singular ceremony (we all have to get dressed), so why wouldn’t you exploit that?I once asked a friend who was a crisis consultant for global leaders whether presidents really spent as much time and thought on a tie as I thought they did, and he said, “You have no idea.” And if they spend that much time on a tie, imagine how much time and thought the first lady and her team spend on a dress seen around the world.Just because something seems frivolous or trivial does not mean it is not an effective tool. Of course, some politicians and their partners understand this better than others. And it’s fine if you just wear something that looks nice. Though it does seem like a wasted opportunity.Can it really make a difference?For a brand, it can give you a recognizable name overnight, as Jason Wu, who made both Michelle Obama’s inaugural gowns, told me, and that changes your profile in the market in a meaningful way. Overseas stores suddenly get interested. Local stores move you to the front of the floor.For the first lady, and first couple, it is really a statement about how she is going to represent the country: If she is going to tell a fairy tale, or be something more accessible. Traditionally, first ladies have worn American designers, in an effort to help bolster local industry, and often worked with one or two in particular throughout their husband’s time in office.Michelle Obama changed that — she worked with an enormous number of American designers, and also wore a fair amount of European brands, most often as a form of outreach during state visits. That, combined with Mr. Trump’s unpredictability, his clear desire to not play by any previous rules, and the few appearances Melania Trump made during the campaign in high-fashion brands like Gucci and Roksanda, means everyone will be watching what she wears closely.At the moment, the buzz is Ralph Lauren and Karl Lagerfeld, the designer of Chanel, both fashion-world tentpole names. If she wanted to project a sense of being at the heart of the global fashion establishment, with their big gold seal of approval, especially after all the postelection brouhaha with designers announcing they would refuse to dress her, this would do that pretty handily. On the other hand, it would not suggest she was focused on helping the little guy.