https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/briefing/donald-trump-jr-christopher-wray-major-league-baseball.html
Donald Trump Jr., Antarctica, Christopher Wray: Your Wednesday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 12, 2017
110
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• “If it’s what you say I love it.”Donald Trump Jr. reacted enthusiastically last year to the possibility of Russian government help for his father’s presidential campaign, according to emails he released on Tuesday.The emails discussed an offer of incriminating material about Hillary Clinton and led to a meeting with a Kremlin-connected lawyer. Read the exchanges here, and catch up with a video recap.The emails undercut President Trump’s line of defense in the inquiry into Russian election meddling, which he has dismissed as a “total hoax,” our White House correspondents write.One of our investigative reporters explains how she uncovered details of the meeting at Trump Tower, and our writers in Russia profiled the lawyer who was there.We also answered questions about collusion and other legal issues raised by the revelation, and checked in with Senate Republicans, most of whom had little to say.President Trump defended his son this morning, saying he was “innocent” and denouncing “the greatest witch hunt in political history.”• Full speed ahead on health bill.Senate Republicans vowed to introduce a revised measure to replace the Affordable Care Act on Thursday and to vote on it next week, regardless of divisions in the party. We look at where they stand on the legislation.On Tuesday, Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, delayed the Senate’s August recess, which our columnist says is a confession that Republicans haven’t gotten the job done, despite having control of Washington.• F.B.I. nominee goes before Senate.Christopher Wray, President Trump’s pick to replace James Comey, is appearing before the Judiciary Committee for his confirmation hearing. Here’s the streaming video and our live coverage.• Major iceberg breaks away.Weighing more than a trillion metric tons, one of the largest chunks of ice ever recorded has broken off the Antarctic Peninsula, scientists confirmed today.“This is a big change. Maps will need to be redrawn,” one researcher said.• What remains in Mosul. A day after the Iraqi government declared victory over the Islamic State, our correspondent toured the city, where artillery fire could still be heard.“While this is a major moment for Iraq,” she writes, “I doubt this fight is over.”• Where North Koreans toil as “slaves.”The country, desperate for foreign currency, has sent tens of thousands of its citizens to Russia, where they are welcomed as “fast, cheap and reliable” laborers in a system denounced by rights groups.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we discuss Donald Trump Jr.’s release of his emails.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• Janet Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, highlighted  continued strength of job growth in an upbeat report to Congress today.• By abandoning development programs, the U.S. is risking global instability, our columnist writes.• As France’s bread falters in sales and quality, one baker returned there from America to start a chain of boulangeries.• U.S. stocks were mixed on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Try avoiding the tyranny of constant digital contact.• Free yourself of your harshest critic. You’re too close to your work to judge it.• Spend some time tonight preparing a feta-brined chicken, and roast it tomorrow.• Reflections from Thoreau.In today’s 360 video, visit Walden Pond, where the writer and philosopher Henry David Thoreau once lived, and listen to excerpts from his book “Walden.” Today is the 200th anniversary of his birth.• Partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.Read about how the other side thinks: Writers from across the political spectrum on the health care overhaul, the travel ban and more.• Baseball’s finest hour.The American League All-Stars beat the National League, 2-1, Tuesday night in a game whose outcome no longer determines home-field advantage for the World Series.• To cook for the crowd.As summer brings returning students and other guests to the table, we offer tips for feeding the masses.• When it’s O.K. to start in the middle.In a TV era of binge-watching, skip ahead to the good parts, our critic argues.• Best of late-night TV.Donald Trump Jr.’s lawyer, who has represented many mobsters, was an offer  some  hosts couldn’t refuse.• Quotation of the day.“Hate has consequences. When we demonize a whole group of people — whether that group is defined by race, by religion or by occupation — this is the result.”— James O’Neill, the New York City police commissioner, speaking at the funeral of the officer killed in an ambush last week.Given North Korea’s latest weapons milestone, we thought we’d review the basics of the intercontinental ballistic missile.A land-based, guided missile, the ICBM has a range of at least 5,500 kilometers (3,400 miles). After it arcs into space, its warhead separates, falling back through Earth’s atmosphere to a target. Most designs carry multiple warheads, against which defenses are limited.ICBMs — a Nazi ambition — were developed during the Cold War arms race. Russia got out in front, launching the R-7 in 1957 as part of the Sputnik satellite program. The U.S.’s SM-65 Atlas followed in 1959, and China tested the Dongfeng 5 in 1971. India and Israel are thought to have ICBMs or to be close. Submarines can loft similar long-range missiles, as France and Britain have demonstrated.ICBMs are entwined with the concept of nuclear deterrence: warding off an attack with the prospect of nuclear retaliation and mutually assured destruction. None have been used in conflict.The U.S. and Russia agreed in a treaty to reduce their vast arsenals of ICBMs. China has 50 to 100.North Korea aspires to put nuclear warheads on its new Hwasong-14 ICBM but could also use it to deliver chemical or biological agents.Jennifer Jett, William J. Broad and David Sanger contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.