https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/dining/what-to-cook-this-weekend-newsletter.html
What to Cook This Weekend - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Recipes
July 14, 2017
6071
Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.Good morning. It is Bastille Day, so we’ve put together a fine new video recipe for French fries that you could make this evening in a hiss and bubble of oil, then serve with a simple pan-fried steak, some béarnaise sauce and a thatch of watercress, alongside a glass of vin rouge. Steak frites! To the barricades!French fries at home are fantastic, after all. Of course, they’re messy to make. There’s the oil, the double-frying, the way the process can take over your kitchen, and I fully understand those who would pass on the process of making them, especially in the middle of summer. (You could cook them outdoors, if you have a propane hob and a big pot, and a fry basket, and a wide table to use as a work space?)Your reluctance doesn’t mean you can’t enjoy the crisp-soft salty sweetness of excellent potatoes for dinner tonight, and celebrate the French.I have a good recipe for steak mock frites you could use, or you might look to one of the more underrated ingredients in the world of home cooking and particularly the state of home cooking in the service of children on a Friday night, on the street that I live on in Brooklyn: frozen French fries. (Je suis the ugly American.) Pour out a pound or so of those from a big red bag, and get them super crisp and fragrant in a hot oven. It makes a Friday night meat feast about five times more enjoyable for the kids and, thereby, for the parent cooking it after a long week of long meetings about workflow and staffing.And for dessert? How about a French yogurt cake with marmalade glaze or, in another American twist on a French tradition, Julia Child’s berry clafoutis? Text a child or underemployed roommate, and get the one who answers to make it this afternoon while you’re working and shopping, and dinner’s complete.Heading in other directions than the bistro meal, American-style, you could go full French with Melissa Clark, make her recipe for quiche or soufflé or ratatouille or sole meunière. (In the New York metropolitan region, you might try that last one with fluke, far cheaper than sole and really delicious this time of year. Out west, Petrale sole. And for those far from the ocean, I bet it wouldn’t be bad with catfish or walleye.)You needn’t cook French food, of course. This could be a great weekend for crispy lamb with cumin, scallions and red chiles, for the Vietnamese noodle soup known as pho bo, or a Japanese-style beef stew.I bet miso-glazed scallops would be delicious this weekend. And I know sautéed salmon with leeks and tomatoes would be. If you can find some corn, you might try our recipe for creamy corn pasta with basil. Follow that with the recipe for nutter butters we got from the cats at Bouchon Bakery, and you’ll have a weekend dinner to remember.Many thousands more recipes to cook this weekend are available on Cooking, at least once you’ve taken out a subscription to the site. If anything goes wrong with that process, just reach out to us at cookingcare@nytimes.com and we’ll take care of you.You can come visit us, as well, on Facebook. We’re on Twitter, too, and we’ve got some stunning pictures up on Instagram and Pinterest. (You can find me while you’re at it: @samsifton on Twitter and Instagram. Here I am on Facebook. And, amid some dream boards on Pinterest.)Not that I’ll be checking in too much before the weekend really gets underway. I write from a porch at the Eugene O’Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn., where I’m helping Chris Jones of the Chicago Tribune train a new generation of culture critics at the National Critics Institute. The dewy grass stretches down before me to the Long Island Sound beneath a pale gray mist, and the foghorn at the mouth of the Thames River sounds mournfully to the east. Later, I’ll sound my bell: Food writing is culture writing, same as writing about dance or theater, art, music, architecture or books.We’ll see if they buy it. Either way, I’ll get a dog at Super Duper Weenie in Fairfield on the way home, in advance of making like frère Jacques and cooking my kids that steak for dinner. Have a great weekend.