https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/television/emmy-awards-2017-samantha-bee-interview.html
Emmy Awards 2017: Samantha Bee on Nominations for ‘Full Frontal’ - The New York Times
Television,Emmy Awards,Actors and Actresses,Full Frontal With Samantha Bee (TV Program),Bee  Samantha
July 13, 2017
1076
It was a crowded and fiercely competitive season for late-night talk shows, but this year, “Full Frontal With Samantha Bee,” the topical TBS satire hosted by that “Daily Show” alumna, was one of six to earn an Emmy Award nomination Thursday in the variety talk series category. “Full Frontal” picked up seven nominations in total, including one for its online work and four for its “Not the White House Correspondents Dinner” special, which was held in Washington in April.On Thursday afternoon, Ms. Bee spoke about her nominations and the joy of not having to cover a big news story during a vacation week. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.[ Emmy Interviews: Samantha Bee | Millie Bobby Brown | Claire Foy | Samira Wiley | Evan Rachel Wood ]You had the experience, many times over, of seeing “The Daily Show” receive Emmy nominations. Is it different when it’s your own program being recognized?It’s a whole different ballgame. This is pretty new to me, as it pertains to my own show. It’s totally gratifying.Do you have a strategy for how you handle the nomination announcements? Do you want to watch them as they’re happening?My technique is to hide my head in the sand and wait until I hear somebody in the office shriek. That was the time-tested strategy I employed today, and it worked quite nicely. We were in a kind of quiet meeting, and then we heard a little yelp from down the hall, and then continued with the quiet meeting, and then somebody very gently poked their head in and said, “There’s a nomination.” And then we felt free to check our computer screens. And now we have champagne and pizza. The two food groups.Some of the big late-night franchises, including “The Tonight Show” and “The Daily Show,” were not nominated in this category this year. Is that a sign of some evolution taking place?I feel like the landscape has grown so much. There’s room for so many voices in this new world we’re living in. I do celebrate that. I think it’s a very good thing.The “Real Time” host Bill Maher had a notorious broadcast a few weeks ago ——He had some rocky times ——in which he said the N-word, and he later apologized. Did it surprise you that his show was still nominated in spite of this incident?No, it doesn’t surprise me at all. I don’t get surprised by these things. I have been in the world a little bit. I’ve had a toehold in this world for quite a while, and mostly, I have to be perfectly honest, I’m so hyper-focused on feeling lots of gratitude and happiness for our nominations today. I’m not really thinking much outside that.Are you disappointed there was no “Full Frontal” episode this week to address all the coverage of Donald Trump Jr.’s emails? This Don Jr. stuff has given us so much joy. We were on summer vacation last week — I was in Maine, we were having such a nice time — and this was a beautiful way to ease back into work. But we value our time off. There are plenty of other shows out there, who can handle things when we’re off the air. We got to enjoy it as spectators, for a change.There would seem to be so much material for “Full Frontal” to work with and a huge appetite for topical satire. Has there ever been talk with TBS about increasing the frequency of “Full Frontal” broadcasts? I absolutely think that they would welcome it. But I’ve only ever said, publicly, on purpose, that I never want to do that. [laughs] I’ve put that out into the universe. Everyone knows that we also value our quality of life. Doing a nightly show would diminish my ability to do field pieces, which I love. That’s a piece of the show I would be unwilling to let go of.