https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/22/us/charlotte-trial-jonathan-ferrell-police-officer-randall-kerrick.html
Mistrial for Charlotte Police Officer in Death of Unarmed Black Man - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Ferrell  Jonathan A,Kerrick  Randall,Charlotte (NC),Blacks
Aug. 21, 2015
1340
CHARLOTTE, N.C. — After nearly four days of jury deliberations, a judge declared a mistrial on Friday in the trial of a white Charlotte police officer who killed an unarmed black man almost two years ago.Judge Robert C. Ervin brought the jury of eight women and four men back into the courtroom shortly after 4 p.m., and the foreman said he saw no possibility of a verdict in the case against Officer Randall Kerrick, who was charged with manslaughter in the fatal shooting of Jonathan Ferrell.“We have exhausted every possibility short of calling in the paramedics,” the foreman said, an apparent reference to the intensity of the discussions.Deputy Attorney General Arden Harris told reporters afterward that prosecutors would consider their options regarding a second trial. He offered condolences to the Ferrell family.The jury foreman had told Judge Ervin earlier in the day that the panel was making progress, only to return, fresh from its third 8-to-4 vote, to report that it was giving up. That was the fourth vote over all; the first, just after arguments ended Tuesday, was 7 to 5. It is not known which way the jury was leaning.Family members of Mr. Ferrell, dressed in black, watched silently as the judge declared the trial over without a verdict. So too did friends and family of the defendant, dressed in pastel colors, across the aisle.The victim’s mother, Georgia Ferrell, said later that the decision had hardened her resolve.“I felt that I had to keep fighting, have to seek justice,” she said. “Jonathan was an innocent bystander looking for help and killed. So we’ve got to stop them from killing our children.”The family’s lawyer, Christopher Chestnut, criticized prosecutors, who he said had failed to present the case with enough passion to persuade the jury or counter defense attempts to paint the victim as a criminal.Mr. Chestnut represented the family in May when the city of Charlotte settled their wrongful-death lawsuit for $2.25 million. The city did not admit liability, and lawyers did not mention the settlement during the criminal trial. Mr. Ferrell, 24, a former college football player, had wrecked his car on a dark stretch of road early on Sept. 14, 2013, and walked to a house in eastern Charlotte where the homeowner called 911. Three police officers arrived soon after. Immediately upon seeing Mr. Ferrell in the dark, one officer fired his Taser and missed. Officer Kerrick then opened fire, hitting Mr. Ferrell 10 times and killing him.The shooting occurred early in the recent national debate over the deaths of young black men around the country at the hands of police officers.Shortly after court adjourned, about 15 people briefly blocked traffic near the Mecklenberg County Courthouse, lying down on the pavement and chanting “Unarmed,” “Don’t shoot,” and “Black lives matter.” Several held printed placards that said “#JusticeForJonathanFerrell.” Later, a small group of protesters stared down a large line of police officers in riot gear outside the city’s minor league ballpark.A Charlotte police spokesman, Robert Tufano, said two people were arrested on assault accusations after rocks were thrown at police officers on Friday evening. No officers were seriously injured, he said.