https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/conservatives-donald-trump.html
As Donald Trump Builds Team, the Right Scours His Blueprints - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,United States,Congress
Nov. 15, 2016
1273
WASHINGTON — For years, restless conservatives were told to wait. Wait until the Republicans controlled the House. Wait until they had the Senate as well. Wait until they occupied the White House.Now, they have all three. And one of the biggest unknowns facing President-elect Donald J. Trump is how long they will wait for him.As Mr. Trump begins putting together a government, the ideological purists of the hard right, suspicious that his campaign pledge to upend Washington will give way to business as usual, are already watching warily as he makes his initial personnel and policy choices.“I am advising Trump to beware,” the conservative radio host Michael Savage said this week. “Because, if he loses his base on the first day, what’s going to happen in the first month?”For some, even Mr. Trump’s decision to appoint Stephen K. Bannon, a champion of the anti-immigration, nationalist and populist movement that helped fuel his victory, was not enough. They still attacked his choice of Reince Priebus, a career party official, as chief of staff.Some on the right are already publicly pressuring Mr. Trump to keep Republicans they deem too ideologically soft out of his cabinet, a process evident on Tuesday in a battle over who will choose and lead the new president’s foreign policy and national security teams.As Mr. Trump adjusts to his role as head of the Republican Party — an institution that he and many of his followers criticized as too disconnected from its base — the president-elect must reconcile a sprawling agenda, and the ideological crosscurrents it encompasses, with the demands of an impatient group of conservatives in Congress and beyond who are less inclined than ever to compromise on their small-government, anti-establishment principles.“They’re going to have to either eat their own, eat Trump or get used to half-a-loaf politics,” said Rich Lowry, editor of National Review and an influential conservative commentator. “Because there’s nothing else that ever happens.”Mr. Trump starts with an advantage. He is not tainted as a member of the political elite the populist right wants to take down.But to achieve his boldest campaign promises, Mr. Trump, a professed master deal maker, has to find a way to get his agenda past a House speaker he does not fully trust, Paul D. Ryan, and the establishment-aligned conservatives in Congress who do not share his views on issues including trade and increased government spending on infrastructure.Mr. Trump has to reconcile the conflicting factions of his party, while giving voters what they said they wanted most from a new president: change in the way Washington works.The tensions are already visible in the transition planning. On Tuesday, the departure of Mike Rogers, a former Republican congressman aligned with the party’s more traditional conservative wing, signaled how the anti-establishment players within Mr. Trump’s orbit are exerting influence. “It’s no mystery; it’s Poli Sci 101: Do what your customer wants,” said Representative Dave Brat, a Virginia Republican. Mr. Brat, himself an insurgent conservative who won a primary two years ago to end the career of the Republican majority leader at the time, Eric Cantor, said he believed Mr. Trump could afford to be aggressive because people elected him “to bring the fight to D.C.”As someone who displays little ideological consistency and has a long history of backing away from his toughest assertions, Mr. Trump has priorities that remain fuzzy.One of his first likely acts as president, however, would pit him against many of the small-government, free-market conservatives in his base: a $1 trillion infrastructure plan. And he is already sowing confusion about his commitment to dismantling the Affordable Care Act after saying late last week that he would like to retain certain elements, like the provision that lets young adults stay on their parents’ plan.“That’s going to be the problem he’ll face,” said Michael Steele, the former Republican National Committee chairman who has helped informally advise Mr. Trump. “Those rabble-rousers, the people who pulled him over the finish line, they’re watching to see: ‘Will you empower us to help you drain the swamp? Or are you just going to add more swamp water?’”The conservatives who found a hero in Mr. Trump through his brand of populism are not likely to be placated by half-measures and conciliations.“There are challenges, and we need to make sure that there are good, qualified people around him,” said Michael Needham, chief executive of Heritage Action for America, a conservative policy group. Mr. Needham said he was encouraged by what he had heard so far from Mr. Trump.“The Republican Party is a party that’s gotten by repeating Reaganesque platitudes,” Mr. Needham said. “But it wasn’t speaking to where a lot of Americans are. Trump did.”He added, “We’ll know in short order how that all works out.”What could be especially dangerous for Mr. Trump is the combustible nature of the populist politics he inflamed — and its tendency, especially in its Tea Party-tinged incarnation, to turn on its own. It is a movement that always seems in search of a fight.“This is the people’s president, and this is the people’s victory,” Laura Ingraham, a conservative radio host, told her audience the other day. “This is your victory. Take a little time to savor it, and then we’ve got to gear up. Because there are a lot of battles to fight ahead.”Whether those battles are the same as those Mr. Trump wants is another issue altogether.How Mr. Trump meets the expectations of his base on the subject of illegal immigration will be one of his biggest tests. No other issue animated it more. But Mr. Trump has sent conflicting signals about whether he intends to follow through on the “great, great wall” he vowed to erect along the border with Mexico.Backing away from that pledge, perhaps the highest-profile promise of his campaign, would no doubt induce anger and anxiety among some conservatives, though others seem willing to grant him some leeway.“Remember, he talked about technology and how we need a barrier between the two countries,” said Representative Raúl R. Labrador, Republican of Idaho, who campaigned across the country for Mr. Trump and speaks to his team regularly. “Some of it is virtual. Some of it is actual.”Mr. Trump will also have to contend with public opinion in determining how hard to push. He is poised to enter office with the dubious distinction of being seen as the least-prepared and least-trusted chief executive ever. Edison Research exit polls of tens of thousands of voters found that nearly four in 10 Americans said they would be “scared” if he was elected; more than six in 10 said he had the wrong temperament, and about the same amount said he was unqualified to do the job.Weakening his hand further, Mr. Trump did not win the presidency in an electoral wave that swept into Congress like-minded conservatives devoted to following the Trump agenda. In fact, Republicans lost seats in the House and Senate on Election Day.Some Republicans suggested that they would be surprised if he tried to push through anything too divisive too soon.“When you’re in business, you’re actually accustomed to accomplishing things, getting a result,” said Senator Ron Johnson, a Republican. He was re-elected to a second term in Wisconsin, a state that polls showed both he and Mr. Trump were likely to lose.“The way you get a result in business isn’t by arguing,” Mr. Johnson said. “You find areas of agreement.”