https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/21/fashion/coffee-cocktails-kobricks-mothers-ruin.html
Spiking Coffee Gives New York Bars a Fresh Buzz - The New York Times
Cocktails and Mixed Drinks,Coffee,Kobrick Coffee Company (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Toby's Estate (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Alcoholic Beverages
July 20, 2016
3685
Kobrick Coffee Company. has been roasting beans since 1920, originally in Lower Manhattan and now New Jersey. This year it opened its first retail shop, a quaint Italian-style cafe in the meatpacking district.But that’s not the only thing novel about this old-timey cafe. Besides the usual coffee drinks like macchiatos and cortados, the cafe serves what it calls “coffee cocktails,” alcoholic drinks with a zing of caffeine.Top sellers include the Mexican Jumping Bean, a frothy concoction of reposado tequila, a ristretto espresso shot and flavored liqueurs, and the Three Hour Kyoto Negroni, made with a mix of gin, campari and vermouth that is then slow-dripped over a Kenyan coffee through a long, cylindrical tube.“There’s a lot of synergies between coffee preparation and cocktail preparation,” said Scott Kobrick, 30, the boyish fourth-generation member of the family business who spearheaded the idea for a cafe. “In many European countries, a barista is a bartender, as a literal translation, and coffee is used as an ingredient in their bar program, and the bartenders use similar tools, too.”Customers have taken to the inventive drinks with glee. “The tequila gets me very hyper and the espresso brings me to a whole new level,” said Ebony Vizcarrondo, 24, a server at the nearby Standard hotel, who was nursing a Mexican Jumping Bean on a recent Thursday after work.These caffeinated drinks are an upmarket evolution from the Red Bull-and-vodka drinks popularized at E.D.M. parties. Moving beyond Irish coffee and Kahlua and Cream, these coffee-based beverages are branching out and becoming a staple among mixologists.Fair Weather Bushwick, a coffee-shop-turned-bistro in Brooklyn, offers a Shochu Latte during brunch that’s made with shochu, espresso and hazelnut syrup. SushiSamba, a Japanese-Peruvian fusion restaurant in the West Village, serves a Cafe Millonario, an espresso martini made with Bacardi Black rum, spiced maple syrup and dark chocolate liquor.And Mother’s Ruin, a popular spot in NoLIta, serves a frozen drink called a Coffee Cordial Boozy Slushy, which features Toby’s Estate coffee infused with white rum, nutmeg, cinnamon and star anise.In Queens, another cafe called Sweetleaf Coffee makes a Java Flip from Jamaican rum, bourbon, egg yolk, cream and a house-brewed coffee liqueur. “We take the cold brew coffee, condense that and add some raw sugar to it,” said Vincent Vee, 36, the former beverage manager there who also previously worked at Milk & Honey. “Then we mix it with an infusion that is El Dorado 151 and El Dorado 5-year aged rum that’s infused with Vietnamese coffee beans, cinnamon, vanilla and orange peels.”Unlike Kobrick’s, Sweetleaf’s coffee and cocktail service don’t overlap, with cocktails starting at 5 p.m. “Bars really don’t make any money during the day, and coffee houses really don’t make any money at night,” Mr. Vee said. “They’re both high-profit businesses, but they’re only high profit for a short period of the day. So when you have them both behind the same doors, it can make a lot of financial sense.”It has led to some confusion. Every so often, Mr. Vee said that stragglers wander in at night looking for an after-dinner cappuccino. “It’s usually people there on a Tinder date,” Mr. Vee said. “And it probably turns out to be a better date for them anyway.”