http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/11/theater/reviews/11oohrah.html
Back From War, Hardly at Peace, From Bekah Brunstetter - The New York Times
Theater,Atlantic Theater Co,Oohrah! (Play),Brunstetter  Bekah,Mudge  Jennifer,Cabnet  Evan,Beck  Cassie,Near-Verbrugghe  Lucas,Osinski  Maximilian
Sept. 10, 2009
1114
A gung-ho military exclamation — “Oohrah!” — provides the title for a new play by Bekah Brunstetter that opened Thursday night at the Atlantic Theater’s Stage 2. But that emphatic note is belied by the mostly mixed-up mood of the play, about the family of a soldier returning from service in Iraq. These affable folks produce a steady stream of perky chatter, but anxiety and dissatisfaction keep rising to the surface.While preparing care packages for the troops, Sara (Jennifer Mudge) speaks glowingly of her warm relationship with her husband, Ron (Darren Goldstein), who is serving a second tour overseas. But when he surprises her with an early return, Sara seems as much unsettled as excited, her antic conversation about plans for home improvement covering an uneasy sense that her family has become a fragmented thing. Sara cannot share Ron’s enthusiasm for the cropped hair, artillery infatuation and general tomboyishness of their teenage daughter, Lacey (Sami Gayle), and the presence in their home of Sara’s sister Abby (Cassie Beck) threatens to become a point of simmering conflict.Ms. Brunstetter, an emerging playwright with a list of promising downtown credentials and current commissions, displays honorable intentions in this contemporary domestic comedy-drama, set in Fayetteville, N.C., home of a major Army post. The physical and psychic dislocations caused by combat and the trouble that soldiers encounter in reintegrating into their families and finding new purpose in their lives are potentially powerful themes.But Ms. Brunstetter often seems torn between a desire to write an honestly observed play and a need to show off her cheerily warped humor. The result, part kooky-family comedy and part reflective drama, feels off kilter and generally unconvincing.Abby comes close to being a comic caricature of a man-hungry vamp. She speaks with frank disparagement of her sex life with her fiancé, Christopher (Lucas Near-Verbrugghe, in an even more absurdly written role), and all but throws herself at a handsome young Marine, Chip (Maximilian Osinski), whom she aggressively flirts with on a flight home and then invites to spend the night at her sister’s place. Chip’s integration into the plot is among the play’s more awkward aspects.But even the relationship between Sara and Ron, which should be the emotional heart of the play, reflects Ms. Brunstetter’s divided aims. Are we meant to sympathize with Sara’s predicament or snicker at her? Her superficial affection for creature comforts, her dithering obsession with Lacey’s birthday party and her eager suggestions that Ron get a job at the Krispy Kreme factory appear to be laugh cues. So do her culinary tastes: Sara complacently refers to her affinity for cooking “exotic foods” like ravioli. (But would such a woman really know from truffle oil?) As a result the play’s final image, of Sara bereft and abandoned in the ruins of the party, fails to resonate. The ending is a fizzle.The role of Ron, played with focused simplicity by Mr. Goldstein, is the play’s least comic and its most persuasive, even if Ms. Brunstetter does not always make the character’s emotional transitions clear. Ron seems relieved to be free of the burden of Army duties when the play begins, but we don’t really see how he comes to change his mind. His difficulty in settling on a new path is only sparsely depicted, but Mr. Goldstein’s grounded, spare acting is affecting.The director, Evan Cabnet, cannot be blamed for the lapses in the writing. Still, a more nuanced hand at the helm might have helped smooth over the variations in the play’s tones. In particular the antic chatter of both Sara and Abby could be slowed down to reveal the strains that underlie it. As played by Ms. Mudge and Ms. Beck, these talkative sisters are as hard to take as their dialogue is occasionally hard to understand.OOHRAH!By Bekah Brunstetter; directed by Evan Cabnet; sets by Lee Savage; costumes by Jessica Wegener; lighting by Tyler Micoleau; sound by Broken Chord Collective; production stage manager, Jillian M. Oliver; fight director, J. David Brimmer; production manager, Michael Wade; general manager, Jamie Tyrol; associate artistic director, Christian Parker. Presented by the Atlantic Theater Company, Neil Pepe, artistic director; Jeffory Lawson, managing director. At the Atlantic Stage 2, 330 West 16th Street, Chelsea; (212) 279-4200. Through Sept. 27. Running time: 2 hours.WITH: Cassie Beck (Abby), Sami Gayle (Lacey), Darren Goldstein (Ron), J R Horne  (Pop Pop), Jennifer Mudge (Sara), Lucas Near-Verbrugghe (Christopher) and Maximilian Osinski (Chip).