http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/24/movies/lenfant-the-child-shows-a-thief-who-eventually-finds-redemption.html
'L'Enfant' ('The Child') Shows a Thief Who Eventually Finds Redemption - The New York Times
MOTION PICTURES,L'ENFANT (THE CHILD) (MOVIE)
March 24, 2006
4287
FOR the past decade, the Belgian brothers Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne have been building one of the most passionately engaged bodies of work in contemporary cinema. Characterized by an insistently moving camera, their films move fast even when the brothers do not. Since the release of their breakthrough film "La Promesse" in 1996, they have made just three other fiction titles: "Rosetta," "The Son" and now "L'Enfant" ("The Child"), stories about men and women engaged in a struggle -- for money, shelter, a break in the fence, a way into the world -- that is inscribed on the very surface of their restlessly beautiful images.Like the Dardennes' other recent films, "L'Enfant" takes place in an industrial town far from the tourist cathedrals and squares. The story opens with Sonia (Déborah François), a pretty young blonde with a newborn son, Jimmy, in tow. Dressed in a mini and boots, clutching the infant awkwardly in her arms like an unexpected gift, Sonia is anxiously searching for the man we soon learn is her boyfriend, Bruno (Jérémie Renier, the young hero of "La Promesse"). When she finds him, he greets her warmly but barely registers the mewling bundle in her arms. For this penny-ante thief, who lives by his wits and willingly plays Fagin to two very young accomplices, a baby, even one he sired, has no meaning because it serves no purpose.Once reunited, Sonia and Bruno retreat to their private bubble, laughing and teasing like the squawking, rambunctious, sexed-up teenagers they more or less are. Everything else, including the inconvenience of sleeping in a homeless shelter (Bruno subleased Sonia's apartment while she was having the baby) and the inconvenience of the preternaturally quiet infant in their distracted care, feels like an afterthought. And then, the next day, while Sonia's attention is directed elsewhere, Bruno sells Jimmy on the black market. With breathtaking deliberation, he places a few phone calls and after a long bus ride and a climb up some stairs to a vacant apartment, he exchanges his son for an envelope of cash. And then he saunters back to Sonia with the empty stroller.The Dardennes know how to build a scene for maximum tension: you yearn to find out who bought Jimmy, and whether his fate lies with a childless couple or an organ mill. But because they make moral thrillers, what matters isn't only actions and events but their emotional, spiritual and psychological costs. The tragedy of "Rosetta," for instance, isn't that the title character is poor, but how poverty has made her an exile, separating her from the rest of the world. Bruno's outsider status initially seems more of a choice than Rosetta's. "Only suckers work," he tells Sonia, though his actual language skews more aggressively potent. With his sporty leather jacket and cigarette, hooded eyes and scheming, he might almost be mistaken for someone who's the master of his life.For Bruno, Jimmy has no meaning beyond what he brings on the market. But then, for most of the world, Bruno has even less value. Sonia loves him, though her passion seems more capricious and flighty than profound, and the two younger boys he uses for his larcenous schemes rely on him only for jobs, not meaningful companionship. But the support that these three provide is as flimsy a shelter for Bruno as the cardboard box he sleeps in one night not long after selling his son. And it's only after he racks up a debt to some local gangsters, who first beat him to the ground and then carefully tabulate his value down to the last cent, that Bruno becomes truly valuable to another human being.Why make a film about Bruno? The same might be asked about Raskolnikov. Like Robert Bresson, whose "Pickpocket" informs "L'Enfant" and is itself a loose reworking of "Crime and Punishment," the Dardennes are not interested in passing judgment on a grievously flawed character; that's why God and Hollywood were invented. Since there is no moral ambiguity in the act of selling another human being, there would be no point in such judgment, other than to indulge in some self-satisfied finger-wagging. Rather, what interests the Dardennes -- what invests their work with such terrific urgency -- is not only how Bruno became the kind of man who would sell a child as casually as a slab of beef, but also whether a man like this, having committed such a repellent offense, can find redemption.Few other questions -- how we live and whether our lives have meaning -- are as important, which is why it's unsettling that few filmmakers bother to raise them. The Dardennes started out making documentaries about strikes and factories, and that may help explain why they are so comfortable asking such basic questions. Some of their critics are rather less comfortable with their subject matter, and it's instructive that the brothers' work is often lumped under the rubric of the social-issue film, probably because their characters are working class or poor. Implicit in this thinking is that poverty is strictly a social problem, an abstraction you read about in the papers or gingerly step over on the sidewalk, rather than a collective falling down on the job of being human.The Dardennes' background in documentary also partly explains their astonishing visual style. Working with the cinematographer Alain Marcoen, who shot all four of their last features, the brothers have developed an instantly identifiable naturalism, unsparing in its attention to detail. Their camera maintains an intimate, at times uncomfortably claustrophobic proximity to the characters, an approach that feels attentive rather than instrusive. In "The Son," the camera often seems to hang off the back of one of the lead characters' necks, almost as if the filmmakers were struggling to keep up. The Dardennes initially keep Bruno at arm's length, perhaps because they want to give us room to discover him for ourselves. That they will eventually move closer to him by the end, folding him in their embrace, should come as no surprise."L'Enfant" ("The Child") is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The film has some rough language, but nothing that anyone over 10 hasn't heard before.L'Enfant (The Child)  Opens today in New York and Los Angeles.Written (in French, with English subtitles) and directed by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne; director of photography, Alain Marcoen; edited by Marie-Hélène Dozo; produced by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne and Denis Freyd; released by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 100 minutes.WITH: Jérémie Renier (Bruno), Déborah François (Sonia), Jérémie Segard (Steve), Fabrizio Rongione (Young Thug), Olivier Gourmet (Plainclothes Officer) and Stéphane Bissot (Receiver).