https://www.nytimes.com/1998/02/22/world/standoff-with-iraq-the-opposition-iraqi-exiles-want-strike-aimed-at-hussein.html
STANDOFF WITH IRAQ: THE OPPOSITION; Iraqi Exiles Want Strike Aimed at Hussein - The New York Times
IRAQ,CLINTON  BILL,HUSSEIN  SADDAM,CHALABI  AHMED,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,IRAQ-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
Feb. 22, 1998
6480
When Washington steps up its threats to unleash its military might on the Government of Saddam Hussein, it might seem logical for Iraq's exiled opposition to be leading the war chants.In fact, Iraqi opposition leaders are warning that any operation that does not explicitly aim to remove President Hussein from power could be counterproductive. And since the Clinton Administration is disavowing that goal, they say the kind of attack the White House has outlined may leave the Iraqi leader stronger.''What we're asking for is this: that any policy to strike Saddam should be in aid of an organized opposition move against Saddam,'' said Ahmed Chalabi, leader of the Iraqi National Congress, an opposition group.Riven by feuds, desperately short of money and weaker than at any time since the Persian Gulf war, the Iraqi opposition is hardly speaking from a position of strength. It suffered catastrophic losses after September 1996, when Iraqi forces pushed into its stronghold in the Kurd-controlled north, and could do little more than complain when the United States chose a token response: a series of Tomahawk missiles fired at sites in southern Iraq.Thus the opposition leaders have obvious reasons for endorsing a strategy that could elevate their own stature instead of merely diminishing Mr. Hussein's. Opposition leaders met American officials this week in Washington, the highest-level such meeting in three years, to seek strong action against Mr. Hussein and to gain recognition of a provisional Iraqi government in exile.''In my view, the kind of attack the Americans are describing would be worse than nothing,'' Mr. Chalabi said in a telephone interview from London, his headquarters. ''If Saddam remains in power, that will allow him once again to declare himself victorious. Second, the mass destruction weapons programs will still be in place. And finally, he will throw out the United Nations inspectors.'' Opposition in France and Russia to an attack on Iraq, he added,  ''will put an end to any unity on the Security Council.''A serious rift between the Iraqi National Congress, a coalition of 24 groups that was formed in 1992, and the Iraqi National Accord, an organization made up primarily of former Iraqi military officers that is based in Jordan, has paralyzed relations.Between 1992 and 1996, the United States spent $100 million to support covert operations by the two groups. But that support was suspended after the September 1996 crackdown in northern Iraq prompted scores of opposition figures to flee.And recently, say opposition leaders based in London, their movement has been dealt another severe blow with the execution of 1,200 dissidents in Iraqi prisons. Their weakness is reflected in the fact that when asked for visible evidence of support within Iraq, they can point only to graffiti in Baghdad in support of the Iraqi National Congress.But in half a dozen interviews this week, opposition leaders from several groups spoke with near unanimity in saying that an American-led military action would be ineffective unless it was backed up by a strategy intended to raise their stature.''If a strike is to be meaningful at all, the United States has to knock out the legs on which the regime is resting and create a security vacuum that we can use to move in,'' said Akram al-Hakim, a member of Iraqi National Congress who represents the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a Shiite Muslim group based in Teheran and supported by the Iranian Government.And Burgham Kazem, a member of the political council of the Iraqi National Accord, said in a telephone interview from Jordan: ''My opinion is that the removal of this vicious dictatorship in Iraq is the solution. I cannot conduct American policy; maybe we'll have an air strike now, maybe not. But unless we get rid of him, there is no other answer.''