https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/07/us/gov-rick-perry-of-texas-faces-judge-in-court-.html
Perry Faces Texas Court on Abuse of Power Charges - The New York Times
Ethics and Official Misconduct,Perry  Rick,Texas,Richardson  Bert
Nov. 6, 2014
3522
AUSTIN, Tex. —  Facing abuse of power charges, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas made his first appearance before a state judge on Thursday, sitting stoically as his lawyers assailed the case against him as a “comedy of errors.”Governor Perry, who is considering a second run for president in 2016, entered the courtroom through a rear door with two security guards. He appeared relaxed, rocking in his chair or sipping water from a foam cup as his lawyers urged the judge to throw out the indictment. Reporters crowded the seats behind him in the seventh-floor courtroom.The governor’s demeanor was more subdued than three months ago, when his visit to the justice center to be booked and photographed resembled a campaign rally. Back then, he walked through a crowd of sign-waving supporters, smiling and waving before making a strongly worded speech against the indictment.Thursday’s two-hour hearing was confined to a narrow issue and ended without a ruling by Judge Bert Richardson. Afterward, Governor Perry appeared before reporters to again defend his attempts to pressure the district attorney here, Rosemary Lehmberg, to step down by threatening to cut off state financing to her office. Ms. Lehmberg had been arrested on a charge of drunken driving.A Travis County grand jury indicted Governor Perry on Aug. 15, claiming that the threat was an abuse of power. Ms. Lehmberg refused to leave office, and the governor carried out his threat, vetoing $7.5 million in funding to the public integrity unit of the Travis County district attorney’s office. “As governor, I took an oath to faithfully uphold the Constitution of Texas, a pledge that I have kept every day on behalf of the Texans I have worked for the last 14 years,” Governor Perry said Thursday. “I stand behind that veto and would make that veto again.”Responding to questions, Governor Perry suggested that he would be willing to make future appearances, as required, and said his legal battle is not interfering with his duties as the state’s chief executive.“We multitask rather well, as I have for lots of years,” he said. “I’m going to follow it,” he said, referring to his legal requirements, and said the matter was not “deflecting me from doing my duties as governor.” Mr. Perry, the state’s longest-serving governor, will leave office in January, giving way to Greg Abbott, the Republican attorney general who easily defeated State Senator Wendy Davis on Tuesday.During the hearing before Judge Richardson, Governor Perry’s lawyers sought to dismiss the case by contending that Michael McCrum, a San Antonio lawyer, was improperly sworn in as special prosecutor. Mr. McCrum called the assertions a “nonissue,” countering that he followed correct procedures when he was sworn in by Judge Richardson in mid-August.“This whole proceeding and the whole way this came about is a comedy of errors,” said the lead defense lawyer, Tony Buzbee, “but it’s not funny at all.”Mr. Buzbee suggested that the Republican governor was being singled out by Democratic county officials. He seized on testimony from Linda Estrada, a senior employee in the Travis County district clerk’s office, who said the felony cases of Mr. Perry and of the former House majority leader Tom DeLay were the only ones given special case numbers during her 16 years in the clerk’s office. Mr. DeLay’s indictment and conviction were later overturned.Ms. Estrada said the numbers were essentially a tool to handle a heavy volume of court filings in the high-profile cases, but Mr. Buzbee suggested the possibility of improper treatment. Mr. McCrum said later that “this allegation of a conspiracy is the biggest red herring I have ever seen.”Judge Richardson said he expected to rule next week.