https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/05/us/in-close-knit-oregon-community-few-are-untouched-by-college-killings.html
In Close-Knit Oregon Community, Few Are Untouched by College Killings - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Colleges and Universities,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Religion and Belief,Funerals and Memorials,Roseburg (Ore),Umpqua Community College
Oct. 4, 2015
2470
ROSEBURG, Ore. —  One by one, the congregants of the Liberty Christian Fellowship took the microphone on Sunday, steadied their breaths and told stories of how a gunman’s rampage inside the community college here rippled through their lives.Dan Silvaz, his voice shaking, recalled how his daughter Daniela had frantically called from just outside Snyder Hall to say she heard gunshots and did not know where to go. Run and hide and pray, he told her. A bus driver named Steve Kekes remembered dropping off one of the victims, Sarena Dawn Moore, on campus that morning. And Jaime Standley, a college student, cried as she remembered a spray of gunfire erupting from next door, and how her classmate Chris Mintz rushed to bar the door.“We’re too small, we’re too close,” said Dale Dickson, the pastor here, as he stood in front of a “Pray for Roseburg” banner. “We know everybody. We have a connection.”It is a cliché of small towns that everybody knows everybody. But in the wake of a shooting that killed nine people on the campus of Umpqua Community College on Thursday, nearly every person in this close-knit lumber town of 22,000 in the shadow of the Cascade mountains in western Oregon seems to know a victim or is related to someone who fled from gunfire that day. Everyone, it seems, has a terrible, personal story to tell.A fire chief, detailing the response at a news conference, said that one of his fellow firefighters had lost a niece and that another, Justin Anspach, had lost his son Treven. Another local pastor has described how his daughter, who survived, was in the writing class when the gunman shot his way in and ordered the students to crawl to the middle of the room. Waiters and hairstylists, librarians and hotel clerks offer similar refrains: I know somebody who was there.In this rural, economically struggling corner of the state, where an illuminated cross overlooks the city, many turned to their faith to come to grips with an act that confounded explanation.Across Roseburg, signs outside taco stands and car dealerships, drive-throughs and coffee stands now say: Pray for the victims. Pray for Roseburg. Please pray for all at U.C.C., the local shorthand for Umpqua Community College.And on Sunday, as families of the dead prepared for the first funerals and memorial services, people gathered at churches around town and joined in a communion of grief.“We kept on hearing shooting after shooting,” Ms. Standley told the congregants at Liberty Christian, a sea-blue church situated in an old bus repair garage. “I can’t sleep at night. I can just hear it over and over.”Last week, First Presbyterian Church downtown tacked a sign to the front door, saying the church was open for meditation and prayer. There, parishioners consoled one another and a teacher from the community college played music on the Reuter pipe organ. On Saturday, in nearby Winston, hundreds gathered to listen to a Christian concert and prayer service.At services in the area, pastors and congregants talked about faith and light, hope and healing. But they did so without uttering the name of the 26-year-old gunman, who had also been a student at the college — one whose rampage stirred conversations about evil. At Foundation Fellowship, a nondenominational ministry here, Pastor Randy Webb told the 50 parishioners scattered in the pews that the shooting was a reminder that “Satan is alive.”“It’s really hard to tell your son that it’s not going to be O.K. — because it’s not,” said Cherie Cox, a Sunday worshiper at Liberty Christian whose son is a student at the college but was not on campus during the shooting. “Evil can come wherever you are.”Investigators have said the gunman, Christopher Harper-Mercer, appeared to have an animus toward organized religion, and some witnesses have said he interrogated his victims about their faith before shooting them. But worshipers did not seem to dwell on this aspect of the crime.The Rev. Del McAmis, a retired pastor who is a parishioner of First Presbyterian Church, gave the homily at the Sunday morning services there and said many of the people he encountered at the vigil Thursday night for victims had questioned how God could allow such a tragedy to happen in their community. The problem, he explained, was that they had a romanticized version of God, whom they expected to make them happy, content, even prosperous.“The problem was not God, but the view of God in their minds,” he said. “Folks like that are going to struggle when life throws something like this in their path.”Will Irwin, a chaplain to firefighters from Mr. Anspach’s unit, said he had spent the past days sitting with them as they cried and went through memories of that day. Everywhere he goes in Roseburg, he said, he runs into people touched by the violence. When he went to dinner at the Red Robin on Friday night, he learned his waitress had just pulled into the college parking lot when reports of the shooting erupted.Downtown, at the Bagel Tree Cafe, a group of longtime residents gathered on Saturday to talk, like so many others at the tables that morning. Many of their children had attended the community college, as had so many other young people and adults seeking new careers and new beginnings. They said it was a crucial resource for a county with 8.1 percent unemployment.“The college is a saving grace,” said Marilyn Woodrich, 90, a former librarian. “It is the cultural center of the community.”Lois Allen, 84, a former mayor of Roseburg, said she had gone out to dinner on Friday with friends. “Our waiters are kids,” she said. “One looked sad, and I asked her, ‘What’s the matter?’ She said, ‘I know someone who died in the shooting.’ ”Everyone at the table fell silent. “What do you say to that?” Ms. Allen asked.TyeAnn Foltin, a hair and nail stylist in the nearby town of Winchester, said a friend of hers was in the classroom when Mr. Harper-Mercer burst in. She hid, in shock. Ms. Foltin also knew a client’s cousin who had been killed.“Everybody knows everybody here,” she said. “We’ve all grown up here, and people stay or else come back. Everyone knows someone. It’s just whether it’s an immediate family member or a distant friend.”The interconnectedness of the community was also on display during the horrific event itself. Shelly Prater, 52, a program coordinator at the community college, said that as she was hiding in a nearby building during the shooting, she and her colleagues used scanner apps on their cellphones — which monitor communications among the police and other emergency personnel — to relay information to others at the school about what was going on.“It got the word out quicker, and if you know anything about small communities, word travels fast,” Ms. Prater said.Last week more than 300 people showed up at Mercy Medical Center to donate blood after hearing about the shooting, said Dr. Jason Gray, the hospital’s chief medical officer. Local doctors canceled office hours and rushed to the hospital to help. Some, Dr. Gray said, were quickly dispatched to the operating room.An Olive Garden restaurant, too, sent meals while residents delivered bagels and coffee. One man even picked flowers from a nearby field and brought them to the hospital, Dr. Gray said.“ ‘United’ would be the word” to describe the community’s response, Ms. Foltin said. “It’s just giving extra smiles and hugs. No words can help, just prayer.”That theme resonated with the congregants at Liberty Christian on Sunday, as they hugged and wiped tears from their eyes, clasped hands and lifted their faces. Mr. Silvaz, whose daughter Daniela fled the gunfire in Snyder Hall, said he and his wife, Tammy, had always been overprotective parents. When the children were small, they did not even let them go out for sleepovers.”The one time we’ve let them go and be vulnerable is the one time ...,” Mr. Silvaz said, and his voice trailed off.