https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/world/europe/trump-poland-law-justice-party.html
Trump Hails Poland as a Beacon of Freedom. Rights Groups Beg to Differ. - The New York Times
vis-multimedia,Poland,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Law and Justice (Poland),Trump  Donald J
July 6, 2017
5491
President Trump praised Poland’s democratic values in a speech on Thursday and lauded the country as a beacon.“I am here today not just to visit an old ally, but to hold it up as an example for others who seek freedom,” Mr. Trump told a crowd in Warsaw.Not everyone agrees. Since Poland’s conservative Law and Justice Party came to power in 2015, the country has been criticized by international organizations over measures that they say undermine freedom. Here are some of their concerns:Shortly after the Law and Justice Party assumed power, it took several steps to gain more control over the nation’s Constitutional Tribunal. It appointed more judges aligned with the party to the court, limited the court’s ability to overturn new laws and made it possible for the government to appoint the country’s top prosecutor directly.The European Union’s executive arm has begun an inquiry into the judicial measures over concerns that they violate the bloc’s rules.The new government moved swiftly in 2015 to replace the management at state-run television and radio outlets, and it then passed a law giving itself direct control over the hiring and firing of executives of state news media.More recently, it has discussed plans to restrict foreign investment in privately run Polish media companies and “repolonize” the industry.“The Polish government’s attacks on the media are attacks on liberal democracy,” said Michael J. Abramowitz, the president of Freedom House, an organization that monitors press freedom around the world. The group said that legislative, political and economic means were all being used to “stifle the media and limit dissent.”The government has come under fire for legislation aimed at women, especially a 2016 bill to ban nearly all abortions in the country. The bill failed after thousands of people protested in 90 Polish cities.Last month, the government passed a bill requiring a prescription for the morning-after pill for emergency contraception, which had been available over the counter to any woman over the age of 15. The health minister cited concerns about harmful health effects, even though the World Health Organization says the pill poses little to no risk.“Restricting access to the ‘morning-after pill’ will have devastating consequences for women and girls living in a country which already has some of the most restrictive abortion laws in Europe,” Anna Blus of Amnesty International said in a statement.