https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/nyregion/soha-in-harlem-the-misguided-madness-of-neighborhood-rebranding.html
SoHa in Harlem? The Misguided Madness of Neighborhood Rebranding - The New York Times
Harlem (Manhattan  NY),Blacks,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Politics and Government,New York City
July 6, 2017
1430
During any other summer, one in which the news didn’t ricochet from presidential wrestling videos to threats of nuclear annihilation at the hands of North Korea to the mysterious arrival of Mesopotamian cuneiform tablets into the treasure chests of people who make scrapbooking easier somewhere in Oklahoma, ordinary citizens might have produced a louder collective tirade over the attempts of real-estate interests to obscure the racial history of one of the most iconic urban neighborhoods in the world. Over the past several months, the industry has been working to designate a section of Harlem, roughly spanning West 110th Street to West 125th Street, as SoHa, an acronym that has been used more casually before. Imagine the creative manpower, the whiteboards and worn-out felt-tip markers it must have required to come up with that.Real-estate developers and their marketing divisions have, of course, a longstanding tradition of manufacturing or misguidedly reinventing neighborhoods and giving them ludicrous names. At one point there was an effort underway to reconsider the area around the Brooklyn Academy of Music in Fort Greene as Bamcudi (standing in for the Brooklyn Academy of Music Cultural District). This presumably would have tricked tourists with no yearning for “Titus Andronicus” or Pina Bausch into believing they were going somewhere with hot-air balloon rides and rum smoothies.In a more notorious example, two years ago, Keith Rubenstein, occupant of an $85 million Upper East Side townhouse with a billiard room covered in Hermès leather, decided that a section of the South Bronx, where he had luxury towers planned, needed to be rebranded as the piano district. Pianos were manufactured there in the early 1900s, and young, aspiring tech executives were unlikely to be drawn, on their own, to a neighborhood with a 40 percent poverty rate. A Halloween party in 2015 to christen the new landscape featured, in addition to supermodels and other variants of Manhattan celebrity, burning trash cans and a display of bullet-ridden cars, to evoke the horror of the area in the 1970s and repackage it as a means of consumer titillation.With rare exception, gentrification proceeds in the modern era either by exploiting the past (often tastelessly) or obliterating it. In his new book, “Race, Class and Politics in the Cappuccino City,” Derek S. Hyra, an associate professor at American University, tracks the evolution of Washington’s Shaw/U neighborhood as a place that fell victim to what he calls “black branding.” This, for the most part, is the developer’s practice of using black history to attract young, affluent renters who want to think of themselves as living a groovier, grittier existence than fate has allotted them. Over the years, the neighborhood went from one that held a black majority to one that didn’t.Has a breaking point in our tolerance for all of this manipulation been reached? The effort to rename a part of Harlem, so closely associated with a glory period in the history of American arts and letters, has met with a robust measure of political resistance. Late last month, Representative Adriano Espaillat, a Democrat, who represents the 13th Congressional District, held a news conference outside the Apollo Theater to assail the efforts at erasure. “Harlem is about an attitude, a personality, a legacy,” he said more recently. “It is the capital of the African diaspora in the world.”Fearing further incursions, he introduced a resolution in Congress that would, as he put it, “keep Harlem Harlem.’’ It would codify and enshrine the name. “We want Google maps or some app that gives you directions to let you know when you enter Harlem, to give you a message that says, ‘You’re in Harlem,’” Mr. Espaillat said. “We want you to be able to get off the F.D.R. and get a message that says, ‘Welcome to Harlem.’” Whatever may come of this action, it stands at least as a meaningful act of protest against an industry that has been given too much power over the character and configuration of neighborhoods populated by minorities.In the New York Legislature, a newly elected senator, Brian Benjamin, has sponsored a bill that would introduce a formal protocol for renaming a New York City neighborhood, which would involve the mayor’s office, the City Council and community boards. Beyond that, it would inflict penalties on real estate brokers who advertised a property in a neighborhood that was essentially a fiction. The language of the resolution takes issue with the reclassification of parts of the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn as ProCro, a name that leaves the area sounding like an appliance, and the transition of parts of Sunset Park, also in Brooklyn, to Greenwood Heights. This switch is meant to capitalize on the presence of Green-Wood Cemetery. “In other words,” the bill reads, “some realtors have concluded that it is more desirable to rename a neighborhood after the dead than associate it with those who have been living in that community for decades.”