https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/us/politics/white-house-spurns-waldorf-astoria-out-of-security-concerns.html
Obama Won’t Stay at Waldorf Astoria for U.N. Event; Security Concerns Are Cited - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts,China,United Nations,International Relations,Beijing (China)
Sept. 11, 2015
7589
WASHINGTON —  With Chinese spies rummaging through White House emails, President Obama has decided not to risk making their spying any easier: He will break with tradition and abandon the Waldorf Astoria, which was bought last year by Chinese investors with deep ties to Beijing’s ruling elite, when he attends the United Nations General Assembly next week.Mr. Obama and other officials will instead take up residence a few blocks away at the Lotte New York Palace, whose owners are South Korean. The White House and the State Department, while vague about the reasons for the change, cited several factors, including security concerns.Why else “would you not stay at the Waldorf?” said a senior State Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to talk openly about the new arrangements. “Who would make that choice for any other reason?”The hotel’s owner, the Anbang Insurance Group, may not be a household name in China or the United States, but it is highly connected in China. Its chairman is the husband of the granddaughter of Deng Xiaoping, who was China’s leader from 1978 to 1992. Its board of directors includes Chen Xiaolu, a former officer in the People’s Liberation Army who is the son of Marshal Chen Yi, a revolutionary military commander who later served as foreign minister.Anbang’s deal to buy the hotel called for a major renovation, raising concerns in Washington about whether it would remain a secure location for official functions, despite the fact that its previous owner, Hilton Worldwide, agreed to manage the hotel for the next 100 years. Frustration has risen in Washington over hacking attacks on government databases and email servers that officials have linked to China, including a breach that exposed the personal data of millions of federal workers.While officials have not specified what they fear could come of the renovation, which has not yet begun, hotels have long represented a weak link in security for traveling officials and others. When the president stays in hotels, his security detail sets up a structure that a former government official described as “something like a minisubmarine,” but no setup can be entirely secure.The Lotte New York Palace, like the Waldorf Astoria, is a luxury hotel on the East Side of Manhattan, but the similarities end there.For decades, the president and hundreds of other American officials have descended on the Waldorf each September for the General Assembly, securing whole floors for meetings. The Waldorf is among the world’s best known hotels, and its guests regularly include celebrities and world leaders. Every Chinese leader has stayed there since Mr. Deng first visited the United States in 1974.An apartment on the 42nd floor of the hotel’s Waldorf Towers has served as the official residence of the United States ambassador to the United Nations for more than 50 years.Apart from its guest register, the Waldorf is known for its lavish décor. Its artwork, crystal chandeliers and gold doorknobs prompted President Herbert Hoover to declare the Waldorf’s opening as “an event in the advancement of hotels, even in New York City.”That was in 1931, when the hotel was owned by the Astor family. It eventually ended up in the hands of Hilton Worldwide, which last year sold it for $1.95 billion to Anbang.The State Department has not yet said whether it will renew its lease on the ambassador’s residence, which expires this year.But good enough for an ambassador does not necessarily mean the hotel is up to presidential standards. When Mr. Obama and his family visited New York in July, they stayed elsewhere.“Obviously, there are a range of considerations that influence where the president will stay when he’s not at the White House,” Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, told reporters on Friday. “Those considerations include everything from available space to cost and to security.”Pressed on whether the General Assembly decision was primarily driven by security concerns, Mr. Earnest said: “At this point, I’m not at liberty to detail the security considerations that may or may not have factored into this particular decision.”