https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/24/opinion/how-venezuela-can-avoid-suspension-from-the-oas.html
How Venezuela Can Avoid Suspension From the O.A.S. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
March 24, 2017
3998
WASHINGTON — Latin American and Caribbean nations have been plagued by dictatorships throughout history. To prevent autocratic regimes from ever establishing themselves again, in 2001 the 34 countries of the Organization of American States signed the Inter-American Democratic Charter, by which they agreed that democracy is a right of the people, one that governments must guarantee.But today, Venezuela, a South American country of more than 30 million people, finds itself in the old, familiar predicament.That is why on March 14, I called for  fair and free elections, as a way to avoid suspension of Venezuela from the O.A.S., in keeping with the Inter-American Democratic Charter. And I urge O.A.S. members to join me.The Venezuelan government suspended the recall referendum for President Nicolás Maduro last October and also the 2016 elections for state governors, thus revoking its citizens’ electoral rights in violation of its Constitution. The opposition won control of the National Assembly in 2015, but the Supreme Court, controlled by the executive branch, has stripped Parliament of its powers. In the last three years, thousands of Venezuelans have been detained because of their ideas, more than 100 people (among them a prominent opposition leader) remain imprisoned in harrowing conditions, and state security forces reserve the right to arbitrarily detain and torture people at will.President Maduro’s government is an inefficient and corrupt authoritarian regime. There are serious food shortages, the sick have no access to medicine, inflation stands at 700 percent per year and the country has one of the highest homicide rates in the world. While Venezuela’s population shoulders this burden, public funds lost through the corruption of the ruling class are estimated at $300 billion, and government echelons are increasingly intertwined with drug trafficking.We can’t continue to look the other way. The O.A.S. member countries must assert their commitment to democracy.I call on Maduro’s government to hold transparent and equitable presidential elections to avoid suspension from the O.A.S. All prisoners should be released, fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed and functioning humanitarian aid channels established. Restoring the basic rights of the people is crucial to allowing Venezuela to stay within the hemisphere’s group of democratic nations.The Inter-American Democratic Charter outlines two measures we can use as a recourse to action: Articles 20 and 21. Article 20 states that if there is an alteration of the constitutional order that seriously undermines democracy in a member country, diplomatic initiatives can be undertaken, including mediation efforts.From 2014 to date, the Union of South American Nations, the O.A.S., the Common Market of the South (Mercosur), the Vatican and the State Department of the United States, among others, have endeavored to establish a constructive dialogue with the Venezuelan government, without success. In part, this has been because the government’s aim has been to create the illusion of a dialogue without making any real commitment to it.Those efforts have failed, so what can be done? How much longer must the people of Venezuela continue suffering from oppression and deprivation?If Venezuela does not return to a democratic path within a month, it should be suspended from the O.A.S., as allowed for in Article 21. The 33 countries of the region must show unity and take a stand in defense of a democracy under attack. The general secretariat and member countries have been meeting this week to coordinate actions toward that end.In accordance with the Inter-American Democratic Charter, when a country’s membership is suspended — the last instance was Honduras, in 2009 — it loses “its right to participate in the O.A.S.” When a country is excluded from the democratic nations of the Americas, that sends clear political, economic and commercial signals to the international community and major economic players at a critical moment: Regimen non gratum.If Mr. Maduro’s government wants to avoid the potential dire consequences of a suspension, it must make a true commitment to democracy and take clear steps toward re-establishing it.I believe, as does anyone who has faith in democracy in the hemisphere, that demanding this is our moral obligation.But let’s be clear: We are not against dialogue. We are against the failure of dialogue.Suspension is the last resource to be found in our regulatory framework for pressuring Venezuela’s present government, faced with isolation and a loss of legitimacy, to call presidential elections that will return democracy, freedom and prosperity to the country.