http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/21/us/tulsa-sheriff-apologizes-to-family-of-man-killed-by-volunteer.html
Tulsa Sheriff Defends Volunteer Deputy in Shooting - The New York Times
Bates  Robert Charles (1941- ),Harris  Eric Courtney (d 2015),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Apologies,Tulsa (Okla),Glanz  Stanley (1942- )
April 20, 2015
4662
An Oklahoma sheriff expressed condolences Monday to the family of an unarmed man who was shot and killed by a volunteer reserve deputy, but continued to defend the reserve program and his department generally.The sheriff’s office in Tulsa County, Okla., has drawn national attention since the April 2 shooting of Eric C. Harris, 44, was captured on video. Deputies arrested Mr. Harris in connection with an illegal gun sale and had pinned him to the ground when Robert C. Bates, a 73-year-old volunteer and longtime friend of the sheriff, fired the fatal shot, apparently mistaking his pistol for a Taser.Mr. Bates now faces a charge of second-degree manslaughter.“I want to speak directly to the Harris family,” the sheriff, Stanley Glanz, said Monday at a news conference. “We are sorry Eric was taken from you. I am sorry we were involved, and my sympathy goes out to that family.”Referring to the manslaughter prosecution, he said, “I agree with what the district attorney has done.”But when asked whether Mr. Bates should have been a reserve deputy, the sheriff said, “Yes, he should have been,” and called the reserve program vital to the office. He repeatedly said that the shooting did not point to any broader problem in the sheriff’s office.Mr. Bates, a reserve deputy since 2008, apologized to the Harris family, in an appearance Friday on the “Today” show.On Monday, Sheriff Glanz played down perhaps the most damaging claim made since the shooting, that his agency falsified training records to show that Mr. Bates was qualified for law enforcement work. The sheriff said his office was not looking into that claim, suggesting that there would have been no point in falsifying any records.“I could have waived all of those requirements if I felt like it,” he said. “I’ve waived a lot of reserves that come over that have been in other law enforcement agencies.”Mr. Bates was a police officer for a short time more than 50 years ago, and his lawyer has said that he served as a reserve deputy while living in Florida.Sheriff Glanz said that the Oklahoma office of the F.B.I. had looked into the case and found no wrongdoing by the department, but if the sheriff’s statement was correct, it was not clear whether the F.B.I. inquiry was limited to the shooting itself or included the claim of falsified records.The F.B.I. said Monday that it had concluded that a civil rights investigation into the death was not warranted “at this time,” The Associated Press reported.The sheriff’s office has 128 volunteer reserve deputies who are allowed to carry firearms, and Sheriff Glanz described them as essential to keeping the force at full strength. Hundreds of law enforcement agencies around the country have such reserve or auxiliary forces.Mr. Bates was in the highest of three tiers of reserve deputies within the sheriff’s office, a position requiring more hours of training than lower levels, meaning that he could perform nearly all the duties of a full-time deputy, including making arrests. He was one of several deputies who formed a backup force for the undercover operation that snared Mr. Harris.Members of the Harris family and their lawyer, Daniel Smolen, have criticized the way deputies treated Mr. Harris after he was shot; deputies yelled at him to stop complaining and did not immediately make any attempt to get his wounds treated. Some deputies have said they did not immediately realize that he had been shot.Sheriff Glanz said two deputies had been reassigned. He said that there would be an administrative review of their performance and the case as a whole, but that it would have to wait until after the deputies served as witnesses in the criminal case against Mr. Bates. In addition, he said, “We’re trying to decide how to do that, whether we ought to bring in outside law enforcement.”The sheriff’s office said that Mr. Bates had extensive training over the last eight years, but it has been unable to produce most of the records, and Sheriff Glanz said the agency was still searching for them.On Saturday, Mr. Bates’s lawyer released some records his client had kept, which the department may not have, and disputed claims that those records or any others had been falsified.Mr. Bates, a wealthy insurance executive, has donated several vehicles and other equipment to the office. Sheriff Glanz partly confirmed reports that he had taken a trip to the Bahamas with Mr. Bates at his friend’s expense.“Part of it’s true, yes, but I paid for part of it, too,” the sheriff said Monday. “The under sheriff was there, along with another reserve deputy.”He added, “It didn’t have any influence on me.”