https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/arts/television/twin-peaks-showtime-david-lynch-interview.html
How ‘Twin Peaks’ Got Lost, and Found Its Way Back - The New York Times
Television,Lynch  David,MacLachlan  Kyle,Twin Peaks (TV Program)
May 17, 2017
7119
At the start of the second season of “Twin Peaks,” David Lynch and Mark Frost’s feverish, paranoid murder mystery, a man’s hair goes white overnight.Granted, this man, Leland Palmer, has had a rough time of it lately: He can’t stop singing songs from 1950s musicals; his teenage daughter, Laura, was raped, murdered and found washed up on a river bank; his wife is stricken with visions of a greasy, feral man hiding behind their furniture.Such swings between absurdity and horror turned “Twin Peaks” into an instant hit for ABC in an otherwise milquetoast prime-time landscape. In 1990, there was little precedent for a series that probed so graphically and enigmatically into the darkest corners of the American psyche. By bringing an auteur like Mr. Lynch, a best-director Oscar nominee for “Blue Velvet” (1986), into the world of serials, the network ultimately seeded a revolution: The show used the devices of popular television to subvert it.[ Welcome Back to Twin Peaks: An Illustrated Glossary ]Its early episodes became appointment television before the Binge Age, but once its quintessential problem was solved — “Who killed Laura Palmer?” — the series got bogged down in a web of increasingly esoteric plotlines (deep space monitoring, for one). “It got very stupid and goofy in the second season; it got ridiculous,” Mr. Lynch said in a phone interview, explaining that he was not involved with the show after Laura’s killer was revealed in the second season. “I stopped watching that show because it got so bad.”Now, more than a quarter of a century later, it’s back. Starting Sunday, May 21, a new, 18-hour chapter of “Twin Peaks” will begin on Showtime, this time with only Mr. Lynch in the director’s seat and much of the original cast returning.Production for the revival, which took eight months, has been tightly wrapped, but Mr. Lynch described it as “exactly like a feature film.” Most of the cast members interviewed for this article said they received scripts for only their scenes and were forbidden to discuss their roles with journalists (or one another).Without a peg to hang expectations on, the world of “Twin Peaks” in 2017 is, for Showtime, a gamble. The television world it paved the way for has evolved profoundly — not only have the show’s offspring raised viewers’ expectations, but connecting with deluged audiences has also become exponentially harder in the era of Peak TV.“I can’t wait to see what ‘Twin Peaks’ is like in a social media universe, because quite honestly, I sort of remember it as if it was a social media phenomenon,” said Gary Levine, the president for programming at Showtime, who was the vice president for drama development at ABC when the show first aired. “It sort of felt like it was viral in some way back then.”When the two-hour “Twin Peaks” pilot debuted on April 8, 1990, it garnered nearly 35 million viewers, becoming the highest-rated TV movie for that season and drawing critical praise in a prime-time era full of histrionic soaps (“Dallas” and “Knots Landing”) and sitcoms (“Cheers,” the show’s main competition when it started running on Thursdays; “The Golden Girls”; and “Night Court”). Centered on the murder of a homecoming queen, the first season’s eight episodes introduced viewers to a small town plagued by secrets and a charismatic F.B.I. agent (played by Kyle MacLachlan) obsessed with food. And it put ABC into an enviable position, having taken a wild swing from third place among the main networks.“The luxury of third place is, you become much more adventurous,” said Mr. Levine, who took the original pitch from Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost. “We were telling the community, bring us original ideas, bring us filmmakers, let’s be ambitious.”That ambition came in the form of a handwritten illustration board for a show originally titled “Northwest Passage,” on which Mr. Lynch and Mr. Frost outlined the web of connections between characters that was part of the show’s narcotic appeal.The first season didn’t resolve the murder but ended with a huge tease, as Mr. MacLachlan’s Agent Cooper was shot by an unknown assailant. A 22-episode second season (ordered a month after the first season began) opened with a riddle-spouting giant from another dimension and an octogenarian room-service waiter lecturing Agent Cooper about milk’s optimal drinking temperature. The show’s creators were using their initial success to stretch out creatively — but ABC was impatient to solve the mystery of Laura Palmer’s murder.“The show just was a little too offbeat for the taste of some of these executives,” said Mr. Frost, adding that his impression was “that it seemed to disturb them a little bit.”Mr. Lynch, who directed the episode in which Laura’s killer was revealed, said it was not his choice to have done so that early (seven episodes into the second season.)“I always say, if you had a little goose that laid golden eggs, why in the world would you kill that little goose?” Mr. Lynch said.With Mr. Lynch not involved, Mr. Frost had to fill 15 more episodes without the show’s original premise. The plot lines that emerged did not endear fans or attract new viewers: Benjamin Horne, the town’s property mogul, had a nervous breakdown and started compulsively eating carrots; a 35-year-old woman with amnesia turned into a high school men’s wrestling champion; an endangered weasel became fodder for corporate subterfuge. By Episode 15, the show was rated 85th out of 89 shows.“It was a tough task to try to engineer something that would be as compelling as the Laura case virtually overnight, and also on the fly,” Mr. Frost said.Mr. Lynch returned to direct the finale — “I wanted to be the one to finish it” — and drastically rewrote the script. The result left the series in various states of limbo, with narrative opportunities that could have been fleshed out in a third season: Agent Cooper’s trip into another dimension resulted in bloodshed; Mr. Horne was possibly killed; an Air Force deep-space research project may have been compromised. And a puzzling promise was made from one character to another that a reunion would occur in 25 years.“That episode was going to be the basis of our argument for whether we were going to come back or not,” Mr. Frost said. “As was the structuring of all the cliffhangers that we included in the story to try to induce them to say, well you know, people are going to want answers to all these things.”ABC was not interested. Mr. Lynch got another shot in the 1992 film prequel “Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me.” Ultimately, for fans and those involved in the show, there was an absence of closure.“It burned so bright, so fast,” said Mr. Levine, whose role developing shows for ABC meant that once “Twin Peaks” took off, he was no longer closely involved. “That unique balance of eccentricity and inspiration and absurdity and drama and mystery and emotion — a very delicate balance to maintain.”Mr. MacLachlan occasionally raised the subject of returning to “Twin Peaks” with Mr. Lynch over the past two decades. “I thought we were kind of wrenched out of, what was, from my point of view, an exciting journey to go on,” he said. “We’re friends, we live close together, we visit all the time — we would occasionally discuss it, just as we would reminisce: ‘I wonder if we’ll ever, you know, do that.’ And he was like, ‘Ehhhh.’”In 2012, Mr. Frost reached out to Mr. Lynch. Conversations between the two creators about returning to “Twin Peaks” had been sporadic. But a satisfying entry back into the narrative had eluded them — a purely nostalgic route was not appealing. A DVD release of the show in 2007 rekindled public interest, and Mr. Frost’s creative wheels turned again.“To come back for real, we needed to have a compelling storytelling reason to do it,” Mr. Frost said. “I felt I’d found a couple of threads that I thought could carry us into a third season.”David Nevins, the president and chief executive of Showtime, said he pursued “Twin Peaks” after hearing that Mr. Lynch was thinking of returning to the series. After an initial stop-and-start — Mr. Lynch indicated in 2015 that he would not resume the series because of a dispute over his contract (reportedly related to DVD and streaming revenue) — a deal was reached for 18 hours of new material, a striking departure from the normal rhythm of cable and streaming franchises.“He was not interested in working for three years on something and then dumping it all on a weekend,” Mr. Nevins said. “He designed it to play out over time, and he likes, I think, the marination that happens when you have to sit for six days in between episodes.”Over time, “Twin Peaks” has acquired a certain cachet for ushering the avant-garde into mainstream television, and its DNA — the supernatural, the macabre and the quotidian, filtered through unconventional cinematography and set direction — has gradually found a home on networks and streaming services: “Lost,” “The X-Files,” “Stranger Things” and, most recently, “Riverdale.” Grace Zabriskie, who played Laura Palmer’s mother, Sarah, remembered first watching the pilot and thinking, “‘I hope none of us ever forgets this, because of course, this is the end of it, because no one else is going to get it.’”“And then came the first set of responses,” she continued. “Then the years of the first terribly disappointing imitations, and then some slightly better ones, and then finally in the last years, a bunch of writers who came by it all honestly. They were born into the culture of ‘Twin Peaks,’ of Lynch, of everything that had come from it.”Mädchen Amick, who played Shelly Johnson, the often-battered wife of a man involved in Laura Palmer’s death, found a new lens to view the show: her high-school-aged children.“‘Mom, why didn’t you tell us that you were in the best TV show ever made?’ And it was like, ‘Well, I kind of did, but you just didn’t understand,’” Ms. Amick recalled. “There were moments when they were like: ‘Mom, this is freaky! This is frightening! Like how was this on television?’”The show’s return comes with new faces: Naomi Watts, Laura Dern, Robert Forster, Michael Cera, Jim Belushi, Jennifer Jason Leigh and Sky Ferreira are all attached the project, but their roles have not been publicly revealed. Mr. MacLachlan is the only actor who got a chance to read the entire script in advance (after doing so alone in a room with a “big pot of coffee,” he had to leave the script there).“It’s the million-dollar question: Does he know everything?” Ms. Watts said, referring to Mr. Lynch. “Or is he still sort of open to exploring it in his mind to the point where he might discover something on the day itself?”Sherilyn Fenn, whose character Audrey Horne was last seen chained to a bank vault just before an explosion, said a version of “Twin Peaks” on premium cable is an ideal vehicle for Mr. Lynch.“He gets to make an 18-hour movie; I mean, it’s perfect for David,” Ms. Fenn said. “There was always that box, or that top, that place where you weren’t supposed to go with television.”It’s been 11 years since Mr. Lynch’s last film, “Inland Empire,” but from all accounts, there was no rust behind the camera. Nearly all of the actors interviewed for this article spoke of their trust in his vision, which seems to embrace happy accidents: The nefarious Bob, whose presence in the first two seasons was central to the plot, was created spontaneously when Mr. Lynch spotted Frank Silva, a set dresser, working on one of the first episodes. (Mr. Silva died in 1995; what will become of Bob in the revival is unknown.)“Somehow having him there crystallized in David’s mind what that part of the story would be,” Mr. MacLachlan said. “To trust that in the middle of filming is pretty amazing, when you think about it.”Mr. Lynch is happy to have returned to a world he loves, even if it is one that dipped into rape, incest and murder. But he shrugs off any idea that “Twin Peaks” ever held any deeper meanings for an American culture — that there’s something sinister lurking in those doughnuts.“No, no, no — it’s a regular town, with a mystery, and mysteries within the mystery,” he explained. “It’s a real place, mentally, but it’s not a real place.”