https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/24/dining/campari-like-spirit-aperitivo-leopold-brothers.html
Leopold Brothers Offers a Homegrown Version of Campari - The New York Times
Bakeries and Baked Products,Maialino (Manhattan  NY  Bakery),Cooking and Cookbooks,Patagonia Inc,Raichlen  Steven,Leopold Bros
June 22, 2015
6143
Leopold Brothers, a small-batch distiller in Denver, has done an admirable job of making homegrown versions of classic European spirits like triple sec and maraschino. Now it has taken on Campari. This version, called Aperitivo, opens sweetly (less sweet than the Italian original), then comes across delightfully dry, bitter and citric. Its vibrant color is not artificial, but is from cochineal (insects): Leopold Brothers Aperitivo, $34.99 for 750 milliliters from klwines.com.Patagonia, the outdoor gear company, is slipping into the food business. Patagonia Provisions offers packages of hot-smoked wild sockeye salmon, which is succulent and does not need refrigeration before opening. Designed for camping, the salmon also suits a picnic or beach party. It comes in plain or lemon-pepper flavor: Patagonia Provisions salmon, $12 for six ounces, $48 for 24 ounces in a wooden box, patagoniaprovisions.com.Sriracha, with its fiery bluster, has become a staple in this country. But in the Thai pantry there is another all-purpose go-to: sweet chile sauce, and it has a kinder nature. This one, called Grama’s, delivers subtle heat and can be used as a glaze, marinade or dip. Kris Wattanaporn, who created it from his grandmother’s recipe, works for Taste Nirvana, the California company that is importing the sauce from Thailand. His father is the company’s president: Grama’s Sweet Chilli Sauce, $9.99 for 13 ounces, 909-598-4300, ichaiyo.com. Oiling the grill is an essential step to minimize food sticking. It can be accomplished with a brush, a wad of paper towel or with this gadget designed by Steven Raichlen, a writer and grilling expert. Oil from the reservoir is released with a little pressure into the wide, dimpled silicone surface, which acts like a brush. A shield protects your hand and a little tray catches drips. The plastic and silicone parts can withstand high heat and the dishwasher: Grill Grate Oiler Brush, $19.95, Broadway Panhandler, 866-266-5927, broadwaypanhandler.com. Marina Halpern, a native of Brazil, is opening a bakery she hopes will replicate the friendly neighborhood places she remembers from growing up in São Paulo. Ms. Halpern, far right, has hired Rachel Binder, near right, who was at Maialino, and has put a creative twist on New York standards, with a black-and-white brownie, not a cookie, and a guava-and-cheese babka. There are savory items, too, like empadinhas and Brazilian cheese bread (pão de queijo), all served from a counter in the bright shop, which has a seating area in the back: Padoca, 359 East 68th Street, 212-249-8085, padocabakery.com.A new app, Pearl, is a guide to selecting oysters. It steers you to restaurants serving them in cities including New York, Boston and San Francisco. You can search according to restaurant or oyster type. The app, created by Sam Asher, an entrepreneur, shows menu prices on a daily basis, provides descriptions of many types of oysters and can be used to make restaurant reservations: Pearl is free from the Apple App Store for iOS devices; an Android version is coming this year, pearlapp.co. 