https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/politics/mitch-mcconnell-wins-sixth-term-in-us-senate.html
Mitch McConnell Wins 6th Term in U.S. Senate - The New York Times
Kentucky,Midterm Elections (2014),McConnell  Mitch,Grimes  Alison Lundergan,United States,Elections  Senate,Senate,Congress
Nov. 4, 2014
7773
LOUISVILLE, Ky. —  Mitch McConnell, the taciturn leader of the Senate Republicans who overcame childhood polio and decades of political conflagrations to become the longest-serving senator in Kentucky’s history, cruised to re-election Tuesday.  With his party winning control of the Senate on the same night, he fulfilled his decades-long dream of becoming majority leader.In capturing a sixth term, Mr. McConnell turned back Alison Lundergan Grimes, the Democrat whose campaign as the anti-obstructionist, fueled by the intense passion and giant cash infusions from her party, failed to ever really catch fire.Ninety minutes after the polls closed, Mr. McConnell thanked supporters at a Marriott in Louisville.“I work hard to bring your concerns to Washington, and I will not let up,” he said. Ms. Grimes, he said, “ran a spirited campaign. She earned a lot of votes, and she earned my respect.”Referring to the congressional gridlock that has appalled many Americans and turned them against Washington, Mr. McConnell said, “Just because we have a two-party system doesn’t mean we have to be in perpetual conflict.”Senator Rand Paul was at the victory party to congratulate Mr. McConnell. “Tonight, Kentucky makes it perfectly clear: Mr. President, the war on Kentucky coal must end,” Mr. Paul said.Although Mr. McConnell’s victory seemed all but assured in recent days, he began his campaign last year as one of the most endangered incumbents, entering the race with an approval rating in the state even worse than President Obama’s.Conservative Republicans, suspicious of Mr. McConnell’s long tenure and willingness to work quietly with Democrats, put the senator in their cross hairs and went searching for a primary challenger.Their pick was Matt Bevin, a businessman whose snappy language and toothpaste-commercial smile helped draw large crowds and early excitement within the state’s Republican base.But Mr. McConnell, 72, lived up to his reputation as a seasoned, often brutal campaigner, and he easily won the Republican primary in May.To inoculate himself from the Tea Party attacks, he hired senior campaign staff members from Mr. Paul.Mr. McConnell had been Mr. Paul’s nemesis, but once his re-election campaign began, he quickly changed course and began supporting the junior senator by voting for his bills and giving him good assignments in the Senate.In Mr. McConnell, Democrats saw a different sort of prey, trying to depict him as the face of Republican obstruction in Washington.Democrats were initially animated by the prospect of pitting him against a female candidate at a time when Republicans were being criticized for their treatment of women.But Ms. Grimes also proved her own worst enemy at times, especially when she refused to say whether or not she had voted for Mr. Obama in a state where the president is deeply unpopular.Further, few candidates know every political nook and cranny of their state like Mr. McConnell. “He has taken it very seriously,” said Senator Rob Portman of Ohio, a vice chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. “He has really been involved and engaged with Kentucky politics inside and out, and he is extremely knowledgeable about the state.”No matter the exact balance of the Senate, Mr. McConnell will have to manage difficult political crosscurrents in his conference. No fewer than three Republican senators who have their eye on the White House will be inclined to pull their colleagues to the right to appeal to the conservative voters who form the party’s base.At the same time, more than a half-dozen Republicans will be up for election in blue or purple states, and will be inclined to cling to the center.Mr. McConnell graduated with honors from the University of Louisville, where he served as student body president. As a student leader, he marched for civil rights in 1964 and often took positions early in his political career that were pro-union, at a time when unions had more clout in Kentucky.He worked as both an aide on Capitol Hill and as deputy assistant attorney general to President Gerald R. Ford, before his election to the Senate in 1984. He was the only Republican challenger that year to defeat a Democratic incumbent.He was among the first Senate candidates to clinch victory on Tuesday night, hours ahead of results that gave the Republicans control.But as he stood before cheering supporters here, he alluded to his anticipation of a new Republican majority and himself as its leader.