http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/11/world/the-reach-of-war-conclusions-powell-s-solid-cia-tips-were-soft-committee-says.html
THE REACH OF WAR: CONCLUSIONS; Powell's 'Solid' C.I.A. Tips Were Soft, Committee Says - The New York Times
IRAQ,CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,UNITED NATIONS,POWELL  COLIN L,CURVEBALL,ATOMIC WEAPONS,BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,INTELLIGENCE SERVICES,TERRORISM,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
July 11, 2004
6469
The images of dysfunction were stark. The C.I.A. stubbornly refused to accept contradictory evidence, relied on dubious, sometimes discredited sources, clung protectively to its own conclusions and reigned over the country's intelligence operations with an almost haughty sense of infallibility -- all this, even as it repeatedly failed to assess accurately crucial evidence on Iraq's unconventional weapons, the Senate Intelligence Committee reported Friday.On the most significant issues the C.I.A. investigated, like whether Saddam Hussein had mobile biologicial-weapons laboratories, tried to buy special aluminum tubes for nuclear weapons or planned to develop drone aircraft to attack the United States, the agency's analysis proved wrong. Its flaws were exposed sometimes after what the report indicated was a cursory examination of the information or sources on which the conclusions were based.Among the most vivid examples was the issue of whether Iraq had mobile bioweapons labs, an issue that set off a debate in February 2003 when Secretary of State Colin L. Powell addressed the United Nations Security Council. One day before Mr. Powell's speech laying out the reasons to invade Iraq, a Defense Department analyst warned the agency against relying on some of the most significant informants, like an Iraqi defector code named Curveball, whom Mr. Powell planned to cite.''I went through the speech,'' an unidentified military intelligence officer, an expert in biological warfare, later told the Senate Intelligence Committee, which quoted him in its report, ''and I thought, my gosh, we have got -- I have got to go on record and make my concerns known.''But the deputy chief of the agency's Iraqi Task Force, who said ''we can hash this out in a quick meeting,'' rejected the worries as irrelevant. ''Let's keep in mind the fact that this war's going to happen regardless of what Curveball said or didn't say, and that the Powers That Be probably aren't terribly interested in whether Curveball knows what he's talking about,'' the deputy chief wrote in an e-mail message obtained by the committee.The episode goes to the heart of flawed procedures that the committee concluded had seriously undermined the agency's broad prewar analysis of Iraq's unconventional weapons. The panel found that the agency was unwilling to consider information that contradicted its expectations, dismissed information from other agencies, and shielded its sources from anyone who might challenge their credibility.But the expert who read Mr. Powell's speech had reason to be concerned. He was the only American intelligence official before the war who had met Curveball, a crucial source of reports about a suspected Iraqi program to house mobile weapons labs in trailers. Information from Curveball and three other informants had given Mr. Powell one of the most provocative pieces of evidence in his far-reaching presentation at the United Nations.The biowar expert said he doubted Curveball's credibility. The one time they met, the informant had turned up with ''a terrible hangover,'' enough to raise suspicions. Intelligence officials were not even sure of Curveball's true identity, he added.Mr. Powell heard none of these doubts during the several evenings he spent reviewing the evidence for his speech. In an interview last summer, Mr. Powell said he had demanded to see the backup material for each piece of evidence, and said he insisted on multiple sources for every assertion. He threw out some evidence, he said, that he found unconvincing.''There were a lot of cigars lit,'' Mr. Powell said last summer. ''I didn't want any going off in my face or the president's face.''Yet now all four of the sources on whom Mr. Powell relied concerning the supposed mobile biolabs seem at best unreliable, and at worst fictional. Curveball has been discredited. Another source was deemed a ''fabricator,'' which in intelligence circles is tantamount to a designation as untrustworthy. The third source said the information needed further checking. The fourth source could not corroborate Curveball's claims.The intelligence committee concluded that the C.I.A.'s belief that Iraq would probably develop mobile biological weapons, in effect, blinded its analysts. In its report, the panel found: ''The intelligence community's expectation that Iraq would move to mobile biological weapons production focused their attention on reporting that supported that contention and led them to disregard information that contradicted it.''''Every statement I make today is backed up by sources, solid sources,'' Mr. Powell told the United Nations. ''These are not assertions. What we're giving you are facts and conclusions based on solid intelligence.''George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, when asked about the episode, told the committee the worries probably should have been brought before Mr. Powell.The events surrounding the speech reflected broader problems involving the agency's protectiveness about its intelligence, the Senate committee concluded. ''Not only does the C.I.A. not accept information readily from other agencies; it also does not always share its most prized intelligence with those who might contradict it,'' the report said.The same problems undercut the agency's assessment of another intelligence finding: that Iraq was trying to buy aluminum tubes for use in centrifuges to enrich uranium for possible nuclear weapons. That finding was initially challenged by Energy Department experts, but the C.I.A. clung to its belief even after specialists from the Defense Department and the International Atomic Energy Agency also disagreed.Similar issues arose in assessing whether Iraq was developing drone aircraft as weapons. The agency warned that Iraq was obtaining mapping software that could only be used inside the United States, a finding that led some analysts to conclude the aircraft might be used to attack American targets with chemical or biological agents.But the agency withheld further information that led to an alternative conclusion: that the software was innocently acquired as part of a package intended for generic guidance of drones.Over all, the committee concluded, the C.I.A. was too secretive for its own good. The report said, ''Contentious debate about significant national security issues can go on at the analytic level for months, or years, without the director of central intelligence or senior policy makers being informed of any options other than those of C.I.A. analysts.''