https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/sports/golf/thomas-pieters-belgian-golfer-at-open-de-france.html
Thomas Pieters Works Hard to Make His Swing Look So Natural - The New York Times
Ryder Cup (Golf),Golf,University of Illinois  Urbana-Champaign,Pieters  Thomas (1992- ),Clarke  Darren,Antwerp (Belgium),France
June 26, 2017
9365
To perfect his combination of power and precision, the golfer Thomas Pieters of Belgium often turns to a tennis ball.Years ago his instructor, Pete Cowen, had Pieters repeatedly throw a tennis ball against a wall every morning before he let him hit his first golf ball. The underhand throws were designed to replicate the proper motion of the body at impact. It also taught Cowen a little something about his young pupil’s dedication.“I’d say, ‘I’ll be back in a half-hour’” Cowen said. “Sometimes I’d forget, and it would be 60 or 90 minutes. He’d still be there doing it. I said, ‘What are you doing?’ He said, ‘Well, you told me to stay here and do it until you got back.’”To this day, Pieters, 25, will toss a tennis ball against a wall whenever he has a spare minute.“Anytime Pete gives me a drill, I just do it until I perfect it,” said Pieters, who will play in this week’s Open de France.His dedication has paid off. He is currently No. 26 in the Official World Golf Ranking, and one of the game’s rising stars after his showing as the top point-earner for the European team at the 2016 Ryder Cup.Cowen has coached five golfers to major championship glory, and counts the newly crowned United States Open champion Brooks Koepka among his 11 pupils who competed at Erin Hills. But Cowen saves his highest praise for Pieters, calling him “my technically most-gifted player.”Pieters began working with Cowen at age 12 and attended the Topsportschool, a boarding school funded by the Golf Association of Flanders.“Thomas was one of those kids that when you’d show him a shot, he’d say, ‘The next time you see me, I’ll be able to do that.’ And he usually did,” Cowen said. “He couldn’t wait to see me and show me. Most kids shy away from a challenge. Not Thomas.”With the help of Cowen and Mike Small, his college coach at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Pieters developed the complete package of skills.“He’s a total freak of nature,” Russell Knox, the 2016 Travelers champion, said of Pieters, who is 6-foot-5 and 190 pounds. “He’s big, he’s strong, he hits the ball forever, and he looks like he has a great short game. When you can hit it 340 and chip and putt, there’s not much that can get in your way.”Small discovered Pieters on a recruiting video and was impressed by the Belgian, who had learned the game at Witbos Golf Club, a 13-hole course in Antwerp, Belgium.“He didn’t know where Champaign was,” Small said. “He just knew it was in America.”Despite three feet of snow on the ground during his campus visit, Pieters committed to the Illini. He was Small’s first international recruit, and won the 2012 National Collegiate Athletic Association men’s golf individual championship as a sophomore.“He taught me how to play golf,” Pieters said of Small. “I was more of a technical player before I got to college, and he taught me how to shoot a 64.”Pieters turned pro in 2013, and since then he has won three times, most impressively at the European Tour’s 2016 Made in Denmark tournament. Playing with the European Ryder Cup captain Darren Clarke, Pieters shot a first-round 62 en route to beating Bradley Dredge by one stroke. A month later, Clarke chose Pieters as a captain’s pick to play in his first Ryder Cup.“I’m old, so I’ve seen a lot of players come and I’ve seen a lot of players go,” Clarke said. “He has the talent to go all the way to the top in the world in my belief.”Pieters lived up to Clarke’s billing, going 4-1 in his five matches in the European team’s 17-11 loss to the United States at Hazeltine, the best record by a European rookie in Ryder Cup history. Clarke paired Pieters with Rory McIlroy, and they made a winning duo. At the post-Ryder Cup news conference, McIlroy wrapped an arm around Pieters and said, “I’ve got a partner beside me for the next 20 years. I’m not letting anyone else have him.”Pieters, thanks to a runner-up finish at the Genesis Open and a fourth-place tie at the Masters, has probably secured his PGA Tour card for 2017-18. But unlike his peers who have made the United States-based circuit their home, Pieters is committed to the European Tour and to earning a spot on the 2018 European Ryder Cup squad.“I just love playing in Europe. I love the atmosphere and seeing different cultures and cities,” Pieters said. “I’m really close to my family, and I love living at home and, you know, I’m a new uncle now, which is really exciting.”This week, Pieters returns to the Open de France, where, in 2013, he banked 25,800 euros (about $34,000 at the time), his first paycheck as a professional. “I went and bought a TV and a PlayStation,” he said, “and I’ve never used that PlayStation.”