https://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/22/world/asia/afghan-officials-deny-french-suspect-escaped-their-prison.html
Afghan Officials Deny French Suspect Escaped Their Prison - The New York Times
France,Afghanistan,Prison Escapes
March 21, 2012
7986
KABUL, Afghanistan — Countering reports that the suspect in seven killings in France was one of hundreds of men who escaped from an Afghan prison in 2008, Afghan officials said Wednesday that a man by the same name had indeed escaped then, but was a citizen of Afghanistan, not France.The suspect has been identified in French media reports as Mohammad Merah. The Afghan authorities said that a Mohammad Merah was arrested on Dec. 19, 2007,  and convicted of planting bombs in and around the southern city of Kandahar, which is the area where the Taliban movement began.“All I can say is that we have this guy Mohammed Merah in our records, but he’s an Afghan citizen,” said Brig. Gen. Abdul Raziq, the police chief of Kandahar Province. “He’s certainly not French.”He was sent to serve his three-year sentence at the city’s Saraposa prison, said Ghulam Faruq, the chief of the detention facility, citing prison records. That is a high-security prison on Kandahar’s southern outskirts.“We have this name in our book,” Mr. Faruq said. “He was registered in 2007 and he was brought to the prison and he was convicted for planting bombs and I.E.D.’s inside and outside Kandahar city.”A spokesman for the government of Kandahar Province, Zalmai Ayoubi, said that the man was from Kandahar and that officials even knew his father’s name — Ahmad Shah, also a citizen of Afghanistan.The Afghan Mr. Merah escaped on June 13, 2008, when a Taliban fighter drove a fuel tanker to the gates of Saraposa, jumped out, dodged a few bullets fired by the prison guards, and then from a distance launched a rocket-propelled grenade into his vehicle. The enormous explosion killed the guards and blew a huge hole in the prison’s walls, allowing about 900 prisoners to escape.Officials said at the time that about 350 of the escapees were Taliban or allied insurgents, and Mr. Faruq said on Wednesday that Mr. Merah was among them.The prison break was one of the worst breaches of security in Afghanistan since 2001, when American forces helped oust the Taliban.