https://www.nytimes.com/1998/06/07/realestate/the-preservation-band-that-sets-the-tone.html
The Preservation Band That Sets the Tone - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,BEYER BLINDER BELLE,JACOBS  JANE,HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND SITES,COMPANY AND ORGANIZATION PROFILES,GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL (NYC),RESTORATION AND REHABILITATION,ROCKEFELLER CENTER (NYC),ARCHITECTURE
June 7, 1998
9032
THE architectural firm of Beyer Blinder Belle was born in the tumultuous year of 1968, with a bow to Jane Jacobs and a commitment to the maverick ideas of community-based planning and rehabilitation rather than bulldozing. Today, it finds itself where its founders never expected to be: on the inside track.The rebuilding and restoration of Grand Central Terminal? That's Beyer Blinder Belle. The remodeling of Rockefeller Center? Beyer Blinder Belle. The Ford Center for the Performing Arts, where ''Ragtime'' is playing? Beyer Blinder Belle again.Across 42d Street from the Ford Center, Beyer Blinder Belle is designing a hotel and entertainment complex for Forest City Ratner. Allied with the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava, it is one of three teams competing for the new Pennsylvania Station concourse that is proposed within the General Post Office on Eighth Avenue.The tiny Swedish Cottage in Central Park bears the mark of Beyer Blinder Belle, as do renovations at La Guardia Airport, new approaches to the Williamsburg Bridge, a study of the Yankee Stadium area, the revival of the Sun Building near City Hall, a new museum in the South Street Seaport and master plans for Columbia University and Governors Island.If Beyer Blinder Belle seems to be everywhere, it is because preservation has become an integral part of development in the years since the firm was founded by John H. Beyer (rhymes with spire), now 65 years old; Richard Blinder (rhymes with tinder), who is 62 and John Belle, 65.Having backed into landmarks practice through rehab work, they embraced it in 1979 by adding James Marston Fitch, regarded as the dean of American preservation, to the partnership. Today, the firm enjoys an influence out of proportion to its modest size. What makes its emergence so remarkable is that the firm does not have a recognizable style, even in the numerous buildings it has designed from scratch, which include a slender, glass-clad 45-story apartment tower at 300 East 93d Street.There is no such thing as a Beyer Blinder Belle signature project, unless it is the renovation of an iconic landmark like Grand Central that leaves the public with little sense of modern intervention.''I've received more favorable comments on the terminal than on any other aspect of our operations,'' said E. Virgil Conway, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. ''There have been a lot of changes but at the same time, the overall appearance is one of restoration.''Asked to name the greatest influence on their practice, the founding partners do not cite a master architect or planner.Instead, they point to Ms. Jacobs, a writer and Greenwich Village activist, who declared in ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities'' (1961) that ''cities need old buildings so badly it is probably impossible for vigorous streets and districts to grow without them'' -- apostasy to a design establishment that was pursuing urban renewal.In a telephone interview from Toronto, where she now lives, Ms. Jacobs recalled the emergence of Beyer Blinder Belle.''They were looking at the fabric of the community,'' she said. ''That was very welcome and very exciting, that there were professionals who were, at last, doing that. Also, they recognized that time is important in these things. A community can't just come by waving a wand. It has history. History was, to the modernists, an enemy. So this was a very radical realization. And an important one.''Beyer Blinder Belle's grounding in community-based planning has served it well.''People look at them as the firm that gets things through agencies,'' said Laurie Beckelman, a former chairwoman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission. ''But they also have compassion and sympathy toward the community, and they can work with both. They are not seen as slam-dunk, but as fair, reasonable and balanced.''It remains to be seen how long this firm -- or any firm with so many high-powered clients -- can maintain that reputation.O NE of the prices of success is that you begin to think like a developer,'' said Barbaralee Diamonstein, chairwoman of the Historic Landmarks Preservation Center. ''That may or may not be a bad thing.'' Beyer Blinder Belle is to be ''congratulated and cautioned,'' she said. ''They learned early on to merge the historical with the commercial. They have obviously perfected that and made it agreeable both to developers and to the public and private organizations, commissions and institutions that have to approve these things. A large aspect of architecture is presentation, and they are virtuosi at it.''But the firm's impressive presentation charting the many changes over time to Rockefeller Center has done little to persuade preservationists that it would be appropriate to enlarge the storefronts along Fifth Avenue and diminish the red-granite setting of Prometheus.Although the New York Landmarks Conservancy supports the plan, it has come under fire from the Municipal Art Society, Historic Districts Council and others.At the same time, Upper West Siders are attacking plans for a 41-story apartment tower by Beyer Blinder Belle that would adjoin the Y.M.C.A. on West 63d Street, near Central Park West. It would rise on the site of the former McBurney School, whose facade is to be preserved. Besides the sheer size of the mid-block building, opponents deplore the segregation of entrances to the lower-income rental housing at the base and the high-priced condominiums above.And even Mr. Fitch questioned the firm's plans on behalf of Donald J. Trump to strip the St. Moritz Hotel on Central Park South to its steel skeleton and erect a new facade that would evoke, but not duplicate, the original. (Debate over that project became moot in April when Mr. Trump lost the property to the hotelier Ian Schrager.)The future probably holds more quandaries of this kind: is preservation best served by rigorous replication of historic features or by new construction, sympathetic in spirit, that sometimes involves the demolition of existing architectural fabric?''It's much easier to be doctrinaire when there's less at stake,'' said Hugh Hardy, of Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, a firm whose restoration work includes the New Amsterdam Theater. ''Their success will inevitably lead them into facing increasingly difficult issues which have as much to do with the marketplace and the client base as with the inherent ideology of the firm.''The challenge is evidently relished by the younger partners who are gradually assuming the reins at Beyer Blinder Belle.''We've redefined what is meant by preservation,'' said Richard Southwick, 44, a partner since 1993. ''It may mean moving a building down the block or building a new theater where two older theaters stood.''(The historic Empire Theater was rolled 170 feet along West 42d Street as part of the Forest City Ratner project. The Ford Center, designed with Kofman Engineering for Garth H. Drabinsky, incorporates significant elements from the Lyric and Apollo Theaters, but both playhouses were razed.)''The greatest and most enriching architecture is that which layers the new and old, allowing each to express itself honestly,'' said Frederick Bland, a 52-year-old designer. In 1978, he became the first partner at Beyer Blinder Belle outside the original trio.''There is nothing so precious that it cannot accommodate some new use,'' Mr. Beyer said. This may not be pure preservationist orthodoxy, but Beyer Blinder Belle has long prided itself in being a bit out of step. ''Controversy contributes to our credibility as architects who are always reaching, always trying,'' Mr. Beyer said.It seems fitting that this partnership should have emerged from the 1960's, when so many conventions were upended.As the decade began, all three men were in Cambridge, Mass., unknown to one another. Mr. Beyer, a native of Weehawken, N.J., and Mr. Blinder, who grew up in New York City, were in different classes at the Harvard University Graduate School of Design. Mr. Belle, who had come from Cardiff, Wales, by way of London, was working for Jose Luis Sert, an architect, planner and  dean of the Harvard design school.When Le Corbusier came to Harvard in 1960 to unveil his design for the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts, Beyer and Blinder and Belle attended the event, having no idea at the time -- as they nibbled cookies baked in the shape of Corbusier's ''Modulor'' man icon -- that they were standing in the same room as their future partners.They did not get to know one another until the mid-60's, when all three worked in the New York office of Victor Gruen. It was then that they felt the tension between their instincts and those of their colleagues. ''A lot of the profession was going in the direction of urban removal,'' Mr. Belle said.SO they set up shop on their own at 31 Union Square West. ''We weren't in the mainstream,'' Mr. Beyer said. ''We were doing nitty-gritty stuff in the Bronx,'' like the 1,000-unit Jose de Diego-Beekman Houses in the Mott Haven section.''We certainly didn't burst on the scene,'' Mr. Blinder allowed. ''We grew and evolved.'' One early client, Robert Bonham, was a developer of low-income co-ops in the Bronx who went on to become the president of the South Street Seaport Museum. Through their planning and design work at South Street, the partners got to know Mr. Fitch, whom they invited to join the firm when he retired from Columbia University.''That was our bridge to Ellis Island,'' Mr. Blinder said of Mr. Fitch, who gave the firm the needed credibility to pursue that commission. The $25 million renovation and restoration of Ellis Island as the National Museum of Immigration, undertaken with Notter Finegold & Alexander, put Beyer Blinder Belle squarely on the map.Ellis Island was one of several factors weighed by the M.T.A. selection committee that was looking for architects to replan Grand Central. ''The terminal needed to be preserved and restored but it also needed to be changed a bit,'' said Peter E. Stangl, the former chairman of the M.T.A. ''John Belle shared that vision, even though he has strong preservation principles.''The most controversial aspect of the project was the decision to build an entirely new staircase on the east side of the concourse, balancing that on the Vanderbilt Avenue side. ''That was kind of shocking to the traditionalists,'' Mr. Stangl conceded.But not to Mr. Fitch. ''The logic of the plan suggested that there would have been a balancing stair there,'' he said. ''That's the essence of Beaux-Arts philosophy. We found working drawings that showed that a staircase could be put in. We found steel connections all prepared for the stair.''At the age of 89, Mr. Fitch retired last month from active practice. He was succeeded in the partnership by James W. Rhodes, 52, who was named on Tuesday. The other partners are Douglas McR. McKean, 42, and Richard Metsky, 40. Marilyn Marullo, 46, is the administrative officer, a position equivalent to partner.Altogether, eight partners and two associate partners own a stake in the firm, whose gross annual billings amount to $15.5 million. There are about 100 employees. In the latest ranking, Beyer Blinder Belle was the 18th largest firm in the New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects.From a peak of 150 employees in the mid-80's, the firm shrank to fewer than 50 during the depth of the recession in the early 90's.''We kept most of our senior staff,'' Ms. Marullo said, ''although we had them working on the boards.'' Those who remained took pay cuts. The firm depended on public works and other ''bread-and-butter'' projects, said Maxinne Rhea Leighton, the managing director of business development.Only six blocks from its original home, Beyer Blinder Belle occupies the second floor of a loft building at 11th Street and University Place. A 60-foot-long display wall bisects the space at a 45-degree angle, leading to the ''crit pit,'' a large room where wide-ranging critiques occur almost every Tuesday morning over breakfast.Its partners take pride in being more New York-oriented than many of their competitors. ''They say they're on their way to Kuala Lumpur,'' Mr. Belle noted, ''and we're on our way to the Bronx.''''I'm going through subway cards like crazy,'' Mr. Blinder added.But the firm's national profile will surely grow. One project on the drawing boards involves the potential recreation of Thomas U. Walter's original 1859 design for the United States Senate Chamber.The firm is active in planning, renovating private homes and corporate interiors. It is also cultivating business in new construction, Mr. McKean said, on the grounds that ''we know how buildings are put together.''''The lack of a signature style has its liabilities and strengths,'' Mr. Metsky said. ''It may be a liability in getting a commission for a new building. But the strength is in our ability to group together to solve complex problems. A non-signature building doesn't have to be done by one hand.''Rather than being divided among specialists, projects are given to teams of generalists who follow the work from the earliest sketches to the last punch list. The advantage is that even junior architects can gain broad experience. The disadvantage is the potential for burnout, particularly on jobs like Grand Central that go on for years.No one is expecting Beyer or Blinder or Belle to burn out anytime soon. ''As long as they want to practice architecture, it's open to them,'' Mr. McKean said, adding that the name of the firm will not change.As to the future, Mr. Belle looks forward to standing in a completed Grand Central and overhearing one commuter ask another: ''Doesn't the east staircase look better now that it's been restored?''