https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/15/arts/television/review-with-stranger-things-netflix-delivers-an-eerie-nostalgia-fix.html
Review: With ‘Stranger Things,’ Netflix Delivers an Eerie Nostalgia Fix - The New York Times
Stranger Things (TV Program),Netflix Inc,Duffer  Matt,Duffer  Ross,Television,Web-Original Programming,Stranger Things (Web-Original Program)
July 14, 2016
3798
If you haven’t already had enough 1980s nostalgia — a big if for anyone who watches a lot of television these days — Netflix’s “Stranger Things” is a tasty trip back to that decade and the art of eeriness without excess.This eight-part series, a supernatural mystery set in Indiana in 1983, mixes the youthful wonderment of “E. T. the Extra-Terrestrial” with the spine-tingling qualities of “Poltergeist” — two of 1982’s biggest box-office hits — to tell a missing-child yarn.Lest you miss the “E. T.” comparison, the tale begins with a bicycle ride: Young Will Byers (Noah Schnapp) is headed home in the dark after a long game of Dungeons & Dragons with three friends when he encounters something sinister, and soon the whole town of Hawkins, Ind., is looking for him. Does a secretive United States Department of Energy lab nearby have something to do with the disappearance? Count on it.The brothers Matt and Ross Duffer, who created the series and honed their skills on the mind-bending Fox show “Wayward Pines,” prove themselves adept at homage. The soundtrack — the Clash’s “Should I Stay or Should I Go” plays a recurring role — will tickle the brain cells of anyone who was young in the ’80s, but that’s the easy part of this kind of project. Harder is capturing the tone of another era. The Duffers manage that quite well, too, thanks to a fine sense of restraint that increasingly seems a lost art these days. There are a few good shocks here, but mostly there is patience.None of it would work without solid acting, and the series has that in abundance. Winona Ryder is appropriately fraught and gaunt as the missing boy’s mother, and David Harbour does solid work as the local police chief, who has a back story that gives Will’s disappearance particular resonance for him.Best of all, though, are the child actors: Finn Wolfhard, Caleb McLaughlin and Gaten Matarazzo as Will’s three friends, and especially Millie Bobby Brown as a mysterious young girl who materializes out of nowhere as the search for Will is ramping up. Amateurish work by children can kill a show that tries to be as subtle as this one. These young performers are up to the task.“Stranger Things” also recalls the feel of another 1980s film, Rob Reiner’s “Stand by Me,” an adaptation of a Stephen King story. It’s worth noting that that story, which involved boys in search of a dead body, was set in the 1950s. Although the 1980s are much in vogue now — the “Full House” revival, the recent revisiting of “Uncle Buck,” etc. — exploiting nostalgia properly isn’t really about invoking the memory of a specific decade. It’s about finding that timeless moment when everything seemed tantalizingly, scarily new.