https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/19/upshot/introducing-the-new-york-times-upshot-siena-college-poll.html
Introducing the New York Times Upshot/Siena College Poll - The New York Times
Polls and Public Opinion,Presidential Election of 2016,Data-Mining and Database Marketing,Voter Registration and Requirements
Sept. 18, 2016
565
On Monday, The Upshot and Siena College will release their first  survey of likely voters in Florida.It’s a little different from most polls sponsored by major media organizations. Most such surveys contact voters by dialing random telephone numbers. The New York Times Upshot/Siena College poll was conducted using Florida records from a voter registration file, a data set covering every registered voter in the country. Our data set came from L2, a nonpartisan political data vendor.The voter registration file is the core of the “big data” that has transformed campaign targeting and analytics over the last decade. It includes detailed information on registered voters in a state, like their age, party, race and vote history (not whom they voted for but how often they voted).Today, virtually all campaigns conduct their surveys off voter registration files.Why hasn’t the media done the same thing? An important reason is that polls often aspire to measure the entire public’s views on an issue, not just likely voters. A recent New York Times/CBS News survey on gender attitudes, for instance, is a great example of the sort of poll that would suffer from interviewing only registered voters. Registered voters may decide our elections, but they’re not representative of the broader public’s views and attitudes.When it comes to election polling, though, the voter registration file has real advantages.Its rich data can be used to make sure the sample is representative. For instance, it includes the party registration of voters, allowing pollsters to select the right number of Democrats and Republicans, and to counter the chance that either party’s voters might be more or less likely to respond at a given point of the campaign. The Upshot/Siena survey is weighted by the race, party registration, age, gender, region and past vote history of active voters.The vote history of respondents can also be used to improve predictions of who’s likely to vote, one of the biggest challenges in polling.Most public pollsters use the self-reported vote intention of respondents to determine who is likely to vote. They then exclude those deemed unlikely to vote. There are a lot of limitations to this type of voter screen. Study after study has shown that self-reported vote intention is not a very good predictor of turnout. The “likely” or “unlikely” determination could cause polls to overrepresent the likeliest voters. And, for good measure, the people who respond to public polls tend to be likelier to vote than the general population.Campaign pollsters instead rely more on the past behavior of voters. Studies have shown that vote history is a more accurate predictor of turnout than self-reported vote intention.The Upshot/Siena survey averages the two approaches, 50-50. Half of the likely voter measure comes from how voters report their vote intention; the other half is based on a model predicting the probability that they vote. The result is that all respondents are still considered to have some chance of voting, as they would in reality.Finally, voter file data can even help improve the quality of the sample itself. Random digit dialing gives public pollsters little control over their respondents — they don’t know whom they’re calling in advance. The result is that they can often get samples, for instance, that are far too old and white, requiring them to undertake herculean weighting efforts to bring underrepresented populations up to their share of the electorate. Many public polls weight some respondents 15 or 20 times more than their least-weighted respondent.But pollsters using the voter file know whom they’re calling in advance, so they can simply call more of the underrepresented voters, reducing the need for weighting.The Upshot/Siena poll called a younger and more diverse set of voters, knowing that many of them would not respond, to try to get a more representative sample of respondents in the end. It yielded a younger and more diverse sample than in most polls, and it considerably reduced the amount of weighting. We suspect that the amount of weighting may be reduced further in future surveys, informed by the results of this first effort.Are there downsides? Yes, as there are with any method.A poll conducted off the voter file could miss new voters who have registered since the voter file was last updated. The effect is marginal — but at this point of the cycle, just ahead of the rush to register before deadlines, it can make the biggest difference.Not everyone has a telephone number in the voter file. And in this election, voter file polls can struggle to weight by education (although the importance of this is reduced, to some extent, by weighting by party registration — an extremely stronger predictor of vote choice).Nonetheless, the advantages of using a voter file sample outweigh the disadvantages for just about every major campaign pollster. And for journalists, the added information allows for novel breakdowns of voters that can’t be attempted through traditional surveys.In the end, of course, there is no guarantee that the survey will be “right.” Pollsters aren’t joking about that “margin of error,” and that doesn’t even include the potential consequences of many of the choices that pollsters can make. But we will be very transparent about the survey, releasing data sets and offering a detailed methodology. We’ll try to illuminate the consequences of our decisions. If we do it right, it will be as informative about the state of polling as it will about the election.