https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/08/fashion/mens-style/bomber-jacket-mens-fashion.html
Flyboy Style: How to Wear a Bomber Jacket - The New York Times
Coats and Jackets,Fashion and Apparel,Tisci  Riccardo
April 6, 2016
9646
Once worn exclusively by military pilots and now a staple of men’s fashion shows, the flight jacket (also known as the bomber jacket) has over the years made the transition from the runway to, well, the runway.United States military pilots wore an early incarnation, the A-2 (think of the jacket worn by Indiana Jones), from the early 1930s through World War II. This model, usually made of horsehide, established the jacket’s cut, and a revised version is still in use today.At the end of the 1940s came the MA-1 flight jacket, in waterproof nylon, with an orange lining to increase the visibility of downed aviators, and this is the model that has inspired 21st-century designers.Bomber jackets became something of a uniform of British punks and skinheads in the 1970s, some of whom were captured in their attire by the photographer Derek Ridgers. In the early 1990s, the jacket had the right look for those in the West Coast hip-hop scene.Sam Lobban, the buying manager of the e-commerce site Mr Porter, said that since 2012, he had seen a 150 percent growth in net sales of bomber jackets. They made up 20 percent of the coats and jackets sold on the site in 2015. “I think the beauty of the bomber is its iconic simplicity,” Mr. Lobban said.If you walk into Bloomingdale’s in New York, you’ll find a wide assortment of flight jackets in the men’s department. To wear one is to project an air of sartorial defiance. But now that the bomber is no longer worn mainly by flyboys or members of subcultures, has it lost some of its cool?“Of course, there is a sort of rebellion in wearing a shapeless round piece as outerwear in today’s world,” said Riccardo Tisci, the Givenchy creative director, who has included a bomber in almost all of his men’s collections since 2010. “This piece is now a real part of my ideal men’s wardrobe.”The democratization of the bomber owes something to how easy it is to wear. Short at the hip and wide at the shoulder, it’s comfortable and it fits most body types. “The bomber is a very masculine sportswear piece,” Mr. Tisci said. “This is why it appeals to so many. It sort of mans up any silhouette.”