https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/t-magazine/the-greats-issue-letter-from-the-editor.html
The Influencers in T’s October 25 Greats Issue - The New York Times
Franzen  Jonathan,Lagerfeld  Karl,McQueen  Steve,Rihanna,Tarantino  Quentin
Oct. 23, 2015
3841
This issue is about really, really talented people whose work and vision have the ability to change our lives in some way — how we think, feel, see, eat or travel.We spent a lot of time debating among ourselves whom to celebrate from the various fields we cover, from art and technology and music to film and fashion and literature. We wanted to feature people whose work pushed at the boundaries of their own fields, enabling them to affect the culture at large. Indeed, the heroes of this issue of T — whom we have grouped together under the moniker ‘‘The Greats,’’ and had emblazoned on different magazine covers — are all rather famous for what they do: Jonathan Franzen, Karl Lagerfeld, Steve McQueen, Rihanna andQuentin Tarantino.And yet the breakout hero for me in this issue is Jeong Kwan, a 59-year-old Zen Buddhist nun who lives in a hermitage in the forest of South Korea, and whose cooking is considered among the most exquisite in the world by chefs such as Eric Ripert of Le Bernardin. Kwan cooks for the two other nuns who study and meditate alongside her, or sometimes for the monks at the monastery down the hill and their visitors. She doesn’t seem to be trying to change the way anyone eats. But Jeff Gordinier’s story about meeting her might change the way you think about your food. It did for me. The great depth but tiny scope of her influence is a reminder that while powerful ideas can now reach more people than ever before thanks to technology, that is no substitute for a single experience shared between two people during an unreplicable, unscalable moment in time.Funnily enough, even the pieces on the well-known ‘‘Greats’’ in this issue have an intimate quality — more like impressionistic portraits or personal renderings of their subjects than typical magazine profiles. I love how small and close they feel despite their subjects being so big and famous. Perhaps this is because their chroniclers — Bret Easton Ellis, Miranda July, Rachel Kushner, Wyatt Mason and Andrew O’Hagan — are no less accomplished than the illustrious people they write about. There’s a lot to read in this issue. I hope you enjoy it.