https://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/08/garden/08summer.html
A Summer Rental of One’s Own - The New York Times
Housing and Real Estate,Travel and Vacations,Renting and Leasing,Writing and Writers,Merkin  Daphne
July 7, 2010
8819
THIS spring, in ripe midlife, after years of thinking and talking about it, I finally rented a summer house of my own. This may not sound like a major feat to those who own weekend getaways in the Hamptons or Connecticut or have been renting for years. But to someone like me, who habitually shies away from taking charge in the hope that someone better equipped will do so instead, it rates as a real achievement, a kind of upper-middle-class rite of passage that I was not ready for until now.Among other things, it represents a final goodbye to the summer house of my youth, which stood ready for me to arrive with a bathing suit and books, and demanded nothing more of me than that I put my dishes in the dishwasher. This house, in the tiny enclave of Atlantic Beach on Long Island, an hour out of New York City, remained in my family until six or seven  years ago. When I think of it, I think of the screen door slamming, of hectic barbecues, of the gritty feel of sand being washed off in long, hot showers.My large family would convene there on many a weekend, six siblings in all, and, as the years went by, enough grandchildren to fill a nursery school. My parents had bought the house when I was 10 at a ludicrously low price; it stood at the end of the block, bounded by a high wooden fence, and had an unsavory reputation that conspired to make it something of a white elephant. (The previous owner had been a doctor, and rumor had it that he had used the house as an abortion clinic. There had originally been ramps to some of the rooms, which gave the rumor some credence.)Two of the spacious upstairs rooms came with enormous bathrooms and closets; the closets doubled as mini-nurseries, equipped with cribs for what seemed like a steady stream of newly arrived babies. A boyfriend of mine once referred to the house, with heavy irony, as “the compound” — a comment, I suppose, on both the house itself and the barricaded life we led there.During my late 20s, together with a somewhat high-strung friend, I took a share in a group rental in Amagansett. The other people in the house were all men, and as I recall there were screaming arguments about wasting food — we all chipped in for what appeared to be a meat locker’s worth of steaks for Saturday night grilling — and cleaning up. After this one venture into the world of ad hoc summer arrangements, I stuck close to the house in Atlantic Beach, eventually bringing my own daughter to join her cousins for weekends full of elaborate games  like “Boarding School” (loosely based on a combination of “Sara Crewe” and “Jane Eyre,” and featuring a cruel headmistress in the form of myself), outings to the beach and swimming competitions.Through more than two and a half decades of summers past, I also mastered the art of being an entertaining house guest. I would arrive at the houses of friends bearing carefully chosen gifts and proceed from there to endear myself to the other occupants, including elderly relatives who were grateful for my attention. I learned to pitch in without revealing my own lack of culinary skill, folding the dinner napkins just the way my hostess liked them and displaying an eagerness to play Scrabble that I rarely showed at home. This paid off in frequent invitations and relationships that were more often than not strengthened by my stays (although once in a while a frayed friendship would give way entirely under the burden of shared quarters).Once the Atlantic Beach house was gone, though, I often found myself at a loss during the steamiest weekends of July and August. There was a limit, after all, to how many times I could invite myself to other people’s houses and, then too, I began to grow tired of being a guest, singing for my supper.I never, on the other hand, made peace with the alternative. Although I know plenty of people who enjoy being in the emptied-out city on summer weekends, when they don’t have to wait in line for art exhibitions or hit movies, I never have. For one thing, despite the carcinogenic rays, I am an inveterate seeker of the sun, and I find it far preferable to lie poolside or beachside than on a towel in Central Park. For another, many of the people I know go away on weekends, including most of the other tenants in my building, and I always end up feeling slightly abandoned, much as I try to persuade myself otherwise.Once, several summers ago, in an effort to resolve the situation, I went out to Long Island to look at rentals with a friend, but I felt so discouraged by what was available for the money we could afford to spend that I gave up. The truth was that I was a picky customer, not willing to live with someone else’s bad taste   or cut-rate decisions just because they fit into my budget. I was also not so sure I wanted to live in close proximity to any friend, however well-intentioned the plan.This past April, I felt my pre-summer longings stir once again and happened to wistfully remark on my unmet dream of renting a house to my friend Howard. We discussed the viability of my doing so on my own — have I mentioned that, born-and-bred Manhattanite that I am, I’ve never learned how to drive? — and then Howard happened to say that he had looked at a house that he hadn’t ended up taking but had found “magical.”Magical? What could be wrong with magical?Howard offered to drive me out to take a look at the house, and on a rainy Tuesday morning we made our way to the Pine Neck section of Noyac, a slightly under-the-radar area of the Hamptons I had never been to before. We took a left off Noyac Road before it hit Cromer’s, the market known for its fried chicken, and there, at the end of a gravel driveway overhung with branches, was a little white gate that read “Main House.” It swung in onto an enchanting space that resembled an English garden, one fitted out with two turquoise Adirondack chairs that I could imagine Lytton Strachey and Leonard Woolf sitting in, discussing fornication and Fabianism. Up some stairs was a cedar-shingled cottage, circa 1928, that looked inviting already from the outside.We entered an open, white-washed living space — kitchen, dining area and living room in one — that fronted Noyac Bay. The back door led to a deck and a pebbled beach and miles of glistening water, literally only steps away. I was smitten even before I saw the two upstairs bedrooms, although the generous master bedroom with a view of the water and a four-poster bed did little to diminish my enthusiasm.Reader, I rented it. Rather, first I obsessed — the house was a six-month rental, which was longer than I had planned on, the price was somewhat higher than I had figured on paying, and there was the matter of logistics — and then I took it. I wrote out a check with a trembling hand, imagining all sorts of terrors. What if I were stuck there by myself, marooned with just the bay to address my thoughts to? What if I found the whole thing too much to handle? What if the house remained inextricably someone else’s and not my own? Was it possible to imprint a rental with a personal stamp or was that asking too much?I hit pay dirt in the owners of the house, who have been more than generous with their help, providing an outdoor grill, bikes and even a vacuum cleaner. At my request, they have filled the two planters out in front with colorful flowers — geraniums and petunias. Their pride in the house — which they purchased two decades ago, when it was a little one-story bungalow that served as a summer cottage for one of the local families, and then slowly renovated — is palpable and has rubbed off on me.The first thing I did, even before the rental started, was to buy placemats on sale at Barneys — eight of them, for the dinners I imagined I’d be giving at the house. Slowly I added napkins that I had found at Comerford Hennessy at Home, a fantastic design store in Bridgehampton, as well as napkin rings from the Loaves & Fishes Cookshop on the same street. (Now my table would be better dressed than I was.) I found a sign that said “Cottage for Rent” for $25 and placed it near the staircase, just for the fun of it (and to remind myself that I was on borrowed turf, lest I grow too attached), and bought two comfortable navy blue Lafuma recliners to add to the collection of wicker furniture on the deck.Finally, I brought out a felt teddy bear that my daughter had made in grade school to sit on the bedroom couch and hung a portrait of Virginia Woolf by Barbara Nahmad that I had acquired in Italy on my bedroom wall. This last was to remind myself that in between kitting out my house and making like Martha Stewart, I shouldn’t forget that my real plan for the summer was to sequester myself with  “the lonely sea and the sky”  in — hallelujah! — a rental of my own, and write.I can’t say I’ve gotten far on that front, or that I’ve yet mustered up the nerve to stay in the house overnight by myself. But the season is young.