https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/podcasts/who-has-the-right-to-make-barbecue.html
Who Has the Right to Make Barbecue? - The New York Times
Podcasts
July 6, 2017
4188
We’re solidly in the middle of summer, which means it’s barbecue season. But let’s be very clear about something: We aren’t talking about throwing burgers and veggies on a grill for a cookout. We’re talking about the Southern tradition of slow-cooking meat over a dirt pit and the rich culinary history that is about more than just food. Barbecue originated as plantation-feast food — a dish cultivated by enslaved Africans who were often given pigs at the end of harvest season. After slavery, as black Americans began to migrate away from the South, barbecue traveled with them and began to evolve regionally.We both live in Brooklyn, where barbecue is trending and gentrifying as quickly as our neighborhoods, and we’re not exactly sure how to feel about it. To talk through our feelings, we invited two Southern food experts on the show: John Thomas Edge Jr., the author of “The Potlikker Papers,” an exploration of how the food of working-class Southerners became American staples, and Nicole Taylor, a chef and the author of “The Up South Cookbook.” They help us trace the history of barbecue back to West Africa and remember the central role that African-Americans played (and continue to play) in establishing one of our country’s most signature styles of cooking.When we asked Edge and Taylor to recommend the best place in New York to get an authentic plate of meat, they both suggested the Arrogant Swine, a spot run by Tyson Ho, a Chinese-American chef from Flushing, Queens. We ventured out to his restaurant to sample the goods and talk to Ho about how he came to man a Carolina-style barbecue pit in the middle of Bushwick, Brooklyn. We tried almost everything on the menu, including a plate of classic East Carolina-style pulled pork and chicken wings smoked and glazed in a Vietnamese caramel sauce, in homage to the Vietnamese pit masters who tend the fire in central North Carolina. The meal reminded us of just how universal and beautiful our country’s culture of food can be.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.If you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying-glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the magnifying-glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.