http://www.nytimes.com/2005/02/01/business/large-cost-cuts-a-crucial-goal-for-sbc-deal.html
Large Cost Cuts a Crucial Goal for SBC Deal - The New York Times
SBC COMMUNICATIONS INC,SBC COMMUNICATIONS,AT&T CORP,NAMES  ORGANIZATIONAL,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,FINANCES,TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS,MARKET PLACE (TIMES COLUMN)
Feb. 1, 2005
9818
As AT&T's board members were about to give their final approval to sell the company to SBC Communications, the lights went out.For a few minutes, the directors, meeting late Sunday night at AT&T's offices in Midtown Manhattan, sat in the dark before they could sign off on the $16 billion deal that would unite the two telecommunications giants."The power outage was a cost-saving measure," joked Tom Horton, AT&T's chief financial officer, in an interview yesterday.SBC is banking on AT&T being deadly serious about keeping its costs down. The acquisition of AT&T offers SBC many advantages, industry analysts say, but also presents big challenges, starting with the projection that AT&T's revenue is likely to fall about $5 billion this year. Another question is the future of the venerable AT&T name. [Page C10.]Wall Street analysts were divided on the benefits of this latest merger in an industry that is in great flux. Some analysts, like Scott Cleland with the Precursor Group, foresee falling prices and more losses, driven by more competitors and the introduction of ever-cheaper Internet-based technology."For SBC, this is a really dumb idea," Mr. Cleland said. "It would make them the largest negative growth company in the country."Many others, however, say that thanks largely to emerging technology, the competitive boundaries that once divided companies into neat product groups -- long distance, local, wireless and so on -- are coming undone. Edward E. Whitacre Jr., SBC's chief executive, said this new reality was a big reason he sought AT&T. He said that combining AT&T's strength in the corporate telephone and data market with SBC's local phone lines, Internet services and mobile phone division could make SBC a telecommunications provider able to meet everyone's needs."The combined companies will have broader capabilities than we could do on our own," he said in a call with investment analysts. "We will be positioned to be the prototypical telecommunications company in the 21st century."To sell this vision of one-stop shopping to Wall Street, though, SBC will have to be brutal in cutting costs. At the very least, it will need to save enough money to help offset the projected decline in AT&T's businesses.The companies say they expect $15 billion in savings and new revenue by the end of the decade, with 85 percent of that coming from cost cuts and the rest from new revenue sources. Most of the savings will come from eliminating jobs.The companies said that merging their corporate business units would permit them to eliminate redundant sales and customer service teams and to share networks, saving $1.6 billion annually.The companies expect about $600 million in savings by 2009 from consolidating marketing, sales and operations teams. Jobs in human resources, legal services and executive staffs will also be eliminated to save an expected $400 million a year by the end of the decade.These job losses could be particularly heavy in New Jersey; AT&T has its corporate headquarters in Bedminster. Mr. Horton said it was too early to say how many AT&T jobs would be lost, but "there are undoubtedly going to be some major labor" changes.Industry analysts expect much of AT&T's shrinking consumer business to be closed, including call centers and back-office jobs. AT&T will also need less commercial space as those jobs disappear.To make these cuts, the companies expect to spend as much as $2 billion in severance and other expenses during the second half of 2006, assuming the deal closes by then, as planned.Richard G. Linder, SBC's chief financial officer, also said the companies would save $1 billion a year by 2009 by pooling their data traffic onto co-owned networks, merging operations like switching stations and buying equipment and services together.Some analysts question those numbers. Fitch Ratings put SBC's A+ credit rating on negative watch yesterday, saying it was concerned that SBC was adding risk. Some of that risk includes AT&T's declining consumer business, the possibility that the costs of blending the companies could reduce cash flow and SBC's taking on $6 billion of AT&T's net debt.Shares of SBC, which is based in San Antonio, rose 14 cents to close at $23.76 yesterday; shares of AT&T declined 52 cents to close at $19.19."SBC is saying it can take AT&T over and reverse the revenue loss," said Blair Levin, an industry analyst with Legg Mason and a former chief of staff at the Federal Communications Commission. "How do you do that?"Mr. Cleland of the Precursor Group said AT&T's shrinking revenue was not necessarily the result of something it did that SBC could easily correct. Rather, he said, the industry is generally weak and could become weaker as technology drives down prices.At the same time, Mr. Cleland said, Internet phone technology makes it easier for corporations to manage their own phone systems.Still, many analysts support SBC's plans, saying that the worst declines in AT&T's revenue are over. Jeff Halpern, an industry analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, says sales of data and phone services to major corporations will account for more than half the annual growth this year in the country's $250 billion telecommunications market.In buying AT&T, Mr. Halpern said, SBC would be able to sell AT&T business customers other profitable products, like cellphone services.Mr. Horton, AT&T's chief financial officer, said, "Think about the potential to drive wireless into the enterprise space." More generally, he said, "the potential synergies are quite large."