https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/22/movies/nina-review-zoe-saldana-nina-simone.html
Review: Casting ‘Nina’ Was Controversial, but Is It a Good Movie? - The New York Times
Movies,Mort  Cynthia,Saldana  Zoe,Simone  Nina,Music,Nina (Movie)
April 21, 2016
6743
One night, Nina Simone, the great jazz singer, composer and pianist, now semiretired on the French Riviera, calls up her old friend Richard Pryor. It’s the 1990s, and both of them have seen better days. His first words to her are “Can you imagine?,” and while he’s referring to his own struggles with addiction and illness, his question haunts “Nina,” a sincere and spectacularly misbegotten new biopic.While the movie may invite us to imagine its subject’s extraordinary life, it frustrates our ability to do so at every turn. The conversation with Pryor, who is played by Mike Epps, is a perfect example. A flashback establishes that they performed together back in the ’60s, but it’s gone before any historical or emotional significance has registered. In its wake there is a lingering flicker of curiosity. Nina Simone and Richard Pryor were friends. Wouldn’t that make an interesting movie?There are so many interesting movies hovering in the air, none of them the one onscreen. “Nina,” written and directed by Cynthia Mort, has taken a long time to arrive in theaters. In the months leading up to its release, the film has been criticized for casting Zoe Saldana, who is also credited as an executive producer, in the title role. The real Nina Simone had much darker skin than Ms. Saldana, whose participation has sparked renewed discussion about persistent color bias in popular culture. The fact that her complexion, like her accent, seems to shift from one scene to the next is unlikely to help.But the problems with “Nina” are more than skin deep. Ms. Saldana does her own singing, and while she has a fine voice, she lacks Ms. Simone’s lower register range and the uniquely Simonean tonal quality that was somehow both raw and silken, furious and sad. Still, the film, shot in cool, soft, vintagey colors by Mihai Malaimare Jr., works better as a lounge act than as a biography. The songs (including “Four Women,” “Wild Is the Wind,” “My Baby Just Cares for Me” and “See-Line Woman”) are still great. Even so, those interested in Simone’s art should listen to her records. Those curious about her life can check out “What Happened, Miss Simone?,” Liz Garbus’s recent, and excellent, documentary.Many of the important facts in that movie appear as footnotes or flashbacks in this one. An early scene shows Simone as a teenage piano prodigy in North Carolina, insisting that her parents be seated in the segregated hall where she is performing. Later, in an interview on French radio, she recalls her Juilliard education and her rejection from the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia, which had no place for a young black woman interested in classical music. We catch a glimpse of her composing “To Be Young, Gifted and Black” in the company of its inspiration, the playwright Lorraine Hansberry. We learn that she had a daughter and was active in the civil rights movement.But the threads that would connect these data points into something coherent — let alone revelatory, moving or provocative — are never supplied. Instead, we are treated to a bizarre, shambling drama about Simone’s relationship, in her last decade, with Clifton Henderson (David Oyelowo), who was her assistant and then her manager.They meet in Los Angeles, where Simone has been placed in a psychiatric ward after pulling a gun on a record-company executive. Clifton, a nurse, treats her kindly and is aware of her fame, so she drops some cash on him (literally) and spirits him away to the South of France, where she leads a dissipated expat life. Existing on Champagne and cigarettes, she pouts and sleeps and swears at poor Clifton, refusing to eat the food he prepares her and occasionally throwing things at him.In her early 60s, she still intermittently performs and records, but her erratic behavior, some of it the result of bipolar disorder, keeps her from the comeback she desires and deserves. To the extent that “Nina” has a plot, it involves Clifton’s efforts to help her and preserve his own patience and dignity.But their interactions, too, feel like a weird cabaret act, or like outtakes from a sitcom about a crazy diva and her loyal servant. Ms. Mort’s writing lacks psychological texture, and her direction generates little intensity, or even continuity.To say nothing of relevance. Ms. Garbus’s documentary implicitly linked Simone’s public career and private travails to the racial and sexual politics of the present. There are few musicians whose work feels so permanently urgent, whose contribution still demands to be grappled with and understood. It gives me no pleasure to say that “Nina” contributes nothing to that understanding.“Nina” is not rated. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.