https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/19/us/charlotte-officer-argues-that-shooting-black-man-at-door-was-self-defense.html
Shooting Unarmed Black Man Was Self-Defense, Officer’s Lawyer Tells Charlotte Jury - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Kerrick  Randall,Ferrell  Jonathan A,Charlotte (NC),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Jury System
Aug. 18, 2015
4694
CHARLOTTE, N.C. —  The lawyer for a white Charlotte police officer charged with voluntary manslaughter concluded his defense on Tuesday by shifting accusations onto the black former college football player who died in the 2013 shooting, portraying the unarmed victim as a would-be burglar who dared the police to kill him.The officer, Randall Kerrick, faces up to 11 years in prison if he is found guilty of using excessive force in the death of the former football player, Jonathan Ferrell, in the early hours of Sept. 14, 2013. Slightly more than two weeks after the trial began, lawyers for both sides made their final appeals to a jury of eight women and four men — of whom seven are white, three African-American and two Hispanic.Mr. Ferrell, 24, had wrecked his car on a dark stretch of road and walked to a house in eastern Charlotte when the homeowner called 911. Three police officers arrived soon after. Immediately upon seeing Mr. Ferrell in the dark, one officer fired his Taser and missed. Officer Kerrick then opened fire, hitting Mr. Ferrell 10 times and killing him.The verdict hinges not only on whether jurors decide that Officer Kerrick was acting in self-defense but on whether they think that the officer “believed it to be necessary” to kill Mr. Ferrell in order to protect himself or someone else, Judge Robert C. Ervin told them.Officer Kerrick’s lead lawyer, George V. Laughrun II, argued in his closing statement that Mr. Ferrell, who had just walked barefoot from the wreckage of his fiancée’s Toyota Camry to a nearby subdivision, intended to commit a crime. He showed jurors the white front door of Sarah McCartney’s house, which had several small dents. Mrs. McCartney, the homeowner, testified that Mr. Ferrell had kicked the door, prompting her to call 911. When the police found Mr. Ferrell walking down a nearby road, Mr. Laughrun said, “it was because he was looking for some other place, some other victim maybe.”Prosecutors rejected that characterization. “They want to demonize this young man,” said Deputy Attorney General Arden Harris.“It’s easy to write that person off when you can demonize them and say they were up to no good,” Mr. Harris said. “There’s nothing further from the truth. It’s a bunch of lies.”Officer Kerrick, who was suspended without pay, testified that he had no choice but to shoot because he thought Mr. Ferrell might try to take his gun. Officer Thornell Little, who was also at the scene, backed up that appraisal in his testimony for the defense, saying he thought that had the officers “gotten to a tussle with him, he would’ve probably, you know, tried to go for one of our guns.”If that were true, prosecutors argue, Officer Kerrick had many other options besides shooting, including disarming the weapon by dropping the magazine, or fending off Mr. Ferrell by using his nightclub, pepper spray, fists or feet.Mr. Laughrun highlighted testimony from Officer Adam Neal, who was also on the scene, in which he described Mr. Ferrell, who had drunk beer and smoked marijuana earlier that night, as looking “like he was in a zombie state.”Despite the case’s racial overtones, particularly in light of the national “Black Lives Matter” movement and protests over police violence against African-Americans, prosecutors made little mention of race during the trial.Still, Mr. Laughrun pounced on Mr. Harris’s choice to paraphrase the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s maxim that “nothing in the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity.” Using the quotation “was an attempt to play the race card,” Mr. Laughrun told jurors, adding, “You ought to be offended.”Several jurors shuddered as prosecutors showed photos of Mr. Ferrell’s bullet-torn body, and reminded them that the former Florida A&M University football player had moved to Charlotte from Tallahassee, Fla., to start a life with his fiancée.When it was his turn, Mr. Laughrun pointed out the family members of Officer Kerrick in the courtroom and called the officer, who joined the force after several years as a dogcatcher, a “warrior” whose job placed him “in a battle every day.” Asking jurors to imagine “their worst day,” he then at least twice compared Officer Kerrick’s trauma of having killed Mr. Ferrell to jurors’ memories of the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.Mr. Laughrun even appealed to the family history of Judge Ervin, whose grandfather Senator Sam J. Ervin Jr. chaired the Watergate Committee hearings that led to President Richard M. Nixon’s resignation in 1974. Echoing the famous question asked in the hearings, Mr. Laughrun asked jurors to consider: “What did Randall Wesley Kerrick know, and when did he know it when responding to the call?”