https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/23/arts/television/stephen-colbert-bruce-loveless-sex-scandal.html
Stephen Colbert Is Missing Out on Perfectly Good Sex Scandals - The New York Times
Colbert  Stephen,Corden  James (1978- ),Noah  Trevor (1984- ),O'Brien  Conan,Stewart  Jon,Trump  Donald J,Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (TV Program),The Late Late Show with James Corden (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
March 23, 2017
3763
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.The signs of Trump-joke fatigue are all over late night these days. On “The Late Late Show,” James Corden seemed to flash a look of true exasperation as he launched into his first joke on Wednesday.And a little earlier in the night, Stephen Colbert said he was outraged that he had been spending so much time on jokes about President Trump that he missed a sex scandal seemingly made for late-night TV: one involving a rear admiral named Bruce Loveless who is accused of trading state secrets for sex parties.On “The Daily Show,” Trevor Noah pointed to a story that hasn’t gotten a lot of coverage in the American media: At least 60 people who planned on attending an African economic conference in Los Angeles were denied visas to enter the United States, leaving the conference without a single visiting African expert. Mr. Noah pounced on the absurdity of the situation.James Corden paid tribute to his hometown of London after the deadly attack there on Wednesday.Mr. Corden got a little territorial when Josh Gad admitted that he’d really like to try hosting “The Late Late Show.”Is it honestly possible to lip-read “appletini”?We’re nearing the end of what has been a very unpredictable March Madness. Shaquille O’Neal, who enjoyed an illustrious college career at Louisiana State University before departing early for the N.B.A., will appear on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” on Thursday. Is his bracket as screwed up by now as most of ours? Maybe we’ll find out.In this week’s Popcast — the New York Times music podcast — the critics Jon Pareles and Jon Caramanica discuss the life and work of Chuck Berry, who died on Saturday. “Chuck Berry was the mastermind” of rock ’n’ roll, Mr. Pareles says. “Elvis Presley was the voice and the costumes and the moves, but Chuck Berry was the grand master.”