https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/arts/television/late-night-comedians-donald-trump.html
On Late Night, Comedians Grapple With Trump’s Victory - The New York Times
Bee  Samantha,Colbert  Stephen,Fallon  Jimmy,Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Full Frontal With Samantha Bee (TV Program),The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),Television,Meyers  Seth,Comedy and Humor
Nov. 10, 2016
3769
Describing the unity with which he and his fellow artists opposed the Vietnam War, Kurt Vonnegut once told an interviewer, “It was like a laser beam. We were all aimed in the same direction. The power of this weapon turns out to be that of a custard pie dropped from a stepladder six feet high.”So it goes for many of America’s late-night TV hosts, who for more than a year aimed their comedic barbs at Donald J. Trump, only to see him elected president on Tuesday night. As these hosts returned to their programs on Wednesday, each was faced with the uneasy task of addressing Mr. Trump’s victory, like it or not, helping their audiences process any shock or disappointment they might feel and trying to find humor in what had happened.Here is how some of these hosts spoke on Wednesday night about Mr. Trump’s election.In a filmed sequence that played before the show’s opening credits, Ms. Bee joyously discovered that it was Nov. 9 and celebrated that the election was finally over, frolicking with nuns, cops, Katie Couric and former “Daily Show” colleagues like Jon Stewart and Larry Wilmore. Then she woke up to realize it had all been a dream.Ms. Bee, who is from Toronto, blamed herself for Mr. Trump’s victory, noting in her opening monologue: “Yesterday I voted in an American election for the first time and I broke America.”She also assigned responsibility to the majority of white voters who had cast their ballots for Mr. Trump. “I guess ruining Brooklyn was just a dry run. The Caucasian nation showed up in droves to vote Trump,” she said, rejecting any complaints about black voter turnout. “How many times do we expect black people to build our country for us?”Onscreen she played a portion of the concession speech by Hillary Clinton, in which she said, “To all the little girls who are watching this, never doubt that you are valuable and powerful and deserving of every chance and opportunity in the world to pursue and achieve your own dreams.”Then Ms. Bee said: “If Ms. Rodham’s not in the White House, that’s O.K. One of those girls is going to be. We still have millions of nasty women who aren’t going away, and as long as women over 25 are still allowed on television, I’ll be here cheering them on. Although that may only be until late January.”Sitting in front of a backdrop that showed the White House with a Trump logo emblazoned over it, Mr. Noah tried to make peace with the fact that Mrs. Clinton had won the popular vote but lost the Electoral College, and he acknowledged his shock that Mr. Trump had won.“I genuinely cannot believe that this has happened. Even the Trumps can’t believe that this happened,” he said.Showing a photograph of a stunned Mr. Trump and his family watching the election results on Tuesday night, Mr. Noah said, “Look at his face. Look at that man. That is the face of a man whose bluff has been called, and he’s only holding a two. And now that face will be the face that represents America to the world. That is the face that will address the nation after a tragedy. That is the face that will command the most powerful military in the world. Washington, Lincoln, Roosevelt, Kennedy, Reagan, Obama. And now, Trump. One of these things is not like the other. And if you’re thinking it’s Obama because he’s black, you probably voted for Trump.”After playing a portion of Mr. Trump’s victory speech, Mr. Noah observed: “Trump was gracious. He was humble. He was compassionate. I’ll tell you now, if that guy ran for president, he also would have lost to Donald Trump.”Mr. Colbert, who had an uneasy time on Tuesday night trying to satirize the election as it unfolded, returned on Wednesday with another live broadcast. In a cold open, he met on the roof of the Ed Sullivan Theater with the astronomer Neil deGrasse Tyson, who was looking through a telescope and urged Mr. Colbert to take a more cosmic perspective on recent events.“When you do that,” Mr. Tyson said, “all Earth’s problems dissolve away, into the infinitude of the space-time continuum.” He asked: “Does that make you feel any better?”“No,” Mr. Colbert said.So they threw the telescope off the roof and let it smash on the street below. In a lengthy opening monologue, Mr. Colbert uneasily confessed, “I’m not sure what to believe about anything anymore.” Noting the air of defeat that he sensed all around him in New York, Mr. Colbert said, “This is what it feels like when America is made great again. I was really hoping it would feel better, because this suuuuuuuucks.”He showed footage of anti-Trump marches that had passed by the Ed Sullivan Theater and carried on a soul-searching conversation with a cartoon representation of God, who has just found out that Mr. Trump won the presidency. (“Oh, I guess I shouldn’t be surprised white men came out on top again, considering how everyone assumes I look,” God said.) Looking skyward, Mr. Colbert said, “At this point, we just have to accept that you chose Donald Trump to be our president.” To which God responded, “Hey, don’t pin this on me — my wife will kill me.”Mr. Fallon, who was criticized for a chummy interview he conducted in September with Mr. Trump on “The Tonight Show,” opened his program on Wednesday with a short set of jokes that poked fun at Mr. Trump’s victory.“Republicans hope he’ll keep his promise to build a wall, and Democrats hope he’ll keep his promise not to accept the election results,” Mr. Fallon said. He added, “After the results came in, Donald Trump gave a big victory speech. He said he couldn’t have done it without the love of his life — his rock, his better half, F.B.I. Director James Comey.”Then, after sitting down at his desk, Mr. Fallon made a brief but more sincere set of remarks: “I know today has been a crazy day. Some people are sad. Some people are scared and nervous. Some people are happy. I think most people are just exhausted. But as President Obama said, no matter what happened, the sun will rise in the morning. This morning I was walking around New York City and this guy came up to me and he said, ‘Hey, we’re going to need some laughs tonight.’ And that’s what we do. My job is to come out here every night and try make you laugh, take your mind off things for a while.”He added, “We’ll be here for you, if you need us, and I’m so thankful that you’re there for us too.”Mr. Meyers, who spent much of the presidential campaign denouncing Mr. Trump in satirical monologues about his personal character and his proposed policies, opened his show on Wednesday with a desk-side speech in which he grappled with the reality of the victory.“I felt a lot of emotions last night and into today,” he said. “Some sadness, some anger, some fear. But I’m also aware that those are the same emotions a lot of Trump supporters felt; emotions that led them to make their choice. And it would be wrong for me to think my emotions are somehow more authentic than their emotions.”Mr. Meyers said he was hopeful that Mr. Trump will be compassionate to the many minority groups who had been offended by his campaign. “And, in general,” he said, “I am hopeful for President Trump, because hope is always the best possible path to take. And one thing that makes me hopeful is we know from interviews he’s given over the years that he has, at any given point, held every position on every issue. He’s been pro-choice, pro-life, for the Iraq war, against the Iraq war, pretty much his only consistent position has been anti-Rosie O’Donnell. So I’m hopeful that he’s not actually a racist, and that he just used racist rhetoric to court voters. Because when you’re courting someone, you’re always willing to pretend you’re something you’re not. For example, when you first start dating someone, you’ll agree to go apple picking.”