http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/02/world/asia/china.html
Attackers With Knives Kill 29 at Chinese Rail Station - The New York Times
Kunming (China),Deaths (Fatalities),Stations and Terminals (Passenger),Murders and Attempted Murders,Railroads,Uighurs (Chinese Ethnic Group),China
March 1, 2014
8152
HONG KONG —  A group of assailants wielding knives stormed into a railway station in southwestern China on Saturday, slashing employees and commuters and leaving at least 29 people dead and 130 wounded, according to Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency. The local government indicated that the attackers were Uighur separatists seeking an independent homeland in the Xinjiang region in China’s far west.The attack, in Yunnan Province, was far from Xinjiang, and if carried out by members of the largely Muslim Uighur minority could imply that the volatile tensions between them and the government might be spilling beyond that restive region.The violence erupted about 9 p.m. in the city of Kunming, when the assailants, all wearing similar clothing, entered the square in front of the station as well as a ticket sales hall, according to the official Yunnan news service.“According to eyewitnesses, the group of males held knives and all wore the same black clothing,” said the China News Service, another state-run news agency. “They slashed at whoever they saw, and at the scene there were many people injured.” Photographs circulated by Chinese news websites, which they said were taken after the attack, showed men and women sprawled and bleeding.If the Kunming government’s account is correct, the attack would be the worst violence outside of Xinjiang to stem from discontent by Uighurs over what they call repression by the country’s Han Chinese majority. The central government in Beijing said Uighur separatists were behind a small but dramatic attack in October near Tiananmen Square, when a vehicle plowed into a crowd, killing two tourists and injuring dozens. Three people in the vehicle also died.The latest attack appears certain to prompt the authorities to increase the already heavy security across Xinjiang, which could deepen the divide between Uighurs and Han Chinese there that has been fueling violence in the region. News reports on Saturday did not identify the attackers, but on Sunday the Kunming government said that there was evidence at the scene “showing that this was an act of violent terror planned and organized by Xinjiang separatists,” according to Xinhua. Although the government’s statement did not say the attackers were Uighurs, it contained language often used to refer to members of the minority group.Many Uighurs resent the government’s controls on their religious life and say the growing presence of Han Chinese people in Xinjiang has deprived them of jobs, land and opportunities. The authorities have consistently blamed violence there on extremist groups inspired and organized from abroad. Advocates of Uighur self-determination have said the Chinese government’s own repressive policies have seeded the violence.After the slashing attack, President Xi Jinping of China said the government would “sternly punish the terrorists according to the law and resolutely put down their arrogant audacity.”The Ministry of Public Security issued a statement vowing that there would be no mercy for the assailants. “No matter what the motive of the perpetrators, to spill innocent blood is to become an enemy of all decency under heaven,” the statement said.According to an article in The Beijing News, a student who witnessed the attack, Wang Dinggeng, said the assailants included women. They pulled long knives from underneath their garments and began slashing at people.“Inside the hall,” Mr. Wang said, “there were still many people lined up to buy tickets, and the people outside came pouring in saying, ‘Murder!’ ”