https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/16/us/louisiana-funeral-alton-sterling-grief.html
Funeral for Alton Sterling Is an Expression of Grief and Anger - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Funerals and Memorials,Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Baton Rouge (La)
July 15, 2016
3659
BATON ROUGE, La. — They called Alton B. Sterling “the CD Man” and “Big Boy;” he was a 37-year-old father of five who sold bootleg music in front of a neighborhood convenience store.It is fair to say that most of the dignitaries who spoke at Mr. Sterling’s funeral here on Friday had probably never heard of him 11 days ago. But in a new age of social media, videos captured by cellphone, and a movement to put the police-related killings of black men under intense scrutiny, this Baton Rouge, La., father was laid to rest in a fashion that “the CD Man” would never have imagined.“It’s just hard to believe,” a former neighbor of Mr. Sterling’s, Junickol Whitfield, 34, said from the upper rows as she looked down at the scene. “If he could see this, he’d be smiling.”The funeral was held in the 7,500-seat arena where Southern University plays basketball and where many of the community’s graduations are held. The speakers included a Baton Rouge city councilwoman and members of both the State Senate and Congress. Resounding speeches were given by the likes of the Rev. Al Sharpton and the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Thunderous applause went to a representative of the Nation of Islam who slammed systematic discrimination; and Abdullah Muflahi, the store owner Mr. Sterling had befriended, got a standing ovation before uttering a word.“Alton wasn’t just a CD man in front of my store; he was one of my friends,” Mr. Muflahi said, describing Mr. Sterling’s “Southern hospitality” when Mr. Muflahi first arrived from Detroit. “I’m sad to see that we are going to have an empty spot in front of the store.”Mr. Muflahi was one of the witnesses who videotaped Mr. Sterling’s shooting death by a Baton Rouge police officer on July 5. Two officers went to Mr. Muflahi’s store, the Triple S Food Mart, in response to a report that a black man in a red shirt had threatened the caller with a gun.Mr. Muflahi captured images of the officers pinning Mr. Sterling down and the sound of the words “Gun! Gun!” from an officer. And then gunfire.In court papers, the police said that an officer shot Mr. Sterling to “stop the threat,” because he had reached for a gun, which was later found in a pocket of his pants. That explanation fell flat in Baton Rouge, the capital of Louisiana, where hundreds of people have since taken to the streets to demand justice. Hundreds of people were arrested, and the district attorney on Friday dropped charges against nearly 100 protesters, said Sima Atri, a lawyer for many of the protesters. DeRay Mckesson, a leading Black Lives Matter activist, said that he was among those whose charges were dropped.The shooting was followed a day later by the death of a school cafeteria supervisor in Minnesota, who was shot by a police officer after he reportedly was pulled over for a broken taillight. Their deaths motivated an Army veteran with a disdain for white people, and police in particular, to kill five Dallas police officers at a Black Lives Matter march on July 7.Mr. Jackson noted that the man who shot the Dallas officers, Micah Johnson, did not come from Black Lives Matter, but from the United States military.“Black Lives Matter did not train him,” he said. “The military did.”In a 16-minute eulogy, Mr. Sharpton denounced the Dallas killings, but said that, unlike a long list of killings of black men at the hands of police, the people who do wrong by killing police officers are usually held accountable.“When some kill wrong, they are held accountable,” he said. “When others are killed wrong, you find ways to excuse it.”He mentioned a few by name: Eric Garner on Staten Island and 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland.“Nobody was wrong?” Mr. Sharpton said.He urged the audience to boycott companies that support legislation that prevents police from being criminally charged after being accused of using excessive force.After the service, Mr. Sharpton declined to name the companies, except to say that there were three; one of them in the food industry and another a big box superstore.“We intend now to go to the economic stage,” Mr. Sharpton said in an interview. “I have done every one of these funerals in the last two years and led the marches. We’ve got to continue marching, but we’ve got to go to the next step. We’ve got to make an economic example.”