https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/dining/cervos-restaurant-openings-nyc.html
Cervo’s, Inspired by the Seafood of Spain and Portugal, to Open - The New York Times
Restaurants,Relocation of Business,Rebelle (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Genuine Liquorette (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Brandywine Realty Trust,AvroKO
June 27, 2017
6077
CERVO’S Seafood that looks to Spain and Portugal is the focus of this restaurant, which is decorated with wood-paneled walls and decoratively tiled floors. The menu draws inspiration from the Iberian coasts, with dishes like clams in white wine with garlic and parsley, monkfish liver on toast, Spanish mackerel crudo, bean salad with mussels and squid, octopus a la plancha, and braised chicken with Portuguese piri piri. Nialls Fallon and the chef Nick Perkins are the partners, Aaron Crowder is also in the kitchen, and their aim is to use sustainable seafood. At the same time, Mr. Fallon is not abandoning his passion for high-quality tinned Spanish and Portuguese seafood. “We’ll definitely be using it,” he said, “and also preserving our own with salting and pickling.” The wines, exclusively from the Iberian Peninsula, most notably the islands and coastal areas, include sherries and Madeiras by the glass. The restaurant will be closed on Mondays and Tuesdays, at least at the outset. (Opens Thursday): 43 Canal Street (Orchard Street), 212-226-2545, cervosnyc.com.AIR’S CHAMPAGNE PARLOR Ariel Arce, the wine director at Birds & Bubbles, is on her own here in the two-story space that was Ladybird and Riddling Widow, where she also served as wine director. She has created two parlorlike areas for serving champagne, and places an emphasis on reasonable prices for her wines in an effort to give them broader appeal. She has done the same with her caviar menu, offering American sturgeon caviar at $28 per half ounce, for example. (Wednesday): 127 Macdougal Street (West Third Street), 212-420-4777, airschampagneparlor.com.DANTE AT GENUINE AvroKO is turning its diner-style Genuine Superette into this new concept, combining food and drinks from Genuine’s inventory with specialties from Dante, a venerable bar and cafe on Macdougal Street in the Village. The menu will feature assorted fried foods and flatbreads, among other items, by Dante’s chef de cuisine, Rachael Polhill. The company expects to announce changes to Genuine Liquorette, on the lower level, soon: 191 Grand Street (Mulberry Street), 646-726-6433, eatgenuine.com. ICELANDIC FISH & CHIPS The Icelandic restaurant Skal came and went on the Lower East Side a couple of years ago. Now, there’s a new entry on the dining scene: a bistro-style import from Reykjavik serving seafood harvested sustainably and flown here from Iceland. A daily selection of fish, including cod, wolf fish and tusk, is fried in spelt batter or baked. Other choices, like arctic char and langoustines, are roasted, and there’s a list of vegetable sides to go with them. A mayonnaise-like dip made with the thick Icelandic yogurt Skyr is also served, in assorted flavors. The owners, Erna Kaaber and Helen Olafsdottir, are giving the duplex space homey touches, with personal artifacts and photos. (Thursday): 28 Seventh Avenue South (Morton Street), 646-954-2280, icelandicfishandchips.com.JANE BROOKLYN In January, Jane, an American bistro on West Houston Street, was sold to RBM Group, which owns Docks Oyster Bar and the Sarabeth’s chain. Now, a Brooklyn branch of Jane, with 100 seats, two dining rooms and two bars, and garden tables, is opening in the space that was Harris Salat’s Ganso Yaki. Mr. Salat is a partner in this venture: 515 Atlantic Avenue (Third Avenue), Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, 718-567-5263, janerestaurant.com.MAKIMAKI Several places around the city serve freshly made hand rolls, but the specialty here is sushi rolls, or maki, prepared and sliced to order. Near the entrance is a counter where teas and iced drinks from Hon Yama, an 800-year-old company, are on offer. (Thursday): 1369 Avenue of the Americas (55th Street), 212-245-4550, makimaki.nyc.MAS (FARMHOUSE) The renovations at Galen Zamarra’s West Village charmer have been completed after a kitchen fire about a year ago, and the space’s look has been elevated with more elegant touches. The chef’s seasonal approach to the menu remains in place. (Saturday): 39 Downing Street (Bedford Street), 212-255-1790, masfarmhouse.com.MINNIE’S Millie Stallings, a 24-year-old first-time restaurateur whose family is in the hospitality business, is opening this American spot with light, seasonal food like whipped sheep’s milk ricotta with peaches and farro with spring vegetables. She also evokes her childhood by serving her family’s recipe for pink cake: 29 Clinton Street (Stanton Street), 917-856-4999, minniesonclinton.com.NAOKI Tucked down an alley in the middle of a Chelsea block, the former Sueños is now this restaurant, with an $80 tasting menu of varied Japanese dishes. Dinner starts with an assortment of eight appetizers presented in a basket, and can end with one of many desserts (for an additional fee). There is a Zen-style garden in back. (Thursday): 311 West 17th Street, 646-861-0086, naokinyc.com.SUGAR FREAK This taste of New Orleans has moved across the street: 37-11 30th Avenue, Astoria, Queens, 718-606-1900, sugarfreak.com.WALNUT STREET CAFÉ The partners in Rebelle and Pearl & Ash on the Bowery, Branden McRill, Patrick Cappiello and the chef Daniel Eddy, are opening this restaurant near 30th Street Station in Philadelphia, and the University of Pennsylvania and Drexel campuses. It is a partnership with Brandywine Realty Trust, and Melissa Weller, formerly at Per Se, will be in charge of the pastries. (Friday): 2929 Walnut Street (South 30th Street), 215-867-8067, walnutstreetcafe.com.JEREMY SALAMON has been promoted to executive chef from sous-chef at the Eddy in the East Village, replacing Brendan McHale.KAMRAN NASEEM, formerly at Junoon, is now the chef de cuisine at Gran Morsi in TriBeCa.TED PRYOR, who was the executive chef at Sea Fire Grill, is now at the Royal 35 Steakhouse in Midtown.MARCUS SAMUELSSON, the chef and an owner of Red Rooster Harlem and Streetbird Rotisserie, will be crossing the river to Greenpoint, Brooklyn. There, he will be opening a restaurant in more than 4,000 square feet of space in a residential tower being completed on the waterfront. As first reported in The New York Post on Tuesday, details about the restaurant, its name or opening date have not been decided. It will not be a version of Red Rooster, and it will have outdoor seating. In an email, Mr. Samuelsson said he was pleased to be able to “build something totally new, fun and fitting for the Greenpoint waterfront”: 21 India Street (West Street), Greenpoint, Brooklyn.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.