https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/14/theater/director-pulls-hamlet-from-theater-for-a-new-audience.html
Director Pulls ‘Hamlet’ From Theater for a New Audience - The New York Times
Theater,Theater for a New Audience,Hamlet (Play),Gold  Sam (1978- ),Horowitz  Jeffrey,Public Theater,Isaac  Oscar,Shakespeare  William
July 13, 2016
7618
It seemed to be a coup for Theater for a New Audience: Its first summer Shakespeare production would be “Hamlet,” with the much-lauded Tony-winning director Sam Gold at the helm, and the rising Hollywood star Oscar Isaac in the title role.The play, announced in April and scheduled to open next June at the Polonsky Shakespeare Center in Brooklyn, had been in the works since 2014. Tickets were sold to subscribers, and a creative team was assembled.But the production has fallen apart.Last month Mr. Gold, citing insurmountable artistic differences, backed out and took the play — and Mr. Isaac — to the Public Theater, which is in talks to add the production to its 2016-17 season. Theater for a New Audience canceled its “Hamlet.”The production’s move from one nonprofit theater to another is unusual. Even more of an anomaly is the response of Jeffrey Horowitz, Theater for a New Audience’s artistic director, who has decided to go public with the details of what happened.“It’s a bad precedent for not-for-profits,” Mr. Horowitz said of the play’s cancellation. “Creative artists should not take a production away. It hurts the field if that kind of thing can happen.”Mr. Gold declined to comment and deferred to the Public, which said in a statement, “We are in early discussions with these Public alumni (Mr. Gold and Mr. Isaac) to see if we can help make their production possible next season.” (Mr. Gold directed “Fun Home” at the Public, which later went to Broadway and won him the Tony; Mr. Isaac, long before his recent turn in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens,” was in “Romeo and Juliet” and “Two Gentlemen of Verona” at the Public’s Shakespeare in the Park.)The first apparent fissure in Mr. Horowitz and Mr. Gold’s collaboration came on June 1, when Mr. Gold met with Jonathan Kalb, a dramaturge with Theater for a New Audience, to discuss Mr. Gold’s editing of the text of “Hamlet,” which Mr. Gold described in a May 27 email to Mr. Horowitz as a “pretty aggressive adaptation/cut of the play.”At first the meeting was cordial, Mr. Kalb later wrote in an email to Mr. Horowitz that was shared with The New York Times. At a Dean & DeLuca in Midtown, Mr. Gold talked about his “longstanding interest in simplicity, unpretentiousness and theater that travels unstable boundaries where fiction and reality blur into one another,” according to the email. They agreed that “Hamlet” would be an ideal play to explore from that perspective.But Mr. Kalb was also there to figure out whether the play would be trimmed or radically adapted, because Theater for a New Audience does not produce Shakespeare adaptations.“I raised questions of how and when Gold planned to do his work on the text, whether he understood that Jeffrey would want to be consulted, and whether he might want to postpone firm discussions until the workshop,” Mr. Kalb wrote. He described Mr. Gold’s response as “defensive.”Within days, Mr. Gold met with Mr. Horowitz to withdraw from the production, saying he didn’t feel supported artistically, according to Mr. Horowitz. They agreed not to settle on a decision immediately, though. Mr. Gold waited a little more than a week to give official word of his departure.What followed were two weeks of meetings, phone calls and emails in which Mr. Horowitz and Oskar Eustis, artistic director of the Public, tried to work out a co-production of Mr. Gold’s “Hamlet.”Among the proposals was having the play preview at the Public but run at the Polonsky. Mr. Horowitz also offered to back off entirely, so that Mr. Eustis would be the only artistic leader Mr. Gold needed to speak with. “I have no ego here,” Mr. Horowitz said he remembered telling Mr. Eustis. “I just don’t want this to be canceled.”But Mr. Gold wrote to Mr. Horowitz on June 20, “I’ve decided to no longer pursue a production of ‘Hamlet’ at Theater for a New Audience.”Another option was to have the play run at the Public, with seats set aside for Theater for a New Audience’s subscribers. But if no proposal worked for Mr. Gold, Mr. Horowitz wrote in an email to Mr. Eustis, his theater would “vigorously defend its integrity and what we believe is unfair, damaging and an injustice.” The email ended nonetheless with his expressing a hope for a “creative outcome: Two theaters and two artistic leaders work together to support exciting artists working on a great play.”By July 3, any chances of a co-production had been dashed for logistical reasons. The Public is also planning to present a different “Hamlet” as part of its touring Mobile Unit division. (The Public would not confirm those plans, which have not been announced.)“There should have been a solution,” Mr. Horowitz said. “It’s just not right.”Theater for a New Audience ended up quickly making arrangements for a “Measure for Measure” production, directed by Simon Godwin, for next June. Without a star like Mr. Isaac, the theater projected, “Measure” would make half the money that “Hamlet” would have.