https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/us/politics/trump-budget-pentagon-defense-department.html
Buoyed by Trump Budget Plan, Pentagon Draws Up a Shopping List - The New York Times
Defense Department,Federal Budget (US),United States Politics and Government,United States Defense and Military Forces,Trump  Donald J
March 16, 2017
1621
WASHINGTON — The biggest beneficiary in President Trump’s budget — the Defense Department — released a broad wish list on Thursday, signaling what it would do with its proposed $54 billion windfall, filling its shopping cart with desires including Apache helicopters for the Army, anti-submarine planes for the Navy, fighter jets and more training for selected personnel.Few people expect that the Pentagon will emerge from what are expected to be protracted budget negotiations in Congress with all of its requests intact, given the threat of mandatory spending cuts that have acted as a brake on military spending. But now, the start of the budget process, is the time for dreams, and military officials unveiled proposals that sprinkled extra money throughout the enormous Pentagon bureaucracy.To help the Pentagon figure out how to spend all that money, Mr. Trump announced that he intended to nominate a Boeing executive, Patrick M. Shanahan, for deputy secretary of defense. If confirmed, Mr. Shanahan would succeed Robert O. Work, a holdover from the Obama administration who stayed on at the behest of Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.Like other cabinet agencies, the Pentagon has been struggling to find people to fill top posts. Several top candidates have withdrawn from consideration amid various problems, including having trouble severing business ties.On Thursday, the White House also announced plans to nominate a budget chief, a deputy budget chief, a deputy to the Pentagon’s policy chief and two other top positions.Mr. Trump’s proposed budget seeks $639 billion for the military in the next fiscal year, a boost of $52 billion over current spending. In addition, the White House wants an additional $2 billion for other national defense programs outside the Department of Defense, for a $54 billion total increase.Mick Mulvaney, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, called the proposal a “hard-power budget.”“The president very clearly wants to send a message to our allies and our potential adversaries that this is a strong-power administration,” he said.The budget proposal does not detail how the Pentagon would spend the extra money. But the Defense Department gave a preview in a request for additional money for the final five months of the current fiscal year, which includes an extra $25 billion in base military spending. The details there, budget experts said, forecast what the Pentagon will seek in the next fiscal year.The Pentagon wants an additional $5.1 billion to accelerate the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, as well as to support operations in Afghanistan. It also wants to spend more money on “readiness,” a catchall phrase that basically means preparing the military for whatever the country — or president — asks of it. After budget cuts and a drain from the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the request said the various military services “simply are not strong enough to protect vital interests from the worldwide threats to U.S. national security and homeland.”The Defense Department request veers away from the president’s stated warmth toward Russia and its president, Vladimir V. Putin. “Russia and China continue to rise and assert themselves, often in a destabilizing fashion or at the expense of U.S. interests,” the budget request says, explaining why the military needs more money for readiness.Todd Harrison, a budget expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said some of the Pentagon’s proposals “may be a bit shortsighted,” as there was no guarantee that increased funding would continue even if the department received the money it was seeking now.Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and the head of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said the budget proposal did not provide enough money to the Pentagon, noting that missions across the military have been grounded or troops are far from prepared to fight.