https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/19/us/2-former-albuquerque-officers-on-trial-in-killing-of-homeless-man.html
2 Former Albuquerque Officers on Trial in Killing of Homeless Man - The New York Times
Albuquerque (NM),Boyd  James M (1976-2014),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Homeless Persons,Sandy  Keith P (1975- ),Perez  Dominique W (1981- ),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Mental Health and Disorders
Sept. 18, 2016
1338
ALBUQUERQUE — The 911 call to the Albuquerque police on March 16, 2014, sounded routine: A man had been illegally camping in the foothills of the Sandia Mountains, just 100 yards from the caller’s backyard. Could an officer come by and take him away? But the man refused to comply.Officers arrived in waves, a handful at first, then more of them, bringing stun guns on their belts, rifles on their shoulders and dogs by their leashes. The man, James Boyd, seemed angry, incoherent. He was wielding two knives, and when officers ordered him to drop them, Mr. Boyd bellowed, “Don’t attempt to give me, the Department of Defense, another directive.”Four hours into the standoff, two police officers fired six shots at Mr. Boyd, hitting him in the back and arms. On Monday, they will stand trial on charges of second-degree murder and, their lawyers said, both will testify in their own defense.The prosecution of Keith Sandy, who has retired since the shooting, and Dominique Perez, who was fired after his indictment, is only the latest against police officers accused of killing civilians while on duty. Two other trials are underway, in Norfolk, Va., and Monroe, La., for the killings of men who were homeless or mentally ill, as was Mr. Boyd.Last month in Portsmouth, Va., an officer was convicted of voluntary manslaughter for fatally shooting an unarmed man in a case that fits a more familiar narrative: The officer was white and the suspect was black.Mr. Boyd was white; the officers who shot him were white and Hispanic.About 1,000 times a year, an on-duty police officer shoots and kills somebody in the United States, according to an analysis by Philip M. Stinson, an associate professor of criminal justice at Bowling Green State University in Ohio, using numbers from the Justice Department and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.The vast majority of the shootings were deemed justified: Since 2005, when Dr. Stinson began his analysis, only 75 officers were charged with murder or manslaughter. Of those, 26 were convicted.“These used to be local stories, quite often,” Dr. Stinson said. “Now, these cases are making national and international headlines, and people from all walks of life are paying close attention.”One reason is video, which has transformed average citizens into arbiters and participants as they watch the action as it unfolds, unfiltered, on their cellphones and laptop screens.In the case of Mr. Boyd, it was video footage captured by a resident and by cameras worn by officers that showed portions of the encounter — and the shooting itself. An officer’s body camera registered more than two hours of the confrontation, including the many attempts to get Mr. Boyd to comply.At times the officers tried to humor Mr. Boyd, and called him “bro” and “dude.” Other times, they pretended to buy into Mr. Boyd’s wild claims — that he worked for the Department of Defense, or that he was on a mission with Special Forces and could kill all of them with a phone call.Then there are the images captured by Mr. Perez’s helmet camera, which offers a clear, unobstructed view of the shooting from the officer’s vantage point. Together, the videos directly contradicted the version of events given by the Albuquerque Police Department immediately after the shooting, which is that the officers had fired at Mr. Boyd as he threatened a colleague with knives. Instead, the video showed Mr. Boyd turning his back to the officers.The special prosecutor, Randi McGinn, has called the shooting a case of “officer-induced jeopardy,” saying that the police cannot pick a fight, end it with bullets and then claim self-defense.Jurors will see much of that footage during the trial. What they will not see is what happened immediately after Mr. Boyd was shot — an officer siccing a dog on him and another firing beanbag shots at him as he lay on the ground, wounded — Judge Alisa Hadfield has ruled, to avoid influencing jurors.They will also have to decide the fate of two men with different pasts. Mr. Perez served two tours in Iraq with the United States Marine Corps, receiving a Purple Heart after his convoy was hit by an improvised explosive. Mr. Sandy was fired from the New Mexico State Police for timecard fraud — he was moonlighting as a tactical instructor while on the clock — before the Albuquerque Police Department hired him in 2007.At the time of the shooting, Mr. Sandy was part of the Police Department’s Repeat Offender Project, a tactical unit with specialized weapons. The team was disbanded when the Justice Department released a scathing assessment of the police here one month after Mr. Boyd’s shooting, accusing officers of routinely violating people’s constitutional rights through an excessive use of force.“Before the Boyd shooting, the problems in the Police Department just didn’t get the attention they deserved,” said Steven Robert Allen, the policy director for the American Civil Liberties Union of New Mexico and a member of APD Forward, a coalition of groups seeking changes in the Albuquerque Police Department.“The visceral impact of the shooting and the video really galvanized the reform effort,” Mr. Allen said. “It was a major factor in keeping the conversation going and pushing them toward reform.”Between 2010 and 2014, city police officers fatally shot 23 people and wounded 14 others, according to the Justice Department assessment. That amounts to four deadly shootings per 100,000 residents, eight times the rate of deadly police shootings in New York City during the same period.Officers were also found to have kicked, punched and violently restrained nonthreatening people, including many with mental illnesses.Mr. Boyd, who had been given a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia, spent much of his adult life on the streets, in jail and in psychiatric hospitals, tormented by delusions and voices inside his head. He had been arrested after punching, kicking and throwing chairs at the police and corrections officers, though never for carrying a firearm.His family settled a federal civil suit against the city last year for $5 million.