https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/magazine/how-to-draw-blood.html
How to Draw Blood - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 14, 2017
2902
‘‘Develop intelligence in your fingers,’’ says Pamela Olton, who has been drawing blood at the Haight Ashbury Free Medical Clinic in San Francisco since 1976. Instinctively, you will look for the telltale blue of veins, but the veins of some people need to be felt rather than seen, including those of scarred intravenous drug users, the obese, the heavily tattooed and anyone with very dark skin. Learn to trust your fingertips by palpating skin with your eyes closed. Even hidden under an inch of fat tissue, a vein will have a distinctly bouncy feel that Olton likens to pressing on a water bed.Gently rub your fingers up and down the inner elbow crease, where veins are closer to the surface and held in place by tendons and muscle. The median cubital vein is usually the easiest to accurately locate and puncture. Apply a tourniquet about four to five finger widths above the jab site and ask the person to make a fist, which makes veins more prominent. Avoid what phlebotomists call ‘‘fishing,’’ or digging under the skin with your needle after failing to hit your target on the first try. ‘‘That can hurt and cause a lot of bruising,’’ Olton says. Poke veins, not arteries. Arteries pulse and carry mostly bright red blood away from the heart, whereas most veins carry darker, deoxy­genated blood back to the heart. ‘‘Don’t stick a needle into anything that’s pulsing,’’ Olton warns; a perforated artery can bleed out under the skin.To get good at finding veins, touch as many different types of forearms as possible. ‘‘Notice the difference between thin people and big, muscular football-player guys,’’ Olton says. Of her hand-eye coordination and natural steadiness around needles and blood, she says, ‘‘That’s in you or it’s not.’’ Still, practice can help you be less squeamish. At the clinic, Olton trains incoming nurses, medical assistants and phlebotomists in how to draw blood from difficult patients, most of them intravenous drug users. Sometimes that requires finding veins elsewhere, like in the hands. ‘‘There’s nothing more horrible,’’ Olton says, ‘‘than a tiny young lady who has scarred up her arms and is injecting into her thighs or some other crazy place.’’