https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/politics/republicans-maintain-control-of-house-and-party-leaders-face-new-questions.html
Republicans Extend House Control as Democratic Holdouts Fall - The New York Times
United States,Boehner  John A,Obama  Barack,Midterm Elections (2014),House of Representatives,Republican Party,Tea Party Movement,Democratic Party,Senate,Congress
Nov. 4, 2014
626
Republicans expanded their majority in the House of Representatives, riding a wave of dissatisfaction with President Obama to victories on Tuesday that will embolden Speaker John A. Boehner as he tries to manage a rebellious Tea Party caucus.Early Wednesday, it appeared that Republicans were on the verge of winning at least 10 additional seats — gains that would give them their largest majority since the 1940s.It was a dispiriting outcome for Democrats, who just a few months ago were optimistic that a badly damaged Republican brand would help them prevail in a handful of races.Some of the political casualties were the last holdouts of an era in which moderate and conservative Democrats could survive in states that were deeply Republican.Representative Nick J. Rahall II, West Virginia’s last Democrat in the House, lost one of the most expensive races this election cycle. John Barrow of Georgia, the last white Democrat to represent the Deep South, also failed to hang on.Republicans also picked up seats in blue territory, adding two in New York State.Mr. Boehner said Tuesday night that the results were “humbling.” He added: “This is not a time for celebration. It’s time for government to start getting results.”Even with the Republican gains, the overall makeup of the House was expected to change little. It will remain a place that largely reflects the bases of both political parties rather than the increasingly diverse nation it represents.When the 114th Congress convenes in January, any changes along ideological, racial or gender lines will be only at the margins.That homogeneity is particularly stark inside the Republican conference. Before Tuesday’s election, 89 percent of House Republicans were white men. The election of a few Republican women lowered that figure only slightly.Political analysts said Democrats’ hopes of retaking the House faced long odds for at least two more elections — and possibly not until after the 2020 census, when district lines are redrawn.“We’re talking about a House that’s very well sorted out,” said David Wasserman, a House political analyst at the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. “There’s very little give.”The stasis is largely a product of the redistricting that Republican-dominated state legislatures pushed through after the party’s victories in 2010. This was the first midterm election to take place under those redrawn lines, which further hem liberals and conservatives into districts that leave little doubt whether the winner will be a Democrat or a Republican.The widening urban-rural divide contributes to the polarization of the House, with cities increasingly becoming Democratic bulwarks while the much of the rest of the country grows more conservative.Though both parties have used redistricting to their advantage over the years, its effects have become more pronounced. In the 2010 midterm elections, political forecasters counted about 100 competitive races. There were 39 for this election, according to the Cook Political Report.Rarer still are so-called split districts, where the congressional representative is from a different political party than the candidate who carried the district in the last presidential election.In 1995, just before Bill Clinton was elected to a second term, 79 Republicans in the House were from districts that Mr. Clinton carried and 20 Democrats from districts that his predecessor, George Bush, carried.Today there are only nine Democrats from districts that Mitt Romney won and 17 Republicans from districts that Mr. Obama won.Republican redistricting eliminated potentially competitive races in swing states like Florida and North Carolina. In Ohio, long considered a bellwether in presidential races and among the most contested states, there was not a single unpredictable race.It was one of the most expensive campaign seasons on record, though no amount of money was going to change the fact that the balance of power was likely to remain the same. In all, spending will exceed $1.2 billion when the amounts from candidates, party committees and “super PACs” are all added up.When Mr. Boehner, of Ohio, drops his gavel in January to open the new session of Congress, his job may be no less complicated than it has been in the four years since a band of Tea Party insurgents helped sweep Republicans into power.He will say goodbye to colleagues who often generated distracting headlines, like Representatives Michele Bachmann of Minnesota and Steve Stockman of Texas, who are leaving at the end of this term.But he will also lose pragmatic moderates like Representative Spencer Bachus of Alabama, one of 26 House veterans who will not be returning.It remains to be seen how firm Mr. Boehner’s grip will be over the incoming class. And some Republicans said he faced a singular problem: a larger majority but one that may be no easier to control.“Normally, a party that’s in control wants to increase their numbers so they can more effectively jam it down the throat of the opposition party,” said Vin Weber, a former Republican congressman from Minnesota. “In this instance, the goal of Boehner and the leadership is to get to the point where they have leverage against their own most conservative members.”Interpreting their victories in the House as a mandate or a wave — as was the case in 2010 — would be a mistake, many Republicans acknowledged.“We have to now earn the trust of the American people by proving that we can govern — and govern responsibly,” said Representative Greg Walden of Oregon, who chaired the National Republican Congressional Committee. “That will earn us credibility.”