https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/us/university-of-california-berkeley-deficit.html
Deficit Threatens Stability of University of California, Berkeley, Official Says - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Dirks  Nicholas B,Tuition,Foreign Students (in US),Brown  Edmund G Jr,Napolitano  Janet,Berkeley (Calif),University of California  Berkeley,University of California
Feb. 10, 2016
8752
The chancellor of the University of California, Berkeley, said Wednesday that the university had a “substantial and growing” deficit that could threaten its long-term stability and that it needed to reduce expenses and raise revenues to maintain its position as a premier public institution.The announcement comes against the backdrop of a long-running political dispute between Gov. Jerry Brown and Janet Napolitano, the president of the University of California, over funding for the university system. Much of the dispute has centered on how much tuition is appropriate for a public university to charge, and also on whether out-of-state and foreign students are squeezing out California residents, changing the mission of what a public university should be.Last March, Ms. Napolitano announced a one-year cap for this school year on out-of-state and foreign students at the University of California, Los Angeles and Berkeley. About 25 percent of all Berkeley undergraduates this year are from other states and countries, up from 16 percent in 2011-12, the university said.But Ms. Napolitano said at the time that the system needed more money, whether through state aid or tuition increases. Out-of-state and international students pay higher rates than California residents.In a budget deal in May, Mr. Brown agreed to provide millions of dollars more to the university system, in exchange for a tuition freeze for in-state students until 2017-18. Out-of-state tuition was allowed to increase.In Wednesday’s announcement, the chancellor, Nicholas B. Dirks, said he was forming a committee to develop proposals to address the $150 million deficit, or about 6 percent of Berkeley’s $2.4 billion budget, including looking at reducing staff, particularly in administration, and using online courses, real estate and branding to bring in new revenue.Ms. Napolitano said in a statement on Wednesday that she supported the plan, while Mr. Brown declined to comment on it.A spokesman for the state’s Department of Finance said the governor had committed to nearly $3.4 billion in additional funding for the entire university system over five years.Mr. Dirks said the fundamental math was still bad. Even with the increases across the state, the greatly reduced level of state support for Berkeley “is here to stay,” he said in a telephone press conference. “There might be a little movement up, a little movement down. It’s not as volatile as the stock market.”He said Berkeley had become increasingly dependent on tuition and fees, now accounting for nearly 30 percent of total campus revenues, while state funding had dropped to about 13 percent of the budget. It was roughly half in the 1980s, Berkeley officials said.The chancellor compared Berkeley’s problems to those faced by many public universities that had lost state funding since the 2008 recession, though Berkeley’s position appears to be more secure than those of some other flagship state universities.“What we are engaged in here is a fundamental defense of the concept of the public university, a concept that we must reinvent in order to preserve,” Mr. Dirks said.But there is a sharp debate over whether the system’s elite campuses, Berkeley and U.C.L.A., are taking too many high-paying out-of-state and international students at the expense of a growing population of lower-paying California residents who want to go to state universities.Of the 10 University of California campuses, Berkeley and U.C.L.A. are the most in demand among out-of-state and foreign students.Out-of-state undergraduate students pay $38,140 in tuition and fees a year, roughly triple the amount paid by residents, $13,432, the university said.The chancellor said that some academic departments could be restructured or combined — a move that would probably face resistance from faculty members — and that the committee would seek ways to address a spending gap in intercollegiate athletics. He also said the university would work to increase alumni donations. The changes will be phased in beginning in July, Mr. Dirks said.