https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/01/world/asia/china-north-korea-defector-hyeonseo-lee.html
Q. and A.: Hyeonseo Lee on North Korean Defectors in China - The New York Times
North Korea,China,Defectors (Political),South Korea,Lee  Hyeonseo
March 31, 2016
3032
Hyeonseo Lee, who lived in a North Korean town near the border with China, often wondered why there were so many more lights on the Chinese side. One winter night in 1997, when she was 17, she walked across the frozen Yalu River to see for herself. What began as an excursion to satisfy her curiosity turned into a decade of hiding in China. In 2008, Ms. Lee made her way to South Korea, where she was granted asylum.Recently Ms. Lee, who last year published a memoir, “The Girl with Seven Names,’’ told her story at the Beijing Bookworm Literary Festival. It was a rare public speech by a North Korean defector in China, which treats defectors as illegal immigrants and returns them to North Korea, where they can face prison or even execution. Ms. Lee discussed with The New York Times her experiences in China, the plight of defectors and China’s relationship with North Korea. Here are excerpts.Q. Why did you come to Beijing?A. Beijing Bookworm invited me, but it took me six months to make a decision. I have a responsibility to protect my family. But over the six months I changed slowly.A few months ago, on one day, I got almost a hundred attacks from Chinese on Weibo. I didn’t know Chinese people hated us [North Korean defectors] that much. A lot of Chinese people believe the Chinese government, and think I’m a traitor. I thought China was the right place to deliver this talk.I don’t hate the Chinese. We’re brothers and we share a border. I just hate the government, politicians, policies, not the people. That’s why I’m here. I want to at least change some of the information they’ve been given.Chinese policy is: If you report a North Korean defector, you’ll get paid. The prices, I understand, are 3,000 to 5,000 renminbi [about $460 to $770] if you report defectors. There are Chinese in border towns who are reporting on them for the money. It’s really sad.Q. You’ve said that the South Korean National Intelligence Service advised you not to criticize China.A. They were worried my visit would bring more disaster to relations between China and South Korea. But the Chinese government — they’re not doing anything good for North Korean defectors. So what could be worse? In the long run, it will be positive if I can change at least one Chinese person’s mind.Q. What message do you want to convey to the Chinese government about North Korean defectors?A. At least let them safely cross this land. They want to go to their motherland [South Korea], they don’t want to stay in China. Of course I wish China would give them refugee status. Maybe I’m asking too much, because they don’t care about their own citizens’ rights. But can they at least pretend they don’t see the defectors, on the train or on the bus?Last year, nine defectors were caught in Vietnam. They were returned to China. Why does China always want to support North Korea, even on defector issues? Why are you the savior of North Korea? Why do you ignore the international community’s demands?The key is still China. That’s why I’m asking the big countries, like America, do whatever you can to change the Chinese government’s mind.Q. Do you think any of the Chinese police or people you encountered had sympathies for North Korean defectors?A. Many Chinese criticize me not only on Baidu, but on Facebook. Some say, do you think Chinese authorities were stupid enough not to realize you were a North Korean defector?If they read my book, they’d understand. I did my best to escape. I think it’s all a miracle. It’s not because Chinese policemen were stupid enough to believe my fake story. I think it was a miracle. That’s why sometimes I think God exists.Q. Are you religious?A. I was brainwashed once [in North Korea]. In 2008, when I got asylum in South Korea, I realized I was brainwashed again while hiding 10 years in China. Right now, believing in God is difficult. What if I really believed and it turned out to be another brainwash? But I’m trying my best to believe in God every moment, because I found they are very kind people who support North Korean people and defectors a lot.Q. In what way were you brainwashed in China?A. When I arrived in South Korea, I saw news about China that I never saw in China — like about Tibet and Xinjiang. I thought, what? This isn’t China. There are no such issues in China. The Koreans, they looked at me with weird eyes — What are you saying? That’s China. I was shocked.And it wasn’t just me. Once I met a Chinese student who was studying in South Korea. When she saw the news in South Korea about her own country, she said, “This isn’t my country. This isn’t happening.’’ At that moment I realized we were all brainwashed.Living in South Korea, I can reach any website. But this time when I arrived in Beijing, I was shocked that you can’t access Google, Facebook, Gmail. I’d heard about this. But experiencing it, it’s freaking me.Q. In your 10 years in China, did you have any encounters with ordinary Chinese people?A. Yes, but nobody knew I was a North Korean defector. I pretended I was a Korean Chinese. I was just worried they might find my records.One day, one of my best friends said, “You never talk about your family, you never visit your hometown at New Year’s.” She was Korean Chinese, from Yanji. I wanted to tell her the truth, but I couldn’t trust anyone. It was really tiring always pretending to be someone else. Not my life, not my real name, nothing.Q. Did you ever want to tell any Chinese people that you were from North Korea?A. No. Because once I said those words, it would no longer be safe. They would become a weapon, to be used against me.Q. In the past few years, is it becoming easier or more difficult for North Koreans to evade the Chinese police?A. More difficult. In the past, at least North Korean defectors could make fake [Chinese] ID cards, but those fake ID cards right now don’t work. Because they’re checking them with a machine, so more people are getting caught.Q. Do you think there will be political change in North Korea?A. No dictator can last forever. History shows that in the end people around the dictator bring about change. Of course a lot of high-ranking officials don’t want change, because they want to keep power. But there are other good people who want change. I believe they are waiting for the chance.China has such an important role. Whether North Korea collapses or we have unification, or everything stays as it is, depends on China. So if China or other countries support those high-ranking officials, giving them power to bring about change, it’s possible to bring about regime change.