https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/us/politics/tensions-rise-among-republican-candidates-still-behind-donald-trump.html
Republican Candidates From Establishment Wing Vie to Take Stage From Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Bush  Jeb,Kasich  John R,Rubio  Marco,Trump  Donald J
Oct. 2, 2015
9476
GREENVILLE, S.C. —  Tensions among three of the Republican presidential hopefuls vying for support from the establishment wing of the party burst into public view this week, suggesting a new, more combative phase of a campaign that has been dominated by attacks between Donald J. Trump and nearly all of his rivals.The crossfire began on Wednesday in New Hampshire when Jeb Bush compared Senator Marco Rubio’s message of generational change to that of President Obama’s. And it escalated on Thursday in Iowa, where Mr. Rubio’s staff ejected a videographer working for a “super PAC” supporting Mr. Bush from a campaign event — and then took a more personal turn on Friday when Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio mocked Mr. Bush’s decline in the polls.With Mr. Trump still at the top of the polls as the calendar moves to October, the other candidates feel a growing urgency to stand out as more voters begin paying attention to the Republican contest and the bombastic casino magnate continues to command much of the media coverage of the race. Mr. Bush, especially, is campaigning more aggressively as he slips in many national and state polls.Introducing himself at a policy forum on the campus of Furman University here Friday, Mr. Bush said that in his time as the governor of Florida he “disrupted the old order” and “turned the place upside down.”Repeating a word he has used with greater frequency as it becomes clear that voters have an appetite for candidates willing to challenge the political status quo, Mr. Bush added, “I think Washington, D.C., needs a little bit of disruption, as well.”And speaking to reporters after the event, he dismissed Mr. Kasich’s criticism, boasting that he was more accomplished than the Ohio governor and every other candidate in the field.“I will match it with any candidate running for president,” Mr. Bush said of his record.He recounted his success cutting state taxes and reducing the state work force while noting Florida’s economic growth during his tenure. Putting aside any inherited Bush modesty for the moment, Mr. Bush asked: “If I don’t toot my own horn, who’s going to toot it?”But he has not just been promoting himself of late. In an interview with CNN on Wednesday, Mr. Bush pointedly linked Mr. Rubio to Mr. Obama.“Look, we had a president who came in and said the same kind of thing — new and improved, hope and change — and he didn’t have the leadership skills to fix things,” said the former governor.The same night, after a New Hampshire town hall meeting, Mr. Bush also seemed to take aim at Mr. Rubio’s voting record, with the lowest attendance rate in the Senate this year at 70 percent.“I think if you had a dock-in-pay strategy, you’d probably get more attendance,” he said, before an aide rushed him away.Thursday night, in Cedar Falls, Iowa, Mr. Rubio’s supporters hurled the political equivalent of a brushback pitch at Mr. Bush, ejecting a video tracker from the former governor’s “super PAC” who tried to record Mr. Rubio at his own campaign event and then fingering him to Politico, which reported the stymied surveillance.Mr. Rubio has refrained from criticizing Mr. Bush by name, but has consistently warned Republicans against nominating “the next person in line or the most familiar name” and, on Thursday, not-so-cryptically said the party should not elect “the person all the experts tell us we have to vote for.”Perhaps feeling left out from the public back-and-forth, Mr. Kasich and his aides gleefully seized on a report that the Bush super PAC had been doing research at the Ohio library which holds the papers from his 18 years in Congress.“I would think that they’re in there because they are getting nervous,” Mr. Kasich told reporters in New Hampshire on Friday. “When you are trailing in places like New Hampshire, where John Sununu has built a great team, and you’re not doing so hot in other places, of course they are going to go looking around at who might be the mature adult.” (Mr. Sununu, the former Republican senator from New Hampshire, is a Kasich backer.)In what is itself a sign of how the campaign is evolving, the Bush super PAC made no apology for its efforts against Mr. Rubio and Mr. Kasich. A spokesman for Right to Rise, Paul Lindsay, said the group was “collecting routine, issue-based research on all the candidates in the race.”“Iowa and central Ohio are also wonderful places to visit this time of year,” he added.Mr. Kasich’s advisers did not try to conceal their delight over what they said was Mr. Bush’s nervousness.“I don’t want to say the Bush campaign is panicked yet but I think panic is not that far down the road given his resources, his name ID,” said John Weaver, Mr. Kasich’s strategist, adding, “No empire, even a fading one, is going to go quietly into the night.”Another veteran of presidential campaigns said the change in tone owed to voters beginning to seriously consider potential presidents.“As we get closer to caucuses and primaries, this race will swing away from registering a mood and swing toward selecting a nominee,” said Kevin Madden, a Republican communications expert who worked on the last three White House races. “That’s where this new round of engagement is coming from. Bush, Kasich and Rubio are scraping up against each other right now in an effort to be in the best position when voters get to that point.”