https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/arts/dance/adam-weinert-ted-shawn-hudson-opera-house.html
Selective Affinities: Adam Weinert Finds a Lineage and a Home - The New York Times
Dancing,Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival,Weinert  Adam H,Shawn  Ted
July 18, 2017
4567
HUDSON, N.Y. — It’s as hot as an oven in the old mill, and the dancers are leaping as high as they can. In wave after wave of grueling action, they jump up, roll back to lie flat, then rise to leap again. There is no air-conditioning in this barely renovated building. There isn’t even a bathroom. But this is where the choreographer Adam H. Weinert has chosen to rehearse.“It’s our version of method acting,” Mr. Weinert explained last week during a lunch break. He and his dancers were working on a section of “Dance of the Ages,” an epic 1938 work by Ted Shawn that hasn’t been performed in nearly 80 years. The next day, they would present the excerpt at Jacob’s Pillow, the rustic property in the Berkshires that Shawn bought as a farm in 1931, used as a home for his pioneering Men Dancers troupe and eventually transformed into the site of America’s foremost dance festival.“Ted Shawn and those men didn’t have A.C. or running water,” Mr. Weinert said. “They did farm work every day and built their own barn.”Mr. Weinert, 32, has not yet required his dancers to raise roofbeams or even strip down for the nude sunbathing that was also part of Shawn’s daily regimen. (He has made them work on a farm and plant radicchio.) But he is interested in investigating the past, finding parallels with the present and arranging layers of historical resonance.Recently, he has become known for reconstructing Shawn dances — which are almost never performed, though Shawn is still celebrated as the founder of Jacob’s Pillow and recognized as a father figure of American modern dance.And Mr. Weinert has followed Shawn’s example in another way. Born and raised in Manhattan, he is trying to create a life in dance for himself outside the big city.Since he moved to this river town three years ago, he has gained access to a small studio, where he teaches, and has made friends with people with the power to open up buildings for his use — with and without air-conditioning. He could have rehearsed “Dance of the Ages” in the Hudson Opera House, a Greek Revival building, built as City Hall in 1855, that contains the state’s oldest theater, which reopened in April, restored and renovated as Hudson Hall. Mr. Weinert and his dancers will appear there July 21 to July 23, performing historical dance works alongside his own 2015 piece “Monument.”Mr. Weinert’s association with Shawn is a story of intellectual affinity and personal connections. After graduating with a dance degree from Juilliard, he was pursuing a master’s degree in performance, digital technology and arts activism at New York University in 2013. He wrote an admiring essay about how Shawn used the movement of labor to communicate with the laboring masses, and he mentioned to his adviser, André Lepecki, that he might be interested in reconstructing some of Shawn’s early solos.Two weeks later, he received an email from the Museum of Modern Art inviting him to perform early solos by Shawn in “20 Dancers for the XX Century,” an exhibition organized by the French choreographer Boris Charmatz. His adviser had recommended him.“I really fell down the rabbit hole investigating this somewhat forgotten figure,” Mr. Weinert said. Granted a research fellowship, he spent a summer at Jacob’s Pillow, digging through photographs and books and watching films, recreating Shawn’s technique class and his training program.He performed at MoMA and later, when the Paris Opera Ballet presented the exhibition, he taught the Shawn solos to a dancer in that company, suddenly having become the expert.At MoMA, noticing that most museum visitors seemed to be watching his dancing through their mobile phones, he created “The Reaccession of Ted Shawn,” an app in which video of him dancing Shawn solos is triggered on mobile phones by locations in the museum, virtually inserting Shawn’s work into the museum’s collection. (Or reinserting, since Shawn gave his materials to the museum and the museum gave them away.)For his next project Mr. Weinert began packaging the Shawn solos in a program with work by one of Shawn’s most illustrious students, Doris Humphrey, and with work by one of her students, José Limón, suggesting a lineage for Mr. Weinert’s own choreography, also on the program.Versions of that show were performed to acclaim at the 92nd Street Y in 2015 and at Jacob’s Pillow last year. At Hudson Hall, he is staging the historical works in several different rooms, like a gallery exhibition. “If you stay in one room,” he said, “you’ll see me do a solo, then Logan Kruger do the same solo, then Davon Rainey do it. It gets at interpretation and lineage.”That’s an expanded lineage, since Ms. Kruger is a woman and Ms. Rainey is black. “Shawn rebelled against gender norms by putting men onstage, but it was a white male masculinity Shawn was describing,” Mr. Weinert said. “Bringing different kinds of bodies broadens the conversation.”Ms. Kruger, the rehearsal director for the Limón Dance Company, also represents the more traditional lineage of modern dance. “Logan learned the Doris Humphrey solo from somebody who learned it from somebody who learned it from Doris,” Mr. Weinert said. “But I didn’t have a bloodline connecting me to Ted.”Instead, the connection is film. Shawn was ahead of his time in filming his works, and films are Mr. Weinert’s primary source, as well as a shared interest.At Hudson Hall, Mr. Weinert is combining the live performance of his own “Monument” with film of the dancers performing the work in a nearby Elks Lodge with a 1930s ballroom.“It’s becoming a palimpsest,” he said. “All these histories can cohabitate onstage together.” The lodge is where the dancers stayed when they rehearsed last year. It’s part of Mr. Weinert’s life in Hudson.“I thought I would be one of those New Yorkers who never lived anywhere else,” Mr. Weinert said. “But I found that I didn’t have much of a creative practice in the city. Space and time are such obstacles.”He recalled dancing for a company in Brooklyn that owned its own rehearsal space but flew its dancers to Atlanta to rehearse so it could rent out its own space. It seemed absurd.While working for the choreographer Jonah Bokaer, Mr. Weinert had rehearsed in Hudson and found himself drawn to its community of “self-employed creative types.” His husband, R. B. Schlather, who is an opera director, had friends who lived in town, and the couple decided to try Hudson as a base.“The more time I spend here, the more time I want to spend here,” Mr. Weinert said. “I find myself putting down roots in ways I didn’t expect.”Aware of a local budding of arts organizations — the construction of the Lumberyard center across the Hudson River in Catskill, not far from the choreographer Stephen Petronio’s new property, Crow’s Nest — Mr. Weinert founded the Hudson Arts Coalition to cross-promote their activities and limit counterproductive competition.“It’s a rewarding scale in Hudson,” he said. “Lay people can actually make a difference in how the town functions. I keep waiting to miss New York City, or to feel that my career is suffering because I’m not there.”