https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/nyregion/nanny-admitted-killing-2-children-former-prosecutor-testifies.html
Nanny Admitted Killing 2 Children, Former Prosecutor Testifies - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Ortega  Yoselyn,Krim  Leo,Krim  Lucia,Manhattan (NYC)
July 18, 2017
2373
A nanny accused of stabbing two children under her care in a Manhattan apartment confessed to the murders as she lay in a hospital bed on Halloween in 2012. Unable to speak because she was on a ventilator, she pointed at a chart to indicate yes and no to questions from investigators, a former assistant district attorney testified at a pretrial hearing on Tuesday.“She admitted that she had killed the kids and that she had used at least two knives,” the former Manhattan prosecutor, Gregory B. LeDonne, said. “She indicated she was mad at the mom.”A defense lawyer, Valerie Van Leer-Greenberg, has asked Justice Gregory Carro to throw out several statements made to the authorities by the nanny, Yoselyn Ortega, arguing that prosecutors ignored messages from a defense lawyer hired by her family that she not be interviewed without him present. Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg has also asserted Ms. Ortega was too sick and too impaired by drugs to waive her right to a lawyer, much less to answer questions truthfully.Justice Carro has granted a hearing on whether Ms. Ortega’s constitutional rights were violated. He also ordered that the recorded and videotaped statements she made while hospitalized with a self-inflicted wound not be played in open court, though witnesses testified about them.Those recorded statements — there are three — have not been made public, but some details came out in a court filing in 2014. Those court papers said Ms. Ortega had admitted that she killed the children because she was angry with their parents and had expressed regret. The papers did not say how the statements were obtained.A trial is scheduled for September. Ms. Ortega, 55, has pleaded not guilty to killing Lucia Krim, 6, and Leo Krim, 2, on Oct. 25, 2012. Prosecutors say she stabbed the children to death in a bathtub while their mother, Marina Krim, was out picking up her third child from a swimming lesson.The mother opened the bathroom door on the grisly scene of her children in the bathtub, prosecutors say. Ms. Ortega then plunged a knife into her own neck, they say.Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg has signaled her intention to mount an insanity defense, and her client has been examined by forensic psychiatrists for each side. If the statements are thrown out on constitutional grounds, it would make it more difficult to prove that Ms. Ortega had a rational motive in killing the children.In his testimony, Mr. LeDonne, who is now the deputy attorney general of Idaho, described the efforts of detectives and prosecutors in the nine days after the murders to get a bedside confession from Ms. Ortega as she was being treated at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, during the time when Hurricane Sandy was hitting the city.He said prosecutors from the Manhattan district attorney’s office and homicide detectives first got a call from a defense lawyer who said he represented Ms. Ortega on the night of Oct. 27. Mr. LeDonne acknowledged on cross-examination that prosecutors did not tell the lawyer where Ms. Ortega was.Prosecutors did not speak to Ms. Ortega until four days later, when doctors informed them about 12:30 p.m. that a breathing tube had been removed from her throat. She was asked if she wanted the lawyer to represent her and she said no, Mr. LeDonne said. Then her oxygen levels dropped and doctors put her back on a ventilator.Six hours later, the prosecutors talked to Ms. Ortega again, this time videotaping the 20-minute episode on a phone. As a police officer translated, Stuart Silberg, a senior assistant district attorney, read Ms. Ortega her rights, then asked her a series of yes or no questions that she answered by pointing at an alphabet chart, Mr. LeDonne said. She admitted killing the children, he said.On Nov. 3, a second prosecutor interviewed Ms. Ortega for 2 hours and 45 minutes, an encounter also taped on a phone. This time, Mr. LeDonne said, Ms. Ortega listed her grievances about the Krim family, saying she had been asked to work too hard and her skin had been damaged by cleaning products. But she declined to say what had happened in the bathroom, Mr. LeDonne said. Each time she was asked, she answered only that “the mother knows,” he said.Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg brought out on cross-examination that the prosecutors did not videotape Ms. Ortega waiving her rights on Oct. 31. She also introduced hospital records showing a doctor had tried to prevent the Nov. 3 interview because Ms. Ortega was still in critical condition and, in the doctor’s view, needed a psychiatric evaluation. Mr. LeDonne said he was unaware of those hospital records and denied that any medical staff member had tried to stop the interview.The defense lawyer also established that Ms. Ortega fell asleep at least twice during the Oct. 31 interview, during which prosecutors say she admitted killing the children, and had to be jostled awake.Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg asserted that the prosecutors had done the second interview because they knew the first one was flawed.“You knew you had a problem,” she said to Mr. LeDonne.“We knew there was an issue a defense attorney could raise,” he retorted.