https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/21/fashion/the-many-lives-of-limelight.html
The Many Lives of Limelight - The New York Times
Restaurants,Limelight (Manhattan  NY  Nightclub),Limelight Marketplace,Shopping Centers and Malls,Bars and Nightclubs,Shopping and Retail,Flatiron District (Manhattan  NY),Jue Lan Club (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Jue Lan Club (NYC)
Jan. 20, 2016
7711
“It’s Harry Chapin going into Cat Stevens into the Beatles into James Taylor into Bob Marley, and then around 10, 11 o’clock, Jay Z and Guns n’ Roses escalating the whole vibe,” Stratis Morfogen said on a recent evening.Mr. Morfogen, a restaurateur, was describing the intended ambience of his new venture, Jue Lan Club, an upscale Chinese restaurant that quietly opened last month in the old Church of the Holy Communion on West 20th Street, in the Flatiron district. The building was once home to the notorious nightclub Limelight, which closed in 2001.“Vibe dining,” Mr. Morfogen said, is the vision. “I wanted really cool music. I wanted lyrics. I don’t like these other places that call it vibe dining, where it’s just a drumbeat and techno music.”He was sitting downstairs in the Salon, one of seven dining rooms at the club, each with its own identity. The Salon has a bar and a few booths and is meant to be a hangout. “I ripped off all the tablecloths,” Mr. Morfogen said, to make the room more casual. Other than the restaurateur’s wife and young children, who were in the next booth, no one else was in the room. Unless you counted the ghosts.In a “Seinfeld” episode titled “The Cafe,” Jerry Seinfeld observed a retail phenomenon in New York: the seemingly cursed location. “Everybody has this in their neighborhood — it’s a leather store, it’s a yogurt shop, it’s a pet supply,” the comedian said. “It’s constantly changing, and nobody can do business there. It’s like some sort of Bermuda Triangle of retail, you know?”So it has been with the old church on 20th. Did the Club Kids and celebrities who danced and did drugs there in the ’80s and ’90s rack up too many karmic violations? Has the Limelight’s former owner, Peter Gatien, who was convicted of tax fraud and deported to his native Canada, been sending down bad mojo from up north? Hard to say.But since the Limelight closed, many of the businesses that have operated inside the space (including another nightclub, an urban mall and several restaurants) have failed, some in quick and spectacular fashion.The mall, for instance, called Limelight Marketplace, opened to great fanfare in 2010 after a $15 million renovation, and featured fashion tenants like LeSportsac and Hunter boots. But the ambitious venture ended after only a year, and was replaced with a scaled-down version called Limelight Shops that continues to limp along.Another current tenant, a branch of David Barton Gym, has occupied part of the building for the last year. Kevin Kavanaugh, the gym’s president, recalled that when he met with the community board to seek approval, he had to overcome grudges incurred by raves past.“They were very concerned that we were going to become that nightclub again, with noise and parties and lines out the door,” Mr. Kavanaugh said. “They had bad flashbacks.”Did Mr. Morfogen have any apprehension about leasing the former church, given the many failures there?“No,” he answered emphatically, pointing out that he opened his previous restaurant, Philippe Chow, in a building on East 60th Street that had housed seven failed restaurants in 15 years.“All my investors backed out because they said the space was hexed,” Mr. Morfogen said. “So now fast-forward 10 years, and it’s become the hottest restaurant block on the Upper East Side.” (Not all was rosy: Mr. Morfogen has spent years engaged in a Kafkaesque legal battle with the restaurateur Michael Chow of Mr. Chow, who claimed trademark infringement, and Mr. Morfogen and his partners had a falling-out, leading to his exit from the business.)Just three blocks north, a five-story brick building has hosted a dozen failed restaurants. The writer Gay Talese once called it “the most unpromising address in New York City for aspiring restaurant owners.”The rectory that Mr. Morfogen has taken over may be another contender for that distinction. Since 2011, several restaurants have come and gone in a blink.First there was CrossBar, a gastro-pub operated by Todd English, which lasted barely a year. It was followed by another restaurant backed by Mr. English, Château Cherbuliez, a French spot that struggled initially, tried and failed to reinvent itself as a boozy brunch location and closed.A speakeasy-style bar and restaurant, backed by the people behind the meatpacking district nightclub SL, was reported to be moving in, but nothing materialized.Mr. Morfogen said that Jue Lan Club, which takes its name and much of its design inspiration from a society of artists in 1930s Shanghai, has a key advantage over those failed restaurants: the Shampoo room.“I told the owners I didn’t want to do it unless I had the Shampoo room,” he said, rising and walking into what was once a dance floor at the Limelight. Previous restaurants didn’t have access to the large space, making do with a maze of small chambers, but now it’s an attractive main dining room that offers dishes like braised oxtail sloppy bao ($16) and one called drunken black bass drowned in heaven-facing chiles ($30).Mr. Morfogen is doing something else differently than his predecessors: embracing, rather than distancing himself from, the past.“The history of New York City night life — it’s pretty incredible what this building represents,” he said. “You had Andy Warhol hosting events here. You had Keith Haring painting the stairs. You’ve got to embrace the art and history of this.”Mr. Morfogen’s way of paying tribute to the Limelight’s wild and even dangerous history has been to add menu items like a Club Kid cocktail and decorative touches like emerald-green banquettes and, in a dining room upstairs, wallpaper created from photos of the clubgoers who made the Limelight famous.“The only one missing is Mike Alig,” Mr. Morfogen said, referring to a former promoter who went to prison for the 1996 killing of Andre Melendez, a fixture of the downtown club scene. “I don’t want him to be associated. I don’t want that kind of controversy.”To liven up an alley behind the church, Mr. Morfogen commissioned murals by “all the cool graffiti artists of Brooklyn,” he said. “I wanted to embrace what’s cool now, and that’s graffiti,” he added. He pointed to one work and identified the artist as Damon Johnson, the son of Richard Johnson, the Page Six editor.One of the Limelight’s former regulars, Walt Cassidy, said he had heard about the new restaurant celebrating him and his old friends but had no plans to visit. He has been inside the space just once since the Limelight closed, he said.“I was knee-deep in it when it was thriving, so don’t really feel like I need to relive it,” Mr. Cassidy wrote in an email. He added that anyone looking to establish a business as successful as the Limelight can’t rely on the building or its legendary history: “You can’t fake or force magic. It comes together naturally when the universe wills it to happen.”Indeed, Mr. Cassidy, now a multimedia artist in Brooklyn, believes the most provocative use of the space so far has been the David Barton Gym.“I believe gym culture has replaced night life,” he wrote.