https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/21/us/politics/maureen-mcdonnell-virginias-former-first-lady-sentenced-to-prison-in-bribery-case.html
Former First Lady of Virginia Is Sentenced to Prison for Graft - The New York Times
Virginia,McDonnell  Maureen Patricia Gardner,McDonnell  Robert F,Sentences (Criminal),Bribery and Kickbacks,Williams  Jonnie R Sr
Feb. 20, 2015
6859
WASHINGTON —  Maureen McDonnell, the wife of former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia, who along with her husband was found guilty last year of trading favors in return for loans, vacations and gifts from a wealthy businessman, was sentenced Friday to a year and a day in prison for her role in a bribery case that upended her husband’s political career.Ms. McDonnell, who became the central figure in her husband’s defense — he blamed her for the financial woes that led to borrowing money, for her involvement with a businessman whose largess led to their downfall, and for causing their marriage to unravel — was a silent figure throughout their shared trial last year.“My marriage is broken, my family is hurting and my reputation is in shatters,” Ms. McDonnell said, addressing the court and breaking the weekslong silence of her humiliating trial. Prosecutors had asked for an 18-month sentence, while defense lawyers wanted probation and community service in lieu of jail.Last month, the former governor, once a rising star in the Republican Party, was sentenced to 24 months in prison, far less than the six and a half years sought by prosecutors; Mr. McDonnell, 60, is appealing the case.Ms. McDonnell’s sentencing was the final measure in a yearlong drama that exposed the marital woes, money problems and searing conflict between Mr. McDonnell’s political ambitions and his wife’s increasing discomfort with their public life.During the trial, which lasted several weeks, Ms. McDonnell’s image as a genteel first lady of a state steeped in decorum was undermined by witnesses who portrayed her as a mercurial and materialistic woman who badgered staff and took an inordinate interest in health care supplements.Judge James R. Spencer of Federal District Court, in sentencing Ms. McDonnell on eight public corruption counts, said, “How can a person become so bedazzled by material possessions that she can no longer see the difference between what’s appropriate and inappropriate,” according to The Associated Press.For his part, Mr. McDonnell evolved before the jury’s eyes from a mildly debonair politician and popular governor whose endorsement was courted by Mitt Romney to a weeping and broken felon begging to do community service in Haiti over time in jail.The case against the McDonnells pivoted on a Virginia vitamin supplement executive, Jonnie R. Williams Sr., who was under federal investigation for possible security violations. Prosecutors granted him immunity in exchange for his cooperation with the McDonnell inquiry into $177,000 in loans he made to the first family as well as trips and goodies including a Rolex watch.During the trial, Mr. McDonnell lamented a life of fights over credit card debt and stock purchases gone south as he watched his wife become more and more enamored of Mr. Williams, who showered the McDonnells with gifts the former governor repeatedly claimed not to know the value of.The prosecution brooked no such arguments, and pressed Mr. McDonnell about fancy trips taken at Mr. Williams’ expense and a $20,000 shopping spree in New York for Ms. McDonnell, paid for by Mr. Williams. Mr. McDonnell testified that he had no idea that the spree was so expensive and noted that he had shunned an offer from Mr. Williams to purchase his wife an Oscar de la Renta gown for the inaugural balls, declaring it inappropriate.Mr. McDonnell, who was governor from 2010-14, spoke of his wife time and time again throughout the trial, even reading from an email he wrote her lamenting the state of their life. “I am spiritually and mentally exhausted from being yelled at,” he wrote. “I don’t think you realize how you are affecting me and sometimes others with your tongue.”Further, he detailed other fears about her abuse of her first lady role, saying that during his campaign for attorney general before he was governor, his political staff told him that his wife had used a campaign contact list to market her Nu Skin vitamin and cosmetic product line, a move that he called “completely inappropriate” and added that he was “very upset.”The issue became significant because Mr. Williams tried to promote his nutritional supplement firm, Star Scientific, to parts of the Virginia government.Mr. McDonnell’s attempt to shift blame to his wife did not sway the jury and was noted by the judge at his sentencing. Judge Spencer, in effect presaging his sentence for Ms. McDonnell, told the former governor, “While Mrs. McDonnell may have allowed the serpent into the mansion, the governor knowingly let him into his personal and business affairs.”Some members of Ms. McDonnell’s staff also testified that she was difficult and even abusive as her marriage unraveled. At her sentencing, however, witnesses for the defense offered a more nuanced picture of Ms. McDonnell, painting her as a besieged housewife who had neither the fortitude nor background for the task of first lady. According to The Associated Press, Rachel McDonnell, one of the couple’s five children, said the scandal surrounding her parents had driven her family apart, and that her mother felt “very alone.”