https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/17/us/politics/michael-bloomberg-discusses-gun-control.html
Michael Bloomberg Discusses Gun Control - The New York Times
Gun Control,Bloomberg  Michael R,de Blasio  Bill
April 16, 2014
8016
In one of his first interviews since leaving office, Michael R. Bloomberg was by turns restless, wry, entirely lacking in self-doubt and, at least for now, reticent to pass judgment on his successor. He mused about his accelerated entry into heaven and his “rock star” reputation. The following is an extended version of Mr. Bloomberg’s interview with The New York Times, in which he also discusses the political potency of the National Rifle Association, the types of gun control he thinks are effective and ineffective, and his post-mayoral life.On the effectiveness of the N.R.A“It is that single-minded focus that gives you a disproportionate percentage of power.”“You have to be careful if there’s two issues you care about, and they’re good on, one bad on the other, what do you do? And I think you’ve got to pick your issue. In our case, my case, it’s guns. I care very much about immigration. But guns are the No. 1 thing. So I’ve got a senator who’s running for re-election. He’s terrible on guns but good on immigration. I’m going after him. That’s it.”On weapons bans and the dangers of guns in homes with children“You can have a ban on assault weapons. But assault weapons kill 400 people a year. They get a lot of press. But its 400 vs. 31,000 with handguns.”“I think having a gun at home when you have children is really dumb. Kids —, we all went and tried to figure out what was in the top shelf of their parents closet. And we looked in mommy’s handbag. Under the bed. Kids are inquisitive.”On politicians who oppose even modest gun control“If somebody stood up and said, ‘I don’t care about lives — I’d let 50 people or 100 people get shot so that I get re-elected,’ you’d massacre the guy or the woman. Just massacre him. He’d be run out of the country on a rail. And yet that’s exactly what we’re suggesting is happening. The press doesn’t write it that way. It’s so frustrating to me. I think that is exactly what they’re doing.”On his successor, Mayor Bill de Blasio“I have said from Day 1 that I will give him the gift that Giuliani gave me. Never criticizing and keeping my staff from criticizing him to the extent that I can.”“It’s tough enough being mayor.”“I would also caution you it’s only 100 days. You’ve got to give somebody time, in all fairness.”“I think its fair to say we left the city a lot better than we found it. And that’s it. And now I’ll go on to other things.”“But I’m going to stay away, to the extent humanly possible, from ever talking about what this administration does. At least for a few years. Maybe for the rest of my life.”