https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/nyregion/long-island-ms-13-gang-killings-arrests.html
On Long Island, More Arrests Announced in MS-13 Killings - The New York Times
Gangs,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Hispanic-Americans,Immigration and Emigration,Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13),Llivicura  Justin (d 2017),Lopez Banegas  Michael (d 2017),Tigre  Jorge (d 2017),Villalobos  Jefferson (d 2017),Central Islip (NY)
July 19, 2017
2378
CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y. — The trap was set. On the night of April 11, the authorities said, more than a dozen MS-13 gang members, wielding machetes, wooden clubs and knives, ambushed four young Latino men in a Long Island park, beating and killing them as planned.Three months later, the police said they had caught the killers.On Wednesday, the Suffolk County Police Department, at a news conference with federal prosecutors, said that they had made more than 15 arrests of MS-13 gang members and their associates in the murders and other crimes committed by the gang members, including a January homicide that left another person severely injured.Those arrests included some detailed in court documents released earlier in the week, when the authorities said they had charged four people in the April killings: Alexis Hernandez, 20; Santos Leonel Ortiz-Flores, 19; Omar Antonio Villalta, who went by the nickname “Anticristo”; and a juvenile whose name was not released. The three adults pleaded not guilty.The Suffolk County police commissioner, Timothy Sini, called the quadruple homicide “one of the worst crimes committed in Suffolk County history.”“The acts of these defendants are unspeakable,” he said. “Nothing will bring these boys back. The community can take solace in the fact that their murderers are behind bars.”In the quadruple homicide alone, Mr. Sini said, the Police Department made more than 10 arrests of MS-13 members, including six who are juveniles.The charges announced at the news conference Wednesday at the federal courthouse in Central Islip included some defendants who were indicted in March.The police said that MS-13 was responsible for 17 killings in the county since January 2016. Known in Spanish as La Mara Salvatrucha, MS-13 has its roots in Los Angeles and El Salvador, and while it has existed in Suffolk County for two decades, it has become more violent here in the last two years.In April, two cousins who fled the gangs in Honduras, Michael Lopez Banegas, 20, and Jefferson Villalobos, 18, were killed along with Justin Llivicura, 16, who was born on Long Island to Ecuadorean parents, and Jorge Tigre, 18, who immigrated from Ecuador at age 10. Jefferson was visiting his cousin from Florida; the other three boys attended high schools in Suffolk County.A detention memo dated July 13 from federal prosecutors outlined the events on the night of the April killings. It said that two girls who were associates of MS-13 lured a group of five young Latino men into the Long Island woods.The girls stopped and texted their location to MS-13 members who had gathered deeper in the woods.Federal prosecutors said the gang thought these young men had disrespected MS-13 and might be in a rival gang. For this, they planned to execute them.According to the federal account, more than a dozen gang members surrounded the victims, who were “engulfed in a horrific frenzy of violence as they were brutally bludgeoned, sliced and stabbed to death.”One boy, whom relatives of the victims identified to The New York Times as Alex Ruiz, was able to escape. The detention note did not name him.The gang dragged the four bodies farther into the woods, where Carlos Lopez Jr., the brother of one victim, found them a day later.The April homicides rattled the Latino immigrant communities on Long Island and provoked national debate over the role of illegal immigration. That furor was fueled by the appearance of Attorney General Jeff Sessions in Central Islip less than two weeks after the bodies were discovered.There, Mr. Sessions vowed to eradicate MS-13. “I have a message for the gangs that target our young people: We are targeting you, we are coming after you,” he said. He added, “We will find you, we will devastate your networks, we will starve your revenue sources, deplete your ranks and seize your profits.”Since then, more than 250 Suffolk police officers have worked full time on the operation and arrested what the authorities say are more than 170 known gang members, mostly from two cliques — the Sailors Locos Salvatruchas Westside and the Brentwood Locos Salvatruchas. Another one of the gang members arrested recently, Ronald Catalan, was the leader of the Brentwood clique, officials say. He was charged with attempted murder and assault in a February 2015 episode.The indictment that charged the gang members in the quadruple homicide said they wanted to gain entrance or maintain their status in MS-13. At least for the adult members charged federally in the deaths, those charges, prosecutors said, could carry the federal death penalty.John Wallenstein, the president of the New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, is representing one of those charged, Mr. Ortiz-Flores. His client is in the Manhattan Detention Center. Mr. Wallenstein said that while it was too early to comment on the case, Mr. Sessions’s decree made his intentions clear — if his client were to be found guilty.“Here’s a case where the government says, ‘We accuse you, and we want to kill you,’” Mr. Wallenstein said. “My object on Day 1 is to save my client’s life.”