https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/05/us/politics/trump-will-not-block-comey-from-testifying-white-house-says.html
Trump Will Not Block Comey From Testifying, White House Says - The New York Times
Comey  James B,Russia,Trump  Donald J
June 5, 2017
4485
WASHINGTON — White House officials said on Monday that President Trump would not invoke executive privilege to try to block James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director he fired, from testifying before Congress this week, clearing the way for a hearing that may be the most anticipated in Washington in months, if not years.Mr. Comey is scheduled to appear before the Senate Intelligence Committee on Thursday for his first public discussion of the events that led to his dismissal last month in the midst of leading an investigation into associates of Mr. Trump’s. Lawmakers are especially interested in reports that Mr. Trump sought to persuade Mr. Comey to shut down an investigation into the president’s former national security adviser.It was not clear that Mr. Trump would have succeeded in stopping Mr. Comey from testifying had he chosen to cite executive privilege. The Supreme Court has found that presidents enjoy a right to confidentiality in communications with their advisers, but it is not an absolute privilege and courts have overridden such claims in the past.If Mr. Trump had tried to assert executive privilege and the Senate committee challenged him in court, legal experts said, Mr. Trump had a weak case because he has himself publicly discussed his private conversations with Mr. Comey.“The president’s power to assert executive privilege is well established,” Sarah Huckabee Sanders, a White House spokeswoman, told reporters. “However, in order to facilitate a swift and thorough examination of the facts sought by the Senate Intelligence Committee, President Trump will not assert executive privilege regarding James Comey’s scheduled testimony.”The president fired Mr. Comey on May 9 as the F.B.I. was looking into contacts between Russia and Mr. Trump’s associates. While Mr. Trump and his aides initially said he had acted at the recommendation of the deputy attorney general because of the way Mr. Comey handled last year’s investigation into Hillary Clinton’s emails, Mr. Trump later said that he had already decided to fire the F.B.I. director regardless of any recommendations and that he had the Russia investigation in mind.In the weeks since, associates of Mr. Comey have said the former director felt uncomfortable about efforts by Mr. Trump to compromise the bureau’s traditional independence. Just days after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, he invited the director to dinner and, according to people familiar with Mr. Comey’s account, asked him repeatedly for his loyalty, which Mr. Comey declined to give. Mr. Trump has denied that he did so, but he said it would not have been wrong if he had.A few weeks later, the day after Mr. Trump pushed out Michael T. Flynn, his national security adviser, who had provided misleading accounts of a phone call with Russia’s ambassador, the president asked Mr. Comey to drop the investigation into Mr. Flynn, according to notes taken contemporaneously by Mr. Comey and read to a New York Times reporter. Mr. Comey refused.Some critics of Mr. Trump have said that such a request, especially given that he later fired Mr. Comey, could be interpreted as obstruction of justice.But Republican lawmakers also plan to quiz Mr. Comey about why he did not act at the time if he considered the president’s request to be improper pressure.