http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/20/us/politics/hillary-clinton-syria-islamic-state.html
Hillary Clinton Goes Beyond President Obama in Plan to Defeat ISIS - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Syria,Obama  Barack,Terrorism,Paris Attacks (November 2015)
Nov. 19, 2015
2628
Hillary Rodham Clinton called on Thursday for accelerating the American-led operation to defeat the Islamic State, going well beyond what President Obama has proposed by urging a no-fly zone with coalition forces to protect Syrians, more airstrikes and an expanded deployment of special operations troops to assist local ground forces.“Our goal is not to deter or contain ISIS, but to defeat and destroy ISIS,” Mrs. Clinton said, using an acronym for the Islamic State group and distancing herself from Mr. Obama’s much-derided contention, a day before the Nov. 13 attack in Paris, that the group had been geographically “contained.”Mrs. Clinton was cautious not to criticize the president directly, saying her plan amounted to “an intensification and acceleration” of his strategy. But it was the urgency with which she spoke of the threat from the Islamic State and the need to respond to it muscularly that most distinguished her approach from that of the president under whom she served for four years as secretary of state.Speaking at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, Mrs. Clinton contrasted her outlook with those of the Republican presidential contenders as “a choice between fear and resolve.”She gave some fodder to Republicans who have criticized the president for not being aggressive enough in combating the Islamic State, but she also sharply rebuked those Republicans as intolerant for calling on the United States to stop accepting Syrian refugees.“We cannot allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and our humanitarian obligations,” she said.At the same time, she declared that the aftermath of the attack in Paris was “no time to be scoring political points.”After days of speaking broadly about a response to the attack, Mrs. Clinton used the address on Thursday to display the breadth and detail of her foreign-policy knowledge. But in demonstrating her readiness to be commander-in-chief, Mrs. Clinton also must avoid inflaming Democratic primary voters who overwhelmingly approve of Mr. Obama and who are still reeling from the George W. Bush era of intervention.For the most part, Mrs. Clinton called for building on what the White House is already doing — but at a faster pace. The Pentagon has said, for example, that it will bolster the use of special forces if the initial effort to train and equip Kurdish fighters and improve the targeting of airstrikes is successful; Mrs. Clinton appeared ready to do so now.By implication, she appeared somewhat critical of the Obama administration for moving too slowly on aiding moderate rebels and getting special forces on the ground in Syria — without being highly specific about the number she would deploy if she were in the Oval Office.“It is time to begin a new phase and intensify and broaden our efforts to smash the would-be caliphate and deny ISIS control of territory in Iraq and Syria,” she said.She noted that the 50 special operations soldiers Mr. Obama authorized to be sent to Syria had not arrived yet, and said they should be deployed “immediately” and that the United States should be “prepared to deploy more, as more Syrians get into the fight.”Mrs. Clinton said that “to be successful, airstrikes will have to be combined with ground forces actually taking back more territory from ISIS.” But, mindful that her 2002 vote to authorize force in Iraq largely contributed to her loss in the 2008 Democratic primary, she was quick to say these should be local Sunni troops, and “we cannot substitute for them.”“Like President Obama, I do not believe that we should again have 100,000 American troops in combat in the Middle East,” she said.Similarly, she called for more air power, but only in cooperation with Persian Gulf allies. And she acknowledged in a question-and-answer session that Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates had halted their air attacks on the Islamic State to focus instead in Yemen.Expanding on her previous call for a no-fly zone, Mrs. Clinton said it should be limited to northern Syria, where Turkey has proposed a buffer zone to protect civilians, and enforced by many countries. That, she said, “will confront a lot of our partners in the region and beyond about what they are going to do.”She took a particularly hard line against Saudi Arabia and other Arab nations who she said had been complicit in the rise of the Islamic State. “Once and for all, the Saudis, the Qataris and others need to stop their citizens from directly funding extremist organizations,” Mrs. Clinton said.The core of Mrs. Clinton’s argument for a faster, more aggressive military operation was her contention that it would reinforce Secretary of State John Kerry’s diplomatic effort to negotiate a cease-fire, and ultimately a political solution, in Syria. Administration officials said it closely resembled the arguments Mr. Kerry has made to Mr. Obama — but Mr. Kerry has not yet persuaded the president, who remains hesitant about the risk of being sucked into a ground war.Asked whether Mr. Obama had underestimated the Islamic State when he referred to the group as the “J.V. team,” Mrs. Clinton said, “I don’t think it’s useful to go back and replow old ground.”But in a new break with the administration’s stated policy, Mrs. Clinton declared what some White House officials have privately said for months: that the fight in Syria is no longer about ousting President Bashar al-Assad.“We had an opportunity, perhaps,” for a regime change, Mrs. Clinton said. But given the current circumstances, she added, “We need to get people to turn against the common enemy of ISIS.”In saying so, Mrs. Clinton seemed to align her strategic approach more closely with those of Russia and Iran, who are backing Mr. Assad, though she criticized both nations in her speech Thursday.She also waded carefully into the question of what American technology companies should do to join the fight. Embracing the least controversial move, Mrs. Clinton said that “social media companies can also do their part by swiftly shutting down terrorist accounts so they are not used to plan, provoke, or celebrate violence.” Most American firms already do that.But on the enormously complex issue of encrypted communications, she fell back to the obvious: that encryption was needed to protect everyday transactions, but should not give cover to terror groups. That is where the debate was a year ago. Mrs. Clinton said nothing about Mr. Obama’s recent conclusion that there is no way to stop companies from marketing end-to-end encryption that is very difficult for intelligence agencies to pierce.Mrs. Clinton portrayed her Republican rivals as un-American for arguing to bar Syrian refugees altogether or to only allow those who are Christians to resettle in the United States.“We are in a contest of ideas against an ideology of hate and we have to win,” she said, adding: “Let’s be clear, though: Islam itself is not our adversary. Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism.”Mrs. Clinton drew criticism from both parties after saying in Saturday’s Democratic debate that defeating ISIS “cannot be an American fight,” allowing that the Middle East was “an incredibly complicated region of the world,” but saying little about what she would do.On Monday, her aides added the speech to a frenetic day of appearances in New York. Her audience included a number of donors and former State Department aides along with Mayor Bill de Blasio and Vernon E. Jordan Jr., a longtime friend and adviser to her husband.Mrs. Clinton arrived at the speech directly after appearing on “Live with Kelly and Michael” where she spoke about the threat of terrorism in more personal terms, saying parents should be honest with their children.“You have to answer their questions,” Mrs. Clinton said. “But you also have to tell them not to let those threats in any way upset their minds or make them be afraid to go out.”