https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/protests-convention-bernie-sanders-philadelphia.html
Bernie Sanders Backers March Against Hillary Clinton in Philadelphia - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Democratic National Convention,United States Politics and Government,Endorsements,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,Philadelphia (Pa),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots
July 24, 2016
7528
PHILADELPHIA — A large, impassioned crowd of Bernie Sanders supporters — chanting “Hell, no, D.N.C., we won’t vote for Hillary” — marched on Sunday afternoon to the site of the Democratic National Convention, promising a week in which the party’s divisions will be on vivid display in the streets.More than 1,000 people from as far as Seattle and Florida participated in the first of what are expected to be many Sanders rallies during the convention, which formally begins Monday. The march, led by a banner proclaiming “Help End Establishment Politics, Vote No on Hillary,” was far larger than any of the protest marches last week in Cleveland at the Republican National Convention.Despite the size of the demonstration, it was a peaceful assembly with no signs of supporters of Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee, and the police maintained a low-key, even casual presence. Marchers headed down Broad Street past fire hydrants spraying cooling jets in the sweltering 97-degree heat.But the unreconstructed anger at Hillary Clinton and the Democratic establishment was not cooled, despite Mr. Sanders’s endorsement of Mrs. Clinton two weeks ago.At the front of the parade was a flag with the Democratic donkey flying upside down. Further animating the protest was the release by WikiLeaks of hacked emails from the Democratic National Committee showing party efforts to undermine Mr. Sanders’s candidacy, reinforcing a widespread view among marchers that party leaders had stacked the deck against him.“It’s not just young people who are furious. There are people who have been Democrats for decades and are completely angry,” said Kimberly Cooper, 59, of Florida. “Now with the WikiLeaks thing, I am finished supporting her.”Brandon Gorcheff, of Youngstown, Ohio, who held a handmade sign reading “Move Left” that spoofed the Clinton campaign’s arrow logo, said nothing could get him to support Mrs. Clinton.Michelle Cyr, who flew to Philadelphia from Bath, Me., said, “The Democratic Party is so out of touch with its constituents.”Joshua Brown, an alternate delegate from North Carolina who supports Mr. Sanders, a Vermont senator, said he was concerned that people would desert the party in the fall, either abstaining or voting for a third-party candidate and bolstering Mr. Trump’s chances.“If Hillary is serious, she needs to work on convincing us to help her and I don’t feel she’s done enough of that right now,” he said. “She got work to do.”Numerous marchers said they would support Jill Stein, the Green Party candidate. They rejected the argument that not voting for Mrs. Clinton would help Mr. Trump.Pasu Tivorat, of Sacramento, who wore a Guy Fawkes mask, an anarchist’s symbol, said Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton were equally bad choices. “If we nominate Hillary, then she can continue to abuse her base,” he said. “Every progressive idea we come up with they throw under the bus.”“I’d rather watch the D.N.C. burn,” he added.Earlier in the day, there was an equally large march supporting clean energy and environmental causes. It had the air of a street fair, with homemade peace signs and other colorful touches. Some participants were less adamantly in the “Bernie or Bust” camp.“I think there’s a lot of Bernie supporters here, and I hope they change their minds because the alternative is unimaginably awful,” said Nad Rosenberg, a technical writer from Philadelphia. She would not bring herself to mention Mr. Trump. If enough Sanders supporters do not come home to Mrs. Clinton, she said, “the result will be a victory by he who must not be named.”The Sanders march proceeded down Broad Street four miles to a park facing the arena where delegates will meet Monday through Thursday. Speakers were scheduled into the evening. The City of Philadelphia expects 35,000 to 50,000 protesters a day, with marches and rallies in support of Mr. Sanders each day, as well as a bit of street theater, a “Mock Trial of Hillary Clinton,” and a march to end homelessness.A subway route follows Broad Street, and on Sunday many Sanders supporters, seeking a shortcut in the blazing heat, ducked underground and emerged at the end of the route. They passed police officers heading uptown, and the two groups exchanged friendly greetings.