https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/dining/queens-night-market-review.html
Around the World in an Evening at the Queens Night Market - The New York Times
Food,Queens International Night Market (Queens  NY),Flushing Meadows-Corona Park (Queens  NY)
June 22, 2017
6095
“This is what you eat in La Paz at 4 a.m.,” said the man half-devoured by smoke as he stood at the grill, stroking oil over beef hearts with a brush of banana husks.It was only 8 p.m., but at the Queens Night Market, next to the undulating walls of the New York Hall of Science in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, the night already felt a little lawless, in the best sense of the word: emancipated from day and of unlimited promise.In one hand, I clutched a newspaper printed in Bengali, whirled into a thonga, or cone, and brimming over with jhal muri: a loose bouquet of cilantro, puffed rice, crunchy filaments of fried chickpea flour and hoops of green chile like castoff earrings. Mustard oil trickled through. The heat clarified the soul.In the other hand was a cup of chicha morada, a Peruvian drink of purple corn brewed with pineapple peels, cinnamon and cloves, and darker than any wine, so purple it was nearly black. The sweetness was a jolt, and then it was gone.A giant inflatable lucky cat, the talisman of storefronts all over Asia, waved its paw by the fence. Burnished ducks hung inside a stall, as if in a restaurant window in Chinatown. A crowd had gathered around a woman dripping molten sugar from a spoon onto a marble slab, letting it crystallize into the shapes of butterflies, bearded goats and koi with pursed lips, which children then toted around on sticks like lollipops.There are other, more celebrated open-air food bazaars in town. But, for me, none is more surprising, thrilling and inspiring than the Queens Night Market. It runs Saturday nights from April to October (with brief breaks during the United States Open and Maker Faire), but in summer it has the most shimmer.I stood in line beside young mixed-race couples and first-generation sons and daughters bringing their immigrant parents out for the night. I consulted with strangers on what to try next: Ecuadorean bollos de pescado, tamale-like packets of stewed tuna inside a dough of mashed green plantains and peanut paste? Ersatz Twinkies frosted with Filipino ube (purple yam) or strewn with jackfruit and Fruity Pebbles? Balinese sate from the brilliantly named Endless Sunrice?The market, which began in 2015, is a testament to both the cultural riches of Queens and the vision of its founder, John Wang, a former lawyer born in Texas to parents of Taiwanese descent. His goal is to showcase vendors “from every country represented” in New York City; the vendor application asks how each menu relates to the seller’s heritage. Because the majority of vendors are first-time entrepreneurs, he offers free small-business seminars and recruits corporate sponsors to help lower their fees.Crucially for marketgoers, he has imposed a $5 price cap per dish (with a $6 exception for a few vendors whose margins are “razor thin”). This encourages smaller portion size and grazing, so I was able to try a dozen booths on each visit. I still mourned all that I had missed.Some pleasures I may never know again, like slippery sweet-potato noodles glossed with black vinegar and chile oil and betraying a throb of Sichuan peppercorn, from a stall whose sign sadly proclaimed, “This is our last week.” (Please return next summer.)Among the snacks and dishes to search and hope for is fuchka, delicate semolina shells lined with a mash of yellow peas and chile and sluiced with tamarind so they are sour-sweet and earthy-hot all at once. This is served under the banner of Jhal NYC, which is half food stall, half social enterprise. The two young men who run it — Queens-born and of Bangladeshi descent — hire recent immigrants and stay-at-home mothers to make the food, as a way of helping them gain footing in the city and a sense of independence.At the Malaysian Project, the burger pays homage to the beloved Ramly chain in Kuala Lumpur. A compact patty of beef or chicken, suffused with a profoundly warm curry blend, is folded inside a yellow-white tie-dye of egg cracked right on the grill, then slid into a bun slaked with brown butter and chile mayo. I ate mine standing, in silence.But I had to keep going, because I also wanted skewers of beautifully tender beef hearts from the smoky Bolivian Anticuchos booth, and Persian love cake from Sweet Zahra, a brief glissando of cardamom and rose water, already a memory even as I ate it.At Joon, there is the crispy rice called tahdig in Farsi, molded into hollow cups to be filled with fesenjan, a stew whose brooding sweetness comes from long-simmered pomegranate juice. It was ladled in while the vendor’s Iranian mother-in-law watched from the sidelines, approvingly.Where else but Queens could you find “Nigerian bibimbap”? (It’s not fusion but marketing savvy.) At Obe, jollof rice is assembled in bibimbap style, with vegetables and meat on top: creamy efo (spinach stew), pepper chicken with gently insistent heat and plantains cooked just enough to sweat without turning too sweet.Paula’s Seoul Food offers a light take on the original Korean bibimbap, with layers of quinoa and rice under pickled vegetables, bulgogi beef and a canopy of spinach leaves, as fresh and clean a version as I’ve had in New York.And my favorite: kue pancong from Moon Man, Indonesian cakes of coconut and rice flour, typically made in grilling pans with crescent-shaped slots. Here they are full moons, hand-torched to order, the best decorated with no more than shreds of coconut and a dark stain of Java palm sugar. More novel toppings may include crumbled Oreos, advertised on the sign with a winking parenthetical: “(Merica!)”At the end of each night, I found myself surrounded by people nibbling helixes of skewered potato slices; gawking as strips of dough were wrapped in spirals around fat metal cylinders to make kurtoskalacs, Transylvanian cakes traditionally roasted over a spit; and extolling the glories of moffles, waffles made with mochiko (glutinous rice flour). But by then I could eat no more.The market’s layout is thoughtful, with room to roam, an A.T.M. in a cloaked booth, picnic tables and portable sinks. Mr. Wang arrives at the park at 7 each Saturday morning to set up, and sometimes doesn’t leave until 24 hours later. His staff members are almost entirely volunteers. They deserve applause.Beyond the fence is a beer and wine garden and a lawn where people roll around in knockerballs — plastic spheres that you can fit your body inside. More than a half-century ago, the park hosted the 1964 New York World’s Fair, whose theme was “Peace Through Understanding.” The public swooned over rocket men in jet packs and dioramas of lunar colonies.But what has perhaps lasted longest in our national memory is the Disney attraction first unveiled at the fair, a cruise by slow boat through caves thronged by dolls of almost every nation, chorusing as one. You know the song: “It’s a small world after all.”Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.