https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/books/review/gabe-habash-stephen-florida-wrestling-novel.html
A First Novel, Wrestling With the Will to Rule the Mat - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Stephen Florida (Book),Habash  Gabe
July 19, 2017
3106
STEPHEN FLORIDA By Gabe Habash 304 pp. Coffee House Press. $24.99.“People are bad at giving up,” a man tells the title character late in “Stephen Florida,” Gabe Habash’s debut novel. “A lot of the time they don’t do it early enough.” He’s commenting on life in the oil fields of North Dakota, where Stephen is considering a job after college, but he might as well be describing Stephen’s current situation: He’s a wrestler at Oregsburg College in the late 1970s, and it’s his senior year, which means it’s his last chance to win a collegiate championship. Habash’s novel follows Stephen through his event-filled final season and traces his complex inner turmoil as he pursues his unbending ambition to dominate the competition. By the time the above statement is made to Stephen, he’s veered far away from mere determination and ended up near monomania, and his will to win has become enmeshed in bitter jealousy, calculated malice and philosophical scrutiny. The sport itself, in other words, is beside the point, as are the actual benefits of succeeding. Stephen’s drive has brought him to the brink, but is it too late for him to give up?“Stephen Florida” is not some Hollywood sports story. First, Stephen’s drive is reinforced or curated not by his coaches but by himself, and second, the novel doesn’t present his grandiose ambitions and unrepentant will as heroic or necessary or even good. Rather, it tries to understand the kind of person who would be attracted to such a vocation in the first place. Do a person’s goals determine the means to achieve them? Or can a sport create these dreams through repetitive and torturous training?What kind of ambitions am I talking about? Winning, sure, but it’s deeper than that. Here’s Stephen: “You know how when you live in a room for a long time and you make the room smell like you? That’s what I’m doing with the world.” Stephen does not want merely to win, he wants to be unavoidably present to the people around him. “I am not stupid, I am not delusional,” he says at another point. “I’m aware of the smallness of the Division IV wrestling record book. But despite its smallness, it is still permanent, and I have in my hand the pen to sign my name into it. … After I’m dead, from time to time, maybe someone will scan through the past results and come across my name.” For all its grandiosity, Stephen’s hope amounts to very little, yet he still clings to it with everything he’s got.Habash has created a fascinating protagonist in Stephen, a hard-driven athlete with a convincingly thoughtful mind — though an erratic one, too. Just when you think you’ve got Stephen pegged, he surprises you with a meditation on Mary Beth, his brief love interest, or on Linus, a fellow wrestler with whom he has a strange and strained relationship. But most important, I think, is the way Habash understands the limits of his subject matter. He does not try to extrapolate Stephen’s narrative into some all-encompassing portrayal of ambition and hubris, but remains firmly in the realm of this particular boy in this particular moment.The same guy who warns Stephen about the non-quitters in the oil fields adds this, which speaks to Habash’s understanding of just where Stephen’s wrestling determination fits in the context of the male-dominated realm of competition: “People end up in a new situation, they don’t act like themselves. People are animals. Men, really, is who I mean.” It’s a fitting epigraph for Habash’s novel and its aims.