http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/25/arts/television/bojack-horseman-netflix-animated-series-with-will-arnett.html
‘BoJack Horseman,’ Netflix Animated Series, With Will Arnett - The New York Times
Web-Original Programming,Television,Sedaris  Amy,Brie  Alison,Paul  Aaron,Tompkins  Paul F,BoJack Horseman (TV Program),BoJack Horseman (Web-Original Program)
Aug. 24, 2014
7135
Anyone who had young children back in the 1960s no doubt had to deal with the questions raised by “Mister Ed,” the sitcom about a talking horse. “Daddy, can horses really talk?” “Mommy, how come the pony at my birthday party didn’t say anything?”These are nothing compared with the questions parents will get if they make the mistake of letting young children watch “BoJack Horseman,” a saucy animated series also featuring a talking horse that began streaming Friday on Netflix. “Daddy, do dogs really date humans and have sex with them? How?”This hilarious and ribald show is not intended for kiddies, or for anyone who cherishes the somewhat cherubic image Will Arnett has recently built up on series like “The Millers” and “Up All Night.” Mr. Arnett is the voice of the title character (and an executive producer), a horse that once had a beloved TV series but is now in the washed-up star category.BoJack isn’t the only talking animal in this world; all of them are pretty chatty. And they intermingle, in all senses, with people. BoJack, for instance, is trying to write a memoir with the help of the human Diane (voiced by Alison Brie of “Community”), who is dating Mr. Peanutbutter (Paul F. Tompkins), a dog and another once-famous star.This irks BoJack more and more because, as the show goes along, he, too, falls for Diane, and Mr. Peanutbutter’s sitcom was basically a rip-off of BoJack’s. Galling, for horse or human. In one episode, BoJack steals the “D” from the “Hollywood” sign to try to impress Diane.Other voices in this star-heavy series come from Amy Sedaris (a cat who is BoJack’s agent) and Aaron Paul of “Breaking Bad” (BoJack’s human buddy Todd). Like some of television’s more out-there animated shows, this one is hard to describe beyond broad outlines, because it’s so odd, a combination of droll and naughty that seems improbable but works deliciously. More proof that much of the funniest stuff available for viewing these days is drawn, not performed on a soundstage.