https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/18/world/middleeast/nefertiti-tutankhamen-tomb-egypt.html
Hints in Search for Nefertiti Are Found in Tutankhamen’s Tomb - The New York Times
Archaeology and Anthropology,Egypt,Egyptian Civilization,Tombs and Tombstones,Travel and Vacations,Tutankhamen,Nefertiti,Luxor (Egypt),Reeves  Nicholas (1956- ),Radar,Eldamaty  Mamdouh
March 17, 2016
5030
CAIRO —  Egypt’s top antiquities official said Thursday that a deeper analysis of radar scans taken last year in the tomb of King Tutankhamen indicated that organic material or metal could be hidden behind its walls — inching forward a theory that someone, perhaps Queen Nefertiti, was buried in the tomb, too.The tiptoeing language used by the official, Mamdouh Eldamaty, suggested no breakthrough, but rather an attempt to satisfy the huge worldwide interest in ancient Egypt and especially anything related to Nefertiti or Tutankhamen, also known as King Tut.It was potentially “the discovery of the century,” Mr. Eldamaty, the antiquities minister, said at a packed news conference in Cairo. But he added: “I cannot say anything about the organic material. I can only say we have some organic material. Maybe. I don’t know.”At a time when Egypt’s tourism industry is suffering badly after years of political unrest and militant attacks, antiquities officials have ardently pursued a theory by a British Egyptologist, Nicholas Reeves, positing that the celebrated tomb of the young Tutankhamen was, in fact, an antechamber to a grander burial complex that, at least according to Mr. Reeves, belonged to Nefertiti.Egyptian officials have been skeptical that Nefertiti is buried there, but they have put aside any misgivings and enthusiastically promoted the search, fully aware of the excitement, and tourist dollars, that would be generated by any find.The work to confirm the theory has been slow, involving physical inspections as well as infrared and radar scans of the tomb, in the Valley of the Kings in Luxor. The tests could eventually lead to the insertion of a camera into the walls, in the quest for conclusive proof. In the meantime, Egyptian officials have worked to keep up the interest in the search, holding splashy news conferences to announce even incremental developments.Another announcement will be made on April 1, after a new round of radar scans, Mr. Eldamaty said. “We have here new information that leads us to a good result, but for our team we still need more,” he said.“Maybe is not fact,” he added. “It is maybe.”Tutankhamen, who reigned from about 1333 B.C. to about 1323 B.C., during the 18th Dynasty, has captured the world’s imagination since the English archaeologist Howard Carter discovered his tomb, in stunningly intact condition, in 1922. The king, who is believed to have died at age 19, succeeded Akhenaten, whose chief queen was Nefertiti, and whose attempt to create a cult dedicated to the sun disk Aten is often interpreted as a precursor to monotheism. (Tutankhamen may have been Akhenaten’s son, but the evidence is unclear.)The trove found in Tutankhamen’s tomb led to a landmark exhibition that toured the world — including, in the late 1970s, six American cities. At the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, “Treasures of Tutankhamen,” on view for four months in 1978-79, was a blockbuster and a lift for a city still reeling from a financial crisis and the flight of middle- and upper-income residents to the suburbs.Nefertiti’s tomb has never been found. A bust that is believed to depict the queen is a crown jewel of the Neues Museum in Berlin.