https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/12/sports/football/9-11-tributes-focus-on-flags-and-anthem.html
An Awkward Alignment of the Flag and Football - The New York Times
Football,September 11 (2001),National Anthems,Stadiums and Arenas,Flags  Emblems and Insignia,New York Jets,Kaepernick  Colin
Sept. 11, 2016
3637
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Hours before football games at MetLife Stadium here, the televisions on the concourses and at the concession stands normally show highlights and interviews with players and coaches. About the only people who seem to watch are fans waiting to buy food and drinks, if they bother to look at all.On Sunday, the first full day of N.F.L. play, the televisions were tuned into something far more somber: the memorial service at ground zero in Lower Manhattan, where relatives of those who died in the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, read the names of their loved ones.The poignant reminder of the horror of that day was completely at odds with the atmosphere in the stadium, where 78,000 fans were setting aside trauma, controversy and pain by watching the Jets and the Cincinnati Bengals open their season.Arenas and stadiums have long been a sanctuary from daily woes, places where fans can commune and commiserate over their teams, and forget, at least for a few hours, personal challenges and the complex issues facing their communities and the country.Yet the desire to focus just on football seemed especially determined this year, and not just because the accident of the calendar put the first full Sunday of football on the same day as the 15th anniversary of 9/11.Already, a vigorous national debate had arisen over players, led by quarterback Colin Kaepernick of the San Francisco 49ers, who chose not to stand for the national anthem, to make a point about issues of race and justice. A Kansas City Chiefs player raised his fist during the anthem Sunday, four members of the Miami Dolphins knelt and other actions during the ritual ensured that the discussion would continue.In addition, renewed concerns about the sport’s safety flared from the season’s first game, on Thursday, when one of the league’s biggest stars, Carolina Panthers quarterback Cam Newton, was repeatedly hit in the head with little done about it. On Sunday, the players’ association said it would look into those plays.Looming, too, outside the stadium was the especially heated rhetoric of the presidential election.So a sometimes awkward juxtaposition of football and patriotism was inevitable.The pain of Sept. 11 remains particularly acute in the New York area, and of course there were plenty of official tributes.The N.F.L. long ago learned to align itself closely with the flag, the military and everything else that passes for patriotic these days.The Jets handed out small American flags to fans, some of whom chanted “U-S-A” during the moment of silence for victims of the attacks. Members of Tuesday’s Children, a group that supports youth, families and communities affected by terrorism, were brought on the field to high-five the Jets as they were introduced.The former New York mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani joined police officers and firefighters at the coin toss. Like practically every politician introduced at a game in the New York area, he was booed. So, too, was President Obama, who spoke in a message shown on the stadium’s video screen.Every player on the Jets and Bengals stood when the national anthem was played after a flag the size of the field was unfurled.That was worth noting because Kaepernick had sat while the anthem was played on one occasion at a preseason game and knelt another time. Kaepernick said each action was done to draw attention to racial injustices in the country.The Broncos’ Brandon Marshall took a knee rather than stand for the anthem at Denver’s opener against the visiting Carolina Panthers.There was no widespread follow-up of such acts on Sunday, but players did make their feelings known about the day on the field.In Nashville, Titans linebacker Avery Williamson wore specially designed cleats that read, “Never Forget” and “9/11” even though he risked a fine by the league, which is finicky about its uniforms. (Several police associations in New York and New Jersey volunteered to pay the fine for him.)The Seahawks made their own tribute, standing arm in arm on the sideline in a “demonstration of unity.”On the opposite side of the field in Seattle, four members of the Miami Dolphins knelt during the playing of the anthem. In Kansas City, Chiefs cornerback Marcus Peters raised his fist as the anthem played, and two players on the New England Patriots did the same before facing the Cardinals on Sunday night in Glendale, Ariz.The moment the anthem ended at the Jets game, however, it was back to football. By the end of the opening drive, which ended with a sack of Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton, the crowd seemed to have found its equilibrium.Spectators celebrated acrobatic catches by Jets receiver Eric Decker and smash-mouth runs by running back Matt Forte, and cheered bone-crunching hits like the one when defensive end Lawrence Thomas leveled the Bengals’ Adam Jones on a kickoff return.When the fans rose to their feet in the fourth quarter to cheer the Jets, the image of the families grieving in Lower Manhattan seemed like a distant memory.Though their focus was on winning the game, the players were well aware of their surroundings.Cincinnati Coach Marvin Lewis said he had taken all the Bengals to the memorial at ground zero right after they arrived on Saturday.Bengals defensive end Margus Hunt, who grew up in Estonia and watched the attacks on television there, said the visit was surreal. He found the debate over the anthem perplexing. During his time in the military in Estonia, he sang the national anthem before bed every night.Eric Winston, an offensive lineman on the Bengals, visited ground zero with his family in December 2001, when he was in high school. The return trip resonated because it put his job, and the N.F.L., in perspective.“I think he wanted us to understand the moment we were playing in,” Winston said of Lewis. “Obviously, we had a job to do today, but we also wanted to see what is important as well.”