http://www.nytimes.com/2001/04/16/us/despite-report-after-report-unrest-endures-in-cincinnati.html
Despite Report After Report, Unrest Endures in Cincinnati - The New York Times
CINCINNATI (OHIO),AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION,THOMAS  TIMOTHY,ROACH  STEVEN,POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT,BLACKS,SUITS AND LITIGATION,DISCRIMINATION,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,POLICE
April 16, 2001
1331
For some residents of this racially embattled city, the Justice Department's decision to open a preliminary investigation into the police department's treatment of minorities follows a familiar pattern. A black man is killed, an investigation is conducted, hearings are held, a report is written and then promptly forgotten.Rather than investigate, the residents say, Justice Department lawyers could simply read. They could start with the report of the Kerner Commission, which studied race riots in Cincinnati and seven other cities in 1968. They could move on to the report of a mayoral community relations panel that concluded in 1979 that police and city officials ''neither really care nor are willing to do anything about reported incidents of misconduct.''They could leaf through the 1981 report of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, which accused the Cincinnati police of discriminatory hiring practices and criticized their lack of standards for using force. In 1981 and again in 1987, the city signed consent decrees, under federal pressure, to improve the hiring and promotion of black officers. In 1995, after a brutality case involving a black student, the city manager appointed a police review panel that concluded that racism persisted in the department because of ''a reluctance to institute necessary organizational and procedural reforms.''Despite all the study, the problems have endured in Cincinnati, which, like Los Angeles, New York and other American cities, has had recurring racial problems involving its police force.Since 1995, there have been 15 fatal police shootings of black men, and none of whites. In 1999, the city's black police officers' association issued a report detailing more than 150 complaints from black citizens about racial profiling and the use of excessive force. Earlier this year, the American Civil Liberties Union incorporated many of those complaints in a federal lawsuit accusing the police department of an array of discriminatory practices.And so, it was not just the report of a police officer's gunshot, but also its echo, that incited civil unrest in Cincinnati last week.When a white officer killed an unarmed black man on April 7, it revived the lingering distrust that has riven this city's black community from its predominantly white police force for more than three decades, long enough for frustrations to have been passed from one generation to the next.''The anger in this city has been building to a boiling point for years,'' said Scotty Johnson, a 15-year-veteran of the police department and the president of the Sentinel Police Association, a group of about 250 black officers formed in 1968. ''Everybody has warned city officials and the police department that you're going to have an explosion in Cincinnati if you keep up the same practices.''Some of the studies conducted over the years virtually predicted that their recommendations would be ignored. The 1995 report by the city manager's review panel, which urged a renewed commitment to diversity in hiring, promotions and training, warned against lip service.''Pious words without resolute and continuous implementation are widely recognized to be the kind of official hypocrisy which generates public cynicism and anger,'' the report said. ''This alienates large sectors of the population.''That shot over the bow never landed, said former Gov. John J. Gilligan, who headed the panel. ''We had a lot of recommendations in there for which we were profoundly thanked,'' Mr. Gilligan said. ''And that was the end of that.''Obviously, the nature and racial disparity of the police shootings have  created the most concern, though  prominent blacks acknowledge that many have been justifiable. They also recognize that the officers involved in several shootings are black. Of the 15 killings since 1995, six of the suspects had guns, one took an officer's gun, one wielded a knife, one a brick and one a nail-studded board. Two were in vehicles.But three of the suspects, including 19-year-old Timothy Thomas, who was killed on April 7, were unarmed, and at least four of the shootings are considered questionable. In addition to the Thomas case, which will be examined by a grand jury this week, the incidents include the Nov. 7, 2000, death of Roger Owensby Jr., 29, an unarmed man who died of asphyxiation after being subdued by several officers; the March 19, 1999, death of Michael Carpenter, 30, who was shot at nine times through a car window; and the Feb. 23, 1997, shooting of Lorenzo Collins, an escaped psychiatric patient who, armed with a brick, was shot after being surrounded by 15 officers.Only one of the cases, that of Mr. Carpenter, prompted a reprimand of any officer involved. No police officer in Cincinnati has ever been convicted of killing a citizen, though two have been indicted in the Owensby case.The perceived toothlessness of the police department's disciplinary process grates on many black residents. ''There's this automatic defensiveness that nothing they do is ever questionable,'' said Marian A. Spencer, a civil rights leader who was Cincinnati's first black city councilwoman.The city's civilian review panel does not have subpoena powers. And each of the last 10 officers who have appealed disciplinary measures  have persuaded arbitrators to overturn their punishments. The police chief has said he feels he has little power to rid the department of bad apples.In one recent case, Officer Robert Hill was fired by the city last year after a convenience store's security camera captured him throwing a 68-year-old Alzheimer's patient to the floor. The patient, who is white, was armed with only a paint brush and a cordless drill. He broke several bones.Mr. Hill appealed his dismissal through an arbitration process that is allowed under the police department's contract with its officers' union, the Fraternal Order of Police. The arbitrator reinstated Mr. Hill, and he is now in line to be promoted to sergeant after scoring well on a civil service examination.''We've got a chief that can't really mete out discipline, officers committing misconduct with impunity, and a discipline arbitration process that takes years and is incredibly frustrating,'' said Robert Harrod, the executive director of Cincinnati's chapter of the National Conference for Community and Justice.Lt. Col. Richard S. Biehl, one of four assistant chiefs, said the shootings must be considered individually and not as part of a pattern. Colonel Biehl also said the killings of three police officers over the last four years, two of them black, seemed to have been lost in the debate over the use of force.Colonel Biehl also said the department had made strides in recent years by adopting a stricter policy regarding the use of deadly force on suspects in moving vehicles, by encouraging the use of Mace and stun guns instead of bullets and by buying high-tech training equipment. As in other cities, the department is also  moving toward a community policing approach, though critics say the movement has been slow.The minority composition of the police force, though it has grown substantially since the consent decrees were signed, continues to trail that of the population. About 28 percent of officers are black in a city where 43 percent of the 331,000 residents are black. The number of blacks on the force has increased to 290 today, from 115 in 1986, and there is one black assistant chief and one black captain. By comparison, about 14 percent of New York City's police officers are black, while 25 percent of the approximately eight million residents are black.But in Cincinnati there has never been a black police chief, a job that has almost always gone to a white career officer from the city's west side. Some blacks fault an unusual civil service system that requires the chief to be selected from among other high-ranking officers who pass a test. They also complain that city officials have little power over police policy because the chief reports directly to a public safety director and not to the city manager or the mayor.Critics of the department also charge that its diversity training is inadequate, and that the city has yet to establish a database that would enable easy tracking of every officer's disciplinary record. The department had committed to doing so as part of a 1998 consent decree.It was not just the shooting of Mr. Thomas that struck a chord in the black community. The incident also resonated because the police were trying to arrest him for 12 misdemeanor traffic citations and 2 warrants charging him with running from the police. For many blacks who have become accustomed to regular traffic stops, the nature of those warrants raised the specter of racial profiling.Several prominent blacks also said they could understand Mr. Thomas's decision to run from officers when he was stopped. The Rev. Damon Lynch III said blacks often run from the police because ''they're thinking, 'If I don't run, I get beat up, get my head pushed into the ground, I get hit with the sticks, I get pushed into the car door.' ''A number of city leaders said Cincinnati's entrenched residential segregation was to blame for much of the fear and distrust. The city is the eighth-most segregated in the country, according to newly released census figures, and young whites and blacks learn to be wary of each other and each other's neighborhoods, civic leaders said.''You have frightened citizens and frightened police,'' said Alphonse A. Gerhardstein, one of the A.C.L.U. lawyers suing the city. ''And that's a dangerous combination.''