https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/briefing/roger-federer-turkey-donald-trump-jr.html
Roger Federer, Turkey, Donald Trump Jr.: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 16, 2017
3025
Good morning. Here’s what you need to know:• The stream of revelations about his eldest son’s meeting with a Kremlin-linked lawyer appears to be taking a toll on President Trump.He fired off a series of Twitter posts in defense of Donald Trump Jr., and renewed his attacks on the news media and his defeated opponent, Hillary Clinton.State governors, meanwhile, are increasingly working around Mr. Trump, embarking on their own global diplomatic missions._____• A top-level finance meeting China holds every five years ended this weekend with underwhelming results. Our Shanghai bureau chief saw the meager outcome, even as overall debt in the country is soaring, as a signal of how complex China’s policy dilemmas have become.Multiple news reports indicated that China’s anti-corruption agency is investigating Sun Zhengcai, the youngest member of the Politburo and the party boss of Chongqing, on suspicion of “serious violation of party discipline.”And in other governance challenges, women appear to still be shut out as the Communist Party prepares to enshrine its next set of leaders this fall._____• In Hong Kong, a weekend march in honor of Liu Xiaobo, the Nobel Peace laureate who died under guard last week, underscores the intensity of democracy advocates’ resistance to Beijing’s power.The march came a day after a mainland court ruling that removed four Hong Kong legislators, effectively ending the pro-democracy camp’s ability to block legislation.In the mainland, some of Mr. Liu’s admirers have been finding creative ways around Beijing’s internet controls to remember him. Mr. Liu’s ashes were dropped into the sea, ensuring that his grave could not became a symbol of China’s democracy movement._____• The U.S. spent more than $1 trillion and lost about 4,500 service members in the effort to make Iraq the cornerstone of a Western-facing Middle East. But today, Iran’s influence is paramount. Our correspondent looks at the shifting dynamics in Part One of our series “Iran’s Turn.”Separately, Hossein Fereydounh, above, the brother of Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, was arrested in a corruption inquiry. It appeared to be a move by Mr. Rouhani’s hard-line rivals to undermine him.Iran also sentenced an American graduate student, Xiyue Wang, to 10 years in prison on charges he was spying for the U.S., an action bound to aggravate relations with Washington._____• In India, a dispute between a maid and her employer exploded into a full-blown riot. Hundreds of the maid’s neighbors, armed with rocks and iron rods, stormed her employer’s apartment.Thousands of families have now locked their maids out, escalating resentments between India’s rich and poor.Separately, lawmakers in New Delhi and in state assemblies across India are voting today to elect the country’s next president. Votes will be counted later this week._____• Roger Federer won his record eighth Wimbledon singles title by defeating Marin Cilic. Federer, who turns 36 next month, is now the oldest man to win Wimbledon in the Open era.He also became the first man since Bjorn Borg in 1976 to win Wimbledon without dropping a set.• Euphoric reviews did not translate to blockbuster ticket sales for “War for the Planet of the Apes.” . (We spoke with Andy Serkis, who stars as Caesar, about how to play a talking chimp.)• China said that its economy grew 6.9 percent in the second quarter.• General Motors is working with Uber to test its car-sharing program, Maven, in Australia.• India is buying ice cream at the fastest rate in the world.• The Dow and the S.&P. 500 closed at record highs on Friday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Hundreds of thousands of supporters of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, turned out for a weekend rally to commemorate the anniversary of last year’s failed coup — and to bolster his stance that he is a hero in a liberation struggle. [The New York Times]• Australia, which lost 38 nationals when Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down over Ukraine in 2014, said it might try suspects in the case in absentia. [Reuters]• The police in eastern China arrested an arson suspect after at least 22 people died in a blaze that gutted a workers’ dormitory. [The New York Times]• Bollywood’s biggest night: Full results from the International Indian Film Academy Awards, held Saturday just outside New York City. [Indian Express]• A 70-year-old South Korean woman became an internet life skills guru after her “Grandma’s Diary” of a trip to northeastern Australia went viral. [Reuters]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• A list of under-$50 items that might improve your life, and more, in our weekly newsletter.• Most of us experience an “acute gastrointestinal event” at least once a year. Reading the clues might reduce your risk in the future.• A quick dinner need not lack flavor. Try shrimp in yellow curry.• A rare political satire about Singapore is a surprise best seller. Sonny Liew’s “The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye” retells the nation’s creation story with a comic book cast of robots, aliens and cockroaches. • In memoriam: Maryam Mirzakhani, the only woman and only Iranian ever to win a Fields Medal, the most prestigious honor in mathematics, died of breast cancer. She was 40.• For “Game of Thrones” fans, winter is finally here. As Season 7 kicks off, let’s review what you need to remember. Our in-house G.O.T. obsessives are also ready to email you a weekly newsletter with exclusive interviews and explainers. Sign up here.• And escape to a place where visuals and poetry merge. We asked six photographers to use works by six rising American poets for inspiration.On this day in 1955, the first Disneyland opened in Anaheim, Calif., on what had once been an orange grove. Walt Disney himself greeted the very first of that day’s estimated 15,000 guests.The opening was covered on television on par with “the dedication of a national shrine,” The Times wrote and later explained the appeal: “Children see their old friends from nursery songs and fairy tales impersonated by local characters.”Perhaps the best-known of those childhood friends, Mickey Mouse, turns 90 next year.The Mickey phenomenon first swept across the world during the Great Depression. Some reacted with skepticism, some countries banned it, but most found solace in the story of an irreverent mouse.“Perhaps it is the bitterness of the struggle to earn a living in Europe this year that has brought Mickey Mouse such tremendous success — Mickey who is forever gay, Mickey who is only made of ink and cannot possibly be hungry, cold or weary,” read a report from Germany in 1931.And the character’s popularity endures. When the latest major Disney theme park opened last year in Shanghai, mouse ears were one of the biggest sellers.Patrick Boehler contributed reporting._____We have briefings timed for the Australian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.