https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/08/realestate/wealthy-chinese-buyers-head-to-new-yorks-suburbs.html
Wealthy Chinese Buyers Head to New York’s Suburbs - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),China,Long Island (NY)
Feb. 6, 2015
9847
For the past several years, wealthy buyers from China have been purchasing investment properties and pieds-à-terre in luxurious Manhattan high-rises. Lately, though, some have moved their portfolios east to the exclusive enclaves of Long Island, springing for the pricey houses of the North Shore’s Gold Coast.Some Chinese buyers are parking money in what they see as a low-risk investment. Others are seeking a trophy home. Still others are intent on living in these places full time while their children attend the area’s high-performing schools.The suburbs of Long Island are not the only places growing in desirability among the Chinese.The Chinese are either the largest or second largest group of foreign property buyers in 46 of the 50 states, according to the National Association of Realtors and Juwai.com, an online real estate marketplace for Chinese buyers, with offices in Shanghai and Hong Kong. In the 12 months ending in March 2014, Chinese investors spent $22 billion on real estate in the United States, or nearly one quarter of all international sales, according to a survey by the National Association of Realtors.Roughly 51 percent of the deals were in New York, California and Washington; the bulk, 46 percent, were in suburbs, while 37 percent were in urban areas. Seattle became particularly popular after the release of “Finding Mr. Right,” a 2013 Chinese film inspired by “Sleepless in Seattle,” with Tom Hanks.Some very recent deals may be attributable to an agreement in November between the United States and China that provides citizens of each country access to 10-year tourist and business visas, eliminating the hassle of having to renew them annually.“It makes buying a vacation home here much easier and has certainly led to more deals being done,” said Andrew Taylor, the co-chief executive of Juwai.com.In New York, headlines have mostly focused on the Chinese who spend big money for apartments in glossy condo towers like One57.But high-end real estate on Long Island is quickly gaining steam. Of the 136 deals that closed between Jan. 1, 2013 and Jan. 30, 2015 for $3 million or higher, 37 of them, or 27 percent, were to Chinese buyers, according to a recent search on Nassau County’s multiple listing service. And this figure does not include several purchases that have yet to close.Chinese buyers are heading east for a variety of reasons, including relative affordability, top-performing public schools and proximity to the Chinese communities in Flushing, Queens, and Manhattan. The area also boasts waterfront access and the promise of fresh air.“New York City is the concrete jungle, much like Beijing or Shanghai. Long Island offers fresh air, no pollution, the waterfront,” said Andrew Wu, an associate broker at Daniel Gale Sotheby’s International Realty in Port Washington, N.Y. “If you have a home in China, that is one thing. But if you own a large home here, with a lot of land or a waterfront view, it is a true status symbol.”Chinese buyers favor all-cash deals — approximately 76 percent of the Chinese purchases made in the last year were all cash, according to the National Association of Realtors. Using information gleaned from online listings and other resources, they are savvy bargainers, brokers say.“There is a fear in China that you could lose your wealth overnight,” said Daniel Chang, a salesperson at Sotheby’s International Realty who heads the Asia desk for the Field Team in Manhattan. “Most Chinese view real estate in the United States as a safe-deposit box — no one can take it away.”While the influx of Chinese buyers is altering the makeup of towns along the North Shore of Long Island, the transition has been relatively smooth. Great Neck, for example, used to be heavily Persian Jewish, said Jennifer Lo, an associate broker with Douglas Elliman in Great Neck, N.Y., “but now there are so many Chinese coming they must be welcome.”Still, sometimes minor misunderstandings do arise.Last year, Ms. Lo sold a five-bedroom house on Long Island to a family from China. As soon as the deal closed, the new owners handed Ms. Lo the key and asked her to keep an eye on the place.“They told me they were returning to China and would not be back for two years,” said Ms. Lo, incredulously. “I said, ‘But what about the house and upkeep on the garden?’ The wife suggested I pour cement over the grass, maybe turn it into a basketball court. I tried to explain this isn’t how things are done on Long Island.”Ms. Lo found a tenant to rent the house — with the garden intact — while the owners remained in China.A large subset of the Chinese buyers who are moving to Long Island are drawn by the public schools, and plan to stay put while their children grow up. “Many Chinese want a U.S. education,” Ms. Lo said. “In China, there is so much competition, even to get into elementary school, and it doesn’t matter if you are rich or poor.”Chinese language schools have cropped up across the island, and some public school districts are nearly half Asian, with a mix of children born overseas and children born to Chinese-American families.Theresa Wang was hoping to escape the pollution in Chengdu, China, where she is from, and to secure an American education for her daughter, Tian Tian, now 4, when she purchased a house in the exclusive town of Old Westbury in 2013. As is common with many Chinese families, Ms. Wang’s husband remains in China for work, coming to visit from time to time.Ms. Wang’s home is in the desirable Jericho Union Free School District, where the public high school is ranked 13th in New York State, according to U.S. News & World Report.“I was recently at an open house, and three Chinese couples came, and the only words they knew in English were ‘Jericho schools,’ ” said Barbara Candee, a manager at Daniel Gale Sotheby’s International Realty who has sold numerous properties in Long Island to Chinese buyers. “It is a huge selling point.”While Ms. Wang wants to remain within the Jericho school district, she has decided her home is too big for a family of two. The house has more than 7,000 square feet with six bedrooms, and four acres of grounds, with a tennis court and in-ground swimming pool. She purchased it with some of the furnishings, including the oil painting of a hunting dog above the fireplace in the den, and the complex audiovisual equipment in the media room that she has never used.“I loved this house when I first came, but it is too large for us,” said Ms. Wang, who is hoping to move to a more manageable home of around 5,000 square feet in a gated community that offers 24-hour security. Her home has a private gate, but no security guard. It is listed for $3.68 million.The price tag is purposeful — the numbers 3, 6 and 8 are all considered lucky for the Chinese. “We actually have another property in Sands Point, and we also listed it at $3.68 million,” said Mr. Wu, who is marketing the house with his partner, Tina Wang, a saleswoman at Daniel Gale Sotheby’s. “We might soon list my mom’s house, and I’m thinking we will ask the same price.”Choosing numbers thought of as lucky is widely embraced as a way to attract Chinese buyers. At the Estates at Green Fields, a new development in Old Brookville, the number 4 does not appear anywhere. That is because it is considered extremely unlucky, as the sound for 4 is similar in Chinese to the word for death. On the even side of the street, the addresses jump from No. 2 to No. 6.Conversely, 8, considered the luckiest number because it is a homophone for the word for prosperity, is nearly everywhere. “Most of our homes are between 8,000 and 8,888 square feet, and the asking price has to have an 8 in it,” said Raymond Hakimian, who with his father owns the project’s developer, the Mashady Development Corporation of Roslyn, N.Y.Feng shui, a system for creating a harmonious environment, was a guiding principle for the design of the Estates at Green Fields, where houses cost $5 million and higher. For example, Mr. Hakimian said, most face the preferred direction, south, letting in more sunlight, and none of the front doors open directly onto a staircase, which is considered unfortunate because of the belief that the energy from the stairs could easily run out of the house through the front door.He recalled showing a property to a couple from China.“They were going gaga over the house; they brought their children to see it,” Mr. Hakimian said. “Then their father came with a compass, and the house happened to be facing north. Even though they had been willing to pay full price, they told me it was simply facing the wrong way.”He built them another house.“We are taking our marketing to Chinese buyers extremely seriously,” said Roberta Feuerstein, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman, who is marketing the Estates at Green Fields and who created a virtual tour of the development in Chinese. So far, the strategies have been a success. “My last two buyers were both executives in China, and they just came, sat down and wrote a check,” Ms. Feuerstein said, adding she is about to close a third sale, also to a Chinese buyer.While incorporating tenets of feng shui into a house’s design can be an important selling point for some Chinese buyers, others do not seem to care.“Most of the larger purchases we do are really more a land buy, where the buyer plans to tear down the house and rebuild it to his tastes,” said Jason Friedman, an agent at Laffey Fine Homes on Long Island, who, along with his mother and partner, Rudi Friedman, has sold three trophy estates, ranging from $13.28 million to $36.5 million, to Chinese buyers in recent years.“About half of our buyers are Asian,” Mr. Friedman said. “I had one buyer who never saw the house before he bought it — he came to the closing at the lawyer’s office, which was in the same town, but hadn’t even seen the home.”Regardless of design specifications or intention, Chinese buyers are wielding increasing power on Long Island.“After someone has worked hard their entire life, and after they bought the beautiful home in China, where do they go? Usually Hong Kong, then London and New York City,” said Kevin B. Brown, a senior global real estate adviser and an associate broker for Sotheby’s International Realty in Manhattan. “Now they are thinking, where else?”