https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/01/dining/wine-school-riesling-spatlese.html
Thrilling and Joyless? The Polarity of Sweet Riesling - The New York Times
Wines,Riesling (Wine),Germany
June 1, 2017
6137
Well, this didn’t go quite as I had expected.In my mind, it seemed easy. The beauty of sweet German spätlese rieslings was so apparent to me that perhaps I lost my perspective. I imagined that all I had to do to entice people to fall in love with these wines was to get them to try them.Instead, I learned yet again, and possibly not for the last time, a fundamental truth: In matters of taste, never assume that people will see things as you do.I absorbed a second truth as well: Sweet rieslings, no matter how balanced and gorgeous, will always be polarizing.Welcome back to Wine School, where each bottle tells a story. Homework consists of tuning in to listen.For the past few weeks, we’ve been drinking spätlese rieslings from Germany. The intent was to demonstrate how beautiful these wines could be, despite the fact that each of the three I recommended had a fair amount of sweetness, a characteristic that seems to inspire fear and dismay among many wine drinkers.The wines were all spätleses, a term that simply signals that the grapes were sufficiently ripe on harvest to produce a wine of discernible sweetness. They all came from the 2015 vintage, a year that produced very ripe, fruity wines.They were: Carl Loewen Mosel Laurentiuslay, Dönnhoff Nahe Oberhäuser Brücke, and Joh. Jos. Prüm Mosel Bernkasteler Badstube.These are lovely wines, thrilling in their balance and their focus. I loved them. And yet, quite a few readers did not. The problem was epitomized by Jeff and Kay, who wrote from the suburbs of Philadelphia. Jeff loved a spätlese with a spicy Thai curry. “Great body and very well balanced,” he said. “Fantastic.”In a postscript, he added that his household was divided. Kay didn’t care for it, finding the wine too sweet.Riesling is one of the most versatile grapes in the world. It can make tremendous dry wines. It also has the acidity necessary to make sweet wines that are refreshing and not cloying, both in a style that can be consumed with a meal or as a honeyed, nectar-like dessert. Spätlese riesling is generally a wine for a meal, with a sweetness that is reminiscent of biting into a ripe peach and yet refreshing enough to encourage the next bite of food.These are wonderful wines, with a place in the world. Still, the sweet German style is contentious, especially in Germany, where many people would just as soon forget it and drink dry rieslings.“Why do Americans only talk about sweet Germany rieslings?” Phyllis asked. She suggested that they are hard to find because American wine shops pander to customers who think all German rieslings are sweet.This is not true. Many Americans actually think that all rieslings are sweet, not just German ones. In fact, Wine School examined dry German rieslings back in 2014, and many readers fell for them. I love them, too.It’s unfortunate that people have to object to one style or the other. Why not embrace both? Each has a role to play, particularly when the wines are as supremely good as these.One of the things that I like best about sweet spätleses is that they force you to question what sweetness even means. Let’s look at the Loewen, the least expensive of these wines at $26 and the least renowned in the company of Prüm and Dönnhoff, two of the most venerated names in riesling.It smelled like peaches, with an underlying hint of wet slate. In a cooler vintage, this mineral aroma might have been more apparent, but in warm 2015 it played a secondary role. The wine tasted like a ripe, sweet peach. But you were not left with a cloying feeling.Instead, the sweetness was curtailed by an acidity that left the mouth feeling dry and refreshed, with a lasting sensation of that underlying stoniness. Was it sweet? Yes. But it seemed dry as well. This is brilliant balance.The Prüm, which was more restrained and less exuberant than the Loewen, illustrated this spätlese phenomenon just as well. It was more delicate and even more precise in its focus, with greater tension between the sweet elements and the acidity. The flavors are apricot and lime rather than peach, indicating grapes that were slightly less ripe when picked. The minerality was there, too, both in the sensation of wet rocks and the touch of salinity.These two wines are from the Mosel, an area known for the delicacy and precision of its wines. The Dönnhoff, by contrast, is from Nahe, where the wines often have greater power and intensity.Indeed, the Dönnhoff was more generous and voluminous. Like the Loewen, the wine reminded me of biting into a ripe peach, but not the neat Loewen peach. Rather it was a juicy fruit that bursts over your face and drips down your chin. The wine was pure pleasure.I thought these wines each went wonderfully with crab cakes, and I believe they are versatile with a range of foods. Many readers agreed with me.“Major discovery: Spätlese riesling is really good with French fries,” Ferguson of Princeton, N.J., said. “I also suspect this would be super with boiled lobster and melted butter instead of our usual beer.”Paul in Cologne, Germany, thought a 2014 spätlese was delicious with buckwheat crepes, asparagus, ham and Gruyère, while Martin Schappeit of Forest, Va., who drank all three rieslings, described them as “elegant, shining like gold, modest and unselfishly giving.”On the other hand, Marc Kruman of Huntington Woods, Mich., was sorely disappointed by a 2007 spätlese with baked cod. NKyPianoMan of Dayton, Ky., felt a 2015 Dönnhoff Norheimer Kirschheck, made from a different vineyard than the Oberhäuser Brücke I had suggested, was too sweet with pan-fried walleye pike, though he said it was great with a strawberry and sour cream dessert.Hanna Boeke of Cape Town found the wines pleasant enough though not as enjoyable as the dry German rieslings from 2014, while Dan Barron of New York was damning: “I found these 2015s energetic, tense and utterly joyless.”Some readers liked the wines well enough, but not with food.“I want food with almost every other kind of wine, but these are so delicious and light and airy, and with such a range of flavors in each sip that food seems irrelevant,” said Mg of Northampton, Mass. “They’re best all by themselves, maybe just a few crackers or a bit of bread.”Personally, I can’t imagine drinking these wines without food, though if you were going to pick one sort of wine to drink on an empty stomach, it could be these because they are so low in alcohol. The sweetness is obtained by halting fermentation before the yeast consumes all the sugar in the grape juice, so sweet spätleses are almost always under 10 percent alcohol. These were just 8 to 8.5 percent.As VK of New York wrote, paraphrasing the writer Hugh Johnson, “A great spätlese is a wine you can drink a bottle of, not just while reading a book, but while writing one.”While I was a bit surprised that the response was not universal love for these wines, I’m happy that most of the unenthralled readers at least tried the wines rather than dismissing them out of hand. Everyone is entitled to an opinion, as long as it has been arrived at honestly.I forgot that a core mission for Wine School is to encourage people to try wines, not necessarily to like them. Opening oneself to reconsidering firm opinions is another mission. So revisiting sweet rieslings someday is a possibility.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.