https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/arts/television/whats-on-tv-tuesday-colossal-and-frontline-life-on-parole.html
What’s on TV Tuesday: ‘Colossal’ and ‘Frontline: Life on Parole’ - The New York Times
Television,Movies
July 18, 2017
9418
In “Colossal,” Anne Hathaway stars as a party girl at the end of her rope, whose frustrations have worldwide implications. And “Frontline” and The New York Times follow some former inmates during their first year of supposed freedom.COLOSSAL (2017) on iTunes. After messing up her romantic life in New York, an unemployed party girl and internet writer named Gloria (Anne Hathaway) returns to her hometown, where a chance reunion with her childhood friend Oscar (Jason Sudeikis), who has taken over his father’s bar, turns out to have enormous impact. Halfway around the world, meanwhile, a giant, lizard-like creature is terrorizing Seoul. And somehow it’s Gloria’s fault. Nacho Vigalondo’s comedy “has such an easygoing, offhand vibe, and takes such pleasure in its characters’ foibles, that it camouflages its deep subject, which is rage,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. Gloria and Oscar “are twinned — and also opposed — volcanoes of frustration and resentment,” he added. “The disproportion between their personal feelings and the wanton destruction of real estate and innocent life is both comical and horrific, and also oddly persuasive. Inside each of us is a colossus with the power to smash everything to pieces.”CASUAL on Hulu. Valerie is corralled into being a bridesmaid for a wedding she can’t come to terms with, especially with Alex and Judy in the throes of new relationship bliss. And Laura raises money to move to Sacramento.BEING MARY JANE 10 p.m. on BET. Season 4 resumes as Mary Jane (Gabrielle Union) stutters in the anchor’s seat when her boss and occasional lover, Justin (Michael Ealy), becomes preoccupied on the job — prompting her to reconsider things with Lee (Chiké Okonkwo). One nearly perfect Manhattan later, Mary Jane’s first phone call is to her mom (Margaret Avery). Whom she really wants to talk with but can’t: her best friend and former producer, Kara (Lisa Vidal), now out of a job.SHOOTER 10 p.m. on USA. The second season begins as Bob Lee Swagger (Ryan Phillippe) and his wife, Julie (Shantel VanSanten), barely escape with their lives during a terrorist attack when he joins his former Marine unit for an awards ceremony in Frankfurt, Germany.FRONTLINE: LIFE ON PAROLE 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). “Frontline” and The New York Times follow four recent parolees in Connecticut, which is trying to reduce its prison population by putting more people on early release, as they navigate their first year out from behind bars. But almost a third of parolees end up violating their terms of release — among them, Erroll Brantley Jr., who was incarcerated for burglary and is barred from contact with previous victims, including his girlfriend, with whom he spent his first night out. Another segment examines a unit devoted to the needs of female parolees like Jessica Proctor, who wants to reconnect with her son but bristles at being under supervision for five years after spending 10 years in prison for assault with physical injury.