https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/01/us/politics/white-women-helped-elect-donald-trump.html
White Women Helped Elect Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Whites,Women and Girls,Race and Ethnicity,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Nov. 9, 2016
7405
More than half of the white women who voted in the presidential election cast their ballot for Donald J. Trump, according to exit poll data collected by The New York Times.The data indicate how deeply divided Americans are by race and gender: 94 percent of black women who voted and 68 percent of Hispanic or Latino female voters chose Hillary Clinton, but 53 percent of all white female voters picked Mr. Trump.The data can be broken down further: 51 percent of white women with college degrees voted for Mrs. Clinton, while 62 percent of women without one voted for Mr. Trump, a reflection of his success with working-class whites.On Wednesday, women of all races were grappling with the findings.“Fellow white women, I’m done with you,” Sarah Ruiz-Grossman wrote in The Huffington Post.At Slate, L. V. Anderson suggested that the majority of white women ultimately supported white supremacy.“What leads a woman to vote for a man who has made it very clear that he believes she is subhuman?” Ms. Anderson wrote. “Self-loathing. Hypocrisy. And, of course, a racist view of the world that privileges white supremacy over every other issue.”The New York Daily News suggested that America should blame white women for Mrs. Clinton’s stunning loss. (Sixty-three percent of white men voted for Mr. Trump, with 54 percent with a college degree choosing him, along with 72 percent of white men without a college degree.)For women of color, the difference was stark. On Wednesday, many of those women were hurt, angry and confused.A week ago, Anne Helen Petersen of BuzzFeed painted a broad portrait of white women who planned to vote for Mr. Trump.“The Ivanka Voter is not the stereotypical Trump voter,” Ms. Petersen wrote. “She doesn’t have a Trump sign in her yard, either because it would get egged or she doesn’t want to fight with the neighbors.”Maureen Sullivan, a Trump voter who wrote about her decision in The New York Times on Tuesday, addressed widespread concern among women about Mr. Trump’s attitude toward them: “Hillary will be bringing Bill Clinton back into the White House. Everyone should be aware that the former president, who was impeached, lied about at least one sexual assault and used another woman, an intern, as a sex toy in the Oval Office.”