https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/magazine/from-wells-fargo-to-fyre-festival-the-scam-economy-is-entering-its-baroque-phase.html
From Wells Fargo to Fyre Festival, the Scam Economy Is Entering Its Baroque Phase - The New York Times
Frauds and Swindling,English Language,Ja Rule,Fyre Festival,McFarland  Billy (1991- )
May 16, 2017
8946
Over the past few decades, as the regulatory and legal protections that once shielded consumers, workers and investors have been systematically rolled back, the character of American business has noticeably changed. Year by year, we’ve reverted toward a 19th-century style of capitalism, one in which the caveat is almost always up to the emptor. We’ve moved from an industrial economy to a consumer economy to a service economy to an information economy to what you might call a flagrant-exploitation economy — one in which branding and “storytelling” have replaced advertising and possibly even reality. It’s not just that we’re being sold the sizzle more than the steak. It’s that we’re being sold the sizzle instead of and at the expense of the steak.Take, for instance, the doomed Fyre Festival, which lured people to the Bahamas late last month with promises of luxury accommodations, gourmet food and frolicsome models, only to greet them with gravel pits, collapsing tents, swarms of sand flies and sad cheese sandwiches in plastic boxes. This event was many things: an international laughingstock, an object lesson in hubris, a surprise survivalist adventure and a handy repository for all the schadenfreude in the world. It was also — at least according to a tweet from one of its chief organizers, the rapper Ja Rule — “NOT A SCAM.” Notwithstanding this heartfelt denial, Ja Rule (whose real name is Jeffrey Atkins) and his co-organizer, the 25-year-old serial entrepreneur Billy McFarland, were hit with several lawsuits, including a $100 million class action claiming that the music festival was, in fact, “nothing more than a get-rich-quick scam.”McFarland has since admitted that he was “naïve” in thinking he could build a functioning festival village from scratch in an island country not his own and too slow in realizing he was in over his head. But the class action claims that McFarland and Atkins intentionally defrauded ticket buyers — that they “were knowingly lying about the festival’s accommodations and safety and continued to promote the event and sell ticket packages” after they knew they couldn’t deliver — even warning performers and celebrities in advance not to bother coming. The case would seem to hinge, in part, on the question of what the organizers knew and when they knew it. In other words: Did they set out to scam ticket buyers, or did they just screw up?Right now seems like a good time to ask this question in general: Where is the line, exactly, between a poorly produced but well-advertised product and a con? More and more, we fully expect things to fall short of their advertising; if everything lived up to its hype, the world would be burdened with far fewer bad movies, miracle vitamins and optimistic campaign promises. Not long ago, I booked a plane flight using miles; when the flight was canceled because of bad weather, the airline simply kept the miles. Wells Fargo employees spent five years creating millions of fake accounts for unsuspecting customers in order to charge them additional fees; the year before this practice was uncovered, a news release introduced the bank’s new brand campaign as one that would “eschew product promotion for storytelling.” Our president has agreed to pay millions in fraud settlements to thousands of students of his “university,” with its $35,000 “Gold Elite” program; his daughter, whom he has employed for much of her career, has published a book in which she writes about “cultivating authenticity” and presents herself as an accomplished businesswoman. It’s a brand that she’s selling — the have-it-all sizzle of a self-actualized career woman and loving supermom in fashionable shoes. Who cares whether, somewhere behind it, there may be the equivalent of an undeveloped gravel pit and some unboxed disaster tents?The ability of wealthy people to purchase and post their way to fabulousness may help explain why, in the aftermath of the Fyre fiasco, much of the delight that burbled up online revolved around the suffering of the presumably moneyed suckers who had purchased tickets: There were even jokes going around Twitter that Ja Rule had not only heroically fleeced wealthy millennials but successfully stranded them in an island gulag.The confidence scam, of course, is as old as American capitalism. In a new book, “Fraud: An American History from Barnum to Madoff,” the Duke University professor Edward J. Balleisen argues that fraud has been a central feature of our freewheeling economy from the start, making it hard to tell scams from legitimate businesses and hard to tell aggressive sales tactics from outright deception — especially in innovative industries. The country has always been a breeding ground for “dissemblers, operators, and downright swindlers,” Balleisen writes. “Some of the psychological impulses that show up again and again in the history of business fraud reflect widespread aspirations or anxieties,” he explains, the biggest among them being “the passion for easily attained wealth.” Entire industries are built around catering to this dream, which explains airport-hotel wealth seminars, millionaire matchmakers and “The 4-Hour Workweek.” Nothing is easier to sell than the notion that a grander life is right around the corner, waiting for you to claim it — as soon as you pony up for the stock tips and pickup tricks.These days, the scam economy may be entering its baroque phase. Technology has ushered in a sharing economy that lowers wages, reduces payrolls and turns workers into roguish free agents. Reality-TV and social-media figures train us to treat them like stars merely for acting like stars. Under the right circumstances, we’ll even make folk heroes out of scammers. Seemingly inspired by the belief that “every modern woman is a scammer” and that the heroine always gets away with it, a comedian named Branden Miller created a beloved internet character called Joanne the Scammer. Miller is a gay biracial man with a beard, but he plays Joanne as a Mexican-American in a fur coat who sees herself as a rich white woman and swans awkwardly through life on a cloud of “Caucasian” entitlement, unapologetically taking everyone for everything she can get. If the scam economy had an id, it would be Joanne, surviving in a scam-or-be-scammed world, fighting fraud with fraud: The odds are stacked against her, but she gives as bad as she gets. BuzzFeed even made a series of motivational posters from her tweets, like “Scam today before tomorrow scams you” and “One way to get the most out of life is to look upon it as one big heist.”When I was a kid, there was a “Sesame Street” skit in which a shady muppet in a fedora and trench coat approached Ernie. “Hey, bud,” said the muppet, whose name was Lefty. “I got something you need, and I can sell it to ya real cheap.” Then he sold Ernie a bottle of air for a nickel. The nickel didn’t even cover the bottle — just the air, which Lefty poured into Ernie’s cupped hands. Lefty was always selling Ernie things like this: an empty box, the number eight. Ernie fell for it every time. But even a 6-year-old could see that Lefty was scamming him.This was in the ’70s, the consumer-advocacy heyday of Ralph Nader. Early in that decade, the transportation, communications, utilities, banking and insurance industries were heavily regulated. Unions were at their strongest. Wealth inequality was low. I was too young to understand any of this; I was watching Ernie excitedly showing off his purchase of nothing to an exasperated Bert. But I imagine it might have been much easier then, without all the extra anxiety and aspiration, to tell a clothed emperor from a naked one. The big generational shift since then, it seems, is from cynicism and avoidance to an admiration of the hustle and an enthusiasm for all the enthusiasm, which has dovetailed perfectly with the new laissez faire. The more Wild West the business environment, the more the hustler is elevated to folk hero or legend, much the same way that the robber barons once were.Of all the fascinating reporting to arrive in Fyre’s aftermath, perhaps the most fascinating involves the amount of early funds the festival spent on models, planes, yachts and promotional videos of models, planes and yachts. Kendall Jenner was reportedly paid $250,000 to promote the Fyre Festival on Instagram and is said to have neglected F.T.C. rules that the post be labeled an ad. She and others gave a convincing enough impression of real enthusiasm that magazines covered Fyre — a thing that was not actually a thing — as the hot new thing. Ultimately, the organizers of the Fyre Festival didn’t produce a festival; they produced the appearance of a festival. What remains unclear, incredibly enough, is whether those organizers had the capacity to tell the difference.How surprising would it be if they couldn’t? We are now expected to favor the story over reality, to accept that saying a thing makes it so. Recently, after I spent the better part of an afternoon on hold, a customer-service specialist asked me: “How may I provide you with legendary service today?” And I thought, Well, I guess, just like that.