http://www.nytimes.com/1977/02/18/archives/quincy-howe-newscaster-dies-long-a-defender-of-civil-liberties.html
Quincy Howe, Newscaster, Dies; Long a Defender of Civil Liberties - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Feb. 18, 1977
9310
Quincy Howe, a pioneer in radio and television news commentary and lifelong defender of civil liberties, died yesterday at an East Side nursing home of cancer of the larynx: He was 76 years old.Mr. Howe, along with Elmer Davis, H. V. Kaltenborn and Edward R. Murrow, was one of the handful of radio journalists who brought the news of World II into the homes of Americans. Afterward, he became familiar to them as a leading commentator and moderator on television.With this, he combined careers as an editor, author and dedicated foe of censorship and social injustice. In these areas, he continued the tradition of a distinguished Yankee family.He was born on Aug. 17, 1900, the first child of Mark Anthony DeWolfe Howe, a literary figure of the epoch, and Fanny Huntington Quincy Howe. A grandfather was an Episcopal bishop.A Year at CambridgeA graduate of Harvard College, class of 1921, Mr. Howe spent a year in Europe and at Cambridge University, then became a staff member and then editor of Living Age, an influential little monthly of international news analysis.In the long line of New England liberalism, Mr. Howe early showed concern for victims of the Depression and of what he saw as oppression. He joined a 1932 motorcade bearing food supplies to striking miners in Harlan County, Ky.; led appeals against legislation to curb immigration, and visited Sing Sing with a prson reform group.From 1932 to 1940 he was a director of the American Civil Liberties Union, and after the war he led an affiliate that combated censorship. As president of the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures in the late 1940's, he pressed the same position. Through the period of the cold war, he lent his name to opposing witch hunts.His first book, “World Diary: 1929–34,” took a bitter view of the causes and results of the Depression, and predicted a worldwide upheaval of nationalism, to be followed by Communist revolutions. Himself opposed to dictatorship in any form, he strongly opposed American involvement in a coming war, which he feared would be provoked by Britain.Controversial BookThis led to his controversial book, “England Expects Every American to Do His Duty,” which appeared in 1937. He had then joined the left‐wing American League Against War and Fascism. His views began to change with the fall of France, and he swung toward full support of the Allied cause.Mr. Howe was chief book editor of Simon & Schuster from 1935 to 1942, but, he wrote later, “For me, life began in 1939, at the age of 39, when I began broadcasting news and.comment on the radio.” This preparation, at WQXR, led to his joining CBS in 1942, after a brief Government assignment in Washington.On CBS, Mr. Howe helped to make analysis an accepted part of news reporting, previously delivered as much as possible without comment. He smoothly made the transition to television after the war, and was widely praised for low‐keyed, easy, and fair reporting. His services were in constant demand for major documentaries, educational features and panel discussions.He was dropped in 1947 from the CBS evening news spot, however, at the request of a sponsor — an action that brought criticism of the network and may have led to stronger independence for the news division. Mr. Howe left CBS two years later to teach journalism at the University of Illinois, but continued to broadcast, going to ABC from 1954 to 1968 and appearing irregularly thereafter.Meanwhile, he brought forth a muchpraised popular trilogy on current history, under, the overall title “A World History of Our Times,” the last volume of which appeared in 1972, and edited the monthly magazine Atlas from its founding, in 1961, to 1965, when he became contributing editor.His wife, Mary Post Howe, whom he married in 1932, died last March. They left two children: Quincy Howe, a photographer‐teacher, and Tina Howe Levy, a playwright.The funeral service will be next Monday at 4 P.M. at All Souls Unitarian Church. Lexington Avenue at 80th Street.