https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/23/movies/jordan-peele-narrates-a-scene-from-get-out.html
Jordan Peele Narrates a Scene From ‘Get Out’ - The New York Times
Movies,Get Out (Movie),Peele  Jordan
Feb. 23, 2017
6343
A young black man goes to visit the parents of his white girlfriend and things get very, very weird in “Get Out,” the thriller from Jordan Peele. In this scene, Chris (Daniel Kaluuya) is attending a party and feeling very out of place until he spots another black man (Lakeith Stanfield). But the man, who goes by the name of Logan, seems disconnected and not reassuring in the ways Chris had hoped. In an interview, Mr. Peele talked about the racial tension in the scene. Here are excerpts from that conversation.What was your idea behind this scene?A lot of this was about taking African-American fears that we internalize and translating it into a horror film. One fear with a black man dating a white person is that they’re at risk of turning their backs on their own family and their own blackness and abandoning a piece of their identity.With this scene, when Chris meets Logan for the first time, he meets one of his fears of what he might be turning into by dating this white girl. Is he going to somehow lose his blackness? And is that even something that exists or is that a notion that we created? Lakeith’s character [Logan] seems like a person who’s totally neutered of his blackness.Have you found yourself in a social situation where there was only you and one other black person in the room and you didn’t make a connection?What’s scary about this situation is that I haven’t really had this happen. And this probably is where the stereotype “all black people know each other” comes from. If you have two black people in a room, no matter who they are, there’s a connection there. And part of the connection is hey, you’re having the same kinds of conversations I’m having, aren’t you? I think that’s intrinsic to the African-American experience. There’s a familial energy. For that connection to not be there totally pulls the rug out from under one of the more comforting things about the black experience for me.There’s the unrecognized fist bump moment.That’s probably as jokey as the movie gets. It’s definitely a fun, satirical moment. The black people found at this estate have this quality where it feels like their African-American soul is gone. It’s a vast generalization, but there’s not a black person in America that doesn’t know what a fist bump is.Did you want to emphasize the whiteness of this situation?From a satirical standpoint, I use a lot of imagery that shows the elements of white culture that we’re not necessarily familiar with. There’s a lacrosse stick. There are bocce balls. Bingo plays a big part. But any horror movie that’s worth its salt masters this feeling of isolation. Whether it’s that you’re in space and no one can hear you scream or you’re in the Overlook Hotel and no one will get to you through the snow. In this one, there’s a social isolation I’m playing with here.