https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/29/us/politics/republicans-press-on-with-health-law-challenge.html
Republicans Vow to Press Health Care Challenge - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2012,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Romney  Mitt,Republican Party,Supreme Court,Decisions and Verdicts,Obama  Barack
June 28, 2012
8453
WASHINGTON — Mitt Romney and other Republicans who oppose the health care law are looking ahead to one remaining avenue of appeal: the ballot box in November.Taken aback by the Supreme Court ruling on Thursday that upheld the constitutionality of the law, Mr. Romney and Congressional Republicans pledged to intensify their efforts to repeal it, an argument that will be a crucial element of the party’s quest to galvanize conservative activists and win control of the White House and the Senate.Republicans swiftly sought to turn the court’s reasoning against President Obama, recasting the legislation as a tax increase. Mr. Romney, who as governor of Massachusetts signed a similar health care law, was one of the few in his party who did not join in that argument. Instead, he criticized the ruling and called the federal law a job killer that inserted the government between patients and their doctors.For Mr. Obama, the Supreme Court victory blunted efforts by his opponents to brand him as a feckless and failed leader who invested too much time trying to overhaul the health care system as the economy foundered.In an example of the conservatives’ determined drive against the president, the House voted just hours after the Supreme Court decision to hold Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. in contempt of Congress.Still, the health care ruling validated, for now, the president’s gamble in pushing through the most ambitious domestic legislation of his administration, and it energized his re-election campaign at the close of an otherwise frustrating stretch.Yet Mr. Obama’s triumph will not necessarily endure in an election that is still expected to be decided on jobs and the economy. The president also faces the challenge of trying, once again, to sell the merits of the health care overhaul in the court of public opinion after largely failing to do so the first time around.Public sentiment about the Affordable Care Act has been essentially frozen since Mr. Obama signed the law two years ago, but the Supreme Court ruling holds the potential to shift opinions, especially among independent voters. Because the ruling came with the blessing of Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., widely viewed as a staunch conservative, it could give Mr. Obama a second chance to persuade Americans that the law is a prudent and not excessively ideological approach to a pressing problem, and to create something of a permission for voters to see the law in a different light.“Whatever the politics, today’s decision was a victory for people all over this country whose lives will be more secure because of this law,” Mr. Obama said from the East Room of the White House, taking care to avoid being seen at reveling in his victory.But even as the White House cast the law as a means for families to feel more economically secure, Republicans rushed to portray it as an expensive intrusion by Washington into middle class pocketbooks. One of Mr. Obama’s central campaign promises was that no individual making less than $200,000 a year, and no couple with an annual income under $250,000, would pay “one penny” in new taxes if he were elected.Republican leaders pounced, with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, declaring: “This law is a tax. This bill was sold to the American people on a deception.”Mr. Romney chose instead to cast the health care overhaul as poisonous to the economy and a prime example of the Obama administration’s expansion of government.“What the court did not do on its last day in session, I will do on my first day as president of the United States,” Mr. Romney said in a rare appearance on Capitol Hill shortly after the ruling. He added, “Our mission is clear: If we want to get rid of Obamacare, we’re going to have to replace President Obama.”There is an element of fatigue about the discussion in the electorate. And both men are operating with constraints: Mr. Obama after being stung by making health care such a focal point of his first term, when voters were overwhelmingly concerned about the economy, and Mr. Romney for signing a health care law in Massachusetts that included a mandate.After running through the benefits of the law, Mr. Obama took care in his East Room remarks to signal that he was most concerned with the economy, saying it was now time “to keep our focus on the most urgent challenge of our time: putting people back to work, paying down our debt and building an economy where people can have confidence that if they work hard they can get ahead.”But for the many outside groups that were so active in the health care debate two years ago, the Supreme Court’s injected new life into the fight. Democrats talked about how repeal efforts would now be seen as taking away popular provisions.On the other side, Tea Party groups and other conservative organizations were poised to pour new resources into arguments that the decision provided all the more reason to vote the president and Democrats out of office so that the law could be repealed in Congress. That idea was already sweeping the ranks of Tea Party activists, whose movement came to life through the early fight over the law.“Thank you, Scotus,” former Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska declared on her Facebook page after the Supreme Court decision was announced. “This Obamacare ruling fires up the troops as America’s eyes are opened! Thank God.”Crossroads GPS, a Republican “super PAC” that operates separately from Mr. Romney’s campaign, said that it would begin a campaign next week seizing on the tax argument. Several conservatives said the ruling gave them a far more potent wedge than they would have had if the court had knocked down all or parts of the law.“The Supreme Court’s decision is actually a tremendous windfall because it reminds people viscerally about the law,” said Steven Law, president of Crossroads GPS. “It takes the centerpiece of it and declares it a massive tax on the middle class, and it will refocus people on the particular provisions of the bill that they don’t like and fear.”If there was a downside for Democrats beyond the tax argument, it was that the ruling threatened to weaken the complaint among liberals that the Supreme Court is steeped in conservative politics and that it is urgent for voters to rally to the president’s side.“The politics be damned,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader who lost her role as House speaker in the wake of the health care vote in 2010. “This is about what we came to do.”