https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/books/review/the-joy-of-reading-about-cooking.html
The Joy of Reading About Cooking - The New York Times
Books and Literature
June 29, 2017
9453
The imperative mood can be so intimate in its rudeness, like a mother or a friend speaking plainly: Skin the chicken. Tell me everything. Crush the garlic. I was drawn to it when I was 9, the year my family moved from London to a tiny village east of Paris.I didn’t speak any French, and no one in town spoke English — not my teachers, not the other students. I sat in the back of class, hoping no one would say my name. They said it both sweetly and incorrectly, an accent added to the e, the j softened out. Children and adults, including my teacher, spoke to me with an insufferable patience. As if I were a baby, they fed me the words one soft, indecipherable syllable at a time. They taught me politeness by demonstrating their own, keeping me at a distance with formality.As soon as I got home from school, a daily humiliation, I read my parents’ cookbooks. These were the only English books in the house I hadn’t already read, a random assortment of gifts and last-minute purchases made at airports. It didn’t bother me too much that it wasn’t Enid Blyton or Roald Dahl. I was a reader, happy to be reading. Every page was new to me, equally precious, and I hung on to the microstories tucked into the recipe introductions, any turns of phrase or quotations I could memorize.No one in my family had been to Australia, but we had a paperback of The Australian Women’s Weekly “Children’s Birthday Cake Book.” I studied its pages before going to sleep, lingering over the steps for a vanilla cake lined with chocolate biscuits, topped with finely chopped green jelly and white plastic figurines, which was meant to look like an aboveground swimming pool. It was a book about aesthetics more so than cooking, and whether the recipe was for a typewriter with candy keys or a rubber duck with potato chip lips, it began, like a prayer, in the exact same way: “Make cake according to directions on packet.”There were at least two cookbooks by the actor and author Madhur Jaffrey, whose clear, confident voice I latched on to immediately. A pink-and-blue box was filled with recipe cards in different people’s handwriting, crusted over in places, stained. I sifted through this box, pretending to reorganize its contents, reading the old newspaper clipping that had gone fuzzy and soft, my grandfather’s notes in the margins in runny blue ink.Maybe I would have learned this reading anything, but I learned it reading cookbooks: Words can be used to make an idea more precise, or more vague, to make something clear or to blur its edges. Some writers are good at imagining people who don’t live a life exactly like their own, and others seem incapable.A small, peach-colored copy of “The London Ritz Book of Afternoon Tea,” published in 1986, became my comfort reading. There was no explanation for it being in the house. It was filled with nostalgia for Edwardian London, and its recipes mercilessly enforced all sorts of snotty rules, including that when baking one should use “only the best quality chocolate” and that tea bags were “never a good idea.” But I liked the sentences, and it fit in my school bag, so for two months I took it everywhere with me, reading a recipe for tea cake or meringues on the bus, or between orthography classes. Finger sandwiches at a posh hotel seemed like such a fantasy, reading about it would kick in like a sedative, immediately soothing. Foreign cakes, the tea book told me, held “a frisson of wickedness,” but won over the English with their “delectable foreign ways.”I started the recipe for rose petal jam, collecting a liter of rainwater in a dirty bucket and snipping the roses that bloomed along the stone wall between our house and the neighbor’s. I covered the washed, shredded petals in sugar overnight, but I never made it to the next step.Before the end of the year, my handwriting changed, the language in my dreams, everything. I made friends, watched French cartoons, read only French books and comics. I wrote my name with an accent on the e, showing people in advance how to mispronounce it. Marielle was my best friend, and she came to school on Wednesdays, which were half-days, with wet hair that smelled like lavender. She’d laugh and correct me if I got something wrong — a gendered article, usually — but it wasn’t that often anymore. And after I had slept over a half-dozen times, Marielle’s mother stopped fussing, stopped asking me what I would and would not like, stopped talking to me delicately, like a thing that might break. “Come downstairs,” she’d shout, when dinner was ready. “Wash your hands. Eat.”