https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/15/business/a-store-with-media-in-mind.html
A Store With Media in Mind - The New York Times
Shopping and Retail,Chelsea (Manhattan  NY),Story (Manhattan  NY  Retail Store),Shechtman  Rachel
March 14, 2014
4129
At a Manhattan boutique called Story, shoppers can buy delicate lingerie or intricately decorated chocolate, scented candles or underwear made by a Swedish company called Bread & Boxers.The items for sale are built around a theme: “Love Story.”But a few weeks from now, or several weeks ago, probably none of those items would be available for sale. In an exceptionally rare merchandising strategy, the store in Chelsea relies on rotating themes, as well as rotating products.“Story has the point of view of a magazine, everything changes every four to eight weeks like a gallery, and it sells things like a store,” said Rachel Shechtman, Story’s owner. “A magazine tells stories between pictures and written words, and we do it through merchandising and events. And our version of publishing is sponsorship.”Ms. Shechtman is expanding on the concept of retail media — in which companies promote items to consumers as they shop. She offers a constant merry-go-round of products, events and brands, built anew each time around a different theme.Even though Story is a tiny business, Ms. Shechtman has cobbled together a variety of revenue streams, and is finding creative ways to make money in an exceptionally difficult retail climate. As an indication that her unusual marketing tactics are succeeding, major sponsors like American Express and General Electric have paid tens of thousands of dollars to take part in one of the store’s singular themes.“When you look at the square footage certain brands occupy, and you look at the amount of time consumers spend in those spaces, why isn’t that a media channel?” Ms. Shechtman said. The time spent shopping in a store, she continued, “is more than the 30 seconds spent flipping through the pages of a magazine.”Sponsorships, Ms. Shechtman said, can cost anywhere from $75,000 to $300,000.Every month or two, the store opens with a new theme. Color Story, which was sponsored by Benjamin Moore, offered merchandise like colorful wireless speakers, bright cashmere socks and lipstick. Home for the Holidays, sponsored by American Express, sold a little something for every gift giver, including headphones, purses, books and bitters for mixing drinks.The store’s events are themed as well, with Wellness Story offering yoga and Pilates classes, and New York Story hosting a mixology class.Another major company that has been willing to give Ms. Shechtman’s “retail as media” theory a try is General Electric, which partnered with Ms. Shechtman for a “Making Things” theme. While there were some products to buy — like a build-it-yourself robot that draws, and 3-D printed jewelry — much of the floor space was devoted to G.E. machines that customers could play around with, like 3-D printers and laser cutters. Most of Ms. Shechtman’s revenue in that period came from the sponsorship.Beth Comstock, chief marketing officer at G.E., said that the store’s theme offered customers a way to interact with the company’s brand.“It’s not like most people are going to be able to come into an aircraft engine factory and make stuff,” she said.“There is a huge value for brands in having a place where you can experiment,” Ms. Comstock added. “And to have a lab that actually creates a profit and a recurring revenue stream, and gives people a good experience, there’s something really compelling about that.”Home Depot has also used Story to experiment, even though it has more than 2,200 stores of its own. Trish Mueller, Home Depot’s chief marketing officer, said the company used the store as a “live lab,” noting that the space is heat-mapped, so it detects the movement of customers as they stop to investigate certain products or walk past others. (Home Depot has not sponsored a specific theme, but has a continuing relationship with Story. Ms. Mueller declined to provide details of the partnership, saying she did not want to tip her hand to the competition.)“I think it’s a very revolutionary type of retail: ephemeral retail,” Ms. Mueller said. “The concept of product as content.”Still, Story is also fundamentally a place to buy stuff.Much of what’s for sale comes from small brands and designers, some of whom were discovered at a “pitch night” where designers offer their wares to Ms. Shechtman and her team. And while most merchandise changes with each new theme, there are a few constants, like some jewelry and a stash of New York City items kept on hand for tourists.Perhaps Story’s most unusual attribute, however, is that it shuts down the entire 2,000-square-foot store for about a week when it switches themes.“It’s quite unique,” Burt P. Flickinger III, a retail consultant, said of the store.Ms. Shechtman declined to share precise profits and revenue, but she said gross revenue for Story was a seven-figure sum and its profit was in the six-figure range. She said the store was profitable in its first year.Nonetheless, there is no obvious road map for expanding this type of business. Thrillist Media Group, an online company aimed at men, also offers a mix of storytelling and retail — some staff members write stories for their target audience, while other employees try to sell them things like clothing or shaving kits. Thrillist entered the e-commerce business less than four years ago and had over $75 million in revenue last year, according to a founder, Ben Lerer.Story has a website, but after two years in business, nothing is sold on it.“We should have had e-commerce three months after we launched,” Ms. Shechtman said. “We’re profitable, so I feel like we’re in a healthy place, but to get to the next level, potentially we’ll need either a strategic investment or an acquisition.”Ms. Shechtman said she had been approached by investors and retailers, but declined to go into detail.Ms. Shechtman, 36, is a fourth-generation retailer (her sister, Jenny Shechtman, 34, works in operations at Story) and an experienced brand consultant. She founded her store with money borrowed from two friends, and, as a regular speaker at conferences and an enthusiastic networker, she has managed to plug herself deeply into the world of retail.She counts among her fans Donna Karan, Ms. Mueller of Home Depot, and Martha Stewart. In an interview, Ms. Stewart compared Ms. Shechtman’s passion to that of Ralph Lauren and Millard S. Drexler, the chief executive of J. Crew.Some retail executives and consultants say they think Story would work in other major cities like Los Angeles or London. Ms. Shechtman suggested that a version of the store, more narrowly focused on one demographic, like children or women, could work more broadly across the country. She acknowledges, however, that the version that works in Chelsea would probably not thrive in smaller cities where brands don’t feel the need to have a presence.Ms. Shechtman has expanded the business in some ways, however. She started a consulting firm, Show and Tell, which will produce pop-up events and installations, and signed up for corporate office space.She has also hired some new full-time employees, which she hopes will allow her to accomplish her most immediate goal. “I have no life,” she said. “My New Year’s resolution was to change that.”