https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/06/nyregion/bronx-shootings-echo-at-officer-liangs-trial-in-stairwell-killing.html
Bronx Shootings Echo at Officer Liang’s Trial in Stairwell Killing - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Gurley  Akai,Cruz  Diara E (New York  NY  Police Officer),Espeut  Patrick (1986- ),Public and Subsidized Housing,Police Department (NYC),Attacks on Police,New York City,Bronx (NYC)
Feb. 5, 2016
4658
Before the jury entered a courtroom in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn on Friday, prosecutors and defense lawyers at the trial of Peter Liang, a police officer whose gunshot killed an unarmed man in the stairwell of a housing project, approached the judge.At issue were events that had taken place in another part of New York City: The night before, two officers, Diara E. Cruz and Patrick Espeut, were shot in a housing project in the Bronx. They were performing the same type of stairwell patrol Officer Liang was conducting in Brooklyn on Nov. 20, 2014, when he fired his gun and a bullet bounced off a wall and killed Akai Gurley, 28, who was walking down the stairs with his girlfriend. Like Officer Liang and his partner, Shaun Landau, the officers shot on Thursday were still relatively new to the job.“We had one primary concern: It’s that the defense not be allowed to refer to last night’s shooting in any way in any question during the trial,” Joe Alexis, an assistant Brooklyn district attorney, told Justice Danny K. Chun.Officer Liang, charged with manslaughter and other offenses, entered the stairwell of the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York with his 9-millimeter Glock pistol drawn. Prosecutors have spent much of the two-week trial arguing that unholstering his weapon was unwarranted and reckless in a place filled with residents going about their lives.The events of Thursday night, in which the officers were shot by a man they encountered during what is known as a vertical patrol in the Melrose Houses in the South Bronx, seem to underscore the Police Department’s view that housing project stairwells can be perilous places to patrol.Officer Liang’s defense has insisted on the danger of such spaces throughout the trial.But, Mr. Alexis told the judge, “That tragic shooting is much different than what happened here.”Robert E. Brown, a lawyer for Officer Liang, who had worked on the police force for only about 18 months at the time of the shooting, disagreed.Looking at the screen of his cellphone, Mr. Brown read remarks made by Mayor Bill de Blasio after the Bronx shooting. “It’s another example of what our officers confront every single day,” Mr. Brown said, quoting the mayor, “keeping us safe not only in the streets of New York City, but in the stairwells and the hallways of our public housing developments.”Mr. Brown finished quoting the mayor, put the phone down and continued: “What happened last night in the Bronx is remarkably similar to the setup to this case: Two rookie police officers, they’re doing a vertical patrol, they’re ambushed.”He asked Justice Chun to sequester the jury for the duration of the trial, preventing them from reading, watching or discussing any news. The judge declined. Instead, he said he would caution the jury not to read any news coverage about Officer Liang’s case.“I think we have a smart jury,” the judge said.As the trial finished for the day, Justice Chun sternly warned jurors to avoid reading not only coverage of Officer Liang’s trial, but also any articles that might even mention the case.On Friday, the defense produced its last witnesses before Officer Liang takes the stand, which he is scheduled to do on Monday. They included a weapons expert, a former police lieutenant and a private investigator, Daniel Reefer, whom the defense had hired to stake out the stairwell where Mr. Gurley was killed.Mr. Reefer said he visited twice last month, spending an hour each time. He positioned himself on the eight-floor landing and videotaped foot traffic. “There were zero pedestrians going up or down the stairs” on either visit, he said.When it was time for Marc Fliedner, an assistant district attorney, to question Mr. Reefer, he asked if perhaps no one took the stairs because of what had happened there to Mr. Gurley.Before Mr. Reefer could respond, the defense objected, and the judge sustained it.