https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/31/us/texas-troopers-behavior-called-catalyst-in-sandra-blands-death.html
Texas Trooper’s Behavior Called ‘Catalyst’ in Sandra Bland’s Death - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Encinia  Brian T (1985- ),Bland  Sandra (1987-2015),Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Texas,Public Safety Department (Tex),Race and Ethnicity,Waller County (Tex)
July 30, 2015
4692
AUSTIN, Tex. —  The head of the Texas state police department faced fierce grilling by lawmakers here Thursday over the confrontational behavior of a trooper in the arrest of Sandra Bland, who was found hanged in her Waller County jail cell this month, three days after she was taken into custody after a routine traffic stop.The hearing by the House County Affairs Committee was the start of a legislative inquiry into Ms. Bland’s arrest and subsequent death, which have attracted international attention and added momentum to a national debate over the treatment of black people by white police officers. The committee chairman, Garnet Coleman, who like Ms. Bland is black, criticized the Texas Department of Public Safety for what he called a pattern of racial intolerance and described the behavior of the trooper who arrested her, Brian T. Encinia, who is white, as a “catalyst” for Ms. Bland’s death.Ms. Bland, 28, was found hanged by a trash bin liner on the morning of July 13 by a corrections officer who had looked into her cell to ask if Ms. Bland wanted to go to a recreation room.Her death was ruled a suicide by the Harris County Medical Examiner’s Office, which said it had found marijuana in Ms. Bland’s system, but Ms. Bland’s family and supporters, including members of the Texas Legislative Black Caucus, have vehemently challenged that ruling.Steven McCraw, the director of the public safety department, repeated that Trooper Encinia, 30, who is now on administrative duty, violated department policy, behaved rudely and failed to de-escalate a confrontational situation that ended in Ms. Bland’s arrest on a third-degree felony charge of assault on a public servant. At one point, the trooper threatened Ms. Bland with a stun gun.But Mr. Coleman, a Democrat from Houston, said he was not satisfied. He expressed what he said was longstanding anger over the agency’s attitude on race, telling Mr. McCraw that he once walked into a department office that had wallpaper with the Confederate flag. Mr. Coleman also said he was driving recently when he was stopped for a minor traffic violation and the officer was “rude and nasty” and “treated me like a boy.”“I get afraid when there’s a law enforcement officer around,” Mr. Coleman said.  “I don’t see them as people who are trying to protect me.”“We have moved backwards in attitude,” he added. Mr. Coleman blamed Mr. McCraw’s agency for what happened to Ms. Bland, saying that “the catalyst” for her death “clearly came from the traffic stop.”  “What he did triggered the whole thing,” Mr. Coleman said of Trooper Encinia. He demanded that Mr. McCraw instruct his officers: “Don’t ever throw a black woman on the ground again.  Don’t ever do that again.” The criticism of the state police cut across racial lines.  “Liberties were stomped on,”  Representative Jonathan Stickland, a Tea Party-backed Republican from Bedford, in the Fort Worth-Dallas area, who is white, said to Mr. McCraw.  “Do you understand the outrage on this issue?”Mr. Stickland also suggested that the release of the autopsy finding of marijuana in Ms. Bland’s system might have been an attempt to discredit her.  “Why is an irrelevant piece of information being thrown out in the media that quickly?” he asked.Mr. McCraw, who opened his testimony by expressing condolences to the Bland family, said his agency had made strides in racial diversity, saying it had become an “agency of color.”He said the Texas Rangers, an elite unit of Department of Public Safety, was working with the F.B.I. in a “comprehensive investigation” of Ms. Bland’s death. The sheriff in Waller County, R. Glenn Smith, said last week that Ms. Bland should have been placed on a suicide watch after she told the authorities during booking that she had tried to kill herself in 2014. In a review of Ms. Bland’s death, the Texas Commission on Jail Standards faulted jail officials for not meeting state standards for mental health training and for not checking on Ms. Bland hourly.Brandon Wood, the commission’s executive director, said Thursday under questioning that compliance with the standards could “have lessened the likelihood” of Ms. Bland’s death.Testimony stretched into the night Thursday as spectators and witnesses filled the hearing chamber and two overflow rooms; at least one person called for Trooper Encinia’s dismissal. An independent committee created last week by the Waller County district attorney, Elton Mathis, to review the Bland case plans to hold its first meeting  Monday. It will investigate the handling of the case “from top to bottom” to determine if any crimes were committed, Darrell Jordan, a Houston lawyer who is a member of the committee, said in a telephone interview.The panel, which will also include Lewis White, a lawyer from Sugar Land, near Houston, and two other lawyers who have yet to be named, will have the power to subpoena witnesses. Its investigation will not be part of a parallel investigation by the district attorney, Mr. Jordan said.Mr. Jordan said the committee would be authorized to present its findings to a grand jury, even if it reaches a different conclusion from the district attorney.“Some people are saying this is not going to be a fair process because we have to check with the prosecutor before we do anything,” Mr. Jordan said. “That’s not the case. We’re totally independent. We have total access to anything and everything they have.” “It’s a unique situation,” Mr. Jordan added. “If we found enough evidence to present to the grand jury and they found probable cause, then charges would be brought,” he said. “If there’s nothing there, then so be it.  But if there’s something there, then it will be presented, and there is no one to tell us, ‘No, you can’t.’ ”