https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/04/dining/at-65-michel-richard-is-tackling-the-new-york-dining-scene.html
At 65, Michel Richard Is Tackling the New York Dining Scene - The New York Times
Richard  Michel,Pomme Palais (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Restaurants,New York City,Bakeries and Baked Products,Chefs,Pomme Palais (Manhattan  NY  Pastry Shop)
Sept. 3, 2013
7073
Over more than three decades, Michel Richard has risen to the highest ranks of American chefs, with acclaimed restaurants in Los Angeles and Washington. But as everyone in his business knows, making a big debut in New York’s tough, trend-happy dining scene is something else entirely — especially when you’re 65.And he is not arriving on tiptoe: Pomme Palais, his pastry shop and cafe, is set to open this month at the New York Palace hotel, and two restaurants in the hotel will follow. The prospect of starting anew here at this stage in his career, he acknowledged, is somewhat daunting.“I’m not known in New York,” he said in an interview at a test kitchen in Harlem. “Nobody’s waiting for me here.”Yet the move is a bit of a homecoming for Mr. Richard. He came to New York from France in 1974 as part of the team that helped Gaston Lenôtre open a fancy food shop and patisserie on East 59th Street. The store closed after three years, and by then, Mr. Richard had decided that America was for him, though not necessarily New York.He is making his return at a time in his life when other chefs might be thinking about golf.“I don’t know why he is doing this at 65,” said Thomas Keller, the chef and owner of Per Se in New York and the French Laundry in the Napa Valley, who added that New York was a city he once struggled in. “It’s a lot of responsibility and a huge amount of effort. I love Michel, but New York can be unkind.”The new venture at the hotel will be called Villard Michel Richard. It will consist of two restaurants, each with different menus. One, the Gallery, will be high end, in a wood-paneled Italian Renaissance-style room to be designed by Jeffrey Beers International. The second, in two rooms with windows overlooking Madison Avenue, will be less formal, with a bistro menu.“My food is French with an American accent,” Mr. Richard said. “It would be terrific if I could come up with something fresh and new in New York.”Mr. Richard was 26 when he first arrived in New York as a pastry chef, and he said that he found the city “easy to love.” But an opportunity to open a pastry shop in Santa Fe, N.M., lured him away. When the shop failed after a year or so, he pushed on to Los Angeles, where he opened another pastry shop bearing his name.“I still remember when Michel opened it,” said the chef Wolfgang Puck, who is based in that city. “It caused traffic jams. I never had a croissant that good, even in Paris.”Mr. Richard, who was born in Brittany and started working in pastry when he was 13, soon started dabbling in the savory side of the menu even though, as he readily admits, he had no training as a cook. “I began doing dinners at night in the pastry shop,” he said. “You could say they were the first pop-ups.”In 1986 he opened his first restaurant, Citrus, on trendy Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles, and it soon became a hit. Nouvelle cuisine was in its heyday, so Mr. Richard came up with his own version: butterless, creamless and also very Californian. “It was casual, like being on the Riviera,” he said of Citrus. It was all white and yellow, with tables on a patio under big, white market umbrellas.The success of Citrus led to a string of restaurants in San Francisco and Philadelphia, more in Los Angeles, and even in Japan, all of which eventually closed. But Mr. Richard did not, in those days, consider coming back to his first American base. “I did not go near New York,” he said. “If you open here, you have to be here full time.” He had too many ventures in too many other places.He wound up in Washington, where he opened Citronelle in a hotel in Georgetown in 1994. He closed it last year because of structural problems in the building and said it was unlikely to reopen. He also created Central Michel Richard, a brasserie-style restaurant on Pennsylvania Avenue that is big, bright and energetic — and still going strong (much like him). There’s a spinoff in Las Vegas.He said it took “all of two minutes” to agree to the deal at the New York Palace. “I like the people, I am putting together a good team, and New York is not so far from Washington,” he said. He has rented a Midtown apartment and expects to be in the city every day for at least a year, although he is not giving up his home in Potomac, Md. His wife, Laurence, will visit often, he said. His brother-in-law, Jean-Jacques Retourné, manages his business and will commute from Washington.And there are many New Yorkers who are ready to welcome him. “He has this little whimsy in his cooking and his personality,” said Rita Jammet, a former owner of La Caravelle. “He brings a classical foundation, but he thinks outside the box and that should play well here.”A few weeks ago, in the temporary test kitchen, Mr. Richard was working on a pastry “egg.” It was made with a white chocolate shell filled, with Italian meringue for the white and lemon curd for the yolk. “I dropped an ice cube in melted chocolate by accident,” he said, “and voilà, I had a shape. So I started playing with it. I froze water in empty egg shells, removed the shells and used the egg-shaped ice cube to make my chocolate eggs.”The eggs were served at a James Beard Foundation event in the Hamptons a few weeks later. Mr. Richard hopes that kind of innovation will work at his restaurants.“I don’t know what people expect from me here,” he said. “You cannot fault the attitude of New Yorkers, only the attitude of the chef. I just hope the guests like what I serve.”