https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/nyregion/homeless-shelters-new-york-mayor.html
De Blasio Quietly Seeks Allies in Battle Over Homeless Shelters - The New York Times
Homeless Persons,New York City,de Blasio  Bill,Suits and Litigation (Civil),Adams  Eric L,Torres  Ritchie (1988- ),Richardson  Diana C,Belmont (Bronx  NY),Crown Heights (Brooklyn  NY),Park Slope (Brooklyn  NY)
May 17, 2017
7671
Not long after Mayor Bill de Blasio announced his plan to open 90 homeless shelters across New York City, he heard from someone whose support was crucial.But the response from Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president, was anything but fully supportive.Mr. Adams said the mayor’s plan was an insult to Brooklyn, with three of the first five shelters concentrated in and near Crown Heights, a Brooklyn neighborhood already teeming with shelters, group homes and transitional housing. Mr. Adams then repeated his objections to the mayor at a town hall meeting in March, saying that he remained his ally but in this case valued candor over friendship.A few days later, Mr. Adams said, he received a phone call from the mayor.The conversation soothed him: Mr. Adams skipped a protest in April against the plan, even after his staff had confirmed his attendance with an organizer.Mayor de Blasio has cast his battle to add dozens of homeless shelters across the city as an effort to convince New Yorkers that it is a moral imperative to give homeless people shelters in neighborhoods where they are from.The fight is being waged during community meetings and call-in radio shows and in courtrooms, where opponents, mostly those from areas where shelters will be placed, have registered their concerns. It is also being waged behind the scenes, as the administration scrambles to enlist influential New Yorkers like Mr. Adams to help marshal support for the plan.Steven Banks, the city’s commissioner of social services, said the efforts, which include his speaking with elected officials, continue the groundwork laid before the mayor rolled out the plan in late February. He said the city is welcoming more comment from communities and elected officials, who could propose sites to be used as shelters.The immediacy of such trust building has become critical: Only three of the first five shelters planned have opened as scheduled.One stalled shelter, designated for older single men in Crown Heights, was to open in mid-March, but became tangled up in court when residents filed a lawsuit and received a temporary restraining order. The order could be lifted as early as this week after negotiations. Another shelter, for families with children in Crown Heights, was delayed amid conversations with residents until the city moved 10 families into the building on Monday. But on Tuesday, the residents filed a lawsuit and were granted a temporary restraining order to prevent the city from moving in more families. A hearing on the matter is scheduled for Thursday.How the de Blasio administration handles each flare-up is being watched by prospective opponents. Any setback could snowball into future slowdowns, severely handicapping the mayor’s goal of opening 18 to 20 shelters a year and ending the city’s use of commercial hotel rooms and so-called cluster apartments, which are both inconvenient and costly.Christine Quinn, the former speaker of the City Council and now chief executive of Win, one of the city’s largest nonprofit shelter providers, said implementation was crucial. “You have to put meat on the bone and make something happen,” Ms. Quinn said, otherwise the administration risked “preparing a really long runway for the opposition to take off.”Mr. Adams is trying to shorten that runway. He is pulling together pastors in Brooklyn to preach in support of the shelters next month.“Part of what we’re doing is to not have ‘anti’ be the only voice,” he said, explaining that his mother played a role in his about-face, reminding him that they were frequently on the verge of homelessness when he was a child.“Just like I had to get a wake-up call, others are going to get their wake-up call,” Mr. Adams said.The mayor told Mr. Adams that space was “at a premium” and that Crown Heights “was the first place we could open.” The administration also gave Mr. Adams something he wanted: a new director of community partnerships who will be a liaison between Brooklyn shelters and residents.“It’s not about the destruction of your plan,’’ Mr. Adams said. “It’s tweaking your plan.”The mayor has said that by placing shelters where people became homeless, community anchors, like churches and schools, will provide support, enabling them to move to permanent housing.As Mr. de Blasio laid out in a radio interview, if 250 homeless people came from within the boundaries of a community board that serves Park Slope, his Brooklyn neighborhood, there should be enough shelter space within that area to accommodate 250 people.But many residents and elected officials have said the boundary-driven plan contradicts a new City Council effort to beef up the Fair Share Law, aimed at equitably distributing social service programs and amenities across the city. Using community board boundaries all but guarantees that poorer black and Hispanic neighborhoods will have the most shelters. Even Mr. Adams questions why the boundaries have to be based on community boards and is pushing the administration to think more broadly.Mr. de Blasio is certainly not the first mayor in New York whose shelter plan encountered a backlash. David N. Dinkins tried to open about 30 shelters after the closure of so-called welfare hotels flooded the system with hundreds of families with children, pushing the homeless population to about 23,000. “The number of people in the city’s primary shelter system now hovers at around 60,000 on a bad night.“Homeless shelters, jails, sanitation facilities,’’ Mr. Dinkins said in a recent interview, “whatever you want to put, everyone will agree that you need them, but it’s not in my backyard. It’s very hard. You got to work the community and get community leaders to agree and understand how important it is.”Those efforts do not always pay off.City officials allowed Diana C. Richardson, a Brooklyn assemblywoman, to tour the unopened family shelter in Crown Heights. Ms. Richardson, who speaks in a forceful, rapid-fire cadence filled with dramatic pauses that can mesmerize a crowd, is either a pot stirrer or a problem solver, depending on which side she is on.Ms. Richardson was homeless as a young adult, but has nonetheless questioned the fairness of the mayor’s plan. After touring the family shelter, she was unconvinced, telling the mayor in a letter dated May 8 that the apartments were too small and better suited for college students and seniors.“To be quite frank, through my personal walk through, a room could only fit a twin-sized bed,” she said in the letter.Dion Michael Ashman, the president of the Crown Street Block Association, has counted on Ms. Richardson to help him and other residents prevent the full opening of the family shelter.Acting as a mediator, Mr. Adams organized a face-to-face meeting for Mr. Ashman with city officials, and they discussed increasing the number of units of affordable housing in the building that the shelter will share. Mr. Ashman and other residents believe the building should be permanent housing for low-income residents of Crown Heights.“His involvement has made a difference because it gave us a legitimate seat at the table,” Mr. Ashman said.But Mr. Ashman and other residents still filed a lawsuit on Tuesday.Elsewhere in the city, the shelter plan has been more successful. A shelter for women in Prospect Heights, a neighborhood adjacent to Crown Heights, opened without protest, though residents have noted that the shelter provider has a good reputation and that the location of the shelter had previously served people with addictions.The other two new shelters — one for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youths and another for families — are in Belmont, a neighborhood in the Bronx district represented by Councilman Ritchie Torres.There was no need for Mr. de Blasio to personally call Mr. Torres, who was already working closely with homeless services.In an interview, he said the mayor’s administration would be better served with a more diverse staff and by offering proof that shelters would be in other areas. “The failure to specify possible sites for shelters in wealthier, whiter neighborhoods is a glaring omission and a cause of concern,” Mr. Torres said.But he said his district needs safer shelters, pointing to two young sisters who died after a radiator malfunctioned in a cluster apartment in a poorly maintained building. Affordable housing alone is not the answer, he said, citing data showing that one million households in New York and nearby areas earn less than 50 percent of the median income in the region but that only 425,000 units of affordable housing would be truly affordable to those households.In March, Mr. Torres joined Mr. Banks and Chirlane McCray, Mr. de Blasio’s wife, to give the news media a tour of the youth shelter. It was a much-needed boost for the administration on the same day that the men’s shelter was scheduled to open, but did not.