http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/21/books/all-history-is-prehistory.html
All History Is Prehistory - The New York Times
NOVACEK  MICHAEL,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE,TIME TRAVELER (BOOK)
April 21, 2002
1463
TIME TRAVELERIn Search of Dinosaurs and Ancient MammalsFrom Montana to Mongolia.By Michael Novacek.Illustrated. 368 pp. New York:Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.PALEONTOLOGY has a lot to answer for. If one discovery shaped the modern world, it was the fossil hunters' proof that life was not created in a few days. Rather, it took billions of years for the first amphibians to crawl out of the sea, followed by hundreds of millions of years when huge reptiles ruled the world. Mammals got going properly only once these monsters were wiped out by a meteor 65 million years ago, and humanity itself is an arriviste of but a few hundred thousand years.Or so at least we are told by the paleontologists. Given the stakes involved, it is natural to be curious about the authority of their claims. They must be pretty sure, to go up against received religion in this way. But how exactly is their trick done? How can they be so confident about events that happened so very long ago?For those who wonder about these questions, Michael Novacek has written an engaging book about the working life of a modern paleontologist. Apart from being curator of paleontology, senior vice president and provost of science at the American Museum of Natural History, Novacek is a fieldworker who has unearthed important fossils in many countries. He explains that you don't need a time machine to know what happened hundreds of millions of years ago. The earth's surface has an abundance of evidence, in the form of rocks, bones and teeth, and those who know how to read these signs are often left in little doubt about far distant events.''Time Traveler'' is as much autobiography as textbook, using Novacek's experiences as a fieldworker to make light of the occasional foray into paleontological theory. By his own account, readers of his earlier nonspecialist book, ''Dinosaurs of the Flaming Cliffs,'' said that they enjoyed his brief descriptions of life in the field as much as the abstract theoretical issues. So this time he highlights his worldwide adventures in the paleontological trade. Along the way, however, he also gives us an excellent sense of the way paleontologists have arrived at their world-shaking conclusions.Like many successful people, Novacek started on his career path at an early age. Growing up in Los Angeles in the 1950's, he memorized the geological dating system as a young boy, dug up fossil shells in the Santa Monica Mountains and was constantly badgering his parents to take him to see the geological strata laid bare in the Grand Canyon. Not that he was a dedicated dweeb from birth. As a teenager he divided his spare hours between the beach and his rock band, much to the irritation of his father, a professional jazzman. During college he continued to float around the edges of the Los Angeles music business, waiting for the big recording contract.Once he entered graduate school, however, a growing obsession with extinct insectivores eclipsed his hopes of becoming the next Stephen Stills, and he became committed once more to serious fossil hunting. His early professors initiated him into the rigors of fieldwork during summers on the Colorado Plateau and in the Montana Badlands. From then on most vacations were spent in the field, and in due course he graduated to leading a series of expeditions to Baja California, the Andes, Mongolia and Yemen.These locations might remind us of Indiana Jones (a comparison Novacek himself invites as early as his second page), but readers looking for tales of derring-do may be disappointed. Novacek does visit distant and exciting landscapes, and conditions are often primitive. But the excitement does not get out of hand. His party is temporarily detained by the militia in Yemen. He becomes tangled in the stirrup of a falling horse, and walks painfully for some time. Twice he is nearly drawn into bar fights. An artery is severed, but by shrapnel from a colleague's hammering rather than by any hostile intentions.These stories are all told with good humor and generosity, but in other ways readers may feel slightly shortchanged. There were issues I would have liked to know more about. We learn about the evidence-gathering side of paleontology, but not about the academic politics. Paleontology, of all academic disciplines, is the most riven by controversy and rivalry. Novacek alludes in passing to theoretical antagonisms and competition for fossil sites. But he tends to skimp on the details; I couldn't help wondering whether his run-ins with other professors all ended as happily as his adventures in the field.I also wondered how paleontologists can so easily identify the bones they excavate. How can they tell what animals their fossils come from? Novacek fills us in on the intricacies of dating, describing the many ingenious techniques he and his colleagues use to narrow down the provenance of their fossils, even against a bewildering history where the earth's magnetic field flip-flops every million years or so, where the continents successively merge and fuse as they wheel about the surface of the earth, and where the highest mountain ranges are suddenly levered from the sea onto the edges of continents. Much of his research aims to reconstruct the geography of past eras, and uses sophisticated methodologies to help figure out which long-gone seas and isthmuses constrained the movements of his ancestral species.BUT he never stops to tell us how he knows which animals his fossils come from in the first place. As he tells it, he and his colleagues simply announce, as they pick up some mangled fragment of petrified bone, that this one comes from some primitive horse, and that from some long-extinct proto-bird. No doubt they acquire this skill from long hours spent poring over specimens in dusty museum drawers, and simply take it for granted thereafter. But to a non-initiate it seems like magic, and I was curious to know more about how it works.Still, despite these occasional blind spots, there is much to savor in Novacek's stories. He offers genuine insights into the kind of reasoning that has allowed us to know so much about past eras, and he conveys a lively picture of his professional experiences. If you are thinking of making a career out of fossils, or even if you are regretting that you didn't, this book will give you a good taste of what it's like to be a paleontologist.