https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/nyregion/homelessness-new-york-manhattan-shelters.html
City Expands Services as More Become Homeless, Even With a Job - The New York Times
Homeless Persons,Homeless Services Department (NYC),Banks  Steven,New York City,Manhattan (NYC)
July 19, 2017
2371
Between intermittent drizzle and drenching downpours, social workers climbed an embankment just off what they called the “zigzag” — an entanglement of roads and exits from the Henry Hudson Parkway and Riverside Drive in northern Manhattan.They were looking for a crudely built wooden loft bed wedged into concrete so that it was suspended above the ground and three feet or so beneath Riverside Drive.Kyle Stefano, one of the workers, shined a flashlight and woke the man who had slept through the rumbling traffic above him. He said that his name was Javier and that he didn’t want help. “Wait, wait,” he shouted from the darkness on Friday morning. “What time is it? I have to go to work.”The problem of homelessness in New York City now includes more able-bodied people who sometimes have jobs but shun the overcrowded shelters. To address the change, the city is expanding its services to help those who recently began living on the street.An annual survey in February found that about 3,900 people were living on sidewalks, in subways, in parks and in isolated areas, like the embankment. The tally was an alarming 40 percent increase from 2016. Though mild winter weather was cited as a factor, Steven Banks, the commissioner of social services, said the survey gave a more accurate picture of what social workers had been reporting.As part of a new approach, the Center for Urban Community Services, a nonprofit, will announce this week that under a $33 million contract with the city, it will lead a consortium to reduce street homelessness in Manhattan. Other nonprofits handle the city’s other boroughs, but Manhattan was the clear epicenter of the surge, according to the survey.Tony Hannigan, the executive director of the Center for Urban Community Services, said the contract required the consortium to broaden its scope and its definition of homelessness. For a decade, the nonprofits focused on chronically homeless people, defined as living unsheltered for nine months or more and having physical or developmental disabilities, substance abuse problems or mental health issues. The providers are now being asked to help newly homeless or short-term homeless people, including panhandlers.“The economy has improved but not necessarily for people on the very bottom,” Mr. Hannigan said.Mayor Bill de Blasio recently upset some homeless people and advocates with off-the-cuff remarks that included calling people begging for money on the street charlatans pretending to be homeless.But his remarks reflected a new effort by the Department of Homeless Services to better understand who is panhandling, why they are begging and how the city can help them get off the streets. “We want to dig more deeply to what their needs are,” Mr. Banks said.One of their needs is to simply have somewhere to go. The city has six drop-in centers, where people can shower and get meals and services. Two more are scheduled to open by the end of the year, including one on 14th Street in Manhattan, Mr. Banks said.On Tuesday, Mr. Banks toured a new center in Ozone Park, Queens, operated by Breaking Ground, which is part of the consortium.Once home to a coffee roaster, the unassuming building still smells of coffee beans, but is filled with computers and has a new kitchen. Abdul Hasan, 38, who said he became homeless three months ago after a dispute with his family over his sexuality and drinking, said he was now getting three meals a day there instead of hanging out in nearby Forest Park.Mr. Hasan said he lived in a shelter in East New York for two months until he was attacked by other residents. He said he quit his job as a cashier at a restaurant at Kennedy Airport after he was unable to maintain his hygiene. Told about the drop-in center, Mr. Hasan said social workers have helped him apply for unemployment benefits and get a mailing address and a library card.“It’s way better than the street,” he said. “I could have been sitting on a bench.”The city has a list of 2,000 names of people who live on the street, Mr. Banks said. That is far from the survey’s estimate of 3,900 people, but Mr. Banks said it was a start to building the trust needed to get people into shelter. It takes an average of five months to establish trust and get people indoors, according to the Homeless Services Department.On Friday as she left the embankment, Ms. Stefano suspected that Javier was a fake name. She and Eric Wilson, a case manager, ticked off nicknames they have been given: Daddy-O, Animal, Tasty, Tow Truck, Charlie Tuna, Mr. Nature, Dirty Harry and Juice.“Some folks have given up on the shelters,” Mr. Wilson said. “The more crowded the shelters get, it trickles to the street.”Mr. Wilson and Ms. Stefano found several people living under an overpass in Highbridge Park in Washington Heights in Manhattan. Meticulously decorated, the encampment of half a dozen people looked like the showroom of a furniture store, complete with a comfy red velour armchair.In Harlem, Ms. Stefano and Mr. Wilson talked to Mohammad Daka, an immigrant from Ivory Coast, who was living in a tent he had fashioned out of a blue tarp, a black shower curtain and cardboard boxes.Mr. Daka and others on the street could be moved by city officials as a nuisance, though the city now gives some notice. Earlier this year, the city settled a lawsuit filed on behalf of three homeless men whose belongings, including birth certificates, were destroyed in a removal.Mr. Daka was willing to take the risk. He said he could not deal with the curfews and rules of the shelters.On a bad day, there are about 60,000 people in the city’s main shelter system. Earlier this year, Mr. de Blasio unveiled a plan to open about 90 new shelters aimed at replacing the apartments and hotel rooms currently being used as stopgap measures for a system too small to meet the demand.High-profile crimes inside shelters, including the murder of a former librarian in January 2016, keep people away.Aware of the reputation, the city is increasing the number of so-called safe haven beds. The beds are generally in smaller settings and in churches and do not have the same restrictions, like curfews. In the past 18 months, the city has added 350 safe haven beds and plans to add 360 by the end of the year, when it with have a total of 1,100.Israel Gonzalez, 47, moved into a safe haven about nine months ago after becoming homeless about eight years ago. “When they told me they were going to house me, I said, ‘Aww, I’ve heard that one before,’ ” he said.But in three weeks, he was in the Center for Urban Community Services safe haven in Harlem, which has 40 beds and is adding 20 more.Mr. Gonzalez said he was grateful to be off 126th Street and Third Avenue where he had made his home outdoors. He preferred it to the shelters. “In the winter, shelters get extra, extra packed,” he said.He said opening more shelters and safe havens was noble of the city. “But I don’t think more shelters would work,” he said. “More permanent housing is the solution.”That is the solution the city would like, too, Mr. Banks said.