https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/04/us/heres-how-racial-bias-plays-out-in-policing.html
Consent Decrees, Racial Bias and Policing - The New York Times
Justice Department,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Racial Profiling,Search and Seizure,Minorities,Obama  Barack,Albuquerque (NM),Baltimore (Md),Ferguson (Mo),Seattle (Wash),Blacks,New York City
Aug. 10, 2016
4697
Attorney General Jeff Sessions has announced that the Justice Department is rethinking its approach to the federal agreements, known as consent decrees, that have been reached with dozens of law enforcement agencies.The re-examination could lead to a retreat by the Trump administration on the consent decrees that the Obama White House used to overhaul troubled police departments.In the past, the investigations leading to the agreements have uncovered widespread patterns of racial bias, use of excessive force, tactical blunders and poor oversight.A sampling of the reports shows how systemic bias plays out.Zero-tolerance policing that was adopted by many city police departments in the early 2000s has led to aggressive tactics. By cracking down on minor offenses, often called the broken windows approach, the thinking went, major crimes would be deterred.In 2013, a federal judge ruled that the stop-and-frisk tactics of the New York Police Department violated the constitutional rights of minorities in the city, repudiating a major element in the Bloomberg administration’s crime-fighting legacy.• BaltimoreThe Justice Department found that the Baltimore police stopped pedestrians more than 300,000 times from January 2010 to May 2015. It said the precise number of those stops was “likely far higher due to underreporting.” The department found that most stops by the police were made in predominantly black neighborhoods without “reasonable suspicion.”The report said:• SeattleThe Justice Department found in its investigation of the Seattle police in 2011 that the police focused largely on minority neighborhoods of the city in its street stops. Its report said:The most common interactions between residents and the police are traffic stops. Members of minority groups stopped by the police face far more searches, as well as arrests and fines. Philando Castile, 32, who was fatally shot by a police officer in Falcon Heights, Minn., on July 6, had been pulled over 49 times in 13 years.• BaltimoreAfrican-Americans accounted for 82 percent of all vehicle stops by the Baltimore police, though the group made up 60 percent of the driving-age population in the city and 27 percent of the driving-age population in the greater metropolitan area, according to the Justice Department’s report.• Ferguson, Mo.African-Americans accounted for 86 percent of traffic stops in 2013 but make up 63 percent of the population, according to recent data published by the Missouri attorney general.Black drivers were more than twice as likely to be searched after being stopped as white drivers were, according to the Justice Department’s report in 2015. But officers found contraband in the possession of African-Americans 26 percent less frequently than they did in the possession of white drivers. The report on Ferguson notes that the data suggests that “officers are impermissibly considering race as a factor when determining whether to search.”In a number of cities, the Justice Department has found that routine encounters with the public often escalate unnecessarily into violent situations.• SeattleThe Justice Department asserts that when Seattle police officers use force, “they do so in an unconstitutional manner nearly 20 percent of the time.” For example, the report said, when the police “use batons, 57 percent of the time it is either unnecessary or excessive.”The report also says that the Seattle police “escalate situations and use unnecessary or excessive force when arresting individuals for minor offenses. This trend is pronounced in encounters with persons with mental illnesses or those under the influence of alcohol or drugs. This is problematic because S.P.D. estimates that 70 percent of use-of-force encounters involve these populations.”• ChicagoIn January, the Justice Department found reasonable cause that Chicago police “engaged in a pattern or practice of unreasonable force in violation of the Fourth Amendment” and attributed the deficiencies to a number of things, including training, supervision and accountability.• BaltimoreIn interviews with the Justice Department, Baltimore residents said “that even when they believe they have done nothing wrong, they flee from interactions with officers, believing that it is better to run at the sight of an officer rather than take the risk that an interaction with the officer will result in unnecessary and excessive force being used against them,” according to the report. The report added:• ClevelandIn May 2015, the Cleveland Police Department agreed to accept close federal oversight of its practices, including how and when its officers were allowed to use force.The Justice Department found that the Cleveland police routinely used stun guns inappropriately, punched and kicked unarmed people and shot at people who posed no threat. The episodes were often unreported and not investigated, the inquiry found.A case from 2012, described in the report, illustrates the problem.• FergusonThe Ferguson police used Tasers and dogs in excess on African-American suspects, according to the Justice Department report. In 2013, one black man was chased down and bitten by an officer’s dog even though the officer had frisked him and knew the man was unarmed. The officer’s supervisor later justified the use of force with a patently untrue statement, suggesting that the officer feared “that the subject was armed,” the report said.• AlbuquerqueThe police used lethal force in 37 cases s from 2010 to 2014. In them, 23 people were killed and 14 were wounded, an usually high number for a city of about 550,000, the Justice Department report said.Among the cases cited in that report: Police officers once fired a stun gun at a deranged man who had doused himself in gasoline, setting him ablaze. Another time, they fired one at a man who yelled, “Bang, bang,” as the officers approached. They also fired a stun gun at a 75-year-old homeless man for refusing to leave a bus stop, at a 16-year-old boy for refusing to lie on a floor covered in broken glass and at a young man so drunk he could not get up from a couch.The Justice Department found that the police often treated minorities with heightened suspicion in pedestrian and traffic stops, leading to unlawful searches.• BaltimoreThe police “regularly escalate” encounters with residents through illegal searches, the Justice Department’s report said, by frisking people without a reasonable suspicion they are armed and dangerous and by conducting strip or body searches in public before an arrest.In a typical case, an officer frisked an African-American man during a traffic stop. The man was the passenger in the vehicle and was frisked, the officer said, because the driver, who was stopped because his headlights were off, looked nervous as the officer approached the car. The frisk of the passenger included a public pat-down of his groin.In another case, officers stopped a woman for driving a car missing a headlight. A female officer searched under the woman’s shirt and in her anal cavity, in public view. The woman was released without charges.In some communities, police and court officials focused on generating revenue from municipal fines, often issuing expensive fees for minor offenses.• FergusonExcessive fines were a tactic most prevalent in the Justice Department’s investigation of the Ferguson police department. The report said:Poor documentation of police officers’ interactions with civilians and lack of supervisory review of reports was another thread found in the Justice Department reports.• ClevelandInvestigators said the analyses of use-of-force incidents by police supervisors was superficial at best and, at worst, appeared to be intended to justify the unreasonable use of force by their subordinates.An episode in which an officer punched a 13-year-old boy in the face three or four times while the teenager was handcuffed illustrates the problem. The officer weighed twice what the handcuffed boy weighed. There was at least one other officer present who could have helped control the situation. The supervisor who reviewed the episode noted the weight difference, the presence of at least one other officer and the fact that the boy was handcuffed, yet nevertheless found that the use of force against the boy was “arguably the best response.”• ChicagoInvestigators found that community policing as a driving force had declined and attempts to restore it have failed. To succeed, the report said, the Chicago police “must build up systems throughout the department, to support and bolster this community-focused approach to policing.” It will fail, the Justice Department found, “if it remains a series of disconnected initiatives, no matter how well-meaning and well-executed.”• FergusonThe Justice Department raised concern about a lack of accurate records in tracking the use of stun guns or Taser weapons by the police. It also noted that much use of force — like “physical blows and baton strikes” — was not reported, which “raises the possibility that the pattern of unreasonable force is even greater than we found.”