https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/01/arts/television/stephen-colbert-donald-trump-address.html
Stephen Colbert Goes Live to Dissect Trump’s Address - The New York Times
Conway  Kellyanne,Colbert  Stephen,Meyers  Seth,Kimmel  Jimmy,O'Brien  Conan,Obama  Barack,Trump  Donald J,Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),Moonlight (Movie)
March 1, 2017
3764
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.Stephen Colbert gave a special live broadcast of “The Late Show” immediately after President Trump’s speech to Congress on Tuesday night. Here are the sharpest jabs.Mr. Colbert ran through the speech’s key moments, offering some caustic commentary.Mr. Colbert didn’t spare the Democrats’ rebuttal, either. He described it as being as if Steve Beshear, the former governor of Kentucky, were speaking “from your normal, relatable, everyday diner where everyone faces the same direction in terrified silence.”None of the other late shows taped after the speech, and Jimmy Kimmel — whose show is also recorded, despite its title — had the most creative way of handling the inconvenience: He declared it a “Trump-Free Tuesday.”Instead, he revisited the Oscars fiasco he had experienced firsthand as the show’s host on Sunday. Kimmel used the opportunity to pull Matt Damon, his “nemesis,” back into the fray.Conan O’Brien went to Mexico last month to tape a segment in his continuing “Conan Without Borders” series. On Wednesday night, that segment will air. Here’s a preview with a creative answer to the big question: “Who will pay for the wall?”Starting this week, the Times Late-Night Comedy Committee is serving you something new: an article every day that makes us smile — and has nothing to do with late-night TV. We’re calling the feature Extra Candy. Today, a look at the box office surge expected for “Moonlight” after it won best picture at the Oscars.