https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/world/asia/visa-denials-afghan-girls-robotics-us.html
After Visa Denials, Afghan Girls Can Attend Robotics Contest in U.S. - The New York Times
Immigration and Emigration,Visas,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Afghanistan War (2001- ),First Global,Group of Twenty,Trump  Donald J,Afghanistan,Robots and Robotics,Sestak  Joseph A Jr,United States Politics and Government,United States International Relations
July 13, 2017
458
A group of six girls from western Afghanistan will be able to attend an international robotics competition for which they had spent months preparing after the United States this week reversed a decision to deny them entry to the country.The team, from Herat, the third-largest city in Afghanistan, is expected to lead a procession of teams from 157 countries into Constitution Hall in Washington on Sunday night, according to the event organizers.The girls, who are ages 14 to 16, had twice been denied visas, according to Joe Sestak, the former Pennsylvania congressman and Navy admiral who now is president of First Global, the nonprofit organizing the event. But thanks to the help of officials in Washington and, reportedly, the intervention of President Trump, they were ultimately able to secure entry. Another team, from Gambia, was also approved this week after an earlier denial.“Every team has now gotten through, whether it’s Iran, Libya, and even after the reinstitution of the executive order on travel, we still got Yemen and Syrian refugees through,” Mr. Sestak said, referring to the president’s ban on most visitors from six predominantly Muslim countries, including Yemen and Syria but not Afghanistan.Kawsar Roshan, a 15-year-old member of the Afghan team, said she had been working on robots for two years, making multiple machines, including a tricycle and a train. The team began its work at the start of the year and applied for visas in May and June, according to the team’s mentor, Ali Reza Mehraban.Over the past couple of years, as more Afghans have joined an exodus intensified by the country’s insecurity and economic uncertainty, obtaining visas has become much more difficult because of concerns that visitors would seek asylum. Many young Afghans, particularly those on student and visit visas, also cross the border to Canada, knowing that the asylum process is much easier there than in the United States.Mr. Sestak said that he did not know why the Afghan team’s visa applications were not approved, but that he suspected it stemmed from a backlog of requests or cautious officials concerned that they might overstay their visas.Either way, he said, “I think they were given a fair opportunity.” He had previously told the leaders and mentors of the 165 teams participating that he did not believe the denials were influenced by “prejudice or politics.”In the end, the girls were granted entry through “parole,” a process by which United States Citizenship and Immigration Services may temporarily authorize otherwise ineligible visitors on humanitarian grounds or because it benefits the public. Parole was requested because it would serve “in furtherance of U.S. foreign policy interests,” a spokesman said.Politico reported that the status was granted after Mr. Trump intervened by asking officials at the National Security Council to consider ways to allow the team into the country.First Global was founded by Dean Kamen, the prolific inventor behind the Segway, to promote the value of education in science, technology, engineering and math. Next week’s competition, the inaugural First Global Challenge, was created to advance that goal.The teams will compete over several days in a game designed to showcase the role technology can play in water purification, a problem in many of the participating countries. Robots will compete to collect clean and contaminated water “particles” represented by differently colored balls, and cooperation among the teams will also be rewarded throughout the competition, Mr. Sestak said.The event, which begins on Sunday night and ends on Tuesday, will be streamed live online.