https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/nyregion/new-york-hotel-union-health-clinic-brooklyn.html
A New Brooklyn Clinic for Hotel Workers Who Enjoy No-Cost Care - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Building Service Employees,Organized Labor,Hotel Association of New York,Brooklyn (NYC),New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council
July 19, 2017
2379
Tania Corchado was already quite happy with the health care promised her family for the next nine years, a plan that would be the envy of many Americans. But once she got a peek at where it would be delivered — with no paperwork or, even better, a promise of never having to wait for a doctor — she was itching to make some appointments.Starting next month, Ms. Corchado and her three children will have all their basic health care needs — like checkups, dentistry and physical therapy — met in a stylish health center on the edge of Downtown Brooklyn. Even better, treatments will cost her nothing, not even a co-payment, because Ms. Corchado belongs to a union, the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, that has championed a remarkable solution to the national challenge of paying for health care.For decades, the union has operated its own health centers, staffed by hundreds of doctors, nurses and dentists employed by its benefits fund. Their services have been part of contracts the union has negotiated with the Hotel Association of New York, including the current one that runs until 2026. As a result, union members who work as maids and bellboys at $400-a-night hotels pay nothing for their health care.Along with annual raises that will lift the wages of hotel maids to nearly $40 an hour in 2025, the contract called for a $120 million investment in the new health center in Brooklyn. With that money, which was diverted from the union’s pension fund, the benefits fund bought a parking lot and turned it into an 11-story building that fits into the cultural district surrounding the Brooklyn Academy of Music.The 32,000-member union’s clout will be on full display on Thursday with both Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio scheduled to appear at a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the building. (Though given the two politicians’ famously fractious relationship, the men are supposed to tour the site separately.)“What we’ve got in Brooklyn now is a real crowning achievement and a culmination of over 50 years of accumulated knowledge,” said Peter Ward, president of the Hotel Trades Council. “It’s a new health care delivery model, which we think will revolutionize the way we do things.”It certainly appealed to Ms. Corchado and her children — Nicholas, 17; Matthew, 13; and Mia, 10 — as they received a tour on Tuesday guided by Dr. Robert Greenspan, who runs the union’s benefit funds. Ms. Corchado, who has been a dispatcher at the New Yorker Hotel in Manhattan for 18 years, said she would have made appointments for the scheduled opening day of Aug. 7 but her family will be on vacation in Orlando, Fla., that week.Dr. Greenspan explained how he expected 90 percent of the patients to be in and out of the building in less than an hour, prescribed medicines in hand. He showed off dental chairs with panoramic views of the neighborhood and a robotic pill-sorter that he said could fill 100 prescriptions an hour.He said patients with appointments would go directly to treatment rooms that encircle a shared work space for doctors and nurses — no sitting around a waiting room leafing through year-old magazines. Video screens in those rooms would greet the patients and display their medical records, he said.The patients may be maids, porters and bartenders, but they will be treated as if they were staying at the Ritz, Dr. Greenspan said.“My members work in some of the most expensive hotels in the world,” he said. “The last thing I can do is have one of them say, ‘If I treated a guest at the hotel the way you treated me, I’d be fired.’ I never want to hear that statement.”Mr. Ward said the health centers emphasized preventive care because the benefits fund takes responsibility for nearly all of the costs of health care for its members. It is an approach long since abandoned by most unions and corporations, but one that may be making a comeback.In Las Vegas, the Culinary Workers Union opened a $30 million health center last month that was modeled on the Hotel Trades’ example. Most of the culinary union’s 57,000 members work in hotels on the Strip or in downtown Las Vegas, but the union built its health center closer to where most of them live, said Bethany Khan, a spokeswoman for the union. She said the health center included a second outlet of the Culinary Health Fund’s six-day-a-week pharmacy on the Strip, which she said was the busiest pharmacy in Nevada.“For shift workers to be able to get in and out is super important,” Ms. Khan said. “People are working all hours of the day here.”In Brooklyn, the Hotel Trades’ health center takes up five floors of the building, leaving room for the union to take advantage of the red-hot market for real estate in Brooklyn. The union and the Hotel Association agreed to divert 3 percent of payroll that would have gone into the pension fund to pay for the building. The benefits fund paid $19 million for a lot on Fulton Street and an additional $100 million on construction.Now the fund will be a landlord, leasing out retail space on the ground floor and offices on the top six floors to other tenants. Dr. Greenspan estimated that those spaces would yield $3.5 million to $4 million in annual rent to help defray the costs of the building.Mr. Ward said the union took a similar, but even riskier, tack at the site of its health center in Harlem. In that case, the funds borrowed from a bank to construct a building with space for additional tenants. That mortgage is now paid off and the rent the union collects helps to cover the costs of operating that health center, he said.Mr. Ward acknowledged that it would take many years to recoup the investment in the Brooklyn building. But, he said, “We’re occupying 65,000 square feet in a building that is in the hottest neighborhood in Brooklyn for no out-of-pocket expense.” And, he added, “We’re going to be living there for free.”