http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/26/nyregion/a-groundhog-day-whodunit-the-mystery-of-chucks-death.html
De Blasio’s Fault or Not, Fatal or Not, Groundhog Had an Early Fall - The New York Times
Groundhogs,de Blasio  Bill,Staten Island Zoo,Staten Island (NYC),New York City
Sept. 25, 2014
7751
A sudden death. A mayor in yellow suede gloves. A fall — or was it two? — that might have proved fatal. And a groundhog named Chuck, until it wasn’t.On Thursday, Mayor Bill de Blasio stood accused of inadvertent rodenticide stemming from an episode in February, when, amid the pageantry of Groundhog Day shadow-viewing, he dropped the star of the early-morning event.According to an article in The New York Post, Charles G. Hogg, known as Chuck to Staten Island Zoo visitors, died one week later of “internal injuries” that were “consistent with a fall.” Also, “Chuck” was in fact a female, named Charlotte. The article alleged a cover-up by the zoo on both fronts.By midmorning, though, the mystery had deepened, as zoo officials and a local Democratic assemblyman presented an alternative timeline that seemed to absolve the mayor.After wriggling from Mr. de Blasio’s grasp on Feb. 2, the zoo said, the groundhog received “a complete medical examination” that revealed no sign of trauma or pain. The animal participated in several events over the next week, displaying no unusual behavior or appetite issues.But on Feb. 9, she was found dead in her quarters. A necropsy revealed “sudden internal injuries,” the zoo said, adding that they might have been sustained “overnight while in its exhibit.”Still, the zoo allowed, “the exact cause of the injuries could not be determined.”State Assemblyman Matthew J. Titone of Staten Island offered the mayor a more complete exoneration.“The medical evidence, the science, simply is not there,” Mr. Titone said of attempts to pin responsibility for the death on Mr. de Blasio.A Republican counterpart, Councilman Vincent Ignizio, the minority leader of the City Council, appeared less convinced.In a Twitter post, Mr. Ignizio suggested, in apparent jest, that the incident warranted an oversight meeting.“Chuck is Charlotte? He fell?” he wrote. “I just want to know what Mayor & Zoo knew and when they knew it.”The de Blasio administration said it had not been aware of the animal’s death but was sorry to hear of it.Brian Morris, a spokesman for the zoo, said officials were in the process of revisiting animal protocols, and it was “more than likely” that new rules would keep mayors and groundhogs from coming into contact every February.“It’ll protect our animals,” he said, “and it’ll also protect whoever the mayor is.”Yet the news raised fresh questions about who was responsible — mayor or marmot? — for the Groundhog Day tumble. The mayor’s defenders have said that the animal squirmed away on her own and was not “dropped,” per se.An analysis of photos and a video from that day yielded no definitive answer. Coaxed out of her hutch with a carrot, the groundhog was handed to Mr. de Blasio, who clasped her with both hands. The animal began to fuss, her head darting to the right, as her body shifted. The mayor seemed to corral her briefly, grinning as he balanced the groundhog on his right wrist. But in a flash, she squirted free, appearing to slip at first and then, perhaps recognizing her fate, spreading her limbs to finish a jump.The groundhog tumbled headlong to the ground, a long descent from the arms of a 6-foot-6 mayor. She did not stick the landing.Mr. de Blasio’s dexterity has come into question in recent days. Last week, while playing first base at a softball game against the City Council, the mayor flubbed several catchable throws that came his way.It was also unclear whether the mayor’s yellow gloves might have played a role in the February fall. They were used to avoid a repeat of a 2009 incident, when Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg was bitten by an earlier iteration of “Chuck.”“Welders use them to protect their hands,” Mr. Morris, the zoo spokesman, said of the gloves, calling them “unwieldy.”Groundhogs generally live to about age 7, according to the zoo. Mr. Titone defended the zoo for not revealing the identities of its multiple Chucks, noting the “breaking news” that Lassie has been played by more than one dog, and Batman by more than one actor.Mr. Titone said the zoo had also been right not to publicly discuss the animal’s death until its hand was forced this week.“When you’re talking about a celebrated icon,” he began, noting that Chuck was an “education ambassador” for Staten Island, “do you really want to tell children Santa Claus died?”