http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/23/fashion/sundaystyles/23touch.html
The Politics of Good Touch, Bad Touch - The New York Times
Politics and Government,Bush  George W,Group of Eight
July 23, 2006
7287
IT was the neck rub heard round the world.At the Group of 8 summit meeting in St. Petersburg, Russia, this week, President Bush walked up behind the seated German chancellor, Angela Merkel, placed his hands upon her shoulders and gave what appeared to be a double squeeze. Ms. Merkel threw her arms into the air and seemed to grimace, and the news media and public were left to decipher the meaning of the incident.The German news media decried what Bild-Zeitung called a love attack, and in the United States, conservative and liberal bloggers slugged it out over whether the act was one of warmth or something more sinister, like an old-fashioned grope.Viewed in isolation, Mr. Bush’s quick foray into shiatsu was at least a low-grade diplomatic goof. However intended, the gesture didn’t go over smoothly with Ms. Merkel. But in the context of a rash of overfamiliar touching by politicians these days, Mr. Bush’s massage moment could be seen as utterly, if unsettlingly, benign.In Moscow this month, President Vladimir V. Putin greeted a 5-year-old boy at the Kremlin, lifted his shirt and kissed his belly. Mr. Putin later explained the gesture as a spontaneous act of affection.“He seemed very independent and serious,” Mr. Putin said at a news conference. “I wanted to cuddle him like a kitten.”In Seattle in April, when a Boeing supervisor gave a cap to the Chinese president, Hu Jintao, not a man often accused of being excessively touchy-feely, Mr. Hu responded by wrapping his arms around the man and giving him a full-body embrace. “My first presidential hug,” declared the stunned supervisor, a man named Paul Dernier.Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut is in the political fight of his life because of a hug and kiss he may or may not have received from President Bush after last year’s  State of the Union address. In New Mexico, Gov. Bill Richardson, a man said to have presidential aspirations, suffered a political setback last December when Lt. Gov. Diane D. Denish told an Albuquerque Journal reporter that she tried to avoid him at events because: “He pokes me. He pinches my neck. He touches my hip, my thigh, sort of the side of my leg.”Have our leaders gone mad?It wasn’t so long ago that politicians limited their physical interaction with the public and one another to a quaint gesture known as the handshake. In case you’ve forgotten: two people extend their right arms, clasp their hands, give a pumping motion at the elbow, then quickly release. No cuddling, no making out. Just a terse shake, and you’re done.How did we go from that to kissing stomachs, giving back rubs and touching “sort of the side of my leg?”It turns out all that touching is no accident. Political consultants have been encouraging politicians — arguably, a group that craves human contact anyway — to hug when the urge strikes. Frank Luntz, a Republican political consultant, said he gives clients explicit instructions to hug away.“I tell politicians in this country that they need to be more physical,” he said. “That’s how you show affection, warmth and teamwork. I believe in general a physical approach to politics is a positive thing.”Mr. Luntz said he recently took his get-physical mantra to Italy, where he advised Prime Minister Romano Prodi on his successful campaign.That an American political consultant would be encouraging an Italian politician to do more touching is telling, said Allan Pease, a media coach to politicians and business executives and the author of “The Definitive Book of Body Language.”Mr. Pease said the United States for much of its history had taken a distinctly northern European view that disdained physical contact between strangers, one shared by the populations of former British colonies like Australia and New Zealand. Mediterranean cultures, he said, have traditionally been more embracing of embracing.“Germany is a very nontouching culture,” he said. “They don’t go in for cuddling. But if you go to Italy, and you give a hug, they’ll think you’re a hell of a guy.”Mr. Pease said that perhaps because of this country’s role as a cultural melting pot, it has become more comfortable with physical contact between strangers. Indeed, over time, the handshake here acquired more intimate variations. There was the double hand clasp, in which one or both participants places a free left hand over the right hands. There was the elbow grab, the upper arm grab, the shoulder shake and, eventually, the wraparound, in which the target of the shaker is brought in with the spare arm like a dance partner.These days President Bush is as apt to hug or kiss someone as to shake hands. He kissed Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice on her appointment as secretary of state in 2004, and at a graduation ceremony at the Merchant Marine Academy last month he offered a bearhug to a graduate onstage who told him, “You’re the man.”Problems occur, Mr. Pease said, when you try to take American-style intimacy to places where it hasn’t caught on. “When you have a world audience watching, some of the people are going to think it’s all right, and some are going to think it’s very weird,” he said.As a political act extreme touching has a mixed record. It can certainly be an effective way of signaling empathy. Mr. Luntz said he had a distinct memory of a public hearing on the budget in 1996, when a woman in a wheelchair began heckling the politicians on stage. He said Representative Christopher Shays of Connecticut walked down the aisle to the woman, took her hand and asked, “How can I help?”“I call it the gentle touch,” Mr. Luntz said. “She felt like he cared.”But just as often, it seems, physical contact with the public can haunt politicians. President Bill Clinton’s embrace of Monica Lewinsky at a rope line became an omnipresent image during the White House scandal. Mr. Bush has been criticized by political bloggers for his seeming compulsion to rub or pat the heads of bald men, an act of touching that Mr. Luntz said he would discourage.“I can tell you that won’t be appreciated,” he said. “The physical touch is supposed to endear you to someone, not make fun of someone.”As for Mr. Bush’s spontaneous back rub of the German chancellor, Mr. Pease said it wasn’t even close.“That’s a definite no-no,” he said.