http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/24/nyregion/us-attorney-preet-bharara-criticizes-albanys-three-men-in-a-room-culture.html
U.S. Attorney Criticizes Albany’s ‘Three Men in a Room’ Culture - The New York Times
New York State,Bharara  Preet,Silver  Sheldon,Corruption (Institutional),Cuomo  Andrew M,Moreland Commission to Investigate Public Corruption (NYS)
Jan. 23, 2015
6842
One day after charging one of New York’s leading lawmakers with exploiting his office to obtain millions of dollars in kickbacks and bribes, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York delivered a stinging condemnation of the culture of corruption in Albany and said the system was set up to breed misdeeds.The prosecutor, Preet Bharara, speaking at the New York Law School on Friday, castigated how deal-making has long been done in Albany — by “three men in a room” (the governor, the State Assembly speaker and the State Senate majority leader), who work in secret and without accountability to decide most vital issues.For decades, state government has essentially been controlled by the three leaders. When they emerge from their private meetings, issues are usually settled, with no cause for public debate.Mr. Bharara said this structure could lead to the kind of corruption outlined in the criminal complaint unveiled on Thursday against Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat who has been the Assembly speaker for two decades.If the charges are proved true, he said, then “at least one of the proverbial three men in a room is compromised.”If that is the case, he said, “then how can we trust that anything that gets decided in Albany is on the level?”By concentrating power in the hands of so few, he said, good people are discouraged from running for office because they know they will have little influence on important matters.“If you are one of the three people in the room, you have all the power and everyone knows it,” he said.There is no need to brook dissent, encourage debate or explain yourself. “If you are one of the three men in the room you keep people in the dark because you can,” he said.Mr. Bharara seemed to revel in mocking Albany and ridiculed the very concept of “three men in a room.”“Why three men?” he asked. “Can there be a woman? Do they always have to be white? How small is the room that they can only fit three men? Is it three men in a closet? Are there cigars? Can they have Cuban cigars now? After a while, doesn’t it get a little gamy in that room?”Mr. Bharara compared the culture in Albany to Wall Street, where he has aggressively pursued insider trading prosecutions.Rather than trying to work for a greater good, he said, many people focused on where the line is between legal and illegal, and then steered as close as possible to that border without crossing over.Such a mentality, he said, is a recipe for trouble.As an example of such thinking, he cited the former leader of the State Senate who instructed his members to deliver their public disclosure forms by hand rather than mailing them so as to avoid any possible federal mail fraud charges — the unspoken assumption being that lawmakers might have lied on those forms.Mr. Bharara said the parade of lawmakers being led away in handcuffs could lead people to tune out and lose faith.Among the sitting Albany politicians who have been prosecuted and convicted by Mr. Bharara’s office are Eric A. Stevenson and Nelson L. Castro, two former Bronx Democratic assemblymen; and Carl Kruger, a former Democratic state senator from Brooklyn. Malcolm A. Smith, a Democratic state senator from Queens, is currently on trial in a corruption case; he has pleaded not guilty.“When more likely to be arrested then defeated at ballot, people lose faith,” Mr. Bharara said. “When politician after politician after politician elected by the voters falls to criminal charges, people lose faith.”But he urged voters to get angry, to demand change. “My hope is that in bringing the case,” he said, “there will be reform.”“That almost happened with the Moreland Commission,” Mr. Bharara said, referring to the anticorruption panel established by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo that was looking at lawmakers’ behavior when the governor shut it down. “But it turned out to be a little bit fleeting.”