http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/27/world/middleeast/irans-new-president-says-israel-must-be-wiped-off-the-map.html
Iran's New President Says Israel 'Must Be Wiped Off the Map' - The New York Times
IRAN,ISRAEL,AHMADINEJAD  MAHMOUD,INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Oct. 27, 2005
6358
TEHRAN, Oct. 26 - Iran's new president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, told a group of students at an anti-Israel event on Wednesday that Israel "must be wiped off the map" and that attacks by Palestinians would destroy it, the ISNA news agency reported.He was speaking to about 4,000 students at a program called "The World Without Zionism," in preparation for an annual anti-Israel demonstration held on the last Friday of the holy month of Ramadan.His tone was reminiscent of that of the early days of Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979. Iran and Israel have been bitter enemies since then, and anti-Israel slogans have been common at rallies.Senior officials had avoided provocative language in the last decade, but Mr. Ahmadinejad appears to be taking a more confrontational tone than have recent Iranian leaders.He said on Wednesday that the issue of a Palestinian state would be resolved only when Palestinians took control of all their lands."The establishment of a Zionist regime was a move by the world oppressor against the Islamic world," the news agency reported him as saying. "The skirmishes in the occupied land are part of the war of destiny. The outcome of hundreds of years of war will be defined in Palestinian land."Referring to comments by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the leader of the Islamic revolution, Mr. Ahmadinejad said, "As the imam said, Israel must be wiped off the map."Mr. Ahmadinejad's predecessor, Mohammad Khatami, in contrast, had proposed a dialogue among civilizations and pursued a policy of détente.At the funeral of Pope John Paul II in April, Mr. Khatami was seated close to the Israeli president, Moshe Katsav, who said he shook hands and chatted briefly with Mr. Khatami. Mr. Katsav was born in the Iranian city of Yazd, which is Mr. Khatami's hometown.But despite media photos that showed the two men standing next to each other, Mr. Khatami denied the account after he returned to Iran.In response to Mr. Ahmadinejad's remarks, Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israel's Foreign Ministry, said, "Unfortunately, this is not the first time we've seen such extreme statements from senior Iranian leaders," adding, "We see today that there is a growing understanding in the international community that the extremist regime in Tehran is not just Israel's problem, but rather an issue that the entire international community must grapple with."Israel contends that Iran finances a number of Palestinian armed factions that carry out attacks against Israel, including Islamic Jihad, which claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing that killed at least five people on Wednesday in the Israeli coastal town of Hadera.In Washington, a State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, said that the remarks reconfirmed "what we have been saying about this particular regime in Iran.""I think that it only serves to underscore our concern, as well as the international community's concern, about Iran's pursuit of nuclear weapons," he added.Mr. Ahmadinejad on Wednesday also called Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip a trick, and said that Gaza was part of Palestinian territories and that the withdrawal was aimed at persuading Islamic nations to acknowledge Israel."Anybody who recognizes Israel will burn in the fire of the Islamic nation's fury," he said. He added that any Islamic leader "who recognizes the Zionist regime means he is acknowledging the surrender and defeat of the Islamic world."