https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/style/clinton-hill-a-welcome-stroll.html
Clinton Hill, a Welcome Stroll - The New York Times
Shopping and Retail,Clinton Hill (Brooklyn  NY),Fashion and Apparel,Restaurants,Travel and Vacations,New York City
Nov. 10, 2016
4148
Joya Studio (19 Vanderbilt Avenue), near the Navy Yard, produces scented candles for more than 100 brands, from tastemaker designer labels to Nike. Since February, the front section of its manufacturing facility has been transformed into a boutique that’s evocative of a high-end art gallery, with hanging oak display cases backed with slabs of hot-rolled steel. (Periodically, the cases slide aside, making room for the delivery trucks that pull into the cavernous space.) Joya’s owner, Frederick Bouchardy, fills the store with personal picks, including the Claude Galien cologne his grandfather wore, Le Baigneur beard and face oil, thick leather coasters and a selection of art books.A few doors down is Parlor Coffee (11 Vanderbilt Avenue), a roastery that supplies beans to restaurants like Semilla and El Rey. On Sundays, it is open for shopping and tasting, with the aroma of beans spinning in a vintage Probat UG 22 roaster frequently drifting through the brick-walled space. Connoisseur-caliber accessories are for sale (Japanese glass Kalita brewers, Bonavita kettles, Aeropress coffee makers) as are, of course, the brand’s beans. Along with choices such as Kenya Miiri, which is slightly sweet and not especially strong, there are seasonal offerings, including a limited-edition blend from the Gesha area of Ethiopia available starting Nov. 28.A few blocks away, Myrtle Avenue — nicknamed “Murder Avenue” in prior times — includes a few noteworthy boutiques. Green in Bklyn (432 Myrtle Avenue), for example, focuses on eco-friendly items, including Klean Kanteen reusable water bottles; it’s also a reliable spot for gifts. Many are stylish souvenirs of the borough, such as the illustrator Claudia Pearson’s dish towels adorned with brownstones, and some are simply appealing, including chunky bars of soap from Marseille and colorfully printed children’s backpacks.Since it opened almost a decade ago, Barking Brown (468 Myrtle Avenue), down the street, has steadily built a loyal following of neighbors and parents visiting their children at Pratt. The main appeal is unpretentious women’s clothing and accessories, including breezy dresses, faux suede jackets, dangling earrings and roomy Matt & Nat handbags. There’s a wide range of choices well under $100. Near the entrance sits a large display of unisex hats, like bowlers and pageboy caps, from brands like Kangol.A few doors down, 21Tara (388 Myrtle Avenue) stocks fair-trade artisanal items like soft cotton Gudri blankets, African Indigo scarves and wood-printed pillows made in Jaipur, India. There’s a bit of a hippie feel to the boutique, with incense, sandalwood oil and malachite stones as part of the mix. Patterned cotton dresses by Mata Traders are also for sale.Su’juk (216 Greene Avenue) offers highly wearable vintage women’s clothing and an assortment of items like kilims from Morocco, jewelry by Rachel Weisberg and Sarah Klass, R&Co hair products and face cleansers by Dirty Mermaid Beauty. In back, there’s an area for hair services, including blowouts and cuts; on Sundays, tarot readings are offered.Nearby, Urban Vintage (294 Grand Avenue) is more than just a store. It is also an inviting cafe, founded by two sisters who grew up in the neighborhood. On the retail side, there are items that are ideal for last-minute gifts, like crisply packaged Gentlemen’s Hardware tool kits, Tilly Doro jewelry and greeting cards from Pepper Press. There’s well-chosen used furniture, too, starting at around $150, amid the vintage pieces used for cafe seating.When you’re ready for something to eat, there are great choices of prepared food and places to sit at Peck’s (455A Myrtle Avenue), where best sellers include gougères baked with Gruyère, black pepper and chives, and lamb shawarma sandwiches. And Mekelburg’s (293 Grand Avenue) serves homey options like meatloaf sandwiches; up front is a large counter filled with cheeses and smoked meats, many supplied by purveyors based nearby. Mekelburg’s also has more than a dozen beers on tap.Clementine Bakery (299 Greene Avenue) serves vegan baked goods, sweet and savory, to eat in or take home, that are creative and (mostly) seasonal. On a recent visit, choices included apple spice cranberry bread, pumpkin cupcakes and scones baked with kale and vegan mozzarella. This summer, the business expanded into a bright space next door to its original location, which draws steady crowds, especially on weekends.For something more formal, the Finch (212 Greene Avenue) has become a popular choice, and it earned a Michelin star last year. The restaurant serves expertly prepared food in a relaxed atmosphere, with what are arguably the best seats on a perch that borders the open kitchen. The cooks use top-tier ingredients, typically with a local and seasonal provenance, in specialties like grass-fed beef tartare and squid ink tagliatelle with littleneck clams and shishito peppers.