https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/17/business/dealbook/the-warren-buffett-of-brazil-behind-the-offer-for-unilever.html
The ‘Warren Buffett of Brazil’ Behind the Offer for Unilever - The New York Times
Lemann  Jorge Paulo,3G Capital Management LLC,Kraft Heinz Company,Unilever NV,Buffett  Warren E,Anheuser-Busch InBev NV,Berkshire Hathaway Inc,Burger King Corp,Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures
Feb. 17, 2017
3278
Jorge Paulo Lemann may be the richest man in Brazil but he does not have the same pop culture status on American shores as the investor Warren E. Buffett.Yet Mr. Lemann’s investment firm, 3G Capital, and Mr. Buffett’s conglomerate, Berkshire Hathaway, are the architects of some of the biggest mergers of household names in American food and drink in recent memory.Mr. Lemann’s team of Brazilian deal makers and Mr. Buffett joined forces to buy the ketchup king, H. J. Heinz, in 2013, and they led Heinz’s merger with Kraft Foods in 2015. 3G Capital also put the American fast-food chain Burger King together with the Canadian coffee and doughnut chain Tim Hortons — with financing from Berkshire Hathaway. And the Brazilians assembled a brewer that eventually merged with the Budweiser producer Anheuser-Busch to become the global beer giant Anheuser Busch InBev. In October 2015, Anheuser-Busch InBev struck an agreement to acquire SABMiller, the maker of Miller Lite, for about $104 billion.Now, the deal makers are poised for what would be their biggest feat yet.On Friday, Kraft Heinz disclosed that it had made a $143 billion offer for Unilever, the maker of Hellmann’s mayonnaise, Lipton tea and Dove soap, a global combination that would create one of the world’s largest food companies.Unilever has turned down the offer, but this could just be the opening salvo. In a statement confirming its offer, Kraft said, “We look forward to working to reach agreement on the terms of a transaction.”Mr. Lemann, 77, a Harvard-educated former Brazilian tennis champion, ranks 19th on the Forbes list of world billionaires, with a fortune estimated at $29 billion. He and his partners at 3G have developed over the years what many call a playbook for extracting costs from companies by eliminating frivolities like corporate-owned aircraft and expensive office space, revamping management and slashing jobs.They instill strict austerity that forces managers to justify expenses beyond basic operating needs. Their model makes expansion overseas crucial for increasing returns.They have also focused on major consumer brands rather than on diversifying. Mr. Lemann, who was born in Brazil but now lives in Switzerland, and Mr. Buffett, nicknamed the Oracle of Omaha, served on the board of the razor maker Gillette years ago. In the 1970s, Mr. Lemann founded an investment bank in Brazil and later sold it to Credit Suisse before starting his investment firm in 2004.Glimmers of the 3G playbook were at work in InBev’s takeover of the St. Louis-based Anheuser Busch, when Mr. Lemann brought a team of Brazilian managers in and eliminated more than 1,000 jobs. He replaced the chief executive of Heinz with a 3G partner and cut 7,000 jobs there.A 3G founding partner, Alex Behring, is chairman of Restaurant Brands, the parent of Burger King, as well as the chairman of Kraft Heinz and a board member at Anheuser-Busch. Mr. Lemann is the controlling shareholder and board member at Anheuser and a board member at Kraft.Mr. Lemann and Mr. Buffett share a similar investment philosophy: patience. Instead of selling his portfolio after he has cut and remodeled companies, Mr. Lemann has used Anheuser-Busch InBev and now Kraft Heinz as base camps for further global expansion. As recently as December, Kraft Heinz was rumored to be looking around, and many thought the target would be Mondelez, the maker of Cadbury chocolate and Ritz Crackers.Hostile situations do not bother 3G. In 2015, Anheuser-Busch InBev made several unsuccessful approaches to SABMiller before the two beer makers merged, offering to bring it into growing markets in Africa and Latin America. SAB demurred, but eventually the deal was made.