https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/sports/tennis/you-cant-tell-the-coaches-without-a-scorecard.html
You Can’t Tell the Tennis Stars’ Coaches Without a Scorecard - The New York Times
Tennis,French Open (Tennis),Coaches and Managers
May 31, 2014
9409
PARIS — In the French Open players’ lounge this year, Stefan Edberg notices a change from his glory days.“There’s a lot more people around, that’s for sure,” he said.Edberg, the elegant Swede who won six Grand Slam singles titles in the 1980s and ’90s, is part of the explanation. He is here at Roland Garros as one of Roger Federer’s two coaches.Entourages have been expanding for years in professional tennis. Novak Djokovic’s staff is nearly big enough to form a soccer team, which is fitting in that tennis is ever more a team sport, from the physical preparation to the recovery work.But the latest expansion, particularly among the elite, is in the coaching ranks. There are more jobs and camera time for everyone, and one of the best and latest examples was Richard Gasquet’s match against Fernando Verdasco on Saturday on the main Philippe Chatrier Court (the match was suspended because of fading light).In the players’ box for Gasquet were his co-coaches: Sébastien Grosjean, a former French Open semifinalist, and Sergi Bruguera, a two-time French Open champion. In the players’ box for Verdasco were his coach, Sergio Pérez, and his coaching consultant, Thomas Enqvist, a former top-10 player from Sweden.If you add in hitting partners, who often do much more than simply exchange ground strokes, then the coaching ranks expand even further.“In the case of the top pros, I think it’s just a case of them making so much more money than everybody else,” said Patrick McEnroe, the former touring pro who is now the general manager of player development at the United States Tennis Association. “It’s like, if you can afford it, then why not do it? It’s like, the top N.B.A. team or the top soccer teams in Europe can hire as many people as they want. They have all these assistants, so I guess that’s kind of what tennis has become.”There are exceptions, temporary exceptions. Andy Murray, at least until the French Open ends for him, has no official coach and is getting advice for the moment from the Adidas consultant Darren Cahill, his friend and hitting partner Dani Vallverdu and, in the occasional phone call, his former coach Ivan Lendl.But Murray is the exception to the rule near the top. Djokovic has his longtime coach Marian Vajda and his new head coach, Boris Becker, a former world No. 1 and three-time Wimbledon champion. Federer has Severin Luethi and Edberg, who joined the team shortly after Paul Annacone left last year.Milos Raonic, the big-serving Canadian who is ranked ninth, has the former top-10 player Ivan Ljubicic and Riccardo Piatti. Kei Nishikori, ranked 10th, has the former French Open champion Michael Chang and Dante Bottini.“My guess is in five years, you will hire coaches like you hire consultants in other businesses,” said Thomas Johansson, a former Australian Open champion from Sweden. “It could be a guy like Goran Ivanisevic who will help you with your serve. Or you can have Michael Chang help you with your movement, or you could have Marat Safin help with the backhand. You will have different consultants you work with for a couple of weeks here and there to try to help you improve a specific shot or area of your game. The coaches now are great, but they cannot be great in every single thing on the court.“Think about it. It’s what you do in a company. If you want to improve your company, you have certain people you hire only as consultants instead of employing them full time. You call them in for a specific thing for a specific time period. And I really see that happening in tennis in five years. It’ll be almost like you’re the C.E.O. of a company.”Djokovic has tested the concept, hiring the former Australian doubles star Mark Woodforde on a short-term basis several years ago to work on his volleys. Johansson once hired Woodforde’s former doubles partner, Todd Woodbridge, to help with his own volleys.“I have never played volleys like I did after that,” Johansson said. “I mean, everything was so easy and everything was so logical because my coach, he was great with a lot of things but technique was maybe his one weakness. Tactically, he was unbelievable, and he made me really work hard, so he was great for my tennis. But when I was working with Todd, I think I was around 30 years old.” Johansson wondered why he had not thought of it earlier.But presumably, traveling coaches will still be required, too. For now, the multiple-coach trend is being pushed along in part by herd mentality, in part by players looking for any edge and in part by the realization that former stars are rarely interested in traveling the circuit full time but are willing to do it part time.Grosjean and Bruguera, who recently joined Gasquet’s team after Piatti left, are splitting the travel duties. So, at least initially, are Vajda and Becker, who were both in Rome and are now in Paris.“I think Ivan Lendl showed with Murray that you can have a full-time impact from a part-time travel schedule,” said Jim Courier, a former No. 1 and now the United States Davis Cup captain. “And I think that’s probably good from both sides of the fence, both the top players looking for an edge, and these former top players maybe wanting to get their hands back into the game more closely.“I think it is positive for the game, and I think one of the great assets in tennis we do have is the ability to keep the legends alive in various instances, whether it’s through commentary or having their own academy or playing senior tennis or coaching. It’s a win-win-win for Michael Chang to be coaching Kei Nishikori. It’s a win for Kei, a win for Michael and a win for the game.”Annacone, now coaching the American women’s player Sloane Stephens, said his co-coaching arrangement with Luethi worked only because of continual communication.“We got along really well, and we talked a lot early, and I think that helped because it was then very easy for us to communicate with Roger because the voice was basically the same,” Annacone said. “He knew Roger obviously a lot better than I did, and I probably had a lot more experience than he did. So we just kind of combined our assets. You have do it real selflessly. I could see if you had a little bit of an internal power struggle or not a lot of communication about how the roles work, then it could be a problem.”Even some young, lower-ranked players are using two coaches, including the American 18-year-old Taylor Townsend, who reached the third round in women’s singles here with two coaches in her box, Kamau Murray and Zina Garrison, a former Wimbledon finalist. “Me and Zina sit around and talk back and forth, and we disagree,” Murray said. “But by the time we get in front of Taylor, there’s one message.”Not all leading players are interested in joining the herd. Marin Cilic, the Croatian star who pushed Djokovic hard in the third round here before losing, said he was too concerned about conflicting messages to hire two coaches. For now, he is working with the former Wimbledon champion Ivanisevic.“I have that kind of feeling that it can be too much in the head, too big of a distraction,” Cilic said. “But for some guys, it definitely works.”Though Annacone was essentially a full-time traveling coach in his final stretch with Federer, Edberg travels only part time and had shown no interest in leaving Sweden and coaching on the tour level until Federer contacted him last year.He remains deeply interested in producing another Swedish champion but for now is busy in Paris helping Swiss tennis.“That’s true,” Edberg said Saturday, chuckling. “But I think it’s good for tennis. The longer Roger stays around, the better it is for the sport.”