http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/29/theater/reviews/enter-two-gentlemen-for-a-sexy-sip-of-sangria.html
Enter 'Two Gentlemen' for a Sexy Sip of Sangría - The New York Times
PUBLIC THEATER,GUARE  JOHN,SHAKESPEARE  WILLIAM,SHAPIRO  MEL,MACDERMOT  GALT,MARSHALL  KATHLEEN,REVIEWS,PARKS AND OTHER RECREATION AREAS,THEATER,TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA (MUSICAL),TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA  THE (PLAY)
Aug. 29, 2005
6746
And now, from the era that brought you casual sex and casual clothing for all occasions, it's the casual musical! Songs are shrugged off like halter tops at a love-in in "Two Gentlemen of Verona," the dizzy gloss from 1971 on Shakespeare's comedy of love and betrayal, which opened last night in a sensibly silly revival at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.Numbers start and stop capriciously in a scramble of musical styles, matching the moods of characters for whom consistency is as negligible a virtue as chastity. Lyrics give the impression of having been dashed off and forgotten in a vaporous haze of inspiration. Speech slides from Elizabethan verse to jive talk to spiels in Spanish. As for the plot, well, you can blame Shakespeare for that, and it still doesn't track. The creative philosophy at work in this musical: if it feels right, do it, man.Such insouciance enchanted theatergoers and critics when "Two Gentlemen," adapted by John Guare and Mel Shapiro with music by Galt MacDermot, first opened in the park 34 years ago. Then as now, the producer was the Public Theater, which had previously birthed the singing acid trip known as "Hair." These were shows that offered hope that the American musical might not be the sickly dinosaur that everybody assumed it was.Like "Hair," "Two Gentlemen" made a fast move to Broadway, where it won the Tony Award for the year's best musical. Its chief competition was Stephen Sondheim and James Goldman's "Follies," a musically complex elegy to the end of a chapter in show business. And who wanted to think about the past and death when you had "Two Gentlemen" affirming the fun in life, life, life?Now that the sweet-smelling smoke has cleared three decades later, "Two Gentlemen" does not, it must be said, look anything like the better show. As is made evident by the director and choreographer Kathleen Marshall's festive production, which runs through Sept. 11, "Two Gentlemen" today tastes less like vintage Champagne than a fruity sangría.Still, isn't sangría the right beverage for a sultry night in the park? Ms. Marshall's "Gentlemen," which features a peppy young cast that includes the rising movie star Rosario Dawson, does not scintillate. But it generates a gentle buzz of pleasure that matches the lazy hedonism of late summer. And unlike most Shakespeare in the Park productions, this one doesn't suffer from an aching gap between ambition and execution."A graffito written across a classic play" was Clives Barnes's felicitous phrase for "Two Gentlemen" when he reviewed its Broadway opening in The New York Times. And "Two Gentlemen of Verona," like "The Comedy of Errors," is one of those lesser Shakespearean works it seems perfectly permissible to scrawl upon. A tale of tangled romances and breezily broken vows, the play is downright jolting in its reversals of tone and character, especially in its portrayal of a fickle young swain named Proteus.This kind of waywardness was not without parallels among the lotus-eating youth of the post-Woodstock years -- a comparison that Messrs. Shapiro, Guare and MacDermot made canny use of. They also scaled down Shakespeare's passages of poetic pain for an approach that emphasized an easygoing, multicultural exuberance over wistful poetry and nonsense over sensibility.Ms. Marshall and company have not tried to weigh down this helium lightness. Designed by Riccardo Hernández (set), Martin Pakledinaz (costumes) and Peter Kaczorowksi (lighting), this new "Two Gentlemen" looks a lot like pictures of the original. Dressed in the style of students moonlighting at a Renaissance Fayre, the cast members bounce happily among musical and comic styles to tell the story of Proteus (Oscar Isaac) and Valentine (Norm Lewis), best friends from Verona who seek their fortunes in the big city of Milan.For the purposes of the musical, Verona has been reconceived as Puerto Rico, with Milan as swinging Manhattan. This allows Ms. Marshall as choreographer ("Wonderful Town," "Kiss Me Kate" on Broadway) to create lots of salsa and samba-flavored disco numbers, with flouncing skirts and twitching hips.To tell the truth, these grow a little repetitive, but that may be inevitable given the sameness of many of Mr. MacDermot's songs, which lack the variety of his score for "Hair." Often, "Two Gentlemen" sounds strangely like a concert by Herb Albert and the Tijuana Brass. And the lyricism Mr. Guare is known for as a playwright is rarely in evidence in his clunky work here as a lyricist. ("I find love alarming/ I'm happier farming.")It seems fitting for a show aimed at what Tom Wolfe would later call the "me generation" that the most reprised song announces "I want to love me" and "You can't love another without loving yourself." The Vietnam War rears a ghostly head in a political parody number in which the Duke of Milan (Mel Johnson Jr.) promises to "bring all the boys back home" from foreign battlefields, a song greeted with knowing laughter by the audience.Yet the show's motor goes into full musical throttle in only two duets (out of several dozen songs): a Motown-style rouser called "Night Letter" and the amusingly swoony "Eglamour." Both, as it happens, feature the production's true find, a sparkplug of musical wit and vitality named Renée Elise Goldsberry, who plays Silvia, the object of lust of both title characters and the silken-voiced warrior Eglamour (Paolo Montalban).As the seduced and abandoned Julia, Ms. Dawson (of the films "Sin City" and the forthcoming adaptation of "Rent") is so ripely beautiful that it's hard to believe even Proteus could desert her. (Her singing is so-so, but who cares?) In supporting roles, Megan Lawrence, John Cariani, David Costabile and Don Stephenson provide a smorgasbord of thick comic shtick that occasionally wears thin.As the more gentlemanly of the gentlemen, Mr. Lewis plies his rich baritone to ear-pleasing effect, whether making like Ezio Pinza or James Brown. Mr. Isaac's Proteus is more impish than passionate. Indeed, though the subject of this show is physical attraction, it is oddly lacking in erotic energy. Its atmosphere is more cute than carnal.Actually, the sexiest presence in "Two Gentlemen" can be found above the fray -- on the central raised platform, where the onstage band is stationed. There, one Kimberly Grigsby, the show's lithe conductor, presides in a long summery skirt and backless top, undulating like a palm in the wind. She is an irresistible human metronome, channeling the relaxed sensual rhythm that "Two Gentlemen" is really all about.Two Gentlemen of VeronaAdapted by John Guare and Mel Shapiro; lyrics by Mr. Guare; music by Galt MacDermot; based on the play by William Shakespeare. Directed and choreographed by Kathleen Marshall; sets by Riccardo Hernández; costumes by Martin Pakledinaz; lighting by Peter Kaczorowski; sound by Acme Sound Partners; music director/conductor, Kimberly Grigsby; music supervisor, Rob Fisher; music coordinator, Seymour Red Press; animal trainer, William Berloni; production stage manager, Lori Lundquist; managing director, Michael Hurst; associate producers, Peter DuBois; Steven Tabakin and Heidi Griffiths; director of production, Ruth E. Sternberg. Shakespeare in the Park presented by the Public Theater, Oskar Eustis, artistic director; Mara Manus, executive director. At the Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrances at 81st Street and Central Park West, and at 79th Street and Fifth Avenue; (212)539-8750. Through Sept. 11. Running time: 2 hours 30 minutes.WITH: Norm Lewis (Valentine), Oscar Isaac (Proteus), Rosario Dawson (Julia), Renée Elise Goldsberry (Silvia), Paolo Montalban (Eglamour), Mel Johnson Jr. (Duke of Milan), Megan Lawrence (Lucetta), John Cariani (Speed), David Costabile (Launce) and Don Stephenson (Vissi D'Amore Boy).