https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/15/nyregion/de-blasio-raises-more-than-gop-challenger-for-the-first-time.html
De Blasio Raises More Than G.O.P. Challenger for the First Time - The New York Times
Elections  Mayors,Endorsements,Campaign Finance,Republican Party,Campaign Finance Board (NYC),Malliotakis  Nicole,de Blasio  Bill,New York City,Massey  Paul J Jr,Faulkner  Michel J
May 15, 2017
7740
Seeking re-election without a strong Democratic primary opponent, Mayor Bill de Blasio has for the first time raised more money than his best-funded Republican challenger, Paul J. Massey Jr., according to the latest campaign finance records, which were disclosed on Monday.Mr. de Blasio brought in $663,000 from more than 2,200 donors over the two-month filing period that ended Thursday, with a little more than half of the money coming from New York City residents and the vast majority giving $175 or less. With help from the city’s matching program, the mayor’s campaign said, Mr. de Blasio has now raised enough money to exceed the maximum allowed for spending in a primary campaign — nearly $7 million.Mr. Massey, a former real estate sales executive who remains unknown to many New Yorkers, raised nearly $545,000. That figure, lower than his haul during the prior two-month fund-raising period, threatened to undermine the best case for his candidacy: that his fund-raising prowess could underwrite a strong challenge to the incumbent mayor.In the two previous filing periods, Mr. Massey, who has been forced to compete for money and attention with new rivals in his own party, brought in more than Mr. de Blasio.Mr. Massey’s campaign also continued to spend money faster than it took it in, recording more than $1 million in spending in the latest filing, mostly on consultants and campaign staff. Mr. Massey, who has lent himself more than $2.7 million so far and has already paid some of it back, is not participating in the city’s public campaign finance program, which offers a six-to-one match for the first $175 from each donor.“I’m very, very happy with the way our fund-raising is going,” Mr. Massey told reporters on Monday before the numbers were disclosed. He was speaking at a news conference at City Hall with an erstwhile rival in the Republican race, the Rev. Michel J. Faulkner, who is now running for comptroller.Mr. Massey’s main Republican rival appears to be Nicole Malliotakis, an assemblywoman representing portions of Staten Island and Brooklyn who declared her run for mayor late last month. She managed to raise $94,000 in a little over two weeks of active campaigning. Political observers said that figure showed she might be able to quickly raise the money needed to mount an effective primary challenge to Mr. Massey.“That’s a great start,” said E. O’Brien Murray, a Republican political consultant not affiliated with any of the mayoral candidates. “The whisper number was that she had to get to six figures.”Ms. Malliotakis pointed out that she had attracted small donations from 584 individual contributors, most of them in New York City (the majority from Staten Island). Her donors included her family, her Assembly campaign and John A. Catsimatidis, the grocery magnate, and his wife, Margo.Ms. Malliotakis has yet to spend money, other than paying $17.50 to use her official state portrait for her campaign.Perhaps the oddest revelation in the filings came from Mr. Faulkner, who declared his run for city comptroller this month and was endorsed on Monday by Mr. Massey during their appearance at City Hall. Mr. Faulkner reported a charge of $188.85 to his campaign for e-Harmony, the dating service; the campaign also recorded a reimbursement for that charge.The payment to e-Harmony was the only one in the filing listed as being the result of “debit theft.”A campaign spokesman, Ken Frydman, called the charge fraudulent and said it had been the result of the candidate’s campaign card having been stolen or lost. “They canceled the card; it was his card,” he said.A spokeswoman for e-Harmony said the company had been alerted to the fraudulent account and closed it on April 21, a day after it was created.Mr. Faulkner’s filing indicated the struggles of his campaign for mayor, which he declared nearly two years ago and ended last week. His campaign has spent about $76,000 more than it has taken in, despite several loans. The incumbent comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, has $1.8 million in campaign cash on hand, according to the latest filing.Bo Dietl, a onetime registered Republican who wanted to run for mayor as a Democrat but filled out the paperwork incorrectly and ended up in neither party, brought in almost $190,000 — about two-thirds of which came from outside the city. Roque de la Fuente, a long-shot candidate from San Diego who brought and recently lost a court case against a Manhattan co-op board that rejected him, raised money from 12 contributors and lent himself $250,000.