https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/14/world/asia/myanmar-aung-san-suu-kyi-sanctions.html
For Myanmar’s Leader, More Power, but More Expectations, Too - The New York Times
Aung San Suu Kyi,Myanmar,Embargoes and Sanctions,Foreign Aid
Sept. 13, 2016
2543
YANGON, Myanmar — When Daw Aung San Suu Kyi visited the United States in 2012, she was celebrated as Myanmar’s newly free opposition leader, after years of detention under house arrest.Since then her National League for Democracy has won a sweeping election victory, and the military seems to be retreating from political life. For Washington, she stands as a gleaming example of a successful policy of constructive engagement.But on Wednesday, as she begins her first trip to the United States as Myanmar’s leader, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi will be accountable for what her government has accomplished, and what it has not, since she took office six months ago.An immediate question for Obama administration officials during her visit is whether the time has come to lift the remaining sanctions on Myanmar, and to encourage military-to-military cooperation and development aid.The decision is not just a matter of promoting American businesses in Myanmar. It also involves an assessment of her short record in power, as well as a measure of how Myanmar fits in Washington’s “pivot to Asia” strategy and its efforts to offset China’s influence in the region.In addition to nurturing relations with Washington and other Western governments, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has rekindled relations with the Chinese government, and made a recent high-level visit to Beijing.“China is our neighbor,” said U Zaw Htay, a spokesman for the state counselor’s office (Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is state counselor and foreign minister). “We cannot choose our neighbors,” he added. “China is our most important trade partner and a key partner in security and peace issues. So she went to China before going to America.”Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is also encouraging continued assistance from Japan, maintaining military relations with Russia and seeking more engagement with fellow members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. She has embraced a classic nonalignment policy — “which is at the very core of Myanmar’s foreign policy DNA,” said Thant Myint-U, a historian.In part, the goal of that strategy is to draw in foreign investment. Myanmar’s gross domestic product is growing at one of the highest rates in Southeast Asia, but the country is coming from very far behind. Some 20 million people, out of a total population of more than 54 million, lack proper road access, according to the Asian Development Bank. Power cutoffs are common, even in the commercial capital, Yangon. Inflation is high. Rice production has dropped below levels in colonial times.Washington’s remaining sanctions on Myanmar are narrowly targeted: They apply to the trade in jade and precious stones, and to doing business with some military officials or their affiliates. In theory they should not be a major impediment to American investment there.But “any sanctions brand the country as being a risky place,” Sean Turnell, an economic adviser to the Myanmar government, said. “And so lifting them would have an effect on corporate psychology.” There are no Western banks or American airlines currently operating in Myanmar, he said.Others think it’s too soon to loosen the restrictions.“I don’t see the N.L.D. government having a proper policy for handling crony capitalism or rehabilitating the cronies,” said U Yan Myo Thein, a political analyst in Yangon, referring to the National League for Democracy. “Some of them have even increased their fortunes in the few months the N.L.D. has been in government by getting more licenses.”Phil Robertson, the deputy Asia director of Human Rights Watch said: “The Burmese government doesn’t deserve a wide-scale lifting of sanctions. Its record on human rights has really been mixed.”Mr. Robertson acknowledged the release of political prisoners, but cited the continued arrests of civil society activists, as well as the government’s failure to repeal laws limiting free speech and the rights of religious minorities and its indifference to the plight of the Rohingyas.Various governments and rights groups in the West, as well as the United Nations, have criticized Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s administration for doing too little to alleviate the suffering of the Rohingyas, a group of about one million Muslims living in western Myanmar, most of them stateless.Since an outbreak of violence in 2012 with ethnic Rakhine — themselves among the poorest people in the country — Myanmar’s Rohingyas have lived in camps or confined to designated areas, with limited freedom of movement or access to education and health services.But now Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi seems to have adopted the issue as a priority, placing herself in charge of a special committee and nominating Kofi Annan, the former United Nations secretary general, to another independent commission that made its first visit to Rakhine last week.These appointments are in keeping with Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s apparent preference for initiatives over policies. She has taken on marquee issues that are fiendishly complicated and may take years to resolve, such as ethnic conflict and minority rights, rather than more urgent humanitarian or economic matters. Yet while reaching for symbolic gestures, she has often fallen back on pragmatism.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi recently convened a major peace conference in Naypyidaw, the capital, to tackle the country’s decades-long ethnic conflicts. For all the pomp of the occasion, though, she was mostly following the lead of the previous government, which had held a peace conference earlier this year, as the first in a series of meetings.By the end of the gathering, she also seemed to accept the importance of a national cease-fire agreement that both the previous government and the armed forces treated as a steppingstone for broader talks about peace, federalism and constitutional reform.“Aung San Suu Kyi is not pursuing things which threaten the military’s essential interests,” said Richard Horsey, a Yangon-based political analyst. “Her sense is that she should use her huge political mandate to push the peace process forward, transcending some of the issues that bogged it down before — and this fits with the military’s approach.”Abroad, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi is seen as a symbol of democracy and resistance to military oppression. But in Myanmar she also personifies the Burmese-Buddhist majority and, as the daughter of a general and independence hero, a rarefied class. That pedigree plays well with the majority, also Burmese and Buddhist, and acts as a bridge to her former foes in the military establishment.In fact, Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s efforts to redefine the military’s relations with civilian authorities sometimes looks more like a power bargain between elites than fundamental democratic reform.When she created the state counselor position, securing greater influence over both the executive and the legislative branches, military members of Parliament called the move unconstitutional. But she was also setting a dangerous precedent.The trickiest challenge of her administration may be managing relations with the military while pushing liberalization along.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, 71, has personalized power, but she has not groomed successors. She promotes confidants, while some veterans of the 88 Generation democracy movement, especially those who have displayed political ambitions, have been sidelined. She cultivates loyalty and discipline within the N.L.D. — requiring, for example, that all parliamentarians in her party live together in the same compound of run-down communal government guesthouses in Naypyidaw.During an impromptu dinner in one of those dorm rooms recently, with a handful of N.L.D. members and local journalists, one senior representative expressed his concern about further democratization given Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi’s all-important role.“Reforms to place the military under civilian control must happen in the next few years, under Daw Suu,” he said. “Otherwise, they may never happen at all.”