https://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/09/theater/09howe.html
Friend-and-Family Network of Inspirations for Tina Howe’s ‘Chasing Manet’ - The New York Times
Theater,Howe  Tina,Alexander  Jane,Chasing Manet (Play)
April 8, 2009
9314
Nearly an hour and a half into the first tech rehearsal of Tina Howe’s play “Chasing Manet,” the cast and crew haven’t made it much past the opening lines. A secret door in the set couldn’t be used after all, and the staging that was designed to throw haunting shadows on the wall turned out to interfere with an actor’s exit.“I didn’t realize it would be so boring,” Ms. Howe said after slipping out of 59E59 Theaters, where the show opens Thursday.Having written several plays, including the Pulitzer Prize finalists “Pride’s Crossing” and “Painting Churches and the Tony-nominated “Coastal Disturbances,” Ms. Howe, 71, has been through her share of tech rehearsals, boring and otherwise. She is on especially intimate terms with this newest creation, however. The characters are based on blue-blood relatives, the plot strikes at her deepest fears (of aging and ending up trapped in a nursing home), and the star is her dearest and oldest friend, Jane Alexander.“I rarely have actors in mind when I write, but I was thinking of Aunt Maddy, and I suddenly realized the play belongs to Jane,” said Ms. Howe, whose lanky frame and straight gray hair are punctuated by black cowboy boots. Aunt Maddy is Madeline B. Post, who was also the inspiration for Mabel Tidings in “Pride’s Crossing.”As she did in that play, Ms. Howe has invented the kind of rich, accomplished life that in reality eluded her beloved aunt, a captive of the rigid social restrictions imposed on Brahmin women of a previous generation. The protagonist of “Chasing Manet,” Catherine Sargent, is an amalgam of family friends, including the painter Margaret Holland Sargent, a distant relative of the American artist John Singer Sargent and a free spirit who up and left her husband for Paris.The play is set in the 1980s, the period when Aunt Maddy was in a nursing home in Riverdale, the Bronx, curled in a fetal position and unaware of much around her. Ms. Howe and her brother would meet there for grim visits, at a loss to comfort their aunt or each other. At the same time her husband’s Jewish, 100-year-old uncle was in an assisted-living home, where dozens of relatives regularly gathered to gossip, eat and tell jokes and old stories. “There was this tremendous disconnect between me and my brother, keeping vigil, and this party,” Ms. Howe said.So she decided to bring the two worlds together in her play by having the angry and depressed Catherine, a renowned painter now legally blind, room with a joyful Jewish woman, Rennie (Lynn Cohen), who wanders in and out of lucidity.Catherine is played by Ms. Alexander, who appeared in Ms. Howe’s very first play 50 years ago, when they were both seniors at Sarah Lawrence College. Ms. Alexander was the director, but at the last moment the leading lady fell ill, and she filled in. A few months later the two women were sailing across the Atlantic, Ms. Howe bound for Paris to study philosophy at the Sorbonne and Ms. Alexander headed for Edinburgh to study mathematics.“I always wanted to be an actress, but I needed a backup,” Ms. Alexander explained after joining Ms. Howe during a rehearsal break. “I was going to be an I.B.M. programmer. That was very sexy at that time. It was my ace in the hole.”Dressed in a long white gauzy nightgown, white bedroom slippers and a luxurious silver white wig, Ms. Alexander settles her dog, a small white-and-black papillon with ears that stick out like furry pigtails, on her lap. It gives her a touch of the diva — a pose to which Ms. Alexander, an award-winning actress who has appeared in more than 50 films and served as the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, is undoubtedly entitled.After an adolescence at all-girl schools, Ms. Alexander said, once in Edinburgh she “succumbed very quickly to the boys,”  as well as to theater, which was abundant during that city’s annual fringe festival. As for Ms. Howe in Paris, she was seduced by Ionesco’s plays “The Bald Soprano” and “The Lesson,” which she saw at the Théâtre de la Huchette, where the plays are still running as a double bill.  “It changed my life,” she said. “It was like a bolt of lightning going through my head.”Back at 59E59 Ms. Alexander said that working with a friend had its risks. “Tina’s work is very hard to do. There ain’t nothing easy about it. It’s like a musical score. You have to get that right, and I’m a slow worker.”Also lurking, Ms. Alexander said, is the “fear that you could lose your friend.”Dismay passes across Ms. Howe’s face, and she grabs her friend’s arm: “No. Never. Not us.”Ms. Alexander quickly agrees: “Not us. You worry that you’re not going to meet your friend’s expectations, and that worm will be there forever.”The director, Michael Wilson, said, “It is so dear to see a friendship and collaboration for that many years.” Still, on occasion “Jane needs to hear from her director and not from Tina, her good friend.”Mr. Wilson said that in his eyes Ms. Alexander brings ferocity and sharpness to the part.As Ms. Howe put it, “She knows how to get down on all fours.”Catherine is animated by her anger, yet her creator seems anything but angry. From where did she draw that emotion?“I had an angry mother,” she answered with a smile.Ms. Alexander chimed in: “It wasn’t hard to have an angry mother in the ’50s. All those women after the war, pre-Betty Friedan, with their 5 o’clock highballs.” Her tongue lolled in a drunken mug. “ ‘Go do your homework. Daddy will be home soon.’ ”In the play Catherine enlists Rennie to help her escape — a bit like “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: The Golden Years.” Her goal destination is Paris, to see the work of Manet, particularly “Le Déjeuner sur l’Herbe,” which hangs over her bed at the home. That painting, with its reclining nude picnicker, upended 400 years of art history, Catherine asserts, by telling artists they could paint whatever they wanted, however they wanted, bounded only by their imaginations.“The play is about all those far-flung journeys of the departing soul,” Ms. Howe said, the “longing for adventure, movement, for something else.” Her own journey to Paris five decades ago with Ms. Alexander was the inspiration for Catherine’s desired escape, the last wish on her bucket list.“I wrote the play to console myself about the inevitability of me and all of those I love ending up in nursing homes,” Ms. Howe said. “And to let the audience know that everything is possible at the end — if not in reality, then in your imagination.”