https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/arts/television/whats-on-tv-wednesday-blind-and-john-schlesingers-first-masterpieces.html
What’s on TV Wednesday: ‘Blind’ and John Schlesinger’s First Masterpieces - The New York Times
Television,Documentary Films and Programs,Movies
July 19, 2017
4575
A woman loses her ability to see, but not to imagine, what her husband is doing. And Mubi resurrects three films, set during Britain’s generational transition in the early 1960s, from the director John Schlesinger.BLIND (2015) on Fandor. “I can still see in my dreams,” says Ingrid (Ellen Dorrit Petersen), who has recently lost her sight in this haunting debut feature from the Norwegian filmmaker Eskil Vogt. “It’s not important what’s real, so long as I can visualize it clearly.” What Ingrid visualizes, as she stumbles around in her newly darkened world and tries to keep the memory of objects intact, is what her husband, Morten (Henrik Rafaelsen), does when he’s not with her — including carrying on a secret sex life with Elin (Vera Vitali), a single mother who has relocated from Sweden to Oslo. But does Elin really exist? She soon does, as Ingrid’s literary alter ego. “Blind,” with its mystically beautiful images of reflections in an eyeball, “evokes a dreamy, dour fusion of Charlie Kaufman and Ingmar Bergman,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. But “despite its heady eroticism, it maintains an almost clinical detachment that engages your mind without making your heart leap.”ROAD TO RACE DAY on go90. Need for speed: Climb into the cockpit with Kasey Kahne, Chase Elliott, Jimmie Johnson and Dale Earnhardt Jr., the superstar Nascar drivers with Hendrick Motorsports, during their 2016 season. Peter Berg (“Friday Night Lights”) is an executive producer of this new adrenaline-driven documentary series.JOHN SCHLESINGER’S FIRST MASTERPIECES on Mubi. Before his Hollywood success with “Midnight Cowboy” and “Marathon Man,” this British director focused on the changing generational tide in his home country in three films with class, gender and sex as the driving forces: “A KIND OF LOVING” (1962), Mr. Schlesinger’s feature debut, starring Alan Bates as a working-class man on his way to a white-collar job who is forced to marry his pregnant girlfriend (June Ritchie) and move in with his mother-in-law; “BILLY LIAR” (1963), featuring Tom Courtenay as an undertaker’s assistant with a vivid imagination, and a breakthrough performance by Julie Christie; and “DARLING” (1965), with Ms. Christie as a model and actor in Swinging London who climbs the social ladder alongside a TV news reporter (Dirk Bogarde). Bosley Crowther of The Times called her character “a selfish, ambitious, fickle wench whose tender and lovable qualities might be compared to those of a threshing machine.”YOUNGER 10 p.m. on TV Land. Our Millennial singles start dating again — an age-appropriate Argentine architect for Liza (Sutton Foster), a job-inappropriate rival editor for Kelsey (Hilary Duff) — but inevitably discover that it’s harder than they had remembered. Empirical, meanwhile, must suddenly fill a hole in its author roster. And Maggie’s assistant gets frisky with Josh (Nico Tortorella).SUITS 9 p.m. on USA. Harvey makes a bold move that leaves his partners fuming. Mike pursues a pro bono case. And Donna’s actions raise some tough questions.