http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/09/us/politics/09scene.html
At Giffords's Office, Drumming Against Hate - The New York Times
Tucson Shooting (2011),Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Giffords  Gabrielle,Murders and Attempted Murders,Tucson (Ariz)
Jan. 8, 2011
7912
TUCSON — By 2 p.m. about 40 people had gathered in front of Representative Gabrielle Giffords’ district office at the intersection of North Swan and East Pima Streets, many holding hand-printed signs, others with hands raised toward the traffic, fingers making peace signs..Motorists sounded car horns in support, but under the cacophony was a quieter sound, the rhythmic tum-tum of a drum. The drummer was Ilene  Thompson, who stood amid the signs that said things like “Hate Speech=Murder.” Ms. Thompson explained that she had been in a store buying that 13-inch drum Saturday morning when she heard of the shooting.“I actually bought it for shamanic energy exercises, but I just rushed out of the store to come here,” said Ms. Thompson, who like many of those in the crowd on the corner, was a volunteer worker in the last Giffords campaign. “This is just my small way of saying we need a heads-up about the real consequences of hate.”Ms. Giffords’ district office is the same that had been vandalized — a window broken, perhaps with a pellet gun, the police said — late last March, after the national health care bill passed with support from Ms. Giffords, who was known as “Gabby” to her constituents.After that, during  her re-election campaign, protesters gathered on most Saturdays on the same corner shouting and holding signs that said things like “Gabby, You’re Gone.”“On a typical Saturday this corner is filled with Tea Party protesters,” said Brenda Tyler, who was with her husband, Lyndon. “I’ve seen signs saying things like ‘It’s time to reload’ and ‘One way or another, you’re gone.”‘ A real estate agency in the neighborhood had a sign out front that said “Goodbye Gabby” and showed the silhouette of a witch on a broom,” she said. It had been taken down on Saturday.There was another scare about 6 p.m. on Saturday when the police said they had found a suspicious coffee can in the parking lot behind the congresswoman's office.“The police moved the crowd across the street to another corner and said the bomb squad would take care of it,” said Rob Servis of Tucson, who arrived around 5 p.m. for the vigil. “About 7 o’clock, we heard a loud boom.”There was no indication that the can contained a bomb, Mr. Servis said, but the authorities destroyed it as a precaution. The area where it was found remained cordoned off on Saturday night.About four hours earlier, soft applause greeted Kevin Bitten, a worker from a nearby Domino’s, when he arrived with 10 pizzas that he said the restaurant's employees had decided to send over. In the parking lot, five of Ms. Giffords's volunteers gathered anxiously by a car whose door was open with the radio on and the volume turned up.One volunteer, Kelly Canady, said that she and her mother had received a signed photograph from Ms. Giffords only a day earlier, thanking them for work working for her.“Gabby is the main reason I will stay involved in politics,” Ms. Canady said.As the car horns blared and the drum sounded in a sort of counterpoint, Jan-Ruth Mills, who teaches the history of the Holocaust at Pima Community College, said: “I’m concerned about the hatred, about the words that you should not use in a democracy. I hope people will realize that hateful words can have consequences.”A few hours later, police officers responded to a report of a suspicious package outside of the Giffords office and asked the group on the corner to move across the street, where they remained for a candlelight vigil as darkness fell and more local residents arrived.The streets near the office were closed as bomb squad vehicles arrived. The police said the suspicious package resembled a coffee can, and had a written message on it, which the police did not describe.