https://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/09/arts/design/09palladio.html
‘Palladio and His Legacy’ at the Morgan Library - The New York Times
Architecture,Palladio  Andrea,Morgan Library & Museum,Art
April 8, 2010
8877
There are lots of gorgeous drawings in “Palladio and His Legacy: A Transatlantic Journey,” which opened last week at the Morgan Library & Museum — just enough to whet the appetites of die-hard Palladio fans.The exhibition offers fleeting glimpses into what made Andrea Palladio (1508-1580) such a radical figure: his creation of an architecture that adapted ancient Roman forms to the houses of the gentry and that would eventually serve as an imprimatur of legitimacy for monarchs and revolutionaries. But despite its title, the show never conveys the sweep of Palladio’s influence, which at its height extended from Constantinople to Madrid, London and Washington, and which continues to resonate today, more than 500 years after his death.This is not entirely the fault of the show’s organizer, Charles Hind. A curator at the Royal Institute of British Architecture, Mr. Hind had planned a much bigger show at the British Museum, but that was abandoned for financial reasons. Because of the comparatively small size of the Morgan galleries, Mr. Hind was forced to cut a key section on Palladio’s influence on British architecture of the 17th and 18th centuries, an omission that severely disrupts the narrative flow of the show.That narrative begins with an accident of timing. In the first years of the 16th century, the Republic of Venice was buffeted by wars with the Ottoman empire and the papal states. But not long after Palladio’s birth, the region began to settle into a long period of peace and prosperity, and its merchant-aristocrats were suddenly flush with money. Palladio was happy to help them spend it.Most architects of the time began as apprentices in the workshops of sculptors and artists; Palladio, too, started out working for a sculptor, in his native Padua — but in the role of stonemason, which may be partly responsible for his practical bent. Once he moved to Vicenza and started designing buildings, he became particularly adept at negotiating the region’s treacherous social and political waters, often working for clients who were enemies of one another.But his greatest gift may have been his balance of a mastery of classical traditions with an almost casual ability to reinterpret them when it suited his own needs. At a time when patrons were becoming increasingly at ease with public displays of personal wealth, for example, he began adding porticoes and domes to domestic architecture.The show includes exacting studies of Roman antiquity, including Palladio’s elegant pen-and-ink interpretation of a round temple described by Vitruvius and another of a decorative band grafted onto the base of a recycled column. The temple reflects Palladio’s idealized understanding of the rules underlying Roman architecture, the band the willingness of Roman architects to bend those rules when it suited them — both of which became fundamental themes in Palladio’s own architecture.This tension — between idealism and practicality — is what enlivens projects like the magnificent Redentore church  in Venice. Palladio initially proposed a circular plan united under a central dome, but church leaders insisted on a more orthodox layout, with a formal nave and transept. To accommodate them without ruining his design’s formal purity, Palladio performed a kind of visual trick, pushing the altar farther back and adding two small side bays, which created the illusion of a transept where there is none.And the tension is more generally evident in the clash between the idealism presented in his Four Books of Architecture — the books that brought him his international fame — and the reality of his buildings. Palladio knew that most people wouldn’t see the original buildings, so he often retouched the images in the books, smoothing out the rough edges. Drawings of the Palazzo Porto, for example, show a giant order of double-height columns extending around the entire courtyard, though in reality it runs only along one side. Other drawings of his expansion of the Palazzo Valmarana leave out the pre-existing 15th-century structures.Not even his greatest masterworks escaped this treatment. Few buildings in architectural history match the idealized symmetry and muscular proportions of the Villa Rotonda outside Vicenza. Its plan, with four classical porticoes projecting from below a central dome, is closer in spirit to the temples of antiquity than to a palazzo, as if elevating its inhabitants to the status of gods. (It was built for a retired priest, probably one of the few people who could tolerate its rigidly symmetrical layout.)Yet when Palladio reproduced the villa in his Four Books, he took pains to replace the shallow dome with a perfect semi-sphere, 20 feet taller than the one that was built. Some scholars have speculated that the lower version was a compromise, to avoid confusion with church architecture. A more likely explanation is Palladio’s understanding of the differences between architectural effect and effective marketing. He surely knew that the steep angle of the hill that leads up to the villa would have distorted the view of a taller dome; the current one reveals itself slowly as you climb up to it. In drawings, however, the low dome may have looked too feeble. The imaginary version is more imposing, its geometry purer.Whatever the case, Palladio’s Four Books were certainly powerful marketing tools, possibly unmatched in the history of architecture. Within a few decades of his death, Inigo Jones was drawing on them to translate Palladio’s work into a style more appropriate for a northern climate. Promoted by Lord Burlington, a powerful figure in the Georgian court, Palladianism eventually became the official style of the monarchy, an antidote to what was considered the lasciviousness of the Roman Catholic Baroque.Scholars have suggested that the great 16th-century Ottoman architect Sinan may have been influenced by Palladio’s books, which Sinan most likely would have been introduced to through Venice’s ambassador to Constantinople, Marcantonio Barbaro. (The admiration was probably mutual; the twin minarets atop Il Redentore were probably influenced by Sinan.)And of course there is Thomas Jefferson, who saw Palladio’s architecture, with its roots in antiquity, as an ideal emblem for a nascent democracy that had yet to develop an architecture of its own. Jefferson’s designs for both Monticello, his Virginia estate, and the Virginia State Capitol building are inspired by Palladio. His 1792 competition entry for the design of the White House, a classical facade topped by a glass dome, mixes Palladian precedents with references to contemporary French architecture — a weird if imaginative effort to link American democracy simultaneously to revolutionary France and the birth of the Roman republic.By then, Palladianism had begun to branch into wildly different directions. Two centuries later, our memories of the architect have been so grotesquely distorted by the endless number of vulgar knockoffs that it’s almost impossible to find the idealism at the work’s core. It’s become nothing but a style.The show corrects some of these misperceptions, even if its scope is too narrow to do away with them entirely.