https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/sports/football/colin-kaepernick-anthem-protest-nfl-roger-goodell.html
Colin Kaepernick’s Anthem Protest Leaves the N.F.L. Necessarily Uneasy - The New York Times
Football,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Kaepernick  Colin,Goodell  Roger,National Anthems,San Francisco 49ers
Sept. 7, 2016
3643
After nearly two weeks of conspicuous silence, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell on Wednesday finally weighed in on Colin Kaepernick’s continuing refusal to stand for the national anthem.No surprise: Goodell, the son of a United States senator and the point man for a group of teams owned mostly by white billionaires, doesn’t agree with Kaepernick.Or, as Goodell said in his carefully chosen and long-overdue words, “I don’t necessarily agree with what he’s doing.”The key word is “necessarily.”On the eve of the N.F.L.’s season opener, it’s a solid assumption that Goodell didn’t necessarily want to speak publicly about Kaepernick at all, which he finally did in an interview with The Associated Press. And it’s a good bet that he didn’t necessarily find it comfortable taking a position on either side of the issue, considering his less-than-stellar relationship with players and a need to appease conservative fans.So Goodell didn’t necessarily come down strongly one way or the other. He was — how shall I put it? — necessarily noncommittal.“I support our players when they want to see change in society, and we don’t live in a perfect society,” he said. “On the other hand, we believe very strongly in patriotism in the N.F.L. I personally believe very strongly in that.”On both of his hands, Goodell has a very sticky situation. But it’s a situation he had to face sooner or later.Ever since Kaepernick’s peaceful protest against racial inequality and police brutality spurred a national conversation in late August, the definition of patriotism — and compulsory patriotism, in the view of those who find it awkward — has stirred debate. That debate is likely to grow even more heated when the first weekend N.F.L. games are played Sunday, on the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.While athletes inside football and out have signaled their willingness to stand in solidarity with Kaepernick, his actions do not have universal support, even in his own league. But more and more players are talking about it. Ben Watson, a tight end with the Baltimore Ravens, said Monday on his Facebook page that he would stand for the anthem but that he respects Kaepernick’s decision not to do so.“His actions and similar actions by figures of the past and present are a vital part of our journey and a key component of the equation for social change and should be respected as such,” Watson wrote. “From the country’s inception, such displays against the status quo are distinctly American.”You know what else is distinctly American? Football. That’s part of Goodell’s problem.Despite the N.F.L.’s insistence that football is growing into an international game, it’s still an American idea willfully cloaked in Americana. Fighter jets routinely fly over stadiums before games. Flags, some fantastically oversize, are unfurled before every kickoff. Color guards march in. The national anthem is sung.But it’s that national anthem that has been problematic lately for Goodell and a league that loves to wrap itself in the flag. Over the past two weeks, Kaepernick’s protest has started a discussion that the commissioner and his league probably didn’t want to have.Eric Reid, Kaepernick’s 49ers teammate, has joined Kaepernick in his protest. So has Seattle Seahawks cornerback Jeremy Lane. Jets wide receiver Brandon Marshall, on WFAN radio on Tuesday, called Kaepernick “one of the biggest patriots out there because he’s standing up for human rights.”As more and more athletes find their voices, Kaepernick and some of his colleagues have moved so far out of the football box that players are now casually talking about constitutional law with the ease they normally display in using the N.F.L.’s military-tinged language of formations and end-arounds and long bombs.The problem, though, is that the N.F.L. has not always been aboveboard in its links to the military, and that is another reason Kaepernick’s stance is touching on a sensitive issue.In raising the issue of patriotism, Kaepernick — perhaps unwittingly — shined a spotlight on the days when N.F.L. teams quietly became business partners with the United States military. For years, the Defense Department paid N.F.L. teams millions of dollars in exchange for the right to have military members stage homecoming events for troops, or unfurl the flag during pregame festivities.Other pro sports teams were involved in the same kind of pocketbook patriotism, but the N.F.L. was the biggest beneficiary, receiving more than $6 million in taxpayer dollars over a four-year period that began in 2011. Senators Jeff Flake and John McCain of Arizona were among those disgusted by the practice after it was uncovered, and they helped make it illegal last year.To the N.F.L.’s credit, it quickly conducted an audit. On Wednesday, the league said it had repaid taxpayers $723,734 last spring, doling out the amount auditors deemed to be inappropriate payments. But as the season opens on Thursday, the N.F.L.’s idea of patriotism — fake or real, paid or free — and Kaepernick’s idea of it remain at opposite ends of the field.“I think they are probably upset and probably worrying about what this does to the firmament of their pregame ceremonies,” Robert Boland, a former N.F.L. agent who teaches sports law at Ohio University, said of league officials. “This is probably not a situation that they want to get into too deeply, given the implications and the bent of society right now. But this issue is going to come to a greater head. I don’t know when, but it will happen.”Boland recalled what Bill Shannon, a former public relations director for Madison Square Garden, decided to do in the 1960s and ’70s when sports officials grew worried about Vietnam protests during the national anthem. The Garden’s lights were dimmed so only the anthem singer could be seen, under a spotlight.It was a neat little trick, but it can’t be done during a daytime football game. For now, the spotlight will remain on Kaepernick and whoever decides to join him — and on the N.F.L.’s claim that it represents much that is good about America.In this debate, we don’t necessarily have to agree on who is right, or who is wrong. But to Goodell’s dismay, it’s a debate that won’t necessarily disappear soon.