https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/07/world/asia/north-korea-china-hydrogen-test.html
North Korea’s Hydrogen Bomb Claim Strains Ties With China - The New York Times
China,North Korea,Xi Jinping,Nuclear Weapons,Nuclear Tests,Earthquakes,Embargoes and Sanctions,International Relations,Kim Jong-un,Far East  South and Southeast Asia and Pacific Areas
Jan. 6, 2016
6252
BEIJING —  North Korea’s test of a nuclear bomb on Wednesday seemed aimed at antagonizing a familiar adversary, the United States. The army spoke of the need to ward off “imperialist aggressors,” and a television commentator warned that foreigners were intent on destroying the country’s way of life.But North Korea’s decision also had a more surprising target: China, its neighbor and chief ally for six decades, which had recently sought to forge closer ties.By proceeding with its nuclear test about 50 miles from the Chinese border, North Korea took a gamble that China, its largest trading partner and economic lifeline, would not react with austere sanctions, as many countries have urged.In doing so, it dealt a rare setback to President Xi Jinping, who had hoped a charm offensive over the past six months would ensure stability in the North.“North Korea is just thumbing its nose at China,” said Douglas H. Paal, the director of the Asia program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington. “That’s got to produce a reaction.”As recently as October, China had received assurances from North Korea that it would stop its nuclear tests. Beijing had agreed to send a senior official to a military parade in the North Korean capital, Pyongyang — the first such visit since Kim Jong-un became leader in 2011 — partly on the condition that the North would refrain from nuclear tests, several American diplomats said.On Wednesday, officials in Beijing were furious.“China strongly opposes this act,” Hua Chunying, a spokeswoman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said in unusually harsh remarks at a news conference. “China will firmly push for denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.”Mr. Xi is in a difficult position. He is under intense pressure to inflict harsh economic punishment on North Korea, but many Chinese worry that any resulting instability could seep back into their territory. He also faces new questions about China’s efforts to curry favor with Mr. Kim, whom many Chinese regard as a bizarre, bumbling figure.Mr. Xi must also reckon with the prospect that actions by the North could galvanize countries like the United States, Japan and South Korea into strengthening military forces in the Pacific, just as China is seeking to assert its dominance in the region.“This is precisely what China does not need,” said Rory Medcalf, head of the National Security College at Australian National University. “If there is one issue guaranteed to refocus U.S. strategic attention on Asia, it is a North Korean nuclear provocation, especially one purported to bring Pyongyang’s destructive capabilities to a whole new level.”On Wednesday, Chinese officials sidestepped questions about whether they would level economic sanctions against North Korea, by paring shipments of oil, for instance, or food. China is North Korea’s largest economic ally, with trade between the two countries having totaled $6.4 billion in 2014.Cheng Xiaohe, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing, said China had several ways of increasing economic pressure, including by limiting the number of tourists allowed to visit North Korea or by reducing Chinese imports of commodities like coal.But he said the leadership in Beijing should be cautious before resorting to more drastic measures.“If China unilaterally imposes sanctions, it will have no more tricks,” Professor Cheng said. “Putting more economic pressure on North Korea might also lead to the fall of Kim, the collapse of the regime and all kinds of unpredictable situations China does not wish to see.”China and North Korea have been allies since the Korean War, when Chinese Communist troops fought to defend the North. Since then, China has helped sustain the rule of the Kim family (Mr. Kim’s father and grandfather governed before him), providing economic aid and political support, even in the face of heavy criticism.The relationship has become more strained in recent years, as North Korea has pushed forward with its nuclear program in defiance of warnings from the United Nations. After the North said it had carried out a nuclear test in 2013, Mr. Xi warned that world peace should not be threatened by the actions of a single country.In recent months, Mr. Xi appeared to recalibrate his strategy, seemingly persuaded that Mr. Kim, despite his rash manner, would stay in power much longer than the Chinese had anticipated.Mr. Xi, 62, has indicated in private meetings that he does not have a warm relationship with Mr. Kim, 32, according to Mr. Paal, who served as an American diplomat in Asia. “Here’s this kid who’s in a very weak position vis-à-vis China that has managed to really stick it to him,” he said.But Mr. Xi made an effort in recent months to change that dynamic, sending a senior Chinese official, Liu Yunshan, to Pyongyang in October to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the founding of Mr. Kim’s governing party. The Chinese government sent Mr. Liu on the condition that the North halt its nuclear tests, refrain from launching missiles and tone down its inflammatory language, Mr. Paal said.Mr. Xi also sent a personal message, extolling Mr. Kim for “positive progress in developing the economy, improving livelihoods and so on.”In December, apparently in another gesture of good will, Mr. Kim sent a North Korean pop band to Beijing to perform. But the group canceled at the last minute, suggesting that tensions between the countries had resurfaced.Bonnie S. Glaser, senior adviser for Asia at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said the troubles with North Korea would add to a long list of challenges for Mr. Xi, including a slowing economy and rising tensions in the South China Sea.“Xi doesn’t want instability on the border any more than his predecessors did,” she said. “China will keep North Korea at arm’s length diplomatically, but economic ties will continue to develop.”Still, some analysts said that Mr. Xi might be forced to take a tougher stance against North Korea, given the threat posed by its nuclear program.“Nonproliferation is their No. 1 concern, rather than the worry of losing bargaining power or leverage to deal with the United States,” said Cheng Li, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “This is a major change under Xi.”L. Gordon Flake, chief executive of the Perth USAsia Center at the University of Western Australia, said the North Koreans “know that the Chinese fear instability more than they fear anything else.”“They have been uniquely and remarkably unresponsive to Chinese demands,” he said.In China, many people have soured on the Communist Party’s alliance with the North, though some say it is important to have friends in the region.On Wednesday, many said they were growing anxious about the North’s erratic behavior.In Yanji, a border city, residents reported feeling tables and chairs shake during the blast from the weapon test, which registered as a magnitude 5.1 seismic event. People flooded online forums, trying to piece together what had happened.“Will the city be contaminated?” one post said. “Will the radiation harm us? Are we safe?”