https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/dining/kismet-la-chef-sara-kramer.html
Sara Kramer, a New York Native, Finds Herself at Home in Los Angeles - The New York Times
Restaurants,Kramer  Sara (Chef),Chefs,Kismet (Los Angeles  Calif  Restaurant),Glasserie (Brooklyn  NY  Restaurant),Food,Greenpoint (Brooklyn  NY),Los Angeles (Calif)
July 7, 2017
1105
LOS ANGELES — This city suits Sara Kramer. Sitting at the counter of Kismet, the airy restaurant she opened this year with Sarah Hymanson on a not-quite-fashionable stretch of Hollywood Boulevard on the edge of Los Feliz, she talks about Southern California ingredients with the same casual boosterism that makes real estate agents bring up the climate.“Local citrus, local dates,” said Ms. Kramer, 31, a native of New York. “This is really the ideal place for us to be making this kind of food.”By “this kind of food,” Ms. Kramer meant her elegant approach to Israeli cooking, a deeply personal take on a cuisine that feels a little exotic in spite of the familiarity of its Mediterranean flavors. “I love this flaky malawach,” she said of a crispy, buttery, supple pastrylike bread you pull apart with your fingers. She said she grew up eating malawach made by her mother, who is Peruvian and Israeli. “It was such a weekend treat.”At Kismet, the malawach is called “flaky bread.” It comes as a part of what is essentially a meal-size dessert, served with labneh (thick yogurt made with kefir cultures), preserved lemon and honey, or as part of a savory dish, again with labneh but accompanied this time by a soft-boiled egg, zhoug (a spicy, garlicky condiment) and crushed tomatoes. The labneh is made in-house, and the zhoug is from a recipe Ms. Kramer credits to the mother of her father’s best friend.“We can put it on the menu year-round because we always have tomatoes,” Ms. Kramer said. “Being able to do that here is amazing.”It wasn’t as simple when Ms. Kramer was the chef at Glasserie, a restaurant that opened in June 2013 in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. While it was an instant hit, she left the next February. New York, she said, is “where you ‘go’ to make it, and so I never ‘went’ anywhere because it’s where I’m from.” So she decided to move to Los Angeles. Two years later, she opened Madcapra, a falafel stand in the century-old Grand Central Market food hall in downtown Los Angeles, with Ms. Hymanson, who also cooked at Glasserie.“New York grinds you down in a lot of ways,” Ms. Kramer said. “New York is also the most awesome place in the world, but, if you grow up there and do not have an experience elsewhere, you could not appreciate it as much as you really should.”Sitting inside Kismet, it’s easy to appreciate the appeal of being in Los Angeles. While Sade plays on the sound system and a breeze blows through the open windows, a casual but stylish crowd lingers over whatever you call the meal between lunch and dinner.It’s the right audience for this food. Seemingly simple dishes contain complex flavors: Persian cucumbers are mixed with rose water-flavored labneh, lightly pickled cherries, and za’atar, made with parsley seeds, which are easier to find in the garden section of a hardware store than in a specialty market.It’s how Ms. Kramer cooks at home, where she might grill a chicken, let it cool, pull it apart and toss it with a tomato and herb salad made with cilantro, mint and different kinds of basil. “It’s patio-dining, rosé-weather food,” Ms. Kramer said, before correcting herself. “I should actually probably say riesling because it’s spicy, and because people don’t drink enough good riesling.”The salad’s secret is its dressing, made with olive oil and lemon juice; the jus from the rested chicken; “crisp,” the spicy Chinese condiment (the version at Kismet has Mediterranean spices: coriander, fennel, cardamom); powdered shallot (you can use powdered onion at home); and sumac (which she first encountered relatively late in life).“I don’t have a very strong Israeli identity, personally, which gives me the freedom to use these flavors and not be so bound by tradition,” Ms. Kramer said. “I feel this is a fairly typical answer in terms of creativity, but I don’t think it needs to be anything but.”Recipes: Chicken and Tomato Salad With Sumac and Herbs | Cucumbers With Labneh and CherriesAnd to Drink ...With this chicken salad, constructed to be refreshing on a hot day, you want a wine that will be equally invigorating. That leaves many choices, some of them obvious, like dry, savory rosé, lovely with the herbs and spices. Any number of lively white wines will do well, so long as they are not overoaked or too fruity — sauvignon blancs from the Loire Valley, or Muscadet, or even a chardonnay from the Mâconnais. A different side of chardonnay, Chablis, would be terrific. So would an Etna Bianco from Sicily, an assyrtiko from Santorini, maybe even a good albariño from Spain. An aligoté from France would be great. You can switch it up with a red if you like. Pick one that can be served cool, like a Beaujolais. ERIC ASIMOVFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.