https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/02/upshot/how-an-adverse-supreme-court-ruling-would-send-obamacare-into-a-tailspin.html
How an Adverse Supreme Court Ruling Would Send Obamacare Into a Tailspin - The New York Times
Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Supreme Court (US),States (US)
Feb. 27, 2015
2681
Even if you don’t receive Obamacare subsidies, you could still be harmed by the Supreme Court case that could take them away.A court ruling for the plaintiffs in the case, King v. Burwell, would have wide-reaching effects for the individual insurance markets in around three dozen states. The approximately six million people currently receiving subsidies in those states would be hit hard, of course. But so could the millions who now buy their own insurance without subsidies. The results could be surging prices and reduced choice for health insurance shoppers across the income spectrum.It’s a phenomenon some health policy experts call the “death spiral,” the result of an insurance pool getting smaller and sicker as more healthy people leave an increasingly expensive health insurance market.The question before the court on Wednesday is whether the federal government can keep distributing subsidies in states that failed to set up their own health insurance marketplaces. For most people receiving subsidies, the full cost of insurance plans would be unaffordable, meaning that only people with the most serious health conditions would be likely to keep buying it.But the loss of all those low-income, relatively healthy people could destabilize the individual health insurance markets for everyone else. No one knows for sure how bad things would get, but economic forecasters estimate that, on average, prices in the affected states would rise by at least a third, and some 1.4 million unsubsidized people would leave the increasingly expensive market.The health law was intended to make the individual health insurance market more fair and accessible than it was before the Affordable Care Act passed. The law requires health insurers to sell their products to anyone willing to buy — even people with known diseases that are likely to mean big health care bills. The law also limits how much insurers can vary premiums they charge to different people; insurers can charge higher prices to older customers than younger ones, but they can’t charge a higher price to a patient with cancer than one who is healthy.But to balance out all the sick people that those provisions help, the law creates inducements for healthy customers to buy insurance. The biggest one is the tax credits that are available on a sliding scale to middle-income Americans. And there’s the individual mandate: Anyone who can afford insurance and doesn’t sign up will face a tax penalty. Taken together, those provisions help people with limited means afford insurance premiums, and they serve to discourage people from waiting until they’re already sick to buy insurance.Upset that balance, and the policy structure will become broken.If the Supreme Court rules that the tax credits can only be awarded in certain states, insurance will become immediately unaffordable for many people getting the subsidies. About 87 percent of people in the affected states qualify for some kind of subsidy, and, in some cases, the subsidy covers the entire cost of the insurance premium. The ruling will also effectively knock out the mandate, since the law says that no one can be punished for failing to have insurance if none is affordable.You might think that such a ruling would leave the market unchanged for the consumers who were always paying their insurance premiums out of pocket. But a small number of people now getting subsidies will find a way to buy insurance — sick people — and their choice has implications for everyone else in the market.“The effect is likely to pull in these very sick people,” said Christine Eibner, a senior economist at the RAND Corporation, whose calculations estimate that prices could rise by an average of 47 percent.We don’t have to speculate to imagine a universe with the health law’s insurer regulations but with no subsidies. In the 1990s, a handful of states forced insurers to cover everyone but did not provide subsidies. In all of those states, prices for insurance went up substantially and the number of people in the market declined. Sicker customers, who had been shut out of the unregulated market, bought insurance. Healthier ones, facing increasing prices, fled it. Insurance companies also often stopped selling individual insurance in those states, finding the line of business unprofitable and the size of the market too small to be worth the risk.Pre-Obamacare, the states with the highest individual health insurance rates — including Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York — all had similar insurance regulations. When subsidies became available, insurance prices actually went down in New York by 50 percent.“We have learned pretty quickly that that policy environment doesn’t work well,” said Mark Hall, a professor of law at Wake Forest University. Mr. Hall wrote a series of papers examining the effects of reform on various state markets. If the court eliminates the subsidies, “it would be a big mess” in the affected states, he said.“Death spiral” probably overstates the likely effect in some states. As my colleague Josh Barro has written, New York’s individual health insurance market did remain intact, in some ways — it was just absurdly expensive, and it shut out a lot of people. That was the experience in some other states, too. Kentucky, however, fared worse: More than 40 insurers left the market when the legislature passed its reforms. The law was rescinded.History is a good reminder that results are unpredictable and variable. Some markets could collapse, while others might achieve some new, more expensive equilibrium. Anthony Lo Sasso, a professor at the University of Illinois, Chicago, who has studied the states that tried these policies, said the ones that fared best tended to be the ones that heavily regulated their insurers in other ways. He places few of the federal exchange states in that category.Whatever happens is likely to happen very fast. In theory, the “death spiral” occurs slowly, over time, as customers become sicker and prices increase in response. But that’s probably not how things would happen in the Obamacare marketplaces.Insurers can set their prices only once a year, and most customers have a small window each year to buy coverage. That means that insurers are likely to hike their prices substantially for 2016, anticipating their changing customer base. Depending on how worried they get, those high prices could become a self-fulfilling prophecy.