https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/arts/frieze-new-york-presents-global-cutting-edge-art.html
Frieze New York Presents Global, Cutting-Edge Art - The New York Times
Art,Frieze New York,Schoneich  Fabian,Proctor  Jacob,New York City,Frieze Art Fair
May 4, 2017
952
Conversation-setting modern and contemporary art galleries from cities across the world will transport some of their most striking and valuable works to 256 acres of parkland in the middle of the East and Harlem Rivers May 5 to 7 for Frieze New York.Upward of 200 galleries will participate in this year’s international art fair, which grew out of the success of a similar festival in London. As the event’s profile continues to rise, its organizers have attracted leading galleries like David Zwirner of New York, the Modern Institute of Glasgow and Sprüth Magers of Berlin. Scattered performance pieces and interactive installations also enliven the proceedings.But one of the major draws of Frieze New York, taking place in Randalls Island Park, is its Frame section, a space reserved for solo shows of promising artists, mounted by the young galleries that represent them.Jacob Proctor, the curator of the Neubauer Collegium for Culture and Society at the University of Chicago, and Fabian Schöneich, the curator of the Portikus contemporary art center in Frankfurt, make recommendations to the fair organizers about galleries’ applications for Frame. Nudges from the two men may also provide the impetus for a gallery to apply. Their suggestions on which artists in a gallery’s stable would make for the most promising bid carry significant weight with the applicants.In the Frame section, many thrilling showrooms and their artists will receive their first broad exposure. Here are a few highlights.The mix of galleries included in Frame always skews international, and this year, the 17 up-and-coming galleries represent 13 different countries. Many are in cities — Cape Town, Warsaw, Guatemala City — not traditionally thought of as art centers.Galeria Jaqueline Martins, from São Paulo, Brazil, works to remind the public of overlooked or forgotten South American artists from the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s, according to Mr. Proctor. Partly in recognition of the extraordinary legwork involved in restoring one artist, the São Paulo native Hudinilson Urbano Jr., to the attention of audiences, Frieze is allowing Ms. Martins to show his work in Frame in New York — even after exhibiting at London’s fair.“It’s an important artist, it’s the first introduction into this context, in New York, and it’s the gallery that has done all the background,” Mr. Proctor said.Mr. Urbano, who died in 2013, was a multimedia artist whose tool of choice was a photocopy machine. In the 1980s he created works that fragmented his body into disorienting black-and-white close-ups — his hairy chest, the soles of his feet, genitalia — and confronted topics that many young artists are grappling with now.“It’s very powerful work, in terms of dealing with questions about gender and sexuality and identity, all of which are big, front-and-center important issues,” Mr. Proctor said.Galerie Bernhard of Zurich is also presenting a hometown artist, Jan Vorisek, whose work is shot through with technological elements.Mr. Vorisek’s creations are the descendants of disparate artistic traditions: performance, installation and sculpture, among others. His assemblages, pieced together from used and found materials, have a way of breathing life into their constituent parts. (Sound-emitting devices provide an added jolt of vivacity.)Although there is not much digital work among the 2017 Frame presenters, Mr. Proctor pointed to the Vorisek works as representing an interesting kind of hybrid, with their integration of sound, sculpture and notation.“There’s a kind of kinetic aspect to it,” he said.Galerie Joseph Tang, a Right Bank newcomer in central Paris, is seeking to unlock some kinetic energy of its own with a solo show highlighting the large-scale installations of the young Latvian artist Daiga Grantina, whose potential in the United States, Mr. Proctor said, has yet to be realized.After having participated in several significant exhibitions in Europe over the last few years, Ms. Grantina has a great deal of critical momentum on the Continent right now, he said. But given the extreme scarcity of opportunities to see her work in the United States, she remains largely unknown to American enthusiasts and collectors.“That’s one that I’m personally, as a curator, I’m excited to see,” Mr. Proctor said.Her works reflect a preoccupation with alternately capturing and throwing off light. Her reliance on nontraditional sculptural materials to achieve her desired effects is of a piece with a broader trend in contemporary art to reach beyond the usual media.New York City can be a challenging place for fledgling galleries. Still, some thrive.Mr. Proctor said he thought two of the best would be in this year’s Frame section.One of them, Bridget Donahue, a second-floor space on Bowery in Manhattan, is enjoying the spotlights that have fallen on one of its artists, Susan Cianciolo, this year. In addition to being selected for a solo show in Frieze New York’s Frame section, Ms. Cianciolo is also featured in the Whitney Museum of American Art’s closely scrutinized — and critically lauded — biennial, continuing through June 11.At Frieze, in a showcase offering an overview of some two decades of her art, Ms. Cianciolo will present a varied array of works on paper: watercolors and drawings, yes, but also garment sketches and recipes. She is also a fashion designer who studied at the Parsons School of Design, and for the Whitney Biennial she revisited her 2001 project “Run Restaurant” for an installation within the museum’s own restaurant, a ground-floor dining room called Untitled.Bridget Donahue, a first-time exhibitor with any Frieze art fair, plans to display Ms. Cianciolo’s energetic leapfrogging between interest areas using vintage brass hanging implements in an alluringly immersive show.“She’s never disappeared from people’s minds,” Mr. Proctor said, adding that Ms. Cianciolo has “come back in a really strong way in the last year or two.”Chapter NY, the other New York City gallery participating in Frame, elected to showcase the work of Los Angeles-based Milano Chow. For a young artist (she is 29), Ms. Chow puts out work in a traditional vein. Chapter’s presentation will include eight new illusionistic graphite drawings depicting, as it would happen, frames.Mr. Proctor has a deep enthusiasm for Ms. Chow’s work. Had any of the other galleries representing her proposed a solo show of her work, he said they could have earned his recommendation, too.Coordination between the various galleries generally keeps such overlap from happening, but it speaks to the strength of her work that, in Mr. Proctor’s appraisal, hers is art that needs to be seen.