https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/22/nyregion/officers-killer-took-aim-at-new-york-city-of-today.html
Officers’ Killer Took Aim at New York City of Today - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Liu  Wenjian (1982-2014),Ramos  Rafael (1974-2014),Police Department (NYC),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Race and Ethnicity,New York City,Jones  Waverly M (1938-71),Piagentini  Joseph (1942-71)
Dec. 21, 2014
7151
If you happen to walk the Macombs Dam Bridge, which crosses the Harlem River between the Bronx and Manhattan near 155th Street, you may notice a staircase that drops down to the street on the Manhattan side. Nearby are the Colonial Park Houses.On a May night in 1971, two police officers, Joseph Piagentini and Waverly Jones, were killed in an ambush there, shot in the back multiple times as they returned to their car after answering a call. It is said that the staircase was used by a lookout for the killers, and as a getaway route.An eighth-grade classmate of mine lived in those houses, and he called off plans for me to come by in the days after the shooting. His father said it was not safe.Once or twice a year I walk across that bridge while coming home from Yankee Stadium and pass those stairs, and from the peaceful summer nights of 2014 think back to that moment and that world, more than four decades ago. That same week, two police officers guarding the home of the Manhattan district attorney were attacked with a machine gun; they survived critical injuries. Eight months later, two other officers, Gregory Foster and Rocco Laurie, were assassinated as they patrolled the Lower East Side, gunned down from behind.In an instant this weekend, it seemed as though 43 years had not passed, and that it was 1971 again.The head of the principal police union said that the mayor, Bill de Blasio, had blood on his hands; police officers turned and showed him their backs when he arrived at the hospital. A former mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and a former governor, George E. Pataki, blamed Mr. de Blasio for fostering a climate of violence against police officers. They say he indulged protesters who have been demonstrating over the lack of charges after the death of Eric Garner, a Staten Island man who died in July while being arrested.New York City in the early 1970s was riven and dangerous, its ordinary criminal activity outdone by political violence. The attacks on the police officers had been carried out by elements of a radical group called the Black Liberation Army. “It’s open season on the cops in this city,” Ed Kiernan, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, said after the shootings of Officers Jones and Piagentini, and he urged all officers to carry shotguns, bringing them from home if necessary.On Saturday, a gunman shot his ex-girlfriend near Baltimore, then came to Brooklyn and opened fire into a police car parked on Tompkins Avenue.Inside were Officers Wenjian Liu, 32, and Rafael Ramos, 40, one a Chinese-American, the other a New Yorker of Puerto Rican origin.The killer was shooting at the New York City of 2014.The officers in the patrol cars of New York City come from 50 countries and speak scores of languages. The Police Department looks more like the city than ever. In two generations, as the city was becoming ever safer, the Police Department utterly changed its makeup. Of course, to the person who killed Officers Liu and Ramos, just as to the people who killed Officers Jones and Piagentini, Foster and Laurie, the only color that mattered was blue. All of them, with skin tones that ran from black to white, got bullets to the head.To look upon social media now is to see a river of rage, a contempt for racial others and political others that is raw or scarcely disguised. The official news conferences get no better. It makes the heart sick.Late in the afternoon on Sunday, a woman named Lucy Ramos, an aunt of Officer Ramos, stepped before a group of reporters. She thanked people for their support for his family, and extended condolences to the family of Officer Liu.With her next words, she suggested that there had to be ways that would not make the terrible events of the weekend even worse.“I hope and pray that we can reflect on this tragic loss of life that has occurred,” Ms. Ramos said, “so that we can move forward and find an amicable path to a peaceful coexistence.”