http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/05/arts/music/review-a-softy-drake-at-ovo-fest-comes-out-swinging-at-meek-mill.html
Review: Drake, at OVO Fest, Comes Out Swinging at Meek Mill - The New York Times
Music,Festivals,Molson Canadian Amphitheatre,Toronto (Ontario),Rap and Hip-Hop,Meek Mill,Drake (Rapper),West  Kanye,Williams  Pharrell
Aug. 4, 2015
6787
TORONTO —  This year’s OVO Fest truly began about three hours before Drake took the stage at the Molson Canadian Amphitheatre here on Monday night, when a picture of him preparing for the concert while wearing a Free Meek Mill T-shirt slipped onto the Internet.Over the last two weeks, Drake and Meek Mill have been engaged in a war of words, a rarity in hip-hop these days and a referendum on the genre’s evolving value systems. Meek Mill accused Drake of using a ghostwriter on a song they recently collaborated on, something Meek Mill and his traditionalist values couldn’t abide. He probably saw Drake — a rapper who also sings and freely emotes and generally isn’t much preoccupied with the tenets of the genre as it was in harsher times — as an easy target no one had yet hit squarely.In February, Drake released “If You’re Reading This It’s Too Late,” which is heavy with the stresses of life at hip-hop’s top. It’s easily the most anxious, resentful and muscled music Drake has ever made — the stuff of fighting, not retreating.So Meek Mill shouldn’t have been surprised when Drake replied to his provocations with a pair of songs, “Charged Up” and “Back to Back,” that tackled him head-on. And he shouldn’t have been surprised when Drake opened his performance on Monday, the third and last night of the festival that carries his label’s name, with those songs. During “Back to Back,” the huge screen behind Drake played an endless scroll of memes insulting Meek Mill, the kind found all over Instagram and Twitter in recent weeks. Online, this would have been called a slide show, or click bait; here, it was a bludgeon.This was the sixth time Drake has hosted OVO Fest here in his hometown, and with this year’s performance, he fully turned the annual show into his personal Summer Jam. In years past, the festival carried a heavy dose of local pride and special guests galore; this year, it offered all that and also a place for the host to settle scores.Drake’s addressing of Meek Mill played like “If You’re Reading This” come to life. But later in the night, too, he remained focused almost exclusively on the tougher parts of his catalog — bionic choruses, punchy rapping, almost no singing to speak of. Notably, he performed only three songs released prior to December 2013. Before then, he was still toggling between hard and soft identities. Those songs were also the only tracks released commercially on one of his studio albums (if you accept that “If You’re Reading This” is a mixtape — a commercially released mixtape — as Drake has said).The Drake of the last 20 or so months has been extremely prolific, releasing songs — individually or in small batches, some originals, some remixes — that have revealed new sides to his creative approach. As a result, his career is best understood not in terms of eras but in terms of moments. (The same is true of his merchandise. If you went to the OVO store during the festival, you could buy a T-shirt with an image of a fully charged iPhone battery on the back, a reference to “Charged Up.”)Which explains why, even though a migraine tension permeated “If You’re Reading This,” every song Drake has released in the last few weeks, even the ones taking aim at Meek Mill, has found him sounding casual, like someone who’s learned how to breathe evenly amid tumult.A self-aware oversharer, Drake is the ideal musician for an era of relentless self-documentation. He’s not waiting around to deliver grand statements; he’d much rather detail his journey bit by bit, which is why even a show like this, largely restricted to the current phase of his career, can still contain multitudes: pugnacious tracks from “If You’re Reading This”; levelheaded Meek Mill disses; exuberant guest verses on songs by Big Sean and Nicki Minaj; clever remixes of Fetty Wap’s “My Way,” ILoveMakonnen’s “Tuesday” and D.R.A.M.’s “Cha Cha,” which Drake has remade as “Hotline Bling,” a standout reggae-lite song about an old flame gone cold.Twice Drake ceded the stage for long stretches to artists he described as his idols. First came the undeniable Kanye West, who for a half-hour performed some of his most aggrieved material — “New Slaves,” “Black Skinhead,” “Can’t Tell Me Nothing” — under a phalanx of spotlights. Even as he was clearly losing his voice, he kept shouting. Mr. West is a case study for how hip-hop success can toughen even the most nuanced artists. The puffed-chest persona that Drake is projecting now? Mr. West has been there twice, maybe three times. No rapper is more experienced at navigating the skepticism of others than he is, to the point at which he no longer responds with outbursts and indignation, but instead knowing smiles.Later came Pharrell Williams, the superproducer turned unexpected recent pop star. Unlike Mr. West, a stage natural who’s completely free with his body, Mr. Williams was tightly wound. He looked uncomfortable rapping older songs, only loosening up when singing more recent material, like “Get Lucky,” his nu-disco collaboration with Daft Punk, and his new single, “Freedom” — which is somewhere between swing jazz and Soho’s “Hot Music.” On “Freedom,” Mr. Williams shrieked like Little Richard and was met with a palpable lack of interest. At no point during the night was the crowd quieter.Together, Mr. Williams, Mr. West and Drake constitute a genuine alternative history of hip-hop’s development, one that favors nonmacho creative eccentrics and bypasses the typical binaries: gangster vs. conscious, mainstream vs. underground. All three are stars who have found grace in the in-between spaces.Their success has also opened doors for others, whether someone like Future, whose mainstream acceptance was kick-started by a Drake remix four years ago and who made a surprise appearance here early Monday night, or J. Cole, who headlined the festival’s previous night with his sometimes awkward, sometimes convincing declarations of modesty.Mr. West and Mr. Williams also encapsulate the two main paths available to an artist like Drake once he peaks. Mr. West remains a provocateur, not eager to jump into fights but with no problem starting them. Mr. Williams, on the other hand, exudes Zen, as if he exists on a plane just high enough to miss the details of what’s happening down below but not so high that he can’t be seen.Drake, the onetime softy, is not choosing the easy route. At the end of the night, he performed a string of songs from “If You’re Reading This” (with a quick return to “Back to Back” sprinkled in). Included were “Know Yourself” and “10 Bands”: In recent days, reference demos for both songs recorded by Quentin Miller, the ghostwriter Meek Mill named, were leaked online. (If Drake had brought Mr. Miller out onstage at this point, that might have been the ultimate act of power and defiance.)And there were other taunts, too. Drake teased “3Peat,” an as-yet-unreleased song dissing Meek Mill. At the end of “Know Yourself,” he brought out dozens of his friends to chant the song’s chorus, a display of unity and strength (and something of a warning). And when he performed “Energy,” he sang some parts of it, including the refrain “got a lot of enemies,” as if to demonstrate that softening the delivery didn’t soften the content, or the man, one bit.