https://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/09/realestate/09livi.html
Living in the Yonkers Waterfront District - It Had the Setting; Now It Has the Housing - The New York Times
Yonkers (NY),Area Planning and Renewal,Housing,Real Estate
March 9, 2008
8831
Like a caterpillar undergoing a metamorphosis, the down-and-out industrial waterfront of Yonkers is shedding its old skin.These days, sleek midrise residences are going up where factories once spewed fumes. Grand old buildings have been put to new use, including a three-story trolley barn, built in 1900 in the Renaissance Revival style, which now contains loft units and a fitness studio that offers belly-dancing classes.The Metro-North station has been restored to its 1911 Beaux-Arts self; its reputation as a locus for prostitution and drug dealing is now a memory.Leading out to the water, a Victorian-era pier — less than a decade ago a site where homeless people gathered — is a New York Water Taxi embarkation point for Wall Street. It is also home to a glass-enclosed 260-seat restaurant overlooking the Palisades and other Hudson River marvels.There is more on the drawing board for this area, which encompasses the waterfront radiating northward from Getty Square, the core of this 18-square-mile city. But already it is attracting new kinds of residents, some of them young professionals whom the area’s investors call “urban pioneers.” As a catalyst for change in this city of nearly 200,000 (the fourth-largest in the state), the neighborhood has fed expectations among officials like Mayor Philip A. Amicone, who knows all too well its history of repeated revitalization attempts.“I’ve lived in this city since I was 2 years old,” said the mayor, 59, “and they’ve been talking about redeveloping the downtown for as long as I can remember. Now, for the first time, that possibility seems real, especially since more than $1 billion has been invested in recent years along the waterfront.”The investment is luring people like Hope Maddox, 24, who cited not only the rent (especially affordable compared with New York City’s), but also the 30-minute commute to Grand Central Terminal and an urban setting reminiscent of Brooklyn and Hoboken. Internet-savvy like many of her new neighbors, Ms. Maddox discovered Getty Square through Craigslist.org and other Web sites.A new job as an assistant fashion designer on Seventh Avenue in Manhattan was what brought Ms. Maddox to the New York area from Tuscaloosa, Ala. “It’s my dream apartment,” she said of her studio with its synthetic grass patio, which she moved into last month at 66Main, which has “green” geothermal heating and cooling. Her rent is $1,400 a month. “I couldn’t have found something I could afford in the city itself,” she said. “I would have had to share.” Yet, the glitz and glamour of a new downtown notwithstanding, some worry that in the rebuilding process, too much of the old city’s architecture and history will be swept away.Nortrud Wolf Spero, the owner of a local real estate company, is of two minds about the revival. Prices are rising as a result of the development, especially in single-family home areas near Getty Square, where she sells property. But as a trustee of the Yonkers Historical Society and a member of the City Council’s Green Policy Task Force, she said, she worries “that in the business of renewal, the past could get lost.”Another worry is the displacement of less affluent residents. “Upscale is nice,” she said, “but an area should retain its diversity.”WHAT YOU’LL FINDThroughout the area, the refurbished and the decaying exist side by side.There is the strip of restaurants near the acclaimed new X2O Xaviars on the Hudson; along Main Street, there are others, in addition to a nail salon and a boutique, that have opened in response to the construction.Yet along Buena Vista Avenue, less than a block from Main Street, buildings like the ornate Romanesque-and-Gothic Teutonia Hall, once a fraternal gathering site for immigrants, stand empty. Crime remains a problem, acknowledged Lt. Diane Hessler, a spokeswoman for the Police Department, although it has eased somewhat. According to statistics posted on the department’s Web site, 314 crimes against individuals (like assault, for example) were committed during 2006 in the Fourth Precinct, of which the waterfront district is a part. In 1997, that number was 426.But such problems are not deterring developers like Nicholas Sprayregen, who has invested $30 million in 18 contiguous parcels for a future mixed-use development. He plans to move his offices to Yonkers from Manhattan.As for any red tape hindering development, Mr. Sprayregen doesn’t let it cramp his style. “I’m ready to be as patient as I need to be,” he said.Others are exhibiting less patience. Struever Fidelco Cappelli, which has an environmental impact statement for a $3.1 billion mixed-use proposal before the City Council, has threatened to withdraw the proposal because of delays.WHAT YOU’LL PAYBetween the railroad tracks and the river, Collins Enterprises, a developer based in Stamford, Conn., is completing Hudson Park North, two brick towers with 294 luxury units ready to be occupied this spring. Monthly rents will start at $1,800 for a one-bedroom.Hudson Park South, the two towers constituting the first phase of the development, has 266 apartments, 97 percent leased, said Rona Siegel, operations vice president of Collins. Among the renters, she said, are empty nesters, young professionals, actors working in Manhattan, and young families.Diane Bender, a paralegal in Manhattan, and her boyfriend, Neal Myers, a freelance chef, moved from a studio in Manhattan last month into a Hudson Park South one-bedroom with river views. They pay $2,100 a month. Ms. Bender’s commute takes less time, she said, than the bus ride from the East Side walk-up that the couple, both in their early 50s, rented before moving.In addition to the newer buildings, Ms. Spero said, there are a few dozen units available in converted commercial buildings and above storefronts.The complex that Ms. Maddox, the fashion designer, moved into, has drawn mostly singles, said Kenneth W. Dearden, a principal in DW Capital, real estate developers, its Yonkers-based builder. The place has 170 units with floor-to-ceiling windows, a media room, a basketball court and a pet-friendly policy, because “that’s what young singles like,” Mr. Dearden said. Rents range from $1,400 for a studio to $4,050 for a two-bedroom with river views.DW Capital also remade the old trolley barn, Metro92; its loft-style one-bedrooms have 20-foot ceilings and 10-foot windows. Rents start at $2,800.For buyers, a one-bedroom condo in the Scrimshaw House on the waterfront lists for $249,000.THE COMMUTEMetro-North provides 25- to 30-minute service on the Hudson Line from Getty Square Station to Grand Central. On the return trip, trains stopping in Yonkers leave Grand Central as late as 1:50 a.m. A daily round-trip ticket bought at the station costs $15.50; a monthly bought on the Web is $165.62.New York Water Taxi offers 45-minute service to the World Financial Center and 57-minute service to Wall Street. A one-way trip costs $12; a 40-trip ticket is $400.WHAT TO DOResidents like Ms. Bender and Mr. Myers frequent restaurants like X2O Xaviars at the pier, and Zuppa Restaurant and Lounge, an Italian restaurant on Main Street. Andiamo, a takeout and catering arm of Zuppa, is also a favorite, as is Belle Havana, a Cuban-French spot that features live music.The Beczak Environmental Education Center is in a two-acre riverside park north of the train station. Events include a Catch of the Day program, with participants in waders dragging a 30-foot net through the water.The Loft Dance and Fitness on Main Street Square offers classes in yoga, Pilates, body sculpting, cardio kick boxing and jazz funk, among other things.And for curling up on a sofa with a book while taking in river views, there is no better place than Yonkers’s new 200,000-square-foot public library, a cornerstone of the revitalization effort.THE SCHOOLSFor families new to the waterfront area apartments, options in the unwieldy and financially troubled Yonkers school system include 29 elementary schools (10 for prekindergarten through Grade 8), three middle schools and six high schools. In the fall, the district plans to open a College Board Academy high school, in collaboration with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.Total enrollment is 24,153. Last year, SAT averages were 426 on the verbal, 423 in math and 421 in writing, according to Jerilynne Fierstein, a board of education spokeswoman. Statewide averages were 493, 483 and 510.THE HISTORYThe city’s name honors its founder, Adriaen Van der Donck, known in the 17th century as “Jonkheer” (Dutch for “young gentleman”). Incorporated as a village in 1855 and a city in 1872, Yonkers thrived on industry. It was where Elisha Graves Otis developed the safety elevator, making skyscrapers possible.