https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/jobs/the-cosmetics-creator-blending-art-and-commerce.html
The Cosmetics Creator: Blending Art and Commerce - The New York Times
Cosmetics and Toiletries,Careers and Professions,Charlotte Tilbury
Jan. 6, 2017
4127
Charlotte Tilbury, 42, is a beauty entrepreneur based in London.Q. Why did you start your own brand?A. I think it had a lot to do with a very bohemian upbringing in Ibiza: I went to Spanish school, then a hippie school where I was taught astrophysics by a man called Ra and my homework was telepathy. I was brought along to nightclubs at the age of 8 while Grace Jones or James Brown played sets, and danced with glamorous adults who gave me more than passing conversation because they were on holiday. That sort of childhood meant I learned from a young age to rely heavily on intuition.What did you do before starting your company?Early on I took a job assisting the makeup artist Mary Greenwell. I then spent the next 15 years working my way up the ranks and traveling the world doing the makeup for everyone from Vogue to W to Dazed & Confused magazine. I also spent a lot of time in Hollywood doing red carpet work. But one of the most fulfilling parts of my work was creating makeup lines. I was creative director at Helena Rubinstein for a while and created products for the big fashion houses. I did lipsticks for Armani and Alexander McQueen. I also created the first cosmetics line for Tom Ford.Any tips for creative types who want to start their own business? Get a great lawyer. And don’t be afraid to ask questions. Business might be intimidating, but it is not rocket science. Don’t define yourself as a creative mind or a commercial mind — you can be both, and limiting yourself to either is a huge reason for failure.Would you ever consider the Charlotte Tilbury brand being part of a big beauty conglomerate like L’Oréal or Estée Lauder?I’m not going to answer that question. How do you maintain balance? Homeopathic drops and vitamins — I am a devotee of both. Also making sacrifices. I am a mother, an artist, a business owner and a friend, and there are only ever so many hours in the day. But don’t always let it be your social life that takes the hit. I’m a firm believer that a drink and a dance let off steam, clear your mind and give you more clarity when you go back to work.