https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/world/middleeast/kuwait-iran-feud-saudi-arabia.html
Gulf States Guarding Their Interests in Saudi-Iran Rift - The New York Times
Iran,Saudi Arabia,Middle East,Nimr  Nimr al-,Kuwait,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates
Jan. 5, 2016
5735
CAIRO — For all the diplomatic dominoes that have fallen across the Middle East in recent days, with ambassadors from different countries flying home as a result of the explosive rift between Saudi Arabia and Iran, the map of allegiances has not significantly altered.Certainly, several countries offered muscular shows of solidarity to Saudi Arabia after an Iranian mob attacked its embassy in Tehran over the weekend, prompting a crisis that has put the United States in a bind and has threatened to set back the prospects for a resolution to the conflict in Syria.By Tuesday, Kuwait had recalled its ambassador to Iran, the United Arab Emirates had downgraded its diplomatic relationship, and Bahrain and Sudan had joined Saudi Arabia in severing its relationship with Tehran entirely.Yet many other Sunni Muslim countries signaled that they intended to take a more measured approach to the argument — sympathizing with Saudi Arabia, a rich and powerful ally, but also determined to avoid getting sucked into a harmful conflict with Iran, a country governed by Shiite clerics, with potentially grave costs.“The smaller Gulf states are worried they will get caught in the middle,” said Michael Stephens, a research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute in London. “It worries them greatly that things could go badly.”Some countries, like Turkey, Egypt and Pakistan, are already battling their own domestic insurgencies. Others are keen to guard their strategic interests or to keep the door open to trade with Iran while there is a prospect of American sanctions being lifted.Qatar, which shares with Iran access to the world’s largest natural gas field in the Persian Gulf, has yet to declare its hand. Oman has also been quiet, sticking to its longstanding position of neutrality on Saudi Arabia and Iran.In Turkey, where senior officials have warned about the impact of the crisis on a “powder keg” region, Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu offered his country’s services to help resolve the conflict peacefully.“Diplomatic channels must be given a chance immediately,” Mr. Davutoglu said Tuesday at a meeting of his Justice and Development Party in the capital, Ankara. Frosty relations between Turkey and Saudi Arabia have warmed in recent months. But even in Pakistan, which for decades has had a close alliance with Saudi Arabia, there is a marked reluctance to plunge into the crisis.On Tuesday, the Pakistani prime minister’s foreign affairs adviser, Sartaj Aziz, warned Parliament that the crisis posed a “grave danger” to the Muslim world. He did not hint at any possible diplomatic moves against Iran, emphasizing instead that Pakistan would work toward “easing tensions.” Although Pakistan has received substantial Saudi financing to bolster its flagging economy, the government in Islamabad also faces pressure from its sizable Shiite minority, and it plans to develop a major gas pipeline with Iran to solve its energy crisis.Another Saudi ally, Egypt, has received billions of dollars in assistance from Saudi Arabia in recent years. In a visit to Riyadh on Tuesday, Egypt’s foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, reaffirmed their nations’ alliance, saying, “The security of the kingdom is an integral part of Egypt’s security.” But Egypt’s room for maneuver against Iran is limited. Cairo severed official ties with Tehran in 1989, although there have been sporadic efforts in recent years to revive them.Mr. Stephens, the analyst, said countries with their own insurgencies were unlikely to do much for Saudi Arabia beyond offering words of support.“The Turks have a problem with the Kurds, the Egyptians have difficulties in Sinai, and the Pakistanis have their own issues,” he said. “They will publicly support the Saudis, but they don’t have the energy or military strength for anything more.”There is little doubt that many Gulf countries share Saudi Arabia’s concerns about Iran, whose support for armed groups in Syria and Iraq has contributed to a burst of sectarian warfare across the Middle East. Many were also offended by the attacks on Saudi diplomatic buildings over the weekend, which followed the execution of a Shiite cleric, Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, in Saudi Arabia on Saturday.Western countries fear that a deepening divide in the region could scuttle efforts to negotiate an end to the Syrian crisis and defeat the Islamic State. The White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, told reporters on Tuesday that it was not in the interest of the leaders of Saudi Arabia or Iran “to continue to foment the kind of violence that often leads to radicalization and terrorism.”Yet the showdown is another reminder of Saudi Arabia’s limited ability, despite all its great wealth, to bend its allies to its will. The two most powerful countries to move against Iran, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, have taken diplomatic half-steps that could easily be reversed if this storm were to blow over. And Yemen, where the Saudis are backing the government as it tries to repel a rebellion by Shiite rebels known as Houthis, has demonstrated the limits of Saudi military power.Although Saudi Arabia triggered the current dispute by executing Sheikh Nimr, a firebrand who had led popular protests in eastern Saudi Arabia, several analysts said Riyadh appeared to be acting from a position of weakness, or at least frustration. The Saudi economy is straining, the country is embroiled in conflicts in Syria and Yemen, and its leaders worry about the prospect of an American rapprochement with Iran.“They are under pressure on so many fronts,” said Toby Matthiesen, a research fellow at St. Antony’s College, Oxford, and author of a book on Saudi Shiites.There are signs that Iran is feeling the strain of international condemnation.On Tuesday, a commander of Iran’s hard-line military group condemned the storming of the Saudi Embassy in Tehran as an “ugly, unjustifiable act.” It was a sign, according to some analysts, that hard-liners in the Iranian regime might regret not having done more to keep the protests under control, and that they might have been taken aback by the vehemence of the international response.The statement could have been a sign of factionalism inside the Iranian regime, said Mr. Matthiesen.“This is one way of getting at the reformists inside Iran,” he said. “The two key issues under debate are the negotiations with the United States, and reaching out to the Saudis. Now that relations with the Saudis have been severed, the non-reformists will be empowered.”