https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/world/americas/venezuela-nicolas-maduro.html
Venezuela Slowed by Strike in Campaign to Oust President Nicolás Maduro - The New York Times
Referendums,Strikes,Maduro  Nicolas,Venezuela
Oct. 28, 2016
1175
CARACAS, Venezuela — Much of Caracas and other cities slowed to a Sunday crawl on Friday as many Venezuelans heeded the opposition’s call for a general strike, a step in its campaign to force a referendum to remove President Nicolás Maduro.Some stores were closed, traffic was light and students stayed away from private schools and universities. But the strike was a considerably weaker show of strength than the opposition had succeeded in mobilizing on Wednesday, when protesters poured into the streets here in the capital, and other major cities.Both sides took to social media to try to influence the public’s impression of the 12-hour strike’s effectiveness. Opposition leaders began the day by posting Twitter messages with photographs and video of empty streets and unfilled seats on rush-hour subway trains. “Empty streets like the stomachs of Venezuelans,” Luis Florido, an opposition legislator, said in a message.The government, for its part, sent out images suggesting a busy workday: scenes of a bicycle factory, a glass plant, children playing chess at school and office workers holding up signs declaring, “I work for the homeland.”Food Minister Rodolfo Marco Torres visited the main branch of the Bank of Venezuela, where clusters of customers could be seen. He then headed to a downtown bakery, Noyer Deley, where the manager nodded yes when Mr. Torres asked if everything was “operating with total normality.”The government had warned that any business heeding the strike call could be expropriated. On Thursday, intelligence agents parked their trucks outside the home of Lorenzo Mendoza, the owner of Polar, the country’s largest food producer. Polar’s factories were open on Friday.Some stores in eastern Caracas pulled down their shutters at noon. Other businesses operated with reduced staff, like the medical laboratory in the Santa Sofía clinic, where only one of three payment windows was open.Jaqueline Gebrael Feghali, 43, shut down her small store selling cakes and cinnamon rolls in the western city of San Cristóbal. “The country is in a state of emergency, there are no supplies to work, no security, no food, or medicine, robberies are increasing,” she said by telephone.But some Venezuelans said they simply could not afford to strike. “It seems crazy because if I don’t work, I don’t produce,” said Victor Mayor, 33, a taxi driver.“But I want a change; 17 years of destruction is enough,” he added, referring to the presidencies of Mr. Maduro and Hugo Chávez, the charismatic former army officer who led Venezuela from 1999 until his death in 2013.The opposition parties called the strike as one of several protest actions after Venezuela’s Electoral Council suspended last week a drive to gather signatures needed to call the referendum. Polls have shown that a wide majority would vote to recall Mr. Maduro.“That’s where the change will come from if it happens,” said George Ciccariello-Maher, a Venezuela expert at Drexel University in Philadelphia. “Once you have the vote, you can have a more stable claim about who represents the voice of the people.”The opposition, which controls the National Assembly, plans a large march on Thursday, this time to the presidential palace. Hundreds of thousands of people turned out on Wednesday in Caracas and other cities for demonstrations against the government.The opposition’s “narrative is one of an overwhelming social force whose time has come,” said Mr. Ciccariello-Maher, although he questioned whether Mr. Maduro’s widespread unpopularity translated into direct support for the opposition parties.The Vatican has stepped in to try to mediate with a dialogue, with the first meeting scheduled for Sunday.