https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/dining/easy-enchiladas.html
Easy Enchiladas! - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Recipes
July 12, 2017
6072
Sam Sifton emails readers of Cooking five days a week to talk about food and suggest recipes. That email also appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.Good morning. I’ve been cooking these enchiladas con carne for a long while now, ever since Robb Walsh taught me how to make them in the kitchen of his crowded El Real Tex-Mex restaurant in Houston last year. I nailed the technique in about three tries and kept cooking it as written for a number of months. Then, in that delicious, ineffable way that recipes you cook a lot start to change when you no longer need to look to them to guide you, I started to alter it. The result is your narrative no-recipe recipe for the week.Make a loose chili con carne: Sauté ground beef with a little flour in a glug of neutral oil, then put it aside and use the same pan to cook some chopped onion, garlic and jalapeño in the fat. Return the meat to the pan with the vegetables and hit them with chile powder, ground cumin and some oregano, to taste. Add some chopped tomatoes and a little water or stock to loosen everything up and make a kind of sauce.While that comes together, heat the oven to 425 and grab a casserole dish from a cupboard. You’ll need fresh corn tortillas as well, and some grated cheese – I like, for this application, a mixture of Cheddar and good ol’ American cheese product, like Velveeta. (You don’t need much to amplify the meltability of the Cheddar, but you need a little, else the cheese sets up too quickly at the end.)The big complaint about enchiladas is what a drag it is to roll them up and assemble them in the pan – for some, it takes the dish from being an easy weeknight winner and makes it into a weekend project. So do as the New Mexicans do, and stack the tortillas instead. I put a little chili in the bottom of the casserole, warm my tortillas in a dry skillet and lay them across the chili as if building the first layer of a lasagna. Top with a little more chili and some cheese and repeat with a second layer of tortillas. Repeat again. And again! Finish the whole thing off with the remaining chili and a lot of cheese, then bake in the oven until it’s all bubbling and melted and fine. Serve under a spray of chopped raw onion, maybe with sour cream and mango salsa on the side.Enchilada casserole, hon. New Mexican hotdish. You could make that tonight.Or, if you’d like an actual written recipe, firm instruction on what exactly to do and when, you could make David Tanis’s excellent new recipe for spicy grilled squid and green bean salad. That would be a fine dinner this evening or this week.As would these ace new recipes Oliver Strand finagled out of the Los Angeles chef Sara Kramer: for chicken and tomato salad with sumac and herbs; and for cucumbers with labneh and cherries.Or you could head into the wayback machine, and cook chicken teriyaki off our new video recipe. You could grill spiedies. Or make a key lime pie.Thousands and thousands more recipes to cook in coming days are available on Cooking. Go take a look at them and, please, take out a subscription to the site. Anything goes wrong, just reach out to us at cookingcare@nytimes.com and we’ll see that we get you sorted.Now, do you follow us on Facebook? On Twitter? On Instagram? On Pinterest? It’s a good way to see what we’re up to, what’s happening in our shop. (If you’d like to see my lame jokes and lamer pictures and get a lot of links to news and fishing reports and goofball memes, I’m on the soc, too: @samsifton on Twitter and Instagram. You can find me on Facebook. I pin pictures of big grills and smokers and the occasional skateboard on Pinterest.)