https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/29/us/jerry-brown-california-ranch.html
The California Ranch That Takes Jerry Brown Off the Grid - The New York Times
Brown  Edmund G Jr,California,Ranches,Governors (US),Gust Brown  Anne,Brown  Kathleen (1945- )
Dec. 28, 2015
3671
WILLIAMS, Calif. —  Four dusty miles off State Route 20, around a curve on a dirt road once used by stagecoaches, a scattering of barns and dilapidated buildings sits hidden among rolling hills speckled with oak trees. There is no electricity or cell service. There is a compact outhouse and a redwood cabin just big enough to hold one air mattress. There is no other sign of civilization for miles.This is Rancho Venada, and for all its isolation and ostensible inhospitality, it is the place that this state’s governor, Jerry Brown, is gravitating to as he approaches the end of his 50-year career in politics. These 2,514 wind-swept acres have been owned by the Brown family for almost 150 years, since the governor’s great-grandfather August Schuckman, a German immigrant, traveled to central California on a wagon train.For the past year, Mr. Brown, 77, and his wife, Anne Gust Brown, have adopted this land as something of a mission. They sleep in the tiny cabin many weekends, rebuilding barns piled with garbage and pockmarked with bullet holes, organizing family reunions and laying plans to create a library here documenting the history of the ranch and this politically storied family. They may even live here after his term ends in 2019.“Nobody likes this place except me,” Mr. Brown said recently.His father, Edmund G. Brown, who was California’s governor from 1959 to 1967 — and whose mother, Ida, was born here — took his son to the ranch just once.“My father didn’t like it,” Mr. Brown said. “What’s here? There’s no swimming pool, no basketball court. There are rattlesnakes and wild boar, and it’s 110 degrees. In the middle of nowhere. Wind gusts blowing. Dust getting in your mouth. It’s not for the faint of heart.”Mr. Brown’s interest in the property grew deep enough that he asked a state official — one of his appointees — to research the mining and oil drilling history of the land, The Associated Press reported last month, prompting accusations of impropriety. The official who conducted the review has since resigned, although he said the decision was not related to the governor’s request, and another state employee filed a whistle-blower’s complaint for being ordered to do the work.“What’s so special about Jerry Brown’s ranch?” asked the headline of a Los Angeles Times editorial that questioned Mr. Brown’s drawing on government resources for personal needs. Mr. Brown defended the request, saying he was simply seeking publicly available information, as any citizen is entitled to do.“I said, ‘Hey, what’s out there?’ ” Mr. Brown said. “They always try to overdo it for the governor. I have to be very careful what I ask for. Bureaucrats don’t own public information — the people do. And the governor, as one of the people, gets to look at it, too.”It turned out that the land had little potential for fracking or oil drilling — a conclusion that perhaps mirrors how bleak many people find the place.Mr. Brown spoke as he offered the first extensive tour of this property to a reporter. The visit came as California began to contemplate a post-Brown era, when a governor central to shaping this state’s national identity leaves the stage. Mr. Brown served two stints in the office that were separated by decades, navigating and personifying the ever-changing political and ethnic currents here.His retirement may prove just as unusual as his time in office, as after all these years in the brightest of spotlights, Mr. Brown looks to a place that could hardly be farther off the grid.Mr. Brown has a history of unconventional housing choices. He spent three years studying to be a Jesuit in the enforced silence of a seminary. When he first became governor, in 1975, he slept on a mattress in a Sacramento apartment. When he was elected to a second tour as governor in 2010, he and Ms. Gust Brown, who do not have children, opted to live in a loft a few blocks from the Capitol. They recently moved to the newly renovated governor’s mansion.At least the governor’s mansion is on a paved road. The town closest to Rancho Venada, Williams, is 12 miles away; Sacramento is an hour’s drive south. Cattle graze on the hills here — though in the midst of the state’s drought, there is not much grass for them.The outhouse is a 200-foot walk from the cabin, which replaced a tent where Mr. Brown slept when he started coming here. “I can definitely touch the walls lying on the bed,” he said. On winter nights, there is not much to warm the cabin. “Just each other,” Mr. Brown said, gesturing to his wife, “and the two dogs.”And then there are the rattlesnakes.“I was sitting out there in the chair and reading,” Mr. Brown said, pointing to the front of their cabin, and recalling the time when Ms. Gust Brown returned from a hike with their corgis. She froze, she said, picking up the story, at the sight of a six-foot rattler sunning itself below where Mr. Brown was sitting.“There’s a rattlesnake!” she yelled as Mr. Brown tipped back in his seat.The encounter was memorable. “I don’t like rattlesnakes,” the governor said.He passes his weekends here doing — well, not much. “They spend a lot of time outside,” said Walt Seaver, a farmer who is one of Mr. Brown’s cousins. “I went up there, and he was sitting on a stump reading a book. I asked him what he was reading. It was like Greek mythology.”“They just think it’s nirvana when they get up there,” Mr. Seaver said. “To me, it’s just an old desolate hill.”On a recent Sunday morning, Mr. Brown, wearing the black sweatshirt he had slept in the night before, jumped into his Kawasaki off-road vehicle and took the reporter on a two-hour tour of Rancho Venada, roaring up steep hills and across ravines parched by the drought. “Whoops!” he exclaimed when the vehicle plunged into an unseen gully before lurching up on to flatter land.Ms. Gust Brown declined to come along. “You are taking your life in your hands,” she said.Mr. Brown and his sister, Kathleen Brown, 70, have both grown increasingly fascinated by their ancestry. Mr. Brown mentioned Mr. Schuckman’s voyage in his 2011 inauguration speech and has brought up his great-grandfather’s journey several times in interviews. In his office in Sacramento, Mr. Brown keeps a photo of his great-grandfather herding sheep.Over the past year, Mr. Brown has been the cheerleader for family reunions, where more than 100 far-flung cousins have gathered around picnic tables to examine an eight-foot-long document of the family tree that includes two Democratic governors of California.“He was a little overwhelmed when we all showed up,” said Bobbie Jo Seaver, a cousin and Walt’s mother.Steven Bohlen, who was the head of the state oil and gas division and the official Mr. Brown called for help in evaluating the property, has returned to his previous employer, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Mr. Bohlen said he had left his state job because he had been overwhelmed by “all the negative press and all the negative state legislative work” that accompanied his agency’s efforts on fracking and other oil and gas issues.“We do this for the public all the time,” he said of the governor’s request.Mr. Brown said he intended to display documents he had collected from his request — which included a single-page summary about finding no evidence of significant oil or gas wells — in the library he plans to establish. “They give you the old well records: I want to put those behind a glass case,” he said.Kathleen Brown said her brother was drawn to the ranch because he “finds this a place where he can be contemplative and at peace, and not have distractions.”Gazing across his ranch at the fluttering flags of California and the surrounding Colusa County, Mr. Brown seemed to take contrarian pleasure in the notion that he could find peace in a place others find forbidding.“You know what I like?” Mr. Brown asked. “You get up in the middle of the night, the stars are very bright, the moon shining on the barn. It makes for a good balance between the intensity of the political and the serenity of the land.”