http://www.nytimes.com/1997/01/08/nyregion/revenge-cited-in-shooting-of-a-captain.html
Revenge Cited In Shooting Of a Captain - The New York Times
LATIN KINGS,LIVOTI  FRANCIS X,BAEZ  ANTHONY RAMON,PLAVNICK  STEVEN,POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT,ATTACKS ON POLICE,MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS,POLICE
Jan. 8, 1997
7158
Bronx prosecutors said yesterday that the shooting of a police captain last October was an act of revenge for the acquittal of Officer Francis X. Livoti in the choking death of a Bronx man, and they said four members of a local gang were paid $5,000 for the attack.After Officer Livoti was found not guilty in the 1994 death of Anthony Baez, a criminal whom prosecutors would not name offered $5,000 to the Latin Kings gang in exchange for killing a police captain, said Dawn Florio, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx. The Latin Kings subcontracted the work out to a smaller gang called the Netas, she said, and four men carried out the plan on Oct. 19 by shooting Capt. Steven Plavnick in the back as he arrived at the station house of the 46th Precinct in an unmarked patrol car.Captain Plavnick did not die, but the shooters collected their fee anyway, Ms. Florio said.''It was not a random thing,'' she said. ''They were sending a message. The contract was to kill a captain in retaliation for the acquittal of Officer Livoti.''As prosecutors made the charge in the Bronx, Mr. Livoti faced the first day of an administrative hearing at Police Headquarters to determine whether he used an illegal choke hold while arresting Mr. Baez. If he is found guilty, he faces the loss of his job and his pension.The killing of Mr. Baez -- who was asphyxiated while Officer Livoti was trying to arrest him -- and the subsequent acquittal of Officer Livoti led to angry demonstrations in the Bronx, where relations between the police and the public were edgy to begin with. Many residents complained that the death of Mr. Baez was emblematic of the Police Department's hostile attitude toward the city's residents. That feeling was also evident at Mr. Livoti's hearing, where members of the Latin Kings held a banner that said ''Stop Police Brutality Now.''While there was initial speculation that the shooting of Captain Plavnick was related to the Livoti acquittal, the comments of Ms. Florio and other Bronx officials were the first official acknowledgment. An informer led the police to four suspects, they said, and after the suspected leader was indicted last week on charges of attempted murder, assault, aggravated assault on a police officer and conspiracy, new information surfaced.Although officials would not say who offered the bounty for shooting Captain Plavnick, Ms. Florio said the contract was passed from the Latin Kings to Rafael Almonte, reputed to be the head of the Bronx Netas. Three other people, she said, were hired for the actual attack. The four suspects are scheduled to be arraigned on Jan. 14.At Officer Livoti's administrative hearing, meanwhile, the clock is ticking. Officer Livoti is eligible to retire, with a pension equaling 40 percent of his salary, on Jan. 27, his 15th anniversary on the force. He filed his retirement papers last month, police officials said, so they want to get through the trial quickly in order to dismiss him, if he is found guilty, without having to pay his pension.''I'd like to retire and get on with my life,'' Officer Livoti, who has been on modified duty since his arrest, said last night as he left Police Headquarters.As the hearing began, two of Mr. Baez's brothers and his father testified about how a touch football game outside the family home in the University Heights section of the Bronx led to a confrontation with police officers, arrests, and then the death of Mr. Baez.''We're re-living everything again,'' said his mother, Iris, who sat in the front row of the hearing room clutching a red Bible, just as she did every day at the criminal trial. ''He should have been off the force a long time ago.''The hearing is being held before the Police Department's Deputy Commissioner of Trials, Rae Koshetz, who sat on a bench between an American flag and a green, white and blue Police Department flag. Hanging from her bench was a framed copy of the ''New York City Police Department Values,'' including a pladge to ''value human life, respect the dignity of each individual and render our services with courtesy and civility.''The Police Department's decision to open its internal administrative hearing to the public reflected how anxious it is to repair an image tarnished by the Livoti case. Pickets and street demonstrations against the police have been held regularly in the Bronx since Officer Livoti's acquittal. And even as Acting Justice Gerald Sheindlin found him not guilty of murder, the judge said that the officer was ''insulting'' and blamed his ''rude, confrontational attitude'' for escalating a dispute over a football game into a tragedy.It is just the opposite of the image the force wants to cultivate, with an advertising campaign lauding its community policing efforts. Within the department there was the sentiment that Officer Livoti was a bad officer with a record of 11 complaints of abuse and brutality. Though none of the charges were substantiated, they were deemed serious enough to put him in a program for special surveillance and psychological counseling.At yesterday's hearing, two Police Department lawyers acted as the prosecutors, calling Mr. Baez's brothers and father as witnesses.  They testified that Mr. Baez and three of his brothers were playing touch football on the street in front of their childhood home when two errant passes hit two police cars that were idling on the otherwise deserted street shortly after midnight.  They said that after Officer Livoti, who was in one of the cars, arrested their youngest brother, David Baez, 16, Anthony Baez, who worked as a security guard in Orlando, protested. A struggle ensued.''He was holding my son with his right hand, holding it to his neck,'' testified Ramon Baez Sr., who heard cries for help and went down onto the street in his underwear and socks.  ''My son's eyes were out, he had big eyes, and he was gasping for air.'' Mr. Baez was pronounced dead at Union Hospital, less than a mile from his boyhood home.The legal proceedings against Officer Livoti have been complicated from the start. He was indicted on a charge of criminally negligent homicide, but the charge was voided in 1995 after the Bronx District Attorney's office made a clerical error in printing out the indictment. A second grand jury was called, and Officer Livoti was indicted again on the same charge. During Officer Livoti's nonjury trial, Acting Justice Sheindlin complained that conflicting testimony by police officers led him to believe that there was ''a nest of perjury'' among the witnesses.On Oct. 7 Justice Sheindlin acquitted Officer Livoti after reading a decision that Mr. Baez's supporters found ambiguous. ''I do not find that the defendant is innocent,'' Justice  Sheindlin said. ''I do find, based on the quality of the evidence presented, that the People have failed to establish the guilt of the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.''The main factor in the murder case was whether the choke hold was responsible for Mr. Baez's death or whether it could have been caused by an asthma attack. Stuart London, the lawyer representing Officer Livoti at yesterday's hearing, raised the issue again, reminding Commissioner Koshetz that it was 44 degrees outside, that Mr. Baez had chronic asthma, and that he ran the length of Cameron Place back and forth in the course of the game.The administrative hearing raises questions about the fate of the civil lawsuits filed by the family seeking to recover millions of dollars in damages from Officer Baez and the city. Susan Karten, a lawyer for the Baez family, said that the city's lawyers have suggested that if Officer Livoti is found to have administered a choke hold in violation of department rules, the city should not be held financially responsible for the death.''We absolutely disagree,'' Ms. Karten said, adding that she would  file a brief in civil court arguing that the city should held accountable.