https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/politics/nikki-haley-un-ambassador-russia-war-crime.html
Nikki Haley, at Confirmation Hearing, Says Russia Is Guilty of War Crimes - The New York Times
Appointments and Executive Changes,United Nations,Haley  Nikki R,Trump  Donald J
Jan. 18, 2017
590
WASHINGTON — Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina on Wednesday became the latest cabinet nominee to show daylight with President-elect Donald J. Trump, declaring that Russia was guilty of war crimes in Syria and that it should also be subject to additional sanctions for its incursions into Ukraine.Speaking to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during her confirmation hearing as ambassador to the United Nations, Ms. Haley said: “Russia is trying to show their muscle right now. It’s what they do.” She added: “I don’t think we can trust them. We have to continue to be very strong back, and show them what this new administration is going to be.”Ms. Haley said she believed the Russians were guilty of war crimes in bombing the Syrian city of Aleppo. At his hearing last week, Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, declined to call President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia a war criminal for ordering the bombing of civilians there or in Chechnya.Ms. Haley, a rising star in Republican politics and the daughter of Indian immigrants, fared better with senators than Mr. Tillerson did. While both were grilled on topics including Russia and the banning of Muslim immigrants, Ms. Haley showed flashes of humor, seemed well prepared and parted company with Mr. Trump diplomatically.Asked if she favored establishing a registry for Muslims in the United States — an idea Mr. Trump proposed during the presidential campaign — she said no, but then suggested that no longer reflected his views either. “This administration and I do not think there should be any registry,” she said.Ms. Haley staked her strongest position on an issue of central concern to Republicans and many Democrats, and one on which she and Mr. Trump are aligned: the United Nations’ stormy relationship with Israel.“Any honest assessment also finds an institution that is often at odds with U.S. interests,” Ms. Haley said, noting the 20 United Nations resolutions critical of Israel — more than against Syria, Iran or North Korea. “This cannot continue,” she said, also criticizing the Obama administration’s abstention from the latest United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israel’s settlement construction.“I will never abstain when the United Nations takes any action that comes in direct conflict with the interests and values of the United States,” she said. Also, noting the United States’ large financial contributions to the United Nations, she asked, “Are we getting what we pay for?”In her opening statement, Ms. Haley acknowledged she was a newcomer to the rituals of international diplomacy and the mechanics of the United Nations. But she said she was steeped in diplomacy because she practiced it every day in the governor’s mansion in South Carolina, whether in attracting foreign manufacturers to open factories in her state or leading the fight to remove a Confederate battle flag from statehouse property after the deadly church shooting in Charleston in 2015.Senator Benjamin L. Cardin, Democrat of Maryland and the ranking Democrat on the committee, praised Ms. Haley for the latter decision, even as he told her, “I am concerned with your lack of foreign policy experience.”Mr. Trump’s choice of Ms. Haley was mildly surprising, and not just because of her background. In 2016, delivering the Republican response to President Obama’s State of the Union address, she criticized Mr. Trump’s campaign. Later in the primary, she was a frequent critic of Mr. Trump and supported one of his opponents, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida.Some of Ms. Haley’s toughest questioning on Wednesday came from Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia and Hillary Clinton’s running mate. He told Ms. Haley her interpretation of the Iran nuclear deal was “completely inaccurate” and encouraged her to “read the agreement.”“What we all need to remember is that a nuclear Iran is very dangerous for the entire world,” she replied.