https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/books/review/newsbook-3-books-immigration-debate.html
As Travel Ban Takes Effect, 3 Books That Delve Into the Immigration Debate - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Miller  David (1946- ),Hamid  Mohsin,Exit West (Book),Strangers in Our Midst: The Political Philosophy of Immigration (Book)
July 6, 2017
4204
Visa policies for six Muslim-majority countries were tightened last week after a scaled-back version of President Donald Trump’s travel ban was upheld by the Supreme Court. As the administration continues to grapple with immigration policy, here are three books that examine how immigration has changed the American landscape and what a country owes to outsiders, while in the realm of fiction, a recent novel zeros in on the experiences of two young refugees.EXIT WEST By Mohsin Hamid231 pp. Riverhead Books. (2017)We find the protagonists of this novel, Nadia and Saeed, at a tipping point: Their unnamed city is “swollen by refugees but still mostly at peace,” and their love affair progresses as the atmosphere devolves into open warfare. Mohsin Hamid writes affectingly about how the casualties of war and violence can creep slowly into people’s lives. Nadia and Saeed are upwardly mobile young professionals living cosmopolitan lives — they meet one evening at a corporate identity and product branding class — when they are forced to uproot in order to escape the truck bombs and armed soldiers overtaking their hometown. In a stroke of magic realism, the pair escape through a portal that transports them to a foreign, safer country. Hamid deftly captures the refugee experience and also imagines a near future when migration becomes the norm, exploring how the “natives” of the host country learn to forge a new society with the incoming strangers.STRANGERS IN OUR MIDSTThe Political Philosophy of ImmigrationBy David Miller218 pp. Harvard University Press. (2016)In this book, David Miller, a political philosopher, tackles the question of what a developed country owes to outsiders when imagining its immigration policies. He argues that a state should have the right to govern its borders however it wishes, so long as the method is fair and transparent. At the root of his argument is the idea of “weak cosmopolitanism.” While strong cosmopolitanism, he writes, would mandate an international “open borders” policy, weak cosmopolitanism allows for discernment when it comes to inviting outsiders into a country’s borders, except in cases when there is a moral responsibility to protect others’ human rights, such as those fleeing genocide. Miller also argues that citizens should be allowed to mold their own vision for their country and protect it by admitting only those who may adhere to it.A NATION OF NATIONSA Great American Immigration StoryBy Tom Gjelten405 pp. Simon & Schuster. (2015)Immigration to the United States was transformed by the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which made laws less restrictive and strongly favored family reunification; whereas most foreigners who came to the United States before were white and European, over the last 50 years the pool has diversified, bringing people from South America, Asia and Africa. In “A Nation of Nations,” Tom Gjelten focuses on how this shift has affected one county: Fairfax in Virginia, which saw its foreign-born population grow sevenfold in the three decades following the passage of the act. Gjelten introduces a cast of characters — some immigrants, some locals — to demonstrate how they have forged a new reality and what has brought them together.