https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/27/sports/football/eli-apple-darron-lee-mothers-twitter-friendship.html
They’re First-Time N.F.L. Rivals. Their Mothers? Longtime Friends. - The New York Times
Football,Apple  Eli (1995- ),Lee  Darron (1994- ),New York Giants,New York Jets,Social Media,Lee  Candice,Apple  Annie
Aug. 26, 2016
3647
They have prayed and laughed and traveled together. They have encouraged and consoled each other. They text all the time and are ever so thankful how the first round of the N.F.L. draft unfolded in April.Otherwise, Annie Apple and Candice Lee would not have been able to meet for lunch on Friday — without their sons.The Giants’ need for a cornerback and the Jets’ desire for a speedy linebacker produced a fortuitous outcome for Eli Apple and Darron Lee, former Ohio State teammates and good friends.“Blood couldn’t make us any closer,” Darron said.That good fortune also allowed their mothers to better preserve a friendship born from a social media message Darron sent while he was in high school. A sharp post from Annie, who operates an engaging Twitter feed at @SurvivinAmerica, resonated enough that Darron replied.You have to meet my mom, he wrote. You guys would get along perfectly.“Next thing I knew,” Darron said, “my mom and her are in a group chat to this very day.”Annie said: “She really should be blessed that she found me. I’m the greatest thing that has ever happened to her, and that takes a lot of humility for me to say that. I think she would agree.”Given their outspoken personalities and backgrounds in television news — Candice recently left her job as a reporter in Columbus, Ohio, and Annie used to work on the production side in Philadelphia — it was no surprise, Candice said, that they clicked when they met at Ohio State.“We bonded spiritually,” said Candice, also an active Twitter presence at @SideEyeSassShow, in a telephone interview. “When you have boys that play football, you have similar stories to tell about their dreams.”For games at Ohio State, the Apples would drive about 500 miles from their home in Voorhees, N.J., outside Philadelphia. When they arrived, they would meet with other families and Candice, who would come from the Columbus suburb of New Albany, Ohio, as her work schedule allowed.At tailgates, they danced in the parking lot. It is a Buckeye tradition for players to walk into Ohio Stadium together, through a tunnel of fans. On days when Candice could not attend, Annie made sure she snapped a photo with Darron to send to her.“It never felt like she wasn’t there,” Annie said.When Candice was there, she munched on popcorn to soothe her nerves while Eli and Darron were on the field. That never failed to make Annie laugh, and she said a video exists of Candice’s chewing “a million pieces” — if only she could find it.“Darron’s her only kid, so I’d always tease her about how lazy she is in the mothering department,” Annie said in a telephone interview. “Who stops at one? What a lazy woman. She was just like, ‘I learned the error of my ways.’ I’m like: ‘I have four. I’m a glutton for punishment.’”Other mothers — like those of running back Ezekiel Elliott, now with the Dallas Cowboys, and receiver Jalin Marshall, now with the Jets — joined the fun.“They’re a cult,” Darron said.But Candice and Annie cultivated their friendship and banter independently of their sons, who met as recruits in 2013 — Darron unheralded, without a position, and Eli yoked by expectations. They bonded over their shared misery on the scout team in practice, tasked with defending an Ohio State offense loaded with future N.F.L. players.“We got our butts kicked,” Darron said.Every time running back Carlos Hyde eluded him and every time quarterback Braxton Miller faked him out, Darron wondered why he had been offered a scholarship. When receivers Devin Smith and Corey Brown got past Eli, his attitude suffered.Their perspective changed, Eli and Darron said, once they recognized that they would improve faster by practicing against the better competition. Of the two, Eli is more reserved, and he could not believe it when Darron started claiming that in a few years he was going to be a first-round pick.“I thought he was crazy; everybody thought he was crazy,” Eli said after a recent Giants practice. “And then when he really started to get his chance, everyone was like, Man, this guy’s going to be a baller.”To hold each other accountable, all either had to say was, I’m going to call your mom. Almost at the same time, they blossomed. In the 2014 season, Darron was named the defensive most valuable player of the Sugar Bowl, the national semifinal, and Eli secured the championship victory against Oregon with a late interception.Projected a year later as first-round picks, they attended the draft in Chicago. That night, after Eli went 10th to the Giants and Darron 20th to the Jets, they joked about rooming together. Unsure if they would be sharing a locker room at MetLife Stadium, Darron told Eli not to touch his stuff. They stayed up until 3 a.m. celebrating with their families.Candice and Annie spent time together in New Jersey a few weeks ago at the Mall at Short Hills, not far from the Jets’ facility in Florham Park, and again on Friday, in Hoboken. But because of training camp demands, Darron and Eli will see each other for the first time in months on Saturday, when they expect to reprise their pregame ritual before the annual preseason game between their teams. Nothing elaborate, just a straight-up handshake.“It’s about business, you know?” Darron said. “We just got to work.”As the home team, the Jets can offer prime tickets for players’ families. But even though Annie will be wearing her Giants jersey — “I’ll root for Darron, but I want the Giants’ offense to crucify the Jets’ defense” — she said she was hoping to score a better seat, near Candice.After all, it just would not be the same watching their sons play if they were apart.