https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/us/politics/donald-trump-administration.html
DeVos Is Confirmed as Education Secretary; Melania Trump Settles Libel Suit Against Blogger - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,DeVos  Elizabeth (1958- ),Immigration and Emigration,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Sanders  Bernard,Cruz  Ted
Feb. 7, 2017
1371
■ The Senate approved Betsy DeVos as education secretary, with Vice President Pence breaking a tie vote.■ President Trump says “haters” unfairly interpret his praise of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.■ A federal appeals court in San Francisco will hear arguments on Mr. Trump’s targeted immigration ban.■ Melania Trump settles a libel lawsuit against a Maryland blogger.The Senate confirmed Ms. DeVos as education secretary on Tuesday, in a vote that required Vice President Mike Pence to break a 50 to 50 tie.Two Republican senators, Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, announced last week that they would join Democrats in blocking her.Democrats employed every procedural tool to slow the confirmation of Ms. DeVos. Republican leaders responded by saying they would simply keep the Senate in session until a few key individuals were approved: Ms. DeVos, Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama for attorney general, Representative Tom Price of Georgia for secretary of health and human services and Steven T. Mnuchin for Treasury secretary.While Ms. DeVos was confirmed, 51 to 50, thanks to Mr. Pence and the support of another important constituent:President Trump’s foreign-policy-by-tweet approach continued Tuesday morning, with the president suggesting on Twitter that “haters” were unfairly criticizing his praise of Mr. Putin.The post appears to be a direct response to the criticism Mr. Trump received for his comments during a Fox News interview. In that interview, he seemed to defend Mr. Putin’s brutality while saying that American political leaders have “killed” people too.The president appears to think that the avalanche of criticism he received is unfair, even though his insistence that he doesn’t know Mr. Putin or have deals in Russia is unrelated to his praise of the Russian president.The website of the federal appeals court in San Francisco is about to be tested.The court will hear arguments at 3 p.m. Pacific time on Tuesday on the Trump administration’s emergency request to reinstate Mr. Trump’s executive order suspending travel from seven predominantly Muslim countries and limiting the nation’s refugee program.The argument in the fast-moving case will be heard by telephone, and the court at first said it would release a recording afterward. An hour and a half later, the court thought better of the delay, now saying the hearing would be live-streamed on its site.You can listen to a live stream of the arguments here:The president had some thoughts to share on the subject.For a moment, House Speaker Paul D. Ryan seemed to be in the clear.Amid the now-typical deluge of questions for Mr. Ryan about the latest explosive comment from Mr. Trump, a reporter acknowledged the speaker’s standard reply: that he does not tend to comment on the “tweet of the day.”“You got my talking points down already!” Mr. Ryan said, perking up.He did elaborate, though, steering clear of any remark that could be construed as a knock on the president.On the subject of Mr. Trump’s insistence that the news media had willfully ignored or played down international terrorist attacks: “I can’t speak to whether or not you’re over or underreporting something. That’s your job. I’ll stick with doing mine.”On Mr. Trump attacking who he called the “so-called judge” responsible for blocking the president’s immigration order: “Look, he’s not the first president to get frustrated with a ruling from a court.”On the uncertainty wrought by the president’s recent suggestion that the Affordable Care Act might not be replaced until next year: “I think there’s a little confusion here.”The legislative process will have played out this year, Mr. Ryan said. “The question is, how long does it take to implement the full replacement of Obamacare?”First lady Melania Trump has settled a libel lawsuit against a Maryland blogger over a blog post published in August that she said contained “false and defamatory statements,” including that she once worked as a high-end escort.The lawsuit, which was filed in September in Montgomery County, Md., pertained to a post that Webster G. Tarpley had published on his blog, Tarpley.net, in early August.Mr. Tarpley retracted the post on Aug. 22 and issued an apology to Mrs. Trump. In a statement, Mr. Tarpley again issued a retraction and apologized to Mrs. Trump for publishing a post that was “replete with false and defamatory statements about her.”“I acknowledge that these false statements were very harmful and hurtful to Mrs. Trump and her family, and therefore I sincerely apologize to Mrs. Trump, her son, her husband and her parents for making these false statements,” he said.Charles J. Harder, a lawyer for Mrs. Trump, said in statement on his client’s behalf that Mr. Tarpley had agreed to pay Mrs. Trump “a substantial sum as a settlement.”In addition to Mr. Tarpley, Mrs. Trump sued the publisher of The Daily Mail for libel. (The Daily Mail also published a retraction and apology.) A Maryland judge dismissed the lawsuit against The Daily Mail publisher last week after determining that Maryland courts do not have jurisdiction over Mrs. Trump’s claims; the lawsuit was refiled on Monday in New York State Court.Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Ted Cruz of Texas will square off in a debate that liberal and conservative purists probably would have preferred in 2016 — a bronze medal game, of sorts, for the presidency.The CNN town hall-style meeting will focus largely on the Affordable Care Act in the age of Trump. We’ll bring real-time analysis — policy, yuks, everything in between — from the reporters who covered the pair during their presidential runs and from a health policy expert.Matt Flegenheimer, @mattfleg on Twitter, who covered Mr. Cruz; Yamiche Alcindor, @yamiche, who covered Mr. Sanders; and Margot Sanger-Katz, @sangerkatz, who writes extensively on health care policy, will be sorting out the facts from the froth.Make it a two-screen experience. The debate begins at 9 p.m. Eastern time.