https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/21/opinion/supreme-court-nominees-were-blocked-long-before-bork.html
Supreme Court Nominees Were Blocked Long Before Bork - The New York Times
Bork  Robert H,Supreme Court,Senate Committee on the Judiciary,Presidents and Presidency (US),Appointments and Executive Changes,Marshall  Thurgood,Johnson  Lyndon Baines,Nixon  Richard Milhous,Reagan  Ronald Wilson
Dec. 20, 2012
1501
THE death on Wednesday of Robert H. Bork, the conservative judge whose Supreme Court nomination was rejected by the Senate in 1987, has prompted a flood of commentaries describing his confirmation battle as a historic turning point. By opposing Mr. Bork for his right-wing views, it is alleged, Senate Democrats engaged in an unprecedented act of brazen partisanship against Ronald Reagan’s nominee, politicizing a once deferential process.These claims are wrong. Although Mr. Bork’s confirmation certainly represented a major battle of the Reagan years, the campaign to defeat him was neither unprecedented nor illegitimate.For much of the nation’s history, the Senate took seriously its role to provide “advice and consent” in the judicial nomination process. Nominees were frequently turned down, for reasons including partisanship and ideology. In 1795 the Senate rejected George Washington’s nominee for chief justice, John Rutledge, largely because of his view on the 1794 peace treaty with Britain.Only at the start of the 20th century, as executive-branch authority expanded under Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, did timidity overcome the Senate. Breaking with historical norms, senators between 1894 and 1968 rejected only one high court nominee. These were the years when the president was regarded, as the political scientist Clinton Rossiter wrote in 1956, as a “magnificent lion who can roam widely and do great deeds so long as he does not try to break loose.”That changed again amid the turmoil of the 1960s, as conservatives began to resist the court’s activism under Chief Justice Earl Warren. The court handed down transformational rulings on, among other issues, civil rights, religious freedom, freedom of speech and the rights of the accused. At a certain point, Republicans and Southern Democrats found it too much to bear.When Lyndon B. Johnson named Solicitor General Thurgood Marshall to be the first African-American justice in 1967, right-wing senators of both parties tried to block him. The reason wasn’t just Marshall’s race; it was the way his critics expected him to vote on key issues.Marshall’s detractors pretended to oppose him as unqualified — a case of “Borking” avant la lettre. This was laughable: Marshall was one of the century’s most accomplished constitutional litigators, having won groundbreaking civil-rights cases before the high court.Strom Thurmond of South Carolina quizzed the nominee on trivia regarding the 14th Amendment, on which Marshall was considered an expert, and when Marshall didn’t know some information, Thurmond deemed him unfit.Marshall’s opponents failed, but they tried again the next year when Johnson sought to elevate Associate Justice Abe Fortas, a friend and adviser, to replace Earl Warren as chief. The right made Fortas a scapegoat for all the alleged sins of the Warren court, with Thurmond setting up a film projector in a Judiciary Committee hearing room to showcase the “smut” that Fortas had supposedly decreed to be constitutionally permissible.Eventually, a coalition of Republicans and Southern Democrats filibustered the nomination, forcing Johnson, by then a lame duck, to withdraw his friend’s name. (Fortas was also hounded by rumors of financial improprieties, which later forced him from the bench.)By the time Richard M. Nixon entered the White House, in 1969, the notion of blocking a president’s Supreme Court nominees was no longer a shocking thought. Nixon had run on a promise to appoint only strict constructionists, and Democrats, who controlled the Senate, took him at his word.Turning the tables, they stopped the nominations of both Clement F. Haynsworth in 1969 and G. Harrold Carswell in 1970 to succeed Fortas. Another Nixon nominee, William H. Rehnquist, drew strong antagonism from the Democratic majority, though unlike his hapless predecessors, he made it through the gantlet.It was no coincidence that Johnson and Nixon, whose dishonesty amid Vietnam and Watergate eroded faith in the White House, found themselves newly vulnerable to challenge. In the revolutionary 1960s, political authority of all sorts was coming under new pressure, and the relative deference that most 20th-century presidents had enjoyed gave way to a widespread public skepticism.If the late 1970s and early ’80s offered a break from this newfound contentiousness, it was a bit of a fluke: Gerald R. Ford named only the moderate John Paul Stevens, Jimmy Carter made no high-court nominations and Reagan picked as his first choice Sandra Day O’Connor, the first female justice — a selection no Democrat was going to quarrel with.The Democratic campaign against Bork in 1987, then, wasn’t anything new; it merely resumed a dynamic that had been temporarily obscured — one as old as the republic and a perfectly fair, if often cynical, deployment of the Senate’s power to advise and consent.The use of the verb “to Bork” may seem like a dig at an important intellectual figure in conservative jurisprudence and a martyr of the political right. But it really represents an unjustified triumph of a right-wing narrative that wrongly imagines blocking judicial nominees on ideological grounds to have begun with a gang of liberal Democrats — rather than with Republicans and conservative Southern Democrats opposed to the legal revolutions of the 1960s and keen to hand Lyndon Johnson a political defeat. It has given the legitimate restraint of presidential power a bad name.