http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/05/nyregion/with-newfound-understatement-port-authority-returns-to-trade-center-site.html
With Newfound Modesty, Port Authority Returns to the World Trade Center - The New York Times
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,World Trade Center (Manhattan  NY),September 11 (2001),Foye  Patrick J
March 4, 2015
9022
The Port Authority has come home. Quietly.After 14 years near Union Square, the agency’s headquarters have returned to a spot at the World Trade Center, where they had been from 1973 until Sept. 11, 2001.No board meetings have been held yet at 4 World Trade Center, at Greenwich and Liberty Streets. But Patrick J. Foye, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said the March 19 meeting may be held there; certainly the April meeting will.An 8-by-12-foot American flag, rescued in tatters from the trade center ruins, is to be moved on Friday to a place of honor outside the new board room. It has been hanging near the interim board room at 225 Park Avenue South, at East 18th Street.Mr. Foye has been in his new office about a month, long enough to hang a portrait of Austin J. Tobin, the powerful executive director who seemed almost single-handedly to have willed the original trade center into existence a half century ago.Mr. Foye’s office, set along an unremarkable corridor on the 23rd floor of 4 World Trade Center, offers its occupant a fine view of the National September 11 Memorial, through five floor-to-ceiling windows. The furniture and finishes are modest almost beyond a fault. The space is comfortable, not imposing; vice-presidential grade, maybe, or associate partner.“Everybody’s office is smaller than it was,” Mr. Foye said.His is nothing like the 67th-floor suite at the southwest corner of the first 1 World Trade Center tower, which was designed for Mr. Tobin, though never occupied by him. Nor is it anything like Mr. Tobin’s office in the old Port Authority headquarters at 111 Eighth Avenue, better known today as the Google building. From that perch, Mr. Tobin had only to go up two floors to reach a private helipad.At least once, in June 1972, the helipad proved handy for an executive trying to dodge the press. William J. Ronan, a critic of the authority’s hands-off stance toward public transit, had just been elected vice chairman, in a surprising move. He was in no mood to answer questions.“Dr. Ronan could not be reached for comment,” The New York Times reported. “He left the meeting, went to the roof of the Port Authority building at 111 Eighth Avenue and took a helicopter to an airport for an out-of-town flight.”By contrast, understatement seems to be the watchword at the new headquarters. That may be smart, given the scrutiny the agency faces on both sides of the Hudson River from critics who have condemned it as a secretive body, answerable to no one and inclined to reward those who are politically powerful.Four World Trade Center could raise eyebrows. A lease signed by New York City under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg for 600,000 square feet of space imposed nearly $60 million in costs, The Daily News reported. The Human Resources Administration is moving its headquarters there from 180 Water Street. The current commissioner, Steven Banks, tried to find ways to avoid the move, a spokeswoman said, but the agency was locked into the lease.The other large office tenant is MediaMath, which has 106,000 square feet. It plans to move into the building this summer, said a spokesman for Silverstein Properties, the owner and developer of the 72-story tower. The food hall Eataly is to occupy two floors of retail space at the base of the building.The Port Authority needed less space at 4 World Trade Center than it had anticipated when it signed its lease. It wound up taking 13 floors, a total of 520,000 square feet, a spokeswoman for the authority said. Nearly 1,400 employees are stationed there, out of a total work force of around 7,000.Among their ranks are those who were present in 2001 when the trade center was destroyed and 84 colleagues, including Neil Levin, the executive director, were killed.Richard M. Larrabee, the director of port commerce, was in his 62nd-floor office as the north tower was hit by a hijacked jetliner. He left with only his wallet and cellphone. Until the recent move, he had returned to the site only once, to escort the shipping executive Maersk McKinney Moller around the memorial in 2012. “I don’t know that I consciously stayed away,” Mr. Larrabee said. “I just didn’t have an occasion to come back.”“When we were on the 62nd floor, we had a commanding view of the port,” he recalled. “There were days when you thought you could see the Golden Gate Bridge. We’re on the 17th floor now. It’s a much more normal view. It’s been an easier adjustment than I thought it would be.”“After 9/11, when people would see one another, we would hug,” Mr. Larrabee said. “We got away from that after a while, but we’re back to hugging each other again.”