http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/us/north-carolina-governor-pat-mccrory.html
North Carolina Governor Tries to Step Back From Bias Law - The New York Times
North Carolina,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Government Employees,McCrory  Pat,Discrimination,Homosexuality and Bisexuality,Transgender and Transsexuals,Bathrooms and Toilets,Law and Legislation
April 12, 2016
3584
RALEIGH, N.C. — Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina, whose state has been the subject of withering criticism since he signed legislation limiting bathroom access for transgender people and eliminating anti-discrimination ordinances based on sexual orientation, announced Tuesday that he would strengthen workplace protections for state employees and urge the General Assembly to modify part of the law.But he stopped short of opposing limits on which bathrooms transgender people could use, and the law will be left largely intact. Critics said his action was more cosmetic than real.Mr. McCrory signed the legislation immediately after it was passed last month and, 20 days later, made his slight retreat with an executive order that he said would alter the equal employment policy for state workers to cover discrimination claims related to sexual orientation and gender identity.He also said he would urge lawmakers to reverse course and allow people to bring discrimination cases in state court.“Simply put, I have listened to the people of North Carolina, and the people of North Carolina are entitled to both privacy and equality,” said Mr. McCrory, a Republican who is seeking re-election this fall. “We can and we must achieve both of these goals.”The announcement reflected the difficult political position for the governor. He faces a steady drumbeat of threats and criticism from business interests calling for repeal of the law, and a united response from social conservatives in his own party who want to defend it.State Representative Paul Stam, a Republican and the speaker pro tempore, said Monday that there was “no appetite” in the Legislature to modify the law significantly.In an email Tuesday, he wrote: “A governor can’t repeal a law, and he did not. He did ask for one sentence in the law to be modified.”Critics agreed that Tuesday’s order by Mr. McCrory made no immediate changes to North Carolina’s law, which includes the provision limiting transgender bathroom access and another that forbids local governments from creating their own anti-discrimination ordinances.“Governor McCrory’s actions today are a poor effort to save face after his sweeping attacks on the L.G.B.T. community, and they fall far short of correcting the damage done” by the law, Sarah Preston, the acting executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of North Carolina, said in a statement on Tuesday.But other opponents of the law said they were fleetingly encouraged by parts of Mr. McCrory’s announcement. Kyle Palazzolo, a staff lawyer at Lambda Legal, a gay rights group, said that the law’s “devastating blow” would not be resolved by Mr. McCrory’s order, but that it had brought “an improvement for the state employees it impacts.”Since the measure became law, North Carolina has faced a barrage of criticism from business interests and warnings of boycotts and canceled investments. PayPal, an online-payment company, said it would abandon plans for a global operations center in the state, and the National Basketball Association suggested that it could move its 2017 All-Star Game from Charlotte. There, tourism officials said that organizers of at least four major events had cited the law when they dropped plans to be in the city.On Tuesday, Deutsche Bank announced that it would “freeze plans to create 250 jobs” near Raleigh.Mr. McCrory is not the first Republican governor to back away from a measure condemned as curbing gay rights. Last year, for example, Mike Pence of Indiana and Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas found themselves under similar pressures.The North Carolina law that led to this year’s firestorm created a mandatory statewide anti-discrimination policy, but it did not include specific protections based on sexual orientation or gender identity. State lawmakers introduced their legislation after Charlotte, the state’s largest city, approved new legal protections for transgender people.The new state law prohibits people from using public bathrooms that do not match the designated sex on their birth certificates.In addition to the outcry from businesses, North Carolina has encountered pressure from the Obama administration, which has previously argued that gay, lesbian and transgender people are protected by federal laws forbidding gender discrimination. A handful of federal agencies have been studying whether the law makes the state ineligible for the billions of aid dollars it receives each year.The measure is also the subject of a lawsuit, and Mr. McCrory’s general-election opponent, Attorney General Roy Cooper, has declined to defend the law in court.In his previous efforts to defend the law in the court of public opinion, Mr. McCrory argued that out-of-state interest groups and news organizations were stripping the law of its context and besmirching North Carolina’s reputation. Mr. McCrory complained about “a vicious, nationwide smear campaign” in late March.On Tuesday, it was not immediately clear whether Mr. McCrory’s decision would do anything to inhibit the pushback from major businesses, including Deutsche Bank.After Mr. McCrory’s announcement, a spokesman for the bank, Michael Golden, declined to comment on its effects on the company’s plans.Other companies that expressed concerns about the measure, including 21st Century Fox, Bank of America and PayPal, did not respond to messages. The chief executive of Charlotte’s chamber of commerce, Bob Morgan, said Mr. McCrory’s announcement “sends a positive message to businesses across North Carolina and to our economic development clients throughout the country and the world.”Just as businesses were considering the consequences of Mr. McCrory’s decision, many members of the General Assembly were trying to digest the essence of his executive order and what it might mean for lawmakers when they reconvene on April 25.Some Republicans quickly said that Mr. McCrory had effectively come down on the side of the law. The speaker of the State House of Representatives, Tim Moore, who was a sponsor of the legislation, said that the governor’s order “affirms the importance of the actions the General Assembly took in passing the Bathroom Bill to protect North Carolina citizens from extremists’ efforts to undermine civility and normalcy in our everyday lives.”Mr. McCrory’s decision will shift at least some of the burden about the law’s future to the General Assembly, which will have to decide whether to assent to his request that discrimination claims again be permitted in state courts.“Our caucus will carefully review the executive order to determine if there will be any further action by the General Assembly,” said Andy Munn, a spokesman for Mr. Moore.Some Democrats offered modest praise for Mr. McCrory’s decision, but others condemned it as tardy and insufficient.“Governor McCrory’s executive order is a day late and a veto short,” Mr. Cooper said. “I’m glad Governor McCrory has finally acknowledged the great damage his legislation has done, but he needs to do much more.”Other Democrats said the executive order was little more than a distraction.“I think it’s an attempt to divert attention from a full repeal effort,” said State Representative Darren G. Jackson, a Democrat from Wake County.He said it was a tacit admission that the new law “has taken a big economic toll on North Carolina.”