http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/06/nyregion/shootings-in-public-housing-project-highlight-risks-of-stairwell-patrols.html
Shootings in Public Housing Project Highlight Risks of Stairwell Patrols - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Cruz  Diara E (New York  NY  Police Officer),Espeut  Patrick (1986- ),Chavis  Malik (1992-2016),Police Department (NYC),Public and Subsidized Housing,New York City,South Bronx (Bronx  NY)
Feb. 5, 2016
4654
Malik Chavis made himself at home in the red brick apartment building in the South Bronx, even though it was his girlfriend who lived on the seventh floor. He would often hang out in the stairwell, a can of beer or cigarette in hand, neighbors said.But if the stairwell was Mr. Chavis’s place of comfort, it was a known hazard to New York City police officers who conducted up-and-down sweeps known as vertical patrols of the building in the Melrose Houses, a public housing project. Step by step, they would navigate its narrow turns on the lookout for drug deals and other illegal activities.It was in this stairwell that four police officers found Mr. Chavis and another man drinking beer on Thursday night. The officers asked the men for identification. Mr. Chavis, 23, said he did not have his, and started to lead the officers to his girlfriend’s apartment when he spun around in the hallway and fired on them with an semiautomatic pistol, wounding two police officers before fleeing into her apartment and fatally shooting himself in the head, the police said.The shooting served as a blunt counterpoint to a trial unfolding in Brooklyn, in which a police officer who seemed perhaps overly cognizant of the dangers of a stairwell fired his gun and killed an unarmed black man, Akai Gurley, as he walked down the stairs in 2014. Police officers have testified at the trial of Peter Liang, who faces charges that include manslaughter and official misconduct, that patrolling stairwells is among the most perilous assignments in the city’s housing projects.While crime has receded citywide over the last two decades, it has persisted in public housing projects where gang violence and narcotics are often a part of daily life. Within the Police Department, about 2,350 officers in the Housing Bureau are responsible for monitoring narrow stairwells, crowded halls and rooftops in the city’s more than 300 public-housing projects.“Patrolling housing projects is dangerous,” said a senior law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the investigation into the Bronx shooting was continuing. “There are inherent risks. You go up one flight, but then you turn a corner. And, before you go up another flight and turn the next corner, you never know what’s around that corner.”Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, the city’s largest police union, said on Friday, “The simple truth is that there is nothing ‘routine’ about ‘routine vertical patrol’ in our city’s housing projects.”The Police Department allows officers on vertical patrols to use their discretion in drawing their weapon, a policy that has not been changed since Mr. Gurley was killed. But the department has taken steps to reinforce training to ensure that when officers do draw their gun, they keep their finger outside the trigger guard and off the trigger, police officials said.At the Melrose Houses, which is operated by the New York City Housing Authority, officials said that all the lights were working in the stairwells and hallways at the time of the shooting on Thursday, and that additional security measures included 10 outdoor security cameras. The authority plans to install closed-circuit television cameras inside the buildings, including stairwells and hallways, later this year.“This tragedy underscores the importance of continuing comprehensive security upgrades throughout Nycha developments,” said Aja Worthy-Davis, a spokeswoman for the housing agency.Officer Liang was on a vertical patrol in a darkened stairwell at the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York when he pulled out his gun as he headed to the roof, his lawyers have said. His gun went off, the round flying down the stairway and striking Mr. Gurley. Within hours, the Police Department acknowledged a grave error, and Mayor Bill de Blasio and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton visited his family’s home to apologize.While well lit on Friday, the stairwells at the Melrose Houses were far from pleasant. They were grimy and reeked of urine. Cigarette butts, a plastic bag with traces of white powder and an empty Budweiser bottle littered the stairwell.Several residents said that young men, often from other buildings, tended to congregate on the stairs and hassled residents who had to rely on them whenever the elevator malfunctioned — another problem, along with darkened stairwells, that happened with some frequency in the city’s housing projects.“Sometimes you come out, you have to be asking for permission to pass by,” said Gloria Ramos, 64, who has lived in the building for 14 years. “It’s horrible.”Wanda Sines, the mother of Belinda Sines, the girlfriend of Mr. Chavis, said she welcomed the police officers on the vertical patrols. “I love it,” she said. “I’m secure if I see a cop in there, I speak to them, I say hi.”The two officers wounded in Thursday’s shooting joined the Housing Bureau in January 2014 after graduating from the Police Academy. While not rookies, they were relatively new to the department. Officer Patrick Espeut, 29, who was hit by gunfire in the cheek, was released from a hospital on Friday afternoon. Officer Diara E. Cruz, 24, who was hit on the side of her body underneath her bullet-resistant vest, was listed in stable condition.Mr. Lynch said both officers had performed stairwell patrols countless times without incident, before running into Mr. Chavis, who had a long arrest record, including for violent crimes, and had served time in state prison. He had been in violation of the terms of his current parole for failing to perform community service.After shooting at the officers, Mr. Chavis fled into his girlfriend’s apartment. Mr. Chavis called his father, told him “I shot this cop” and hung up, the police said. Mr. Chavis asked another man in the apartment to shoot him, and when the man refused, he went into a bedroom and shot himself in the head, the police said.Mr. Chavis had written on social media about his daughter, which might have given him a reason to live, police officials said. At the same time, the officials said, he may not have wanted to return to prison. In addition to the semiautomatic pistol Mr. Chavis was carrying, officers found a sawed-off shotgun in a bag in the apartment where he killed himself.Ms. Sines, who was visiting her daughter’s apartment on Thursday night, said that her daughter had been dating Mr. Chavis since October. She said that Mr. Chavis, whom she described as a “clean fanatic,” had worked the night shift stocking shelves at an Old Navy store in the Bronx. “He was a very good guy, that’s why I can’t believe it happened,” she said. “He helped my daughter out a lot.”But Mr. Chavis left a different impression on other neighbors.Katherina Martinez, 28, a home health aide who lives on the eighth floor, said she was suspicious of Mr. Chavis because she would see him loitering in the stairwells.Susie Hodges, 73, who has lived in the building for five decades, said that violence had become a fact of life there. “I’m just relieved the cops survived,” said Ms. Hodges, whose son is a police officer. “They were just trying to do their job and keep us safe.”