http://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/11/science/physicists-strive-to-build-a-black-hole.html
Physicists Strive to Build A Black Hole - The New York Times
CERN,SPACE,BLACK HOLES (SPACE),PARTICLE ACCELERATORS,PHYSICS
Sept. 11, 2001
3387
To see black holes, those gravitational whirlpools that suck in matter and even light, you need not just a powerful telescope but a bit of imagination. You can't observe the holes themselves, just the bad effects they have on their neighborhoods: gobs of stellar matter screaming out radiation as they are pulled toward what appears to be an omnivorous, bottomless pit.It is comforting to think that something so voracious is so far away. But there are times when physicists wish that they could take a closer look. Some of the newest ideas in high-energy physics suggest that this may soon be possible. The next generation of particle accelerators, like the Large Hadron Collider, which is under construction at CERN, the European physics center near Geneva, may be able to produce miniature black holes on demand. Some particle physicists say they may be in a better position than the cosmologists to establish, once and for all, that black holes are real.''Future colliders could become black hole factories,'' said Dr. Steven B. Giddings, a physicist at the University of California at Santa Barbara. If some recent theories turn out to be right, the effect would be far from subtle, with one tiny black hole popping into existence every second and harmlessly disappearing with an unmistakable burst of energy.''Black hole production should light up the detectors like Christmas trees,'' Dr. Giddings said.Dr. Greg Landsberg, a Brown University physicist who also works at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., is hoping to give the astronomers a run for their money. ''Despite what cosmologists like to tell the general public,'' he said, ''there is no compelling evidence that they have seen a single black hole. There will essentially be a competition to see who finds a black hole first.''Cosmologists consider the case for black holes to be more persuasive all the time. Just last week, they announced strong new evidence that one lurks at the core of the Milky Way. But being able to create and manipulate black holes in an accelerator would make them seem more palpable and open up new theoretical terrain to explore.Miniature black holes mark a point where the theory of gravity, called general relativity, comes together with quantum mechanics, which describes nature's other forces. Artificial black holes could be used to test ideas about merging the two disciplines into the long-sought Theory of Everything.''We've been trying for a century, and we still don't fully understand black holes,'' said Dr. Andrew Strominger, a physicist at Harvard. ''If there is some possibility we actually could make them in an accelerator lab and watch what they do, that would be just fantastic. This could guide us toward understanding the fundamental mystery of how quantum mechanics and general relativity fit together.''The experiments will also be used to explore one of the most jarring ideas in contemporary physics, that the universe consists of hidden dimensions, beyond the three we call home. According to the new theories, a reserve of extremely strong gravity lies dormant within the other dimensions. If physicists could tap that wellspring, they might be able to smash subatomic particles together so hard that they form black holes. If so, that in itself would attest to the  possibility that the extra dimensions are real.''It would be not just a smoking  gun but a smoking cannon,'' said Dr. Landsberg, of Brown.Out in the cosmos, black holes are created when stars burn out and collapse. As a star becomes denser and more compact, its gravitational field intensifies, causing it to contract even more. Smaller stars reach a point where gravity can compress them no further. But if the star is very large to begin with, so much  mass becomes concentrated into so small a volume that a threshold is passed. The star becomes overwhelmed by its own gravity and goes right on collapsing, pulling in everything that falls into its ''event horizon,'' the boundary beyond which nothing can escape.In theory you do not need stars to make black holes. Even two objects as small as subatomic particles would form a black hole if they were squeezed into an extremely small space. That, however, would require the energy of a particle accelerator the size of a galaxy, something that would never get through Congress.But there may be a cost-cutting alternative, a recipe for making black holes at energies around a trillion electron-volts -- within the range of the Large Hadron Collider. The plan is based on the possibility that scientists have been underestimating the full strength of gravity. Suppose that within spaces of less than a millimeter, where gravity has yet to be reliably measured, it is far more powerful. Then subatomic particles would not have to be compressed so severely before their gravity took over and sucked them into a black hole.Why would gravity behave that way? The answer requires taking a leap of faith: when one reaches into the submillimeter realm, extra dimensions open up. And when gravity has more dimensions in which to operate, it becomes far more intense.Imagine two particles hurtling toward a head-on collision. As the gap between them narrows, their gravitational pull on each other increases according to what is called the inverse square law. That means that each time the distance is halved, the gravitational attraction becomes four times as strong. For it to become strong enough to form a black hole, the gap would have to be narrowed to 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, a distance called the Planck length -- and that would require a galactic-size accelerator.But all that assumes that the particles are traveling in the familiar land of three dimensions. If gravity has four dimensions in which to exert itself, it obeys an inverse cube law: each time the distance between the particles is halved, the gravitational field increases eight times. In five-dimensional space, gravity increases by the fourth power, growing 16 times.So suppose when the particles are less than a millimeter apart, they enter a space with more dimensions. Gravity would increase at a much faster clip and a black hole would open up when they were just about 10 to the minus 17 centimeters apart.  That is still an inconceivably tiny gap, but it is 10 quadrillion times as large as the black hole threshold in three dimensions. And it could be reached with the energies produced by the Large Hadron Collider.Physicists have been pondering that idea since at least 1999, when papers by Dr. Nima Arkani-Hamed of the University of California at Berkeley, Dr. Lisa Randall of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Raman Sundrum of Johns Hopkins and other theorists suggested how gravity's full strength could be hidden inside extra dimensions.This summer two teams of physicists -- Dr. Giddings and Dr. Scott Thomas of Stanford University, and Dr. Landsberg and Dr. Savas Dimopoulos, who is also at Stanford -- worked out the implications in more detail, showing that multidimensional gravity would be strong enough to produce black holes in great abundance in the next generation of particle accelerators. (The papers can be found on the Web at xxx.lanl.gov /abs/hep-ph/0106219 and xxx.lanl .gov/abs/hep-ph/0106295.)''Somehow this had escaped attention before the two papers appeared,'' Dr. Landsberg said. ''People had thought black hole production would be a weird and rare event.''After the Large Hadron Collider goes online in 2006, physicists will try to make black holes by slamming protons together. These particles are made of even smaller subparticles called quarks and gluons. If two of these ''partons'' collide to form a black hole, the result should be spectacular.The black hole would almost immediately evaporate, sending a spherical burst of subatomic particles ballooning outward like the sparks in an aerial fireworks display. Quarks, gluons, electrons, photons -- every particle in the book would be likely to appear. The odds of such a wide variety of particles accidentally arranging themselves in such a distinctive pattern are extremely low. ''The probability of faking it is completely negligible,'' Dr. Landsberg said.What if the theory is wrong and the black holes don't immediately disappear? Is there a danger of sucking the accelerator, the laboratory, the city of Geneva, the Swiss Alps and ultimately the whole planet into the hole? Could something like that ever qualify for an environmental impact statement?Hoping to avoid the kind of doomsday fears aroused two years ago by the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, N.Y., physicists have done some reassuring calculations.''There is a constant flux of ultrahigh-energy cosmic rays striking the atmosphere,'' Dr. Giddings said. ''The same calculations that we do for the L.H.C. also predict that around 100 such black holes a year are 'organically' and apparently safely produced in the earth's atmosphere in cosmic ray collisions. So if this were dangerous, we shouldn't be here to begin with.''If black holes can be manufactured and studied in captivity, physicists will be able to test ideas in the hinterlands of understanding. The black holes are so tiny that they would obey the laws of quantum mechanics, but their gravity is so powerful that they must also obey general relativity. By observing how the two theories interact, physicists could see if they were just different  manifestations of a more general law.They might even gain some insight into a conundrum known as the information paradox. A fundamental truth of quantum mechanics is that information can never disappear from the universe. But what happens when you drop an encylopedia down a black hole? When the black hole eventually disintegrates, the information would be gone.But some physicists believe that the information must not actually vanish, that it is imprinted somehow in the pattern of radiation emitted during evaporation. By comparing the characteristics of the particles that collide to form a black hole -- things like spin and charge -- to the characteristics of the radiation coming out, theorists can look for some kind of subtle correlation.The experiments may also provide clues about the number of extra dimensions and even hint at their shape and size. Mini-black holes would be like depth charges used to plumb the fathoms of a hidden world.In fact, when accelerators reach the trillion electron-volt range, physicists may find that there is nothing to study but black holes. Anything else would be hidden inside their horizons, beyond the point of no return.Reaching that frontier would mark a profound change in the nature of particle physics. As they go to higher and higher energies, experimenters study what happens in tinier and tinier spaces. The appearance of black holes would mark the place where the concept of size breaks down. With nothing smaller to probe,  short-distance physics would come to an end.''When I told an experimental colleague this, he didn't like it,'' Dr. Giddings said. ''But then I pointed out to him that in this scenario high-energy physics has a bright future: the experimentalists would become the geographers of the extra dimensions.''