https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/05/nyregion/2-police-officers-are-shot-in-the-bronx.html
Police Sergeant Fatally Shot in the Bronx; Another Is Injured - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Bronx (NYC),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Tuozzolo  Paul J (1975-2016),Rosales  Manuel (1981-2016),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Police Department (NYC),New York City
Nov. 4, 2016
7143
The police found the suspect just a few blocks from the Bronx apartment he had stormed into on Friday, armed with a gun and looking for his estranged wife.One sergeant approached the red Jeep that dispatchers had told the officers to look for. He was shot in the face. Another sergeant was shot in the leg.“Officer down! Officer down!” a police officer on the scene radioed to the dispatcher.The sergeant who was shot in the face, Paul Tuozzolo, died at Jacobi Medical Center within hours of the shooting. The other sergeant, Emmanuel Kwo, was in stable condition at the same hospital.The suspect, identified as Manuel Rosales, 35, of Long Island, was killed during the exchange of gunfire, which unfolded in the middle of the afternoon, not far from the southern edge of the Bronx Zoo.In an interview, the father of Mr. Rosales said his son was deeply troubled. He had spoken of committing “suicide by cop,” had received a diagnosis of bipolar disorder as a teenager and had a volatile relationship with his estranged wife, the father, also Manuel Rosales, said.The death of Sergeant Tuozzolo was the first line-of-duty killing of a police officer in New York City since October 2015, when Officer Randolph Holder was shot in the head in East Harlem.And the episode came just days after two officers were killed in adjacent cities in Iowa, allegedly by a man who ambushed the officers in their patrol car.But unlike those killings and other targeted attacks on the police over the past year, the shooting in the Bronx on Friday appeared to have stemmed from an episode of domestic violence — the sort of call that is routine for the police but is also freighted with danger.Sergeant Tuozzolo, 41, was a father of two and a 19-year-veteran of the Police Department who had spent the past 10 years assigned to the 43rd Precinct, which covers a large part of the southeastern Bronx.At a news conference at the hospital, Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, stood with a line of grim-faced local officials.“The city is in mourning, and the family of the N.Y.P.D. is in mourning,” the mayor said.Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill spoke after him. “I always talk about what a great job this is, but there’s nothing worse than a day like today,” said Mr. O’Neill, who was sworn in to his position in September.The suspect, Mr. Rosales, was believed to have lived in Brentwood in Suffolk County, where he had been arrested 17 times, Mr. O’Neill said.The trouble started on Friday afternoon, the police said, when Mr. Rosales forced his way into his estranged wife’s apartment on Beach Avenue. Their 3-year-old son and a 50-year-old woman were present at the time. The night before, the police said, Mr. Rosales followed his wife in a car on Tremont Avenue but disappeared before the officers the woman had summoned could arrive.According to a law enforcement official who was briefed on the situation, he stayed for at least two hours at the apartment on Friday. Around 2:45 p.m., the 50-year-old woman called 911, telling a dispatcher that an armed man had broken in and giving a description of the vehicle he had fled in.Responding to the call, the two sergeants and a rookie officer pursued Mr. Rosales to a dead end, about half a mile away from the apartment, near the intersection of Noble and Bronx River Avenues, the official said.Mr. Rosales’s car mounted the curb in an effort to turn around but was blocked by a truck on the street, another official said. The police car bumped into Mr. Rosales’s, at which point the three officers got out to confront him.Surveillance video caught what happened next: It shows the two sergeants with their guns drawn approaching Mr. Rosales in his car. There is no audio, but officials said the officers were probably ordering him to step out of his vehicle. The video captured Mr. Rosales shooting Sergeant Tuozzolo, and the rookie and Sergeant Kwo firing at the suspect.Sergeant Tuozzolo was shot with a .45-caliber semiautomatic handgun at close range, the police said. It had been about two minutes since the 911 call.Sergeant Kwo suffered a bullet graze wound to his leg as he and the other officer fired, the official said.It was the rookie officer’s third day on patrol, said Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, the city’s largest police union.Dionice Perez, who lives nearby on Noble Avenue, said she had been startled by the volleys of gunfire. “It was just pow, pow, pow, pow, pow,” she said.Officials said that more than 20 shots had been fired.Scores of police officers converged on the scene, many in tactical gear, as a police helicopter circled overhead. Investigators in white protective suits milled around a damaged sport utility vehicle on the side of the road, one of its windows shattered.Officers stood in front of the Beach Avenue apartment building, the entrance cordoned off by police tape.Mr. Lynch said Sergeant Tuozzolo’s two sons were ages 2 and 4.Mr. Rosales, 56, said his son had lived a troubled life since his teens, with several arrests and stints in jail. The father recalled one event that occurred around the time his son was 18. His son was in a car accident with an 18-wheeler while drag-racing, and the police, despite the father’s protests, said they would not press charges because the loss of his son’s car was enough.“Manny, he could do whatever he wants and the judge always says you deserve a second chance, only because he looks white,” the father, who is from Honduras, said.Some years ago the father discovered his son had a gun. When his son called a suicide hotline late one night, dozens of police officers appeared in front of the family’s home in Brentwood hours later.“He had told the lady on the phone he was going to commit suicide by cop,” the father said. “He had a gun and was going to go to the precinct and shoot till they killed him.”