https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/us/politics/trump-travel-ban-court.html
The Court Arguments on Trump’s Travel Ban: What You Need to Know - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Trump  Donald J,Canby  William Cameron Jr,Clifton  Richard Randall,Friedland  Michelle Taryn,Robart  James L
Feb. 7, 2017
4110
WASHINGTON — The federal appeals court in San Francisco will hear arguments on Tuesday in a challenge to President Trump’s targeted travel ban. Here’s what you need to know.The court has scheduled an hour of arguments to start at 3 p.m. Pacific time. The arguments will take place by telephone, probably because the judges and lawyers are scattered around the country. The court will stream the audio live on its website.The Justice Department is seeking an emergency stay of a trial judge’s ruling that blocks Mr. Trump’s executive order. The order suspended travel from seven mostly Muslim countries and limited the nation’s refugee program. The ruling, issued Friday by Judge James Robart of the Federal District Court in Seattle, has allowed previously barred travelers and immigrants to enter the country.The case was brought by Washington State, which was quickly joined by Minnesota.The case will be heard by Judge William C. Canby Jr., who was appointed by President Jimmy Carter and is based in Phoenix; Judge Michelle T. Friedland, who was appointed by President Barack Obama and is based in San Francisco; and Judge Richard R. Clifton, who was appointed by President George W. Bush and is based in Honolulu.Each side has 30 minutes. A lawyer for the federal government will go first, followed by one for the states. If the court follows its usual practice, the first lawyer will be allowed a brief rebuttal.There are preliminary questions, including whether the states have suffered the sort of direct and concrete injury that gives them standing to sue. But the core question is whether Mr. Trump has the constitutional and statutory authority to exclude some categories of people from the United States.The Justice Department has said that courts may not second-guess the president’s national security determinations in deciding whom to let in. The states have said that due process and equal protection principles, along with the First Amendment’s protection of religious liberty, make the travel ban unlawful.On Tuesday, Mr. Trump said his administration will take the challenge to the executive order “through the system,” calling it “very important for the country.”“Some things are law,” he said, “and I’m all in favor of that. And some things are common sense. This is common sense.”