https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/13/fashion/a-hamptons-local-considers-the-summer-people.html
The Other Side of the Counter - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Hamptons (NY)
Sept. 11, 2015
8937
Tumbleweed Tuesday is what Hamptons locals call the day after Labor Day. It’s always refreshing. The summer people have disappeared. Parking spaces reappear. Stress levels dip.Three years ago, when I started working as the manager of a health food store out here, I was warned about the summer people. I even feared them.I heard they were rich, rude, intolerant of gluten. They liked to shop in pop-up stores, and they had a pronounced inability to drive. They were to be my enemies.But it’s not that simple.I should say here that I’m talking about a specific type of summer person. Many of them are generous and easy to be around. One worked with me to develop a writing project, and another used connections to help a co-worker move to Hawaii. I laugh with them, and our children play together.Yet soon enough I also saw the worst of them, frowning or half-drunk, wearing their white pants and fedoras, standing in the middle of Main Street while asking directions to “the Main Street, with all the shops.” Sometimes they tugged on the door at 6:30 p.m., mystified that the store would close so early.Those who stick out most are marked by a certain intensity. From where I stand, behind the counter, they appear to be intense about their children, the efficiency of their digestive tracts and the cleanliness of their livers.They are acutely inquisitive about the foods they choose to eat. They must know the provenance of their vegetables, and they will ask you to tell them exactly what the dead animal they are about to ingest ate before it died.The summer people are not so uniformly defined, and the line dividing the locals and our visitors has blurred considerably in recent years. We’re not living in a John Cheever short story, with the same families returning to the same sleepy seaside town year after year.Apps and the web have made the summer people at once more transient (those who stay for only a weekend, thanks to Airbnb) and more permanent (those who live here year-round, while the breadwinner works from his or her Hamptons home four days a week).Still, it seems as if most of the people who come out here do so with the intention of escaping the city, but they can’t help but bring the city with them. As a friend of mine who works as a cashier told me: “They don’t want to spend the time to assimilate. They don’t want to become part of the culture.”Many of them seem to want what the city provides, only in a nicer setting. As in a bad relationship, there’s an expectation problem.For example, while the store I manage stocks many varieties of gluten-free cereal, we don’t have every single one “you can get in the city.” And when customers grouse about this kind of thing, we locals see haughtiness in their reactions.Social media can make relaxation exhausting, and the summer people seem more Internet-addicted than most. They tap away at their phones, competing in a relaxation competition. Who’s having the best summer? Who’s going to the most exclusive parties? Who’s #blessed?Relaxed people look different from people who are trying to relax. No one is fooled by yoga pants and a T-shirt that reads “Today matters” when they are worn by someone who is screaming into an iPhone or scolding children over nothing. The summer people seem hurried and worried.The smart vendor will exploit such tendencies.We once hosted a raw-juice demonstration in the store. The person who set up the juicer pitched her wares like an old-time carnival barker:“Drink this every day and you will have so much energy. Your hair will shine, your hearing will improve, your teeth will be sharper!”While she appeared a little on the insane side to me, the summer people from the city ate it right up.“If I drink enough, will it increase my ejaculate?” one man asked.“Yes!” the hopped-up raw-juice lady said.Sold.These are people who try to use their money to buy health and happiness. They have traded a sense of calm for a second (or third) house with a trophy lawn. They project a perfect script onto our town and fall into a delusion that it exists for their benefit.We’re interlopers on their movie set. And if we don’t play our roles, we hear about it. As a cafe employee told me, “The summer people are fine, as long as you tell them, ‘Yes.’ ”I’ll never forget my first Labor Day in the store. Endless lines at the register and in the cafe. Outside, a crush of cars, inching back to the city. A migration. Passing through our town, through me, back to their lives.Now the sun hangs lower in the sky, which means the fall-festival people are gearing up. We’ll be ready for them, happy to be on their path.