http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/science/new-medical-advice-kittys-night-life-and-a-galactic-group-photo.html
New Medical Advice, Kitty’s Night Life and a Galactic Group Photo - The New York Times
Medicine and Health,Obesity,Sunscreen,Language and Languages,Saturn (Planet),Cats,American Medical Assn
June 24, 2013
6185
The nation’s doctors were busy last week: Not only did they declare obesity to be a disease, they also made a host of decisions about other medical matters.DevelopmentsNew PrescriptionsChildren should be allowed to take sunscreen to school, but should not have energy drinks marketed to them. Gay men should be allowed to donate blood. And nobody should face discrimination based on genetic information. So said the American Medical Association, the nation’s largest physician group, at its annual meeting, held in Chicago. While its policy decisions are not legally binding, they do come with white-coat authority — particularly when one of the association’s pronouncements is dear to your heart, like the one about desk chairs being bad for you. “Today, the A.M.A. adopted policy recognizing potential risks of prolonged sitting and encouraging employers, employees and others to make available alternatives to sitting, such as standing workstations and isometric balls,” said one of the policy statements. Or, as Dr. James Levine of the Mayo Clinic told The Los Angeles Times, “The chair is out to kill us.”Fluffy on the MoveRemember the scientist who just published a paper about cheetahs, finding that it is their agility — rather than speed — that spells doom for so many law-abiding gazelles? In that study, Alan M. Wilson, a specialist in animal locomotion at the University of London’s Royal Veterinary College, reported on a novel tracking collar he developed to detail the movements of cheetahs in the wild for the first time. Data from the collars showed that nimble leaps, abrupt stops and lateral pounces were what helped those cheetahs the most as they hunted. Now the professor, armed with smaller collars, has done the same experiment with 50 house cats, tracking the daily prowlings of pets in the very Britishly named village of Shamley Green, in Surrey. His team built a map charting the paths of Brutus, Phoebe, Coco, Rosie and other cats. “Often our findings would contradict what owners believed their cats were getting up to,” Professor Wilson wrote in an article for the BBC. “We were particularly surprised by how small the ranges of most of the cats were, and how few of them went into the surrounding countryside.” The cats largely stayed out of one another’s territories, he added, but they did go into neighbors’ homes, presumably looking for food.Foreign Language TipsA  small study found that Chinese immigrants in America spoke English more fluently when shown American images (like Mount Rushmore) rather than Chinese ones (like the Great Wall). Further, when the people in the study were shown a Chinese face on the screen and asked to converse with that person, they were less fluent — though they seemed more socially comfortable — than when they were asked to have the same conversation with someone who was Caucasian. The authors referred to this phenomenon as “frame switching,” your brain’s natural way of adjusting its reference points. A headline on Smithsonian.com summed up the findings this way: “Seeing Pictures of Home Can Make It Harder to Speak a Foreign Language.”Coming upWave at SaturnOnly twice has Earth ever been photographed from the outer solar system, but now NASA plans to make it a hat trick. On July 19, the faraway Cassini probe will take a mosaic of images of the whole Saturn system — rings, moons and all — as backlit by the Sun, which will be in just the right place that day. The Earth, 898 million miles away, will make a cameo appearance, showing up as “just a pixel” in the mosaic, said Linda Spilker, the Cassini project scientist, in an article on NASA’s Web site. To drum up excitement for the project, NASA has started a social media campaign called Wave at Saturn, which Dr. Spilker described this way: “We hope you’ll go outside, look in the direction of Saturn and send us pictures of yourselves waving.” Ah, the grandeur of space.