https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/fashion/diamond-reef-tropical-bar-brooklyn-bed-stuy.html
Diamond Reef, a Tropical Bar for Brooklyn Summers - The New York Times
Diamond Reef (Brooklyn  NY  Bar),Bars and Nightclubs,Bedford-Stuyvesant (Brooklyn  NY),Cocktails and Mixed Drinks
July 3, 2017
1823
When it gets warm, the measure of a good bar shifts to the great outdoors. Happily, Diamond Reef, a bar with a vaguely tiki theme and “Miami Vice” accents in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, has a large outdoor patio with a permanent food truck and a place to smoke.The bar, opened in March by the owners of the Lower East Side craft cocktail lounge Attaboy, is the night-life equivalent of a shirt open one button too far. That is to say, it is perfect for summer.THE PLACEDiamond Reef is tucked between a Christian center and an auto body shop on an industrial stretch of Atlantic Avenue, with few neighbors to complain about noise. Inside, the wood paneling, tropical print wallpaper and glass bricks give the place a 1980s-meets-midcentury-modern-rec-room vibe. The bar is long, and the teal-blue stools are high. Outside, a string of lights twinkles through a smoky haze of grill meats and secondhand smoke.THE CROWDDuring the day, the backyard is full of heavily bearded men with baseball caps on backward, and boho women with dyed hair wearing jorts. Children scurry around. At night, it heats up to adults only. On a recent Friday, a cadre of graphic designers celebrating a 40th birthday flirted with one another while sipping frozen cocktails.THE PLAYLISTA diverse and mellow mix — Rick James, Sade, Isley Brothers, Serge Gainsbourg — fills out the week, while weekend playlists, curated by Dan Greenbaum, the managing partner, tend to be played louder and dancier.GETTING INTables are prime real estate and hard to find past 8, but that’s nothing compared with the scrum for the metal chairs and tables outside when the weather’s nice. By 10, a line sometimes stretches down Atlantic Avenue.DRINKSLighthearted, easygoing and tiki-adjacent, the cocktails at Diamond Reef are far less fussy than those at Attaboy. Clear standouts include the Penichillin ($12), a frozen slushy made of frozen Scotch, lemon and honey; and the Booze and Juice ($12), a shot of liquor and a glass of freshly squeezed Granny Smith apple juice.