https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/25/arts/television/seth-meyers-late-night-donald-trump.html
Seth Meyers Confronts the Trump Era on ‘Late Night’ - The New York Times
Television,Comedy and Humor,Meyers  Seth,Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Conway  Kellyanne
Jan. 25, 2017
3768
As he warmed up the crowd at Studio 8G on the evening of Jan. 10, Seth Meyers had a special request. Before the cameras rolled, he told those in his audience at “Late Night” that, though they were used to seeing him interview celebrities and newsmakers with whom he often agrees, he wanted them to be respectful of a guest “who does not agree with me on a lot of things.”Soon, he would talk with Kellyanne Conway, who would become the White House counselor to President Donald J. Trump after serving as his campaign manager. Mr. Meyers, the literate, quip-firing comedian and host of NBC’s “Late Night,” had spent the preceding days mapping out his conversation with Ms. Conway, a steadfast and unflappable spokeswoman for Mr. Trump.Then, about an hour before “Late Night” was taped, the world learned that Mr. Trump had received an intelligence briefing on a possible Russian attempt to compromise him, and Mr. Meyers had to decide how to address this breaking news with a key member of Mr. Trump’s team.This was all occurring days before Mr. Trump was sworn in as president; before his White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, gave a combative briefing in which he falsely stated that Mr. Trump drew “the largest audience to ever witness an inauguration”; and before Ms. Conway said on “Meet the Press” that Mr. Spicer was merely offering “alternative facts.” (Even as this sentence was being typed, Mr. Spicer was telling White House reporters, “Sometimes we can disagree with the facts.”)“It’s moving at light speed,” Mr. Meyers said earlier, contemplating a presidency and a news cycle with the potential to make “Late Night” — which starts taping around 6:30 p.m. — obsolete by the time it airs at 12:35 a.m. “Last week’s headlines are a million years ago.”He’d been watching Ms. Conway’s past exchanges with news anchors like Rachel Maddow, Jake Tapper, Chuck Todd and Anderson Cooper, and was trying to gauge how he could be welcoming but not obsequious; funny but not snide; probing but not hostile.But if you’ve followed the trajectory of Mr. Meyers, 43, who made an affable anchor of the “Weekend Update” segment on “Saturday Night Live” and led the 2011 White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner, where Mr. Trump spent the night being pummeled with caustic one-liners, then you know he did not plan to hold his tongue in Ms. Conway’s presence.“As important as it is for her to say what she believes to be true, it’s just as important for me to jump in when I feel the opposite to be true,” Mr. Meyers said.It’s a challenge that Mr. Meyers and his late-night colleagues will continue to confront throughout the Trump presidency. Over a haphazard and unpredictable presidential campaign that Mr. Trump dominated, they served a steady diet of acidic commentary on his candidacy; hosts like Samantha Bee, Stephen Colbert, Trevor Noah and John Oliver made their opposition to him an intrinsic part of their shows. (An exception was Jimmy Fallon at NBC’s “The Tonight Show,” who was widely criticized in September for an interview with Mr. Trump that was perceived as too cozy.)While no amount of jokes or sketches was able to prevent Mr. Trump from winning the election, these programs have galvanized viewers who crave the satirical dissent that Mr. Meyers provides. Nearly three years into his tenure at “Late Night,” he has found his voice, and with it, greater resonance.He evolved a hyper-topical style of comedy that asks viewers to be as engaged in current events as he is — epitomized by his signature segment, “A Closer Look,” which can spend 10 minutes or more unpacking a given subject — and which, let’s face it, has grown no fonder of Mr. Trump.Ms. Conway’s visit was a hopeful sign to Mr. Meyers that he could still have cordial relations with the new administration if he conducted the interview thoughtfully. (“There’s also the fear that it goes the other way, and then that’s not the case,” he said.)Still, there’s an existential air of uncertainty that hangs over “Late Night,” and all of late night, now that Mr. Trump has assumed office. Can Mr. Meyers continue to lay into the president without attracting his angry tweets (or worse reprisals)? Is that what his viewers will want in the months to come?“The bigger reshuffling of the deck for us, potentially, is what will the audience’s appetite for it be, moving forward?” Mr. Meyers said. “Because everything up to this point was speculative, and now it’s reality. Will it go from the fun of dating to, now, oh my God, we’re married?”And if Mr. Trump — who clearly pays attention to how TV portrays him — really does follow through on the most authoritarian, anti-media rumblings he expressed as a candidate, is there anything that comic commentary can really do to challenge it?“We fool ourselves if we think it does everything,” said David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker and an occasional “Late Night” guest.“‘A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall’ did not end the nuclear arms race,” Mr. Remnick said. “Kendrick Lamar has not ended racism in America, and Seth Meyers is not going to turn Donald Trump into a sincere, fair-minded liberal. This is not going to happen.”But when it comes to highlighting “the vanities and almost eerie distraction of Trump’s consciousness,” Mr. Remnick said, “satire brought that out a lot better than news stories.”Earlier on the afternoon of our interview, Mr. Meyers and his writing staff had been huddled in his eighth-floor office at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, furnished with sports memorabilia, comic-book art and video game consoles, to pore over a 30-page draft of the “Closer Look” segment he would deliver that night.The comic tirade on Mr. Trump’s maladroit presidential transition — riffing on his praise for Vladimir Putin, his Twitter feud with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Meryl Streep’s criticism of him at the Golden Globes, among many other subjects — was one of three that Mr. Meyers would deliver in a four-show week.Getting this oversize script to hold an audience’s attention meant excising some jokes about cabinet nominees like Steve Mnuchin, and adding jokes, like the sound of tiny knuckles cracking.The dense and lengthy “A Closer Look” has become one of Mr. Meyers’s hallmarks. In a 10-minute segment on Monday, he took on Mr. Trump’s inaugural address, his fixation on turnout and Mr. Spicer’s declaration that it was seen by “the largest audience to ever witness an inauguration, period.”“Period?” Mr. Meyers said in disbelief. “I think you mean double question marks.”That explanatory, can-you-believe-this structure, Mr. Meyers said earlier this month, was simply a means to an end. “It’s ‘This happened, here’s a joke; this happened, here’s a joke,’” he said. “But the ‘This happened’ part is important to us.”If the segment, with its mission of rooting out falsehoods and making sense of unfathomable news, has focused so often on Mr. Trump, Mr. Meyers said, this was unavoidable. “He gave us so much content that we had to turn into a content machine in order to get through it all,” he said.This approach has helped “Late Night,” which was drawing more than 1.6 million viewers at the end of last year, stand out in a crowded field of competitors, and has earned Mr. Meyers praise from viewers, critics and his fellow hosts.Though he is not known for the madcap viral videos that Mr. Fallon and James Corden have mastered, and is not a gregarious showman in the manner of David Letterman or Mr. Colbert, Mr. Meyers has a sincere interest in news and a frustration with hypocrisy that is earned honestly — what Mr. Remnick called a “good-natured political fury that’s infusing the show.”Mr. Corden, of CBS’s “The Late Late Show” (which runs neck-and-neck with “Late Night” in the ratings race), said Mr. Meyers had been smart to build a program that contrasts with the carousing style of his popular lead-in, Mr. Fallon’s “The Tonight Show.”At “Late Night,” Mr. Corden said, “they tried a few different lanes — maybe the show should be this, maybe the show should be that.”“As soon as you go, ‘No, this is the show I want to make, and this is what I’d like to say,’ it’s a brilliant show to watch,” he added.Mr. Noah, the host of “The Daily Show” on Comedy Central, said that any contemporary late-night show with a topical focus owed some creative debt to his predecessor, Jon Stewart.“The truth is, everybody is emulating and trying to evolve their own version of what was inspired by Jon,” Mr. Noah said. “If everyone is doing it, that’s when you seek ways to differentiate yourself, and that pushes you closer to who you should be.”He hailed Mr. Meyers for “how passionate he’s become about everything that is happening in the country, beyond what everyone assumes a late-night show should be talking about.”When Mr. Meyers took over “Late Night” in February 2014, it wasn’t clear his show would turn out this way. He had his time at “Weekend Update,” where, he said, he had possessed “more a comic point of view than a worldview”; two gigs as host of the ESPY Awards; and the White House Correspondents’ Dinner, where he said, “Donald Trump has been saying he’ll run for president as a Republican, which is surprising, as I just assumed he was running as a joke.”In person, Mr. Meyers can be diplomatic when talking about others but self-deprecating when the subject turns to him.Coming into “Late Night,” he said, “I don’t think I had any sense of the grand architecture of the show, probably to the detriment of the show.”“I, at no point, was capable of gathering the writing staff or anyone else and saying, ‘Here is the vision of what this will be,’” he said.To the extent that Mr. Meyers tried to do a more all-around show, and avoided the qualities for which people already knew him, he acknowledges this was a mistake.“I don’t know why, at age 40, I thought, ‘Oh! I’m a jack-of-all-trades,’” Mr. Meyers said with a laugh. “If anything, ‘S.N.L.’ already told me I wasn’t. I started as a cast member, and they basically wore me down to a guy with a tie who sat behind a desk.”For him, a big breakthrough was the realization, about a year and a half into the “Late Night” gig, that he could deliver his opening monologue at his desk, à la “Weekend Update,” instead of in a stand-up style, which never felt right to him.Or, as Mr. Meyers imagined his audience’s response: “Oh, thank goodness, this nice man can now put his hands on paper and a pencil, as opposed to flapping around, trying to land some invisible plane.”Mike Shoemaker, the veteran “S.N.L.” producer who is now Mr. Meyers’s producer on “Late Night,” said he encouraged the host to rely more on his storytelling skills.“When we started, I wanted him to tell a story every day,” Mr. Shoemaker said. “Until finally, he was like” — here Mr. Shoemaker began to gasp exaggeratedly — “‘I can’t think of stories every day! Not enough things happen in my life!’”As “A Closer Look” became a more frequent feature in the ensuing months, Mr. Shoemaker said it essentially filled that void. “It really is how Seth feels about things,” he said. “It’s like telling those stories, except that the story is about what’s going on in the world.”That includes the sobering monologue Mr. Meyers delivered in his Nov. 9 broadcast, where he acknowledged he had been wrong about Mr. Trump’s chances of winning and reckoned with how he, a husband and father of an 8-month-old son at the time, was dealing with his disappointment.“I am hopeful for President Trump,” Mr. Meyers said in the monologue, “because hope is always the best possible path to take.”Reflecting on the process that led to that monologue, Mr. Meyers said: “For a lot of reasons, I was tossing and turning that night. But one of them was, I’m going to have to put this experience into words.”He said he owed his audience an explanation, “since I’d been vocal about how I felt for the 18 months leading up to it.”“It’s a lot easier for one person to say, ‘I got this wrong, I made the mistake,’ than it is for an entire institution,” he added.Though he has never been told by NBC to lay off Mr. Trump, nor been on the receiving end of his angry tweets, as “Saturday Night Live” has, Mr. Meyers said he had concerns about how Mr. Trump would govern. “If he completely restricted the press, I don’t know how many of his followers would care,” he said. “That’s pretty scary.”On the other hand, Mr. Meyers said, “He’s always one compliment away from changing his mind.”A similar uncertainty pervaded Mr. Meyers’s preparations to interview Ms. Conway. If he didn’t hold her feet to the fire, would he face the kind of backlash directed at Mr. Fallon for his interview with Mr. Trump?Mr. Meyers spoke only of himself. “It’s an expectation for my show, and it’s an expectation that we place on ourselves,” he said.But he added that not every late-night program had to be adversarial. “I’m aware that I’m probably doing things that are making people want to watch my show less,” he said. “I don’t know if it’s great for the country if we all, collectively, do stuff that makes everybody want to watch our shows less.”Over the 13-minute interview, Mr. Meyers was cordial to Ms. Conway, congratulating her on Mr. Trump’s victory. He also asked her directly about “allegations that the Russian government has compromising information” on Mr. Trump; Ms. Conway responded: “Well, guess what hasn’t happened, Seth? Nobody has sourced it,” adding that “nothing’s been confirmed.”As he parleyed with Ms. Conway, Mr. Meyers was able to score a few points. When Ms. Conway discussed the delayed hearings for some of Mr. Trump’s cabinet nominees, asking, “Why are we playing politics?,” he answered, “Well, it’s politics.” When Mr. Meyers said he tipped his cap to Ms. Conway for her accessibility, she asked if he would do that with an actual “Make America Great Again” cap.“I’ll tip an imaginary hat,” he said. “But you can’t see what it imaginary says.”The response to the interview, in the studio, among viewers and in the news media, was largely positive, though Mr. Meyers chided himself the next day for not being tougher on some of Ms. Conway’s claims. “Anytime someone from team Trump talks about delegitimizing a president, you wish you brought up his birth-certificate nonsense,” he said.Mr. Meyers said he hadn’t really been reading his online praise or criticism. He had other ways of gauging that the conversation had been successful, though they also made the job of being a late-night host sound ever so slightly less glamorous.“I do so many shows in any given year where none of my friends reach out to say, ‘Good job,’” he said, chuckling at himself. “So even when you wake up with a few emails or texts, you have a sense that it was well received, and that’s a really nice feeling.”Though Mr. Meyers is an avid Twitter user, he said he was not looking at the real-time response to his interview, either. “Mostly because I’m asleep so much earlier than when the show airs,” he said.