https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/magazine/maxine-waters-is-learning-from-millennials.html
Maxine Waters Is Learning From Millennials - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Blacks,Trump  Donald J
July 19, 2017
2894
Recently you’ve found internet fame after some of your public appearances went viral. Why do you think you’ve become so popular with young people? They like the way that I don’t camouflage how I feel. They don’t see elected officials act that way. When I first experienced the millennial response to me, I had come out of a classified briefing, and I told the group of media individuals who were there that I didn’t think James Comey had any credibility, and I threw up my hands and walked away — that went viral.How does it feel to be a meme? I have been adopted by the millennials, and I’m enjoying every minute of it! I’m learning a new language. You never think about shade, for example, other than, you know, ‘‘a tree is providing shade,’’ but when they taught me what shade was, I thought: Now, isn’t that creative?I’ve seen a few references to your rhetoric, including the nickname Kerosene Maxine. Do you like — I don’t. I think it was born out of a right-wing group’s description of a person they didn’t like, and they try to tag you with something that would help others believe there’s something wrong with you. I like Auntie Maxine.You’ve actually said that you have a right to your anger. There’s a history of enslaved African-Americans having to make their slave masters comfortable. This business of what we call skinning and grinning — that is something African-Americans are very much cognizant of.Tucker Carlson went after you recently: He used some very loaded language about your home, which he implied you could not afford on a government salary. I own several properties. The way he talked about it is: What right does an African-American woman have to do well? He doesn’t know anything about my investments, about the house that I’ve lived in for 25, 30 years. This idea of ‘‘how could she afford that?’’ is racist, and I just dismiss it.Do you think that the Democrats should have made a more compelling argument to black voters in the last election? Most African-Americans really do believe that we are voting for our better interest in voting for Democrats. Can the Democrats do an even better job of having a platform that speaks not only to opportunity but also to some of the targeting and killing of young unarmed black males that has taken place in our country? I think that is not dealt with nearly enough.In 2010, the Republican-dominated House ethics committee investigated you for allegations that you tried to intervene on behalf of a bank that your husband had a financial stake in, but you were cleared in 2012. Do you think it’s odd that they did that to you but won’t go after President Trump? I was completely exonerated. There have been numerous times when Trump should have been convicted of a crime. If Robert Mueller does the investigation that I think he’s going to do, I think he will connect the dots. I think that they’re going to find not only conflict of interest but also obstruction of justice. I think he’s in for new possibilities of either being charged criminally or, as I think, impeached.Do you think you might be having a more relaxed life if Trump weren’t president? I don’t know if I’m a relaxed person. In my spare time, I’m curious, and I explore. I collect black dolls. I have about 300 of those. I think that comes out of a history of not having those images all of my young life.Do you feel pessimistic about the future under this administration? I cannot afford to really think like that. I have to get up every morning believing that I and others can make it better, and that no matter how difficult it is, that we will rise to the occasion to force this country to be the democracy it claims to be.If you could have a private conversation with Trump, what would you say to him? I would not waste my time.