http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/14/nyregion/neighborhood-report-clinton-hill-broken-angel-lifts-its-eccentric-wings-over.html
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CLINTON HILL; A Broken Angel Lifts Its Eccentric Wings Over the Brooklyn Skyline - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,WOOD  ARTHUR,HOUSING
April 14, 2002
2827
Brooklyn's skyline has only a few standouts. A building named Broken Angel is one of them.The building, at 4 Downing Street, north of Fulton Street in Clinton Hill, is 10 stories high behind a tract of starter homes on Grand Avenue. It is a jumble of structures cobbled together seemingly without reason; some of its ''stories'' are no more than crow's-nest-size outcroppings perched on wooden beams.From a distance, viewers may find it hard to choose what to focus on. Depending on the angle, Broken Angel may resemble a blimp impaled on a church or a laboratory from which some mad scientist might launch a pedal-driven flying machine.''It's like a moonshine distillery gone crazy,'' one neighbor said. Another said, ''That's just a crazy old man's house.''Broken Angel's owner, builder and designer is Arthur Wood, a self-taught architect and painter, and the closest thing around to a mad scientist. One room in his work in progress has only half a floor, but has an intricate wall of stained-glass windows made from found objects. The neck of a jug of wine has been cemented into one window so it protrudes into the room.''If you want to be just a tiny, tiny bit cooler, you can unscrew the cap,'' Mr. Wood explains, running his fingers through his fittingly wild mane of white hair.Mr. Wood, 71, has been working on Broken Angel for 22 years. He is building on the remnants of a decrepit tenement he bought in 1971 for $2,000.His plans for his opus are in flux. He muses about an architectural school, a graduate center or ''a think tank on life.'' At the moment, though, Broken Angel is simply where he lives with his wife, Cynthia. His two adult children live elsewhere. He also has 14 cats, 4 dogs and the occasional pigeon.Aspirations aside, Broken Angel is in no condition to house tenants. In many places, flooring is missing, exterior walls have crumbled and some staircases are so unstable that Broken Angel's spire can only be reached by scrambling over a system of planks and fire escape ladders.Nevertheless, Mr. Wood said he has complied with city building requirements. The Building Department says Broken Angel has ''open'' violations, but Mr. Wood says that listing is obsolete.In any case, the structure's disarray is generally not an issue for him. Looking around at the litter of bricks and pigeon feathers, he sees his vision, not the reality.Mr. Wood has already completed many details that most people would leave until later. In the ''kitchen'' (a dusty landing littered with tools), a piece of PVC pipe is built into the only wall. Peering through it, one's eye is guided to another pipe in an exterior wall 20 feet away. Through these pipes the viewer can read the clock on the Williamsburg Bank more than a mile away.''My kitchen clock,'' Mr. Wood said.   CHRIS CONNOLLY