http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/15/realestate/in-queens-ceramics-history-and-a-bit-of-mystery.html
In Queens, Ceramics, History, and a Bit of Mystery - The New York Times
Klein  James,Reid  David,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Ceramics and Pottery
March 13, 2015
778
The ceramists James Klein and David Reid came to live in the borough of Queens as many do, after a stint in Brooklyn.When they moved to New York in 1992, after graduate school at Alfred University (Mr. Klein) and the Cranbrook Academy of Art (Mr. Reid), they settled in Williamsburg, which was then a magnet for struggling artists.“It was pretty fabulous, but it was pretty empty,” said Mr. Klein, 47. “It was not a bohemian cafe society. I remember wondering where everybody else was. There wasn’t even a cafe or an A.T.M.”The men, who are married, found an apartment on Bedford Avenue and North 10th Street, which is now the heart of gentrified Williamsburg, and set up a studio on North Fourth Street. “James sold his truck so we could buy a kiln,” said Mr. Reid, 48.They began developing their own recipes for porcelain and glazes, initially collaborating on a line of vases made of three parts so they could work separately and together at the same time. “We designed 10 tops, 10 middles and 10 bottoms that were all interchangeable,” Mr. Reid said. “We got a large order from Bergdorf Goodman, which was our big break.”Today, their company, KleinReid, produces handmade vases, dinnerware, lamps, candlesticks, jewelry and silk-screen prints that are sold at Room&Board as well as by independent retailers and on their own website.About eight years ago, the men, who have been together since their high school days in Tallmadge, Ohio, decided it was time to own instead of rent. They wanted to stay in Brooklyn (though they’d already moved their studio to Long Island City), but they were disappointed by what they saw for sale in their price range. “Nothing felt solid to us,” Mr. Klein said. “Everything was renovated and felt like veneer.”They were intrigued when friends told them about a tranquil neighborhood of prewar co-op buildings in Jackson Heights, Queens, which they had visited only once. When they saw a 1,300-square-foot three-bedroom apartment in Hawthorne Court, a 1922 full-block complex of 14 five-story neo-Georgian brick buildings, they felt immediately at home.“When we walked in here it felt so solid — Jackson Heights is not a veneer,” Mr. Klein said. “We could get an elegant, classic layout with a lot of space.”They have furnished their home with an eclectic assortment of art and furniture found mostly at flea markets and junk shops. “We like things that have a history and a mystery to them,” Mr. Klein said.“For example, we don’t know what this is,” said Mr. Reid, pointing to a large cast-iron medallion with two torches crisscrossing a wreath that hangs between the bookshelves they themselves built in the dining room. “I have a fantasy it’s from a bridge. We bought it at this magical thrift store in Williamsburg that we passed all the time when we lived there.”On another wall of the dining room, they keep everyday dishes and glasses in a metal hutch that resembles an old post office sorting stand. Many of the vintage plates and bowls are by their idol, Eva Zeisel, the artist whose midcentury tableware was as innovative and influential as the contemporaneous furniture of Charles and Ray Eames.In 1999, the men approached Ms. Zeisel and began collaborating on a line with her until her death in 2011 at the age of 105. “We became friends,” said Mr. Klein, showing off some of her stoneware, designed for Monmouth Pottery of Illinois and bought by the couple on eBay. “It’s refined and rustic, very humble and very beautiful. That is perfect Eva to us. This is what she would use when we had lunch with her in the country.”Throughout are vases, bowls and candelabras that they designed themselves. “We decided we shouldn’t be making anything we wouldn’t want to have in our home,” Mr. Reid said. “We test things out here to see how they look out of the studio, which is bright and white, while our home is dark and comfortable.”The cozy formal living room is painted a rich Benjamin Moore gray. “It’s our fancy-stuff room with all the gold frames,” said Mr. Klein, who especially loves the self-portrait lithograph by the Japanese artist Tsuguharu Foujita that hangs over the fireplace. “We found that in Cleveland. I just started crying it was so beautiful. Do things ever hit you that way?”They’re delighted that they paid only $100 for the two 1960s chrome-plated steel and leather lounge chairs with belted backs by the Swedish designer Arne Norell that flank an orange-painted wood table. (They sell for thousands on 1stdibs.) “We love that table because we have no idea what it is, but it’s very pretty and adds contrast because this is a bit of a heavy room,” Mr. Klein said.They keep two decorative wall pieces that resemble pistols on top of the table. “I love that it looks like we are getting ready to duel,” Mr. Klein said.In the kitchen, there are stacks of colorful vintage pots and pans by Dansk, the American company with a Scandinavian sensibility with which they collaborated on several lines of dinnerware. A sculptural Atomic espresso pot by Brevetti Robbiati sits proudly on the stove. “It’s gorgeous and un-precious,” Mr. Klein said. “It’s simple — one cast piece of aluminum. No muss, no fuss.”The sunroom off the dining room is as bright as the living room is dark. A black-and-white lithograph overlaid with a silk-screen silhouette of a figure from Kara Walker’s “Harper’s Pictorial History of the Civil War (Annotated)” hangs on the pale-gray walls. “That was another thing James cried over and knew he wanted,” Mr. Reid said.They have views from the sunroom of Hawthorne Court’s English-style community garden, which they consider one of the co-op’s best features. “It’s almost as large as a football field. We have lunches and dinners in the garden and play croquet. It’s very old school,” said Mr. Klein, who is head of the co-op’s garden committee.“Did you notice the flag outside because it’s Presidents’ Day weekend?” he said one day last month. “There is a flag schedule for the super. We love these old traditions, which are very civilized.”While they sometimes miss the energy of Williamsburg, living in Queens has been a balm. “I remember once being in the city — I still think of Manhattan as the city — and I was very upset and devastated about something and I thought: I will just cry when I get home,” Mr. Klein recalled. “But when I got home, I couldn’t cry because I realized this home is our antidote. It makes us feel good and cures things.”