https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/11/business/mary-barra-gms-new-chief-speaking-her-mind.html
Mary Barra, G.M.’s New Chief, Speaking Her Mind - The New York Times
Barra  Mary T,General Motors,Appointments and Executive Changes,Automobiles,Women and Girls
Dec. 10, 2013
3352
Mary T. Barra, who was named the next chief executive of General Motors on Tuesday, visited The New York Times in November and talked with reporters and editors. What follows is an edited, condensed version of the interview.Q. Can you talk about your career, in a male-dominated industry, and how have things changed?A. I started at General Motors at 18 years old as a co-op student at the General Motors Institute, which is now Kettering. My father was a die maker for 39 years, so I had a basic understanding of the automobile industry and what the manufacturing world was like, just from the opportunity to spend time with him — just talking, because he was a car buff.Things have changed dramatically. When I started back in 1980 at 18 years old, the factory was a different place than it is right now. But — not that it was completely impossible then — I just think it has become more welcoming. There are women in every aspect of the business.You start with our board. We were just recognized for having a very high percentage of women board members.And then you look at the women who sit at the top level of the company at the executive committee. We have several women, whether it is Alicia Boler-Davis, myself, Melissa Howell — all members of that. So I think there are more women in more senior roles than in 1980 when I started. But from my career perspective, I don’t go into a room and take count. I want to be recognized for my contribution and for what I do. Yeah, there were probably times it was to my benefit, and there were probably times when it was not to my benefit. But that is true for everyone. There are always things that potentially impact how you are received. And I just don’t focus on it. I don’t focus on what you can’t control.Q. When did things change?A. Through my whole career, I have seen more and more women. It’s been a decade where we have had many women plant managers. When I started in 1980 that was probably something that wasn’t necessarily even comprehended. And maybe 15 or 20 years later there were many women across the country and across the globe in leadership roles, running operations. Which is a really core experience.I don’t know if there was a moment where I said, it’s really different now. Because I would say that through my career I’m very fortunate. I have worked for a lot of really great leaders and mentors that I felt provided me, along with many of my peers — many of them women — opportunities.Q. Would you want Daniel Akerson’s job?A. I have the best job in the company right now. I am responsible for designing, building and selling. I spend time with the design staff and Ed Welburn. Spending time in design and looking at the future — what can be — and having a strong influence in that, to quite often on Friday afternoons we spend time at the Milford Proving Ground or when I am around the globe at other proving grounds and driving vehicles — from Korea to Brazil to Europe to Milford — it’s a pretty good job.Q. How much travel do you do? How do you split time?A. Eight to nine major trips a year overseas. I try to be as efficient as I can because I am a mom with two teenagers. And then a lot of smaller overnight trips.When I am there at our global product development centers, I am meeting with the design team and reviewing design work being done there and meeting with engineers responsible for work being done specific to that region, meeting with purchasing team.Q. What do you drive?A. I drive a lot of things. That’s one of the benefits of the job.The new CTS, I really love it.The Corvette is just a great car to drive. If you can do an old-to-new comparison you will see, it’s just been taken a step further. You have this great sports car but still it is true to the Chevrolet brand, because it is a great value. Yes, it is a $50,000 car, but it is competing against cars approaching two times that, so it is true to Chevy’s heritage for value and ingenuity — the work that was done, the learnings from the racetrack that were driven into that vehicle.The Impala. It’s a car I am really proud of. I really love the Spark BEV.So I drive them all.Q. Do you miss your old Chevette?A. Well, that was a car I could afford, and thanks to my parents’ help. It was my first car, and my dad was a die maker so he did get a benefit from being a General Motors employee. But I had the most basic of basic cars.It actually was an automatic. My manual was a Fiero. I worked at the Fiero plant.But I still remember the Chevette vividly because it gave me freedom. It was our way to spend more time with our friends. They have that now all the time. I have two teenagers, a 14- and a 16-year-old.My son couldn’t wait to drive. It’s not that the millennials do not want vehicles.Q. Do you have any classics?A. My husband has been on a two- or three-year hunt for the perfect Camaro. We have owned different cars, but right at this point in time I don’t. I can’t tell you how many different Camaros we have looked at. A couple of times we have just been slow to move — the values go pretty quickly.We are kind of — if you ask me what my all-time favorite is, I am a Camaro fan. Or a Firebird.Looking for a ’67 to ’69, a convertible.We have owned every generation. We have a Camaro SS right now. I can’t really claim it is my husband’s car. There are a couple in the future that we are looking at buying as they come out.There is an active debate going on right now.Q. Is your husband a G.M. employee as well?A. Actually, no. We met at General Motors Institute so he is an engineer as well. But he is actually a consultant. That is probably best.