https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/20/us/politics/trump-presidency.html
In Inaugural Address, Trump Continues to Shun Establishment - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Inaugurations,United States Politics and Government,Speeches and Statements
Jan. 20, 2017
2266
WASHINGTON — President Trump’s Inaugural Address on Friday was a scalding repudiation of the Washington establishment. The question left hanging after this angry jeremiad: How will the new commander in chief be able to work with these people to govern the country?Uncompromising in tone and entirely in keeping with his insurgent campaign, Mr. Trump dispensed with appeals to unity or attempts to build bridges to his opponents. He tarred the nation’s political class, arrayed behind him on the West Front of the Capitol, as faithless and corrupt.“Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs,” he said. “And while they celebrated in our nation’s capital, there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.”“That all changes,” a grim-faced Mr. Trump declared, “starting right here, and right now.”From Ronald Reagan to Barack Obama, presidents have come to Washington as agents of change and enemies of the status quo. Most have discovered, to their benefit or misery, that they must work the levers of government to push through their agenda. But none in recent memory have appeared so ready to lead by going to war against the existing order.That could include members of his own party. Mr. Trump is as close to an independent as has ever served in modern times. He ran against the Republican establishment as much as he ran against Hillary Clinton.In his address, he ignored the Republican leadership in Congress, and said nothing about working with Speaker Paul Ryan or Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, to advance a legislative agenda. His views on trade, foreign policy and the role of government are at odds with Republican orthodoxy, setting the stage for a clash between the party and its standard-bearer.As for the Democrats, there were signs, under the leaden skies on the National Mall, that they were already girding for battle. The Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, issued a blunt warning to Mr. Trump, moments before he was sworn in, that the American people would stand up for the rule of law, a free press — the things, he said, “that make America America.”Mr. Schumer quoted from a farewell letter that a Union soldier, Maj. Sullivan Ballou, sent his wife during the Civil War, days before he was killed in the First Battle of Bull Run. The doomed soldier’s words — which recalled the sacrifices made by the nation’s founders — could provide solace in the days to come, he said.Democratic lawmakers wore buttons on their lapels that said “Protect Our Care,” a reference to the landmark health care law that Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress have promised to overturn. About 60 Democrats boycotted the inauguration altogether — a movement that picked up steam once Mr. Trump clashed with Representative John Lewis of Georgia, after Mr. Lewis said that he did not view him as a legitimate president.“There was very little in this speech that would offer comfort to a Trump opponent or skeptic,” said Michael Beschloss, the presidential scholar. “It had the texture more of a convention or campaign speech than what we usually hear in an Inaugural Address.”And yet, Mr. Trump has presented himself as a dealmaker, not an ideologue, and it remains an open question whether he will continue to be the relentless populist who was on display on Friday.For all the public tension between Mr. Trump and Mr. Schumer, the president has reached out to his fellow New Yorker, whom he has known for decades. He has named cabinet members who disagree with him on issues like banning Muslims or torturing terrorism suspects. He has suggested that his own views are themselves a work in progress.Mr. Trump has shown a quicksilver ability to shift his positions on major issues, like his campaign promises to repeal the Affordable Care Act and to build a wall on the Mexican border and make Mexico pay for it. He mentioned neither in his speech.Mr. Trump’s aides like to say he is a direct descendant of Andrew Jackson, the nation’s first populist president. Populists in the Jackson tradition, political theorists say, are protean in character.“They’re kind of like the moon,” said Walter Russell Mead, a professor at Bard College and a scholar at the Hudson Institute who has written extensively about Jackson’s influence. “They’re the brightest object in the night sky when the moon is full, but they wax and wane.”On Friday, Mr. Trump’s moon was full. He dispensed with the usual grace notes of inaugural speeches, not even mentioning or shaking the hand of his vanquished opponent, Mrs. Clinton, who sat watching with her husband, former President Bill Clinton. (Mr. Trump did recognize the Clintons at a lunch at the Capitol after the ceremony.) While he thanked former President Barack Obama and his wife, Michelle, for their “gracious aid” during the transition, he described the country Mr. Obama left behind as a Mad Max-like dystopia.Using ominous language reminiscent of his speech at the Republican National Convention, Mr. Trump talked about “mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities,” “rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation,” schools that teach students nothing, and “the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.”Lest Republicans become complacent, Mr. Trump made it clear that he believes he is leading a populist movement that has little regard for any party platforms or loyalties. He thundered against free trade, a pillar of the Republican Party, as he did during the campaign.He promised a Franklin D. Roosevelt-style public works campaign — “new roads and highways, and bridges, and airports, and tunnels, and railways” — something the Republicans would have implacably opposed had it come from Mrs. Clinton.That was only one of Mr. Trump’s promises: He also said he would deliver jobs, wealth, a secure border, a path off welfare, and the return of America’s dreams. And he did not suggest he needed anyone’s help to do it.Mr. Trump has told visitors in recent weeks that he had looked to the inaugural addresses of Ronald Reagan and John F. Kennedy for inspiration. There were echoes of both in his words: Reagan’s blunt rejection of the Washington status quo (“government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem”), and Kennedy’s call to join a grand national project (“the torch has been passed to a new generation”).But Mr. Trump did not have the uplifting vision with which Mr. Reagan ended his speech. And he attached his Kennedy-like promise to send forth a message to his campaign slogan “America First.”“We will seek friendship and good will with the nations of the world,” he said. “But we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.”Mr. Trump was as unyielding toward foreign adversaries as he was toward domestic ones. He promised to protect the nation from China and other economic rivals who he said would “ravage” it by luring away its factories or stealing its jobs. And he pledged what would amount to a clash of civilizations in the fight against Muslim extremism.The country, Mr. Trump said, would “unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism, which we will eradicate completely from the face of the earth.”“At the bedrock of our politics,” he concluded, “will be a total allegiance to the United States of America.”