http://www.nytimes.com/2005/02/11/movies/mr-darcy-and-lalita-singing-and-dancing.html
Mr. Darcy and Lalita, Singing and Dancing - The New York Times
AUSTEN  JANE,CHADHA  GURINDER,ASHANTI,RAI  AISHWARYA,HENDERSON  MARTIN,MOTION PICTURES,REVIEWS,PRIDE AND PREJUDICE (BOOK),BRIDE AND PREJUDICE (MOVIE)
Feb. 11, 2005
9466
The pitch meeting for the new British movie "Bride and Prejudice" must have been a killer: "Jane Austen's novel 'Pride and Prejudice' -- you know, the dead chick that wrote that Gwyneth Paltrow movie 'Enya,' 'Emma,' whatever -- done like a Bollywood musical, only shorter."Then again, because the director Gurinder Chadha knows how to sell multiplex multiculturalism -- her last feature was "Bend It Like Beckham" -- the actual pitch was probably cannier, something along the lines of: "Jane Austen's 'Pride and Prejudice' recontextualized as a Bollywood musical (only shorter) and set against the backdrop of the new global economy. I think we can get Ashanti for one of the numbers."Whatever the case, "Bride and Prejudice" -- which transposes Austen's 1813 novel to 21st-century India, with layovers in swinging London and sunny Los Angeles -- is as high concept and rife with cliché as anything ever churned out by Hollywood, but with worse production values and a load of sanctimonious political correctness. Think "My Big Fat Sari Wedding" tricked out with putatively exotic locales and clumsy song-and-dance numbers, and delivered with much finger-wagging about cultural tolerance. The kicker here being that the wagging finger belongs to the story's heroine, originally called Elizabeth, here called Lalita (the Bollywood star Aishwarya Rai, radiantly beautiful but inert), and the object of her reflexive high-mindedness is none other than a wealthy American hotel heir, Will Darcy (Martin Henderson, just inert).For those who have never read Austen's satiric comedy of manners or watched one of the many large-and-small-screen adaptations, including the 1940 charmer with Greer Garson and Laurence Olivier, the story involves two lovers who don't at first know they were made for each other. In the screenplay written by Ms. Chadha and Paul Mayeda Berges (her husband), Lalita takes an almost instantaneous dim view of Darcy following some strategic miscommunication. Given that Darcy does little initially other than ooze hauteur, her prejudice against his pride seems justifiable. But the more this petulant beauty finds fault with her would-be love interest, the less sympathetic she seems, largely because such complaints ring hollow from a woman who wears her own entitlement as casually as a silk wrap.Although she doesn't appear to have a job, Lalita does have a gaggle of marriageable sisters, an unsuitable suitor (Nitin Ganatra) and a talent for emotional complication. Alternately intrigued and irritated by Darcy, Lalita parries and thrusts, and even scores a few bloodless hits. ("I thought we got rid of imperialists like you!") Midway through all this romantic storm and stress, a challenger materializes (Daniel Gillies), rising up from the ocean without a shirt or portfolio. And, of course, every so often, someone breaks into ragged song and dance.Depending on your appetite for kitsch, the highlight or nadir of Ms. Chadha's attempt to pay homage to Bollywood is an accidental showstopper featuring the singer Ashanti and some oiled musclemen who bring a little Las Vegas magic to the beaches of Goa.A few years ago, Ms. Chadha managed to squeeze a modest winner from "Bend It Like Beckham," an ingratiating trifle that made it to the big screen through a timely combination of girls' soccer, a salable vision of multiculturalism and the fact that the film's co-star, Keira Knightley, has lips as protuberant as the front bumper on a 1955 Chrysler station wagon. Since then, Ms. Knightley has gone Hollywood, while Ms. Chadha has delivered yet another movie with unassailable ideas (tolerance good; money, too) and an unfortunate absence of discernible filmmaking talent. With "Bride and Prejudice" Ms. Chadha also manages to make hash of a classic of literature and one of the world's leading film genres, which is almost as neat a double trick as a heroine who can have her sanctimony and eat her wedding cake, too."Bride and Prejudice" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The film contains some chaste romancing, some naked and ripped male torsos and a Harvey Weinstein cameo.'Bride and Prejudice'  Opens today in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Boston, Dallas, Washington, Detroit, Houston, Seattle, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Denver and San Diego.Directed by Gurinder Chadha; written by Ms. Chadha and Paul Mayeda Berges, based on Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice"; director of photography, Santosh Sivan; edited by Justin Krish; music by Anu Malik and Craig Pruess; choreographer, Saroj Khan; production designer, Nick Ellis; produced by Ms. Chadha and Deepak Nayar; released by Miramax Films. Running time: 111 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.WITH: Martin Henderson (William Darcy), Aishwarya Rai (Lalita Bakshi), Daniel Gillies (Wickham), Naveen Andrews (Balraj), Nitin Ganatra (Mr. Kholi), Namrata Shirodkar (Jaya Bakshi), Indira Varma (Kiran), Anupam Kher (Mr. Bakshi) and Ashanti (as herself).