https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/world/americas/as-tensions-rise-opposition-takes-reins-of-venezuela-assembly.html
Venezuela Opposition Takes Reins of Assembly as Tensions Rise - The New York Times
Venezuela,Maduro  Nicolas,Chavez  Hugo,Elections,Legislatures and Parliaments,United Socialist Party (Venezuela)
Jan. 5, 2016
4014
CARACAS, Venezuela —  Change came to the National Assembly here on Tuesday in very Venezuelan style — with a lot of shouting.In a raucous session that at times resembled a professional wrestling smackdown, without the hair-pulling and spandex, opposition legislators were sworn in as a majority for the first time in 16 years.“Do you know what’s surprising — that this is sensational news in Venezuela,” Henry Ramos, the new head of the National Assembly, said as he was surrounded by reporters and television cameras on the floor of the Assembly chamber. “In no other part of the world is the opening of Congress big news.”“Everyone is paying attention to this today, like never before,” he added. “Why? Because the world knows that a new phase starts in Venezuela today.”The opposition swept to a landslide victory in elections in early December, winning two-thirds of the 167 seats in the Assembly and breaking with a long period of domination by the socialist movement of Mr. Maduro and his predecessor and mentor, Hugo Chávez. Their victory derived from widespread dissatisfaction with a crumbling economy, but many voters also spoke of disapproval over the governing style of Mr. Maduro, who is seen as both indecisive and overly combative.Mr. Maduro has come out swinging in the weeks since the election, slamming the winning majority as a bourgeois faction intent on slashing social programs and replacing him through a coup.Far from pledging to work with the opposition to solve the country’s deep economic crisis, he and other government officials have taken steps in recent days aimed at constraining the new Assembly’s actions.In late December the exiting Assembly members approved 13 new Supreme Court judges in what critics said was an attempt to stack the court and prevent the new body from filling vacancies that would have come up this year.Then, just days before the swearing-in, the Supreme Court blocked four newly elected legislators from taking office, three from the opposition and one from Mr. Maduro’s United Socialist Party. The court ruled in favor of a socialist candidate who had challenged the election results in Amazonas State.The opposition viewed this as part of a bid to chip away at its two-thirds majority, which allows it to propose constitutional changes and remove Supreme Court judges, among other things.Then on Monday the lame-duck legislators approved a new package of government spending and Mr. Maduro signed a decree that stripped the Assembly of its traditional oversight of the Central Bank, including the ability to remove and appoint directors and receive economic data.And opposition leaders accused the socialists of taking away the audiovisual equipment that would allow the opening session to be televised.But Mr. Maduro also called for a peaceful transition to the opposition-led Assembly, and he dispatched soldiers to block the area around the capitol building and keep supporters of the two sides far apart.The opening session was full of symbolic moments and gestures. Members of the news media were allowed into the Assembly chamber for the first time in years, marking the end of a period in which only government-run television stations and other government-controlled media could cover sessions.This session started with speeches from lawmakers from each side, interrupted by catcalls, whistles and loud chants from opposite sides of the room. The socialist legislators accused the opposition of being traitors and shills for big business and the United States government. The opposition accused the socialists of corruption, and of presiding over an economic collapse.“Our country isn’t for sale!” the socialists chanted, backed by supporters in the balconies.The opposition legislators and their supporters responded with chants of “112! 112!” referring to the commanding number of seats they won, making up exactly two-thirds of the Assembly.In another break from the recent past, there were no portraits of Mr. Chávez in the chamber. Eventually, a vote was held in which the opposition legislators approved Mr. Ramos as the head of the Assembly, ratifying a decision reached over the weekend. Mr. Ramos ascended the chamber’s two-tiered wooden rostrum and, under the Assembly’s rules, swore himself in.At one point legislators from both sides rushed the rostrum and engaged in a heated kerfuffle and a shouting match. As temperatures rose there was a brief spate of pushing and shoving. The dispute was about whether an opposition legislator should be allowed to make a speech after the leadership vote, with the Chavistas insisting that the rules for the opening session did not permit it. The socialist bloc walked out in protest.“We can’t endorse violations of the rules,” said the first lady, Cilia Flores, who was elected as a socialist legislator. “This session was only for the swearing-in.”While the day gave little hope that the two sides would find a way to work together, there did appear to be at least one point of agreement. When Mr. Maduro later phoned in to a program on the main government-run television channel, he echoed words uttered earlier by Mr. Ramos.“We’re in a new phase,” the president said.