https://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/11/world/americas/11chile.html
Joy, and Violence, at Death of Pinochet - The New York Times
Pinochet  Augusto,Deaths (Obituaries),Santiago (Chile),Demonstrations and Riots
Dec. 11, 2006
4059
SANTIAGO, Chile, Dec. 10 — Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets in celebration here on Sunday almost immediately after news circulated of the death of the former dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet. But within hours the revelry was marred by violence, with confrontations breaking out and the police using tear gas and water cannons against a large group marching toward the presidential palace.Gen. Jorge Acuna, of the capital police force, said that six police officers had been wounded in the scuffles and that seven demonstrators had been arrested in the capital, while dozens of others were detained in police vehicles and more arrests were expected.The government called for calm on Sunday night. “We call on the detractors and supporters, if they’re going to demonstrate to do it peacefully. And for this, we’ve deployed a major security force,” said Felipe Harboe, the under secretary of the interior.After General Pinochet’s death, at 2:15 p.m., President Michelle Bachelet met briefly with cabinet ministers and then released a terse announcement through her spokesman, Ricardo Lagos Weber, covering only funeral and memorial considerations with no other comment. Mr. Lagos said that General Pinochet would not receive a state funeral, but would receive military honors. The president authorized flags to fly at half-mast at military installations, but did not decree a period of national mourning.A spokesman for the White House, Tony Fratto, said: “Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship in Chile represented one of most difficult periods in that nation’s history. Our thoughts today are with the victims of his reign and their families.”On Sunday night, General Pinochet’s remains were taken from the Military Hospital of Santiago, where he died, to the Army Academy in Santiago, where religious services were to be held throughout the day Monday. Funeral services will take place at the Army Academy on Tuesday at 11 a.m., and Defense Minister Vivianne Blanlot will attend to represent the government. The general’s remains will be cremated and given to his family, Mr. Lagos said.A few hundred mourners gathered in front of the hospital Sunday afternoon, with some weeping or chanting, “Viva Pinochet!”“Pinochet rescued and transformed Chile into the country we all feel proud of,” Hernán Guillof, president of the Pinochet Foundation, said to a group outside the hospital. “Once passions subdue, he will be given his place in history as architect of our nation.”But many more focused instead on the brutality and terror of General Pinochet’s 17-year rule, in which more than 3,200 people disappeared or were killed and tens of thousands were detained, tortured or exiled.Some rights advocates said they had mixed feelings about General Pinochet’s death. Hiram Villagra, the prosecuting attorney in dozens of human rights cases against the general, said he would have preferred that he lived long enough to be sentenced in the trials he was facing.“The air will feel lighter tomorrow, we will feel a sense of liberation,” Mr. Villagra said. “But I lament that Pinochet has died without having been sentenced. However, in all serious charges against him, he has had his immunity lifted and has been indicted. Pinochet does not die an innocent man.”José Miguel Vivanco, Americas director at Human Rights Watch, said, “Pinochet spent his last years fending off an ever-tightening web of prosecutions in Chile and died a profoundly discredited figure in the land he once ruled.”Even his final illness proved to be divisive. He was admitted to the hospital in critical condition on Dec. 3 after he had a heart attack. He underwent angioplasty, and doctors said he was recovering well — so well that human-rights groups here began charging that the health crisis may have been staged, and they requested a judicial investigation.But his condition took a sharp downturn on Sunday morning, his doctors said, and his family was gathered around him in the intensive care unit at the military hospital when he died.Demonstrators began pouring onto the main avenue in the center of Santiago immediately after the news of General Pinochet’s death, chanting human rights slogans and denunciations of him. The gathering quickly took on the air of a street party, with drinking and dancing, and the crowd began marching toward La Moneda, the presidential palace.The size of the main demonstration grew quickly and steadily, reaching about 6,000 by 6 p.m. Around then, demonstrators began trying to cross over barriers guarding the presidential palace, and police officers in riot gear broke out tear gas and water cannons to turn them back.The violence spread, with demonstrators throwing rocks, uprooting stoplights and burning at least four barricades and two cars. One person was reported injured by a thrown bottle. A radio reporter said there was “massive destruction” in a 10-block stretch in downtown Santiago.