https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/09/travel/north-dakota-oil-boom.html
In North Dakota, Boom, Bust and Oil - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,North Dakota
Aug. 6, 2015
373
On U.S. 2 in North Dakota, just west of the turnoff for Tioga, you will spot two little brown highway signs pointing left:Historic Site 5 MilesAnd:Lewis and Clark State Park30 MilesIt would be natural to assume that the historic site has something to do with Lewis and Clark, but it doesn’t. Drive too fast or ignore your odometer and you will miss it: a narrow dirt drive that leads to a stout monument of reddish stone, maybe seven feet high. It reads:The monument was dedicated on Oct. 25, 1953, just two and a half years after the event it commemorates, but people had wildcatted for oil in North Dakota since 1916. After 35 years of fruitless drilling, you can understand why contemporaries would have regarded that first strike as historic.Now, for some, the notion of this as a “historic site” could be jarring; oil might seem to mix with history as poorly as it does with water, or waterfowl. But in North Dakota, an oil boom is indeed historic. It does not look like history, at least not as we think of it; it looks like storage tanks, and gas flares, and towering derricks. Most of all, it looks like pump jacks, alone, in sets, always in motion.North Dakota has had three oil booms; the most recent one, which started around the end of the last decade, is much larger than those of the 1950s and the 1970s. If you drive around the back roads of northwest North Dakota with a couple of lifelong residents, they can spot some of the older rigs from a half-mile off.“That one’s from 1959,” a longtime farmer told me, pointing to a small black pump jack south of Lignite (named for the type of coal that used to be mined near there). “And that one, over there” — it was blue-green, like an old Chevy Bel-Air — “that’s from 1957. Still pumps 30 barrels a day,” he added, with respect.These remnants of earlier booms look almost quaint. The city of Williston, the unofficial capital of the current boom, has grown in the past decade from about 12,000 residents to as many as 60,000, and some predict it will hit 100,000 before too long. Developers have built sprawling neighborhoods where everything — apartments, townhouses, free-standing houses, maybe thousands of units in all — is rented by oil companies. A stylish new apartment complex several miles east of town, surrounded by absolutely nothing, harks back to a mid-1880s photo of a towering apartment house at 72nd Street and Central Park West, a location then so remote that the edifice was named the Dakota.The open plains are dotted with modular “man camps”: The shabbier ones are haphazard collections of RVs, trailers and cabins; the nicer ones look like mobile home parks with scores of units, perfectly aligned and identical down to the placement and angle of their satellite dishes. The largest resemble military bases.The roads, flat and endlessly straight, can be a pleasure to drive, as long as all the newly rendered potholes have been patched adequately. Traffic is a function of the price of oil; above $80 or $90 per barrel, and it could start to look displeasingly metropolitan. At $50-something, though, as it was when I last visited, you can cruise and pass at leisure as you seek out that giant gravel pit you overheard someone talking about in your hotel’s breakfast room, or that cluster of 250,000-barrel oil tanks across the way from a towering old grain elevator, a scene that in the gloaming brings to mind King Kong squaring off against Godzilla.All of it — flares, derricks, pumps, King Kong — is surrounded by wheat. Occasionally you will spot a pond with water as blue-black as the North Atlantic; but mostly there’s wheat. Miles of it. And somehow, it keeps the petroleum works in check, even makes them look clean. Some of that, to be sure, is the fact that they are new, but these are also not the dusty, grimy oil fields of West Texas or the San Joaquin Valley, at least not yet. In the right frame of mind, you might even find something romantic in the sight of a pair of bobbing pump jacks silhouetted against the setting sun.Admittedly, this is a strange form of ecotourism. Then again, people have been drawn to North Dakota for strange reasons at least since Lewis and Clark’s time.In 1866, Col. Delos B. Sackett of the Army’s Office of the Inspector General, having made a tour of the area, declared it would “never be settled by the white man.”“The more I see of Dakota,” he wrote, “the more I am convinced the government should donate every foot of it to the Indians, and the Indians should be well recompensed … if they agree to remain.”The white man came anyway, as he had been doing since Lewis and Clark. Those two and their Corps of Discovery arrived at the spot that is now their eponymous state park on Lake Sakakawea (not truly a lake; it is part of the Missouri River basin) on April 17, 1805.“A delightfull morning,” as they noted in their journals; they were pleased to find “immence quantities of game in every direction … consisting of herds of Buffaloe, Elk and Antelopes, with some deer and woolves.” They bagged three beavers that day, their favorite game. “I eat very heartily of the beaver myself, and think it excellent,” Lewis noted. “Particularly the tale, and liver.”This site, though, is notable not for that visit, but for what happened when they came through on their way back, 16 months later. Lewis went hunting for elk with Pierre Cruzatte, a trapper and mountain man who was blind in one eye and myopic in the other. In his buckskins — his Army uniform having long since fallen apart — Lewis, apparently, looked too much like an elk to Cruzatte. “A ball struck my left thye about an inch below my hip joint,” Lewis wrote. It missed bone, but tore through both his buttocks; he spent the rest of the expedition lying on his belly at the bottom of a boat.Perhaps it was an omen. Colonel Sackett, who was sent there to survey the area for a new fort, certainly thought so. Thirty years later that fort was shuttered, and the number of white men in the area fell close to zero. But then the railroads came through, and the government opened the land up to homesteading. Settlers came — many of them immigrants from Norway, where the climate and terrain were said to be similar — and found the land well-suited for certain crops, especially durum wheat. The railroads established towns, spacing them out more or less evenly along three parallel lines, which today hew to the three main roads in this corner of the state: U.S. 2, Highway 50 and, closest to the Canadian border, Highway 5.Like Lewis and Clark and Sackett before them, the settlers quickly learned that life here was hard. Most failed at homesteading; many of the rest were crushed by the Dakota version of the Dust Bowl, remembered as the “Dirty Thirties.” If you drive up and down those three roads and turn at every little green sign, you never know whether you will hit a ghost town or a boom town. Some are odd combinations of the two, like Fortuna, which has maybe two dozen residents but which recently turned its long-empty schoolhouse into a community center called the Teachers Lounge. It features a bar, a convenience store and an extended-stay motel for oil workers where rooms rent for $1,500 a month.The next town east, Colgan, is littered with semicollapsed houses and rusting automobiles; an older man I spotted working on some kind of machine in his yard told me there were six residents left. I didn’t see one in Ambrose, the next town over, though my cellphone registered several texts while I was there, inviting me to talk on a Canadian network for just 89 cents per minute. The next town after that, Crosby, expanded so quickly that it planned a commercial district and housing development on the other side of the highway. It laid out a wide dirt boulevard, lined it with street lamps, and then stopped. That was years ago.It’s an interesting way to pass an afternoon or two, driving these long, straight roads and playing town roulette. Grenora, at the western end of Highway 50, has a few hundred people, many of them in a large new trailer park on the edge of town. Hanks, the next town to the east, has four residents. (Ten years ago it had one.) Stanley, with a preboom population of around 1,500, now has a vast subdivision on its north end with scores and scores of houses and townhouses. In Appam, which appears deserted, someone has posted homemade wooden signs around town, marking what used to be there: Appam Mercantile. Post Office. Dance Hall. Hendrickson Bros. Hardware. Bethany Lutheran Church. It’s hard to say whether, in another 10 years, there will be more Stanleys or Appams here. It’s entirely possible there could be more of both.Downtown Williston seems unsure of which way it wants to go. Main Street features a glitzy new office of Raymond James Investment Services, but the marquee of the movie theater next door, the New Grand, still proclaims: “Our Screen Talks.” A block away, a sprawling edifice under construction promises glittering retail, office and residential units by the end of the year. But the biggest structure in the neighborhood, by far, is the old city grain elevator.Twenty-five miles southwest, near the Montana border, is the spot where the Yellowstone River flows into the Missouri. When Lewis and Clark arrived here on April 26, 1805, Lewis recorded that the Corps was “much pleased at having arrived at this long wished-for spot,” breaking out fiddles and bottles. Great cities often spring up at such sites, but the area around this confluence is close to empty, featuring only a modern interpretive center and the remains of two forts.The older of these, Fort Union, was built in 1828 by John Jacob Astor’s American Fur Company as a trading post. Known among Native Americans as the Great White House on the Prairie because of its whitewashed walls, Fort Union, 1,600 miles upriver from St. Louis, drew Indians and trappers from all around to barter beaver and buffalo pelts for East Coast and European delicacies, furnishings, armaments, trinkets and liquor. In high season, upward of 120 employees might stay at the fort, while many more Indians camped just outside its walls.There was violence — this was the frontier, after all — but for nearly 40 years, until the frontier pushed west and beaver hats went out of fashion, it was a largely congenial, and entirely profitable, enterprise. The fort itself, built of cottonwood — the only timber available locally — had long since disappeared before the National Park Service undertook to reconstruct it starting in the 1960s. If you go, there’s a very good chance you will share it only with a couple of park rangers.You’ll probably see even fewer people if you go to the remains of Fort Buford, a couple of miles away. This was the fort that Colonel Sackett had come to set up in 1866, an Army post intended to protect settlers passing through the area on their way to newly discovered gold fields in Montana, and later, to supply soldiers fighting the Indian Wars. In its first two years, there was a single company of infantry stationed there; they withstood relentless attacks from Sitting Bull’s Hunkpapa Sioux, who were determined to eradicate them. But then the Army expanded the fort, which at its peak had more than 600 soldiers, and Sitting Bull moved on. He returned in 1881 to surrender.There are several sizable man camps on your way to Fort Buford, but nothing near the fort, which is now mostly an open field. The Army sold off most of the site’s 112 buildings after it was decommissioned in 1895. All that remains are the commanding officer’s house, where Sitting Bull surrendered, and two other structures. And an excavation pit or two. And a boardwalk. And, tucked away in back, the cemetery.In all, 161 people were buried there: soldiers and scouts, traders and laundresses, Americans of European descent and Native Americans, wives and children. Their markers, simple whitewashed wooden tablets, offer, in just a few words apiece, a vivid description of what life was like in Colonel Sackett’s day, after beaver and buffalo pelts but before wheat and oil, a time when this spot was, hard as it may be to conjure, even lonelier than it looks today:BealsGeorgePrivateCo. E 31 U.S. Inf.Aug. 20 1868Killed by Indian.WeersigbrodtCharlesPrivateCo. C 6 U.S. Inf.Aug. 25, 1879Meningitis.ShafferEdwardCo. G 6 U.S. Inf.Dec. 13, 1878Murdered.Blue HornScoutMay 18, 1869Killed by Indians.DeLappEmmaLaundressCo. F, 6 U.S. Inf.Sep. 9, 1872Phthisis.BartholemewNormanPrivateCo. I 7 U.S. Inf.Nov. 3, 1871Inebriation.AhernsCarlPrivateCo. H 11 U.S. Inf.Jan. 11, 1883Suicide.McAllisterCharlesQ.M.D. ClerkJan. 29, 1876Suicide.BrownRobert M.1st Sergt.Co. C 15 U.S. Inf.Mar. 10, 1886Suicide.Just outside Grenora, there is another brown highway sign:Writing RockRecreation Area15 MilesYou’ll want to check your odometer again; it is easy to miss the turnoff, an unassuming, modestly marked dirt road, especially if you have been dodging pheasants all the way up. A couple of miles on there is a small cul-de-sac. Down a back slope is the recreation area, a playground and a pair of open shelters with picnic tables. More than likely, there won’t be another soul there. You might suspect no one had ever been there before but for the playground, and a solitary power line feeding a lamppost, and a radio tower off to the left a bit, and a few distant grain silos to the left of that. And, of course, the small stone hut right in front of you.It was built, in modern times, to house a pair of granite boulders covered with petroglyphs: circles and polygons, craters and rays, and thunderbirds, “sacred figures to Late Prehistoric Plains Indians,” according to a plaque at the kiosk. No one’s quite sure when they were carved — the kiosk says it was between 300 and 1,000 years ago, though possibly even earlier — or by whom. Modern visitors might have a Rorschach experience (I’m pretty sure I saw Homer Simpson on the smaller one), but the Indians believed they offered visions of the future, at least until around World War I, when someone hauled the smaller one off to the University of North Dakota in Grand Forks, nearly 400 miles away. It was returned in the 1960s; too late, they say. The power was gone.But turn your back on the hut — and the playground and picnic tables, the power line and the lamppost, the radio tower and the grain silos — and you will see the past. The site sits on a humble rise; it’s all you need. Spread out before you, for untold miles into Montana and Saskatchewan and endless North Dakota, are the Great Plains, beige ground and blue water. That’s it. For 270 degrees around you, there is nothing that Lewis and Clark, or for that matter the Indians who patiently carved those petroglyphs, wouldn’t have seen, too.Lodging options in Williston, N.D., include major chains like Holiday Inn Express and Suites (415 38th Street West); Hampton Inn and Suites (1515 14th Street West); MainStay Suites (200 26th Street East) as well as the Brooks Hotel (7715 Second Avenue West).Basil 16 East Broadway. Sushi and Asian cuisine with the slogan, “A touch of California atmosphere, almost makes you forget you’re in Williston.” basilwilliston.com. Los Compadres, 216 Main Street. Mexican fare, steak, seafood.Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site, 15550 North Dakota Highway 1804, Williston; nps.gov/fous.Fort Buford State Historic Site, 15349 39th Lane Northwest, Williston; history.nd.gov/historicsites/buford.Writing Rock State Historic Site Grenora; ndtourism.com/grenora/native-american-culture/writing-rock-state-historic-site.Lewis and Clark State Park Williams County; www.parkrec.nd.gov/parks/lcsp/lcsp.html.