http://www.nytimes.com/2004/06/18/movies/film-review-an-emigre-s-paradise-lost-and-found.html
FILM REVIEW; An Émigré's Paradise Lost and Found - The New York Times
TUCCI  STANLEY,SPIELBERG  STEVEN,ZETA-JONES  CATHERINE,HANKS  TOM,MOTION PICTURES,REVIEWS,TERMINAL  THE (MOVIE)
June 18, 2004
3953
AN airline terminal is, by definition, a space you pass through on the way from one place to another, spending only as much time as is absolutely necessary. But the word terminal itself, which supplies the title for Steven Spielberg's new film opening today nationwide, also has some darker connotations that tug against its unassuming everyday meaning.Its etymology -- termini were the local gods whose shrines served as boundary markers in the ancient Roman world -- suggests a frontier between worlds, while its modern medical usage associates the word with mortality. To be trapped indefinitely in a terminal, then, without recourse to either flight or ground transportation, can be imagined as a kind of living death, a nerve-racking state of perpetual limbo.Which makes it all the more remarkable that Mr. Spielberg has transformed this quintessential modern nightmare of interrupted air travel into a vision of earthly paradise. The director's lyrical view of flight was evident long before ''Catch Me if You Can,'' his soulful, finger-popping evocation of the golden age of commercial aviation: it could be glimpsed in the flashing spaceship lights at the end of ''Close Encounters''; in the soaring bicycle of ''E.T.''; even in the Japanese fighter planes of ''1941'' and ''Empire of the Sun.'' (Tact forbids me from saying too much about ''Always.'') ''The Terminal,'' at once following this preoccupation to its logical conclusion and (so to speak) flying in the face of it, is, improbably and enchantingly, about the romance of being stuck on the ground.Viktor Navorski (Tom Hanks), on a long-anticipated visit to New York from the imaginary Eastern European republic of Krakozia, arrives at J.F.K. just as a military coup abolishes his country's government and renders him effectively stateless. A complicated (and somewhat implausible) web of bureaucratic glitches and regulations strands him at the airport, where he remains for nearly a year, unable to board a flight home or hop a cab into Manhattan but innocent of anything that would warrant his detention. He is at once utterly trapped and completely at liberty. (His predicament is loosely based on the real experience of an Iranian traveler marooned for a much longer period in a Paris airport after the fall of the shah).Mr. Spielberg and the screenwriters, Sacha Gervasi and Jeff Nathanson, emphasize freedom rather than constraint and focus on the lightness of Viktor's situation, rather than on its gravity. What sounds like a scenario out of Kafka or Gogol turns into a benign fairy tale of solidarity and resilience. The horror afflicting Victor's homeland is safely confined to cable news broadcasts on airport television monitors, and real-life traumas of loneliness and displacement melt away in the airy glass-and-steel volumes of the terminal.The villain, since even the cheeriest fairy tale must have one, is an ambitious, humorless Homeland Security functionary named Frank Dixon, played with pursed lips and narrowed eyes by Stanley Tucci. Dixon, on the verge of a big promotion, regards Viktor not as a person in distress but as a procedural inconvenience. When his attempts to shoo Viktor into some other jurisdiction fail, his annoyance mutates into obsession, and he turns into a less sympathetic version of Hanratty, the monomanical Treasury Agent Mr. Hanks played in ''Catch Me if You Can.''In the serene comic world of ''The Terminal,'' Dixon's vindictiveness is very much an anomaly. Before long, Viktor finds himself welcomed into an easy-going, multicultural tribe of nongovernmental airport employees, including a mischievous Indian custodian named Gupta (Kumar Pallana), a gruff baggage handler named Joe (Chi McBride) and a sweet-faced food-service worker named Enrique (Diego Luna).In exchange for pilfered first-class meals, Viktor, with his balky English and cheery disposition, plays Cyrano for Enrique, who is smitten with Dolores (Zoë Saldana), the immigration officer who performs the daily ritual of rejecting Viktor's application for permission to enter the United States. Viktor's own romantic longings are piqued by Amelia (Catherine Zeta-Jones), a flight attendant so used to being mistreated by the married men she dates that she has forgotten how to respond to genuine kindness.It may strike you that some of the good feeling on display in ''The Terminal'' is pretty phony. The story, at times, is thin to the point of banality, and the filmmakers seem uncomfortable with characters who manifest anything more complicated than simple, quirky goodness.Ms. Zeta-Jones is as spirited and lovely as ever, but the movie is content to use her for her looks rather than for the arch, self-mocking wit that is her secret weapon as a comic actress. (So far, Rob Marshall in ''Chicago'' and Joe Roth in the otherwise dreary ''America's Sweethearts'' are the only directors to recognize this quality. The rest, Mr. Spielberg included, seem unnerved by the notion that a woman of such regal beauty could actually be funny.) As for Mr. Tucci, he is an obvious choice to play an officious apparatchik, but not a very inspired one; if he were a less officious actor, Dixon's coldness might carry a hint of pathos, and his malice might be psychologically interesting.Dixon and Amelia are there to serve the plot, a mess of runny egg yolks and artificial sweeteners that Mr. Spielberg has somehow cooked into a light and pleasing soufflé. Rarely have I been so acutely aware of a movie's softness and sentimentality, and rarely have I minded less. Some of the credit surely goes to Mr. Hanks. Like Mr. Spielberg, whose mastery of the medium expresses itself in a kind of sublime playfulness, Mr. Hanks is a man with nothing left to prove. His performance is so easy and amiable that its nuances emerge only in retrospect.At first Viktor seems like a holy fool with a funny accent, but the pouches under his eyes and the weary determination of his posture tell another story. In time we learn that Viktor is a skilled carpenter and a devoted son, but well before this information reaches us, and before he has mastered enough English to tell us so, we understand that he is resourceful and stubborn as well as generous.There is a superficial resemblance between this character and the all-American Crusoe Mr. Hanks played in ''Cast Away,'' but Viktor arrives from Krakozia already in possession of the stoicism it took Chuck Noland more than four years on a desert island to acquire. In some ways his journey is the reverse of Chuck's. Chuck, cast out of modern consumer society, learned to make do with very little. Victor, coming from circumstances of relative privation, must adapt to a scene of surreal and prodigious abundance.I'm guessing that Viktor's homeland, not long ago, was a socialist country, and a dogmatic old Krakozian might point out that ''The Terminal'' presents a beguiling, airbrushed fantasy of global capitalism, the true face of which is not always so benevolent. Fair enough, but another way to say this is to note that the film bathes a sterile, alienating commercial environment in the glow of utopian possibility, much as ''E.T.'' transformed a drab, half-built sprawling suburb into a realm of enchantment. In both cases the spell is cast by the desire and ingenuity of inhabitants whose surrogate and soul mate is the director himself.The magic here is a bit more forced, perhaps because it is more urgently needed. Air travel, once a symbol of freedom and mobility, is now more often associated with frustration, anxiety and terror. Mr. Spielberg, assisted by John Williams's soft, buoyant score, the celestial glow of Janusz Kaminski's cinematography and Alex McDowell's meticulously designed set, dispels those demons with effortless grace and irresistible optimism. In ''The Terminal,'' the scary modern world simultaneously shrinks into a friendly, artificial garden of escalators and food courts and expands toward the farthest horizon of the human imagination.''The Terminal'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some moments of danger, some mild sexual references and a bit of strong language.THE TERMINALDirected by Steven Spielberg; written by Sacha Gervasi and Jeff Nathanson, based on a story by Andrew Niccol and Mr. Gervasi; director of photography, Janusz Kaminski; edited by Michael Kahn; music by John Williams; production designer, Alex McDowell; produced by Walter F. Parkes, Laurie MacDonald and Mr. Spielberg; released by DreamWorks Pictures. Running time: 128 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.WITH: Tom Hanks (Viktor Navorski), Catherine Zeta-Jones (Amelia Warren), Stanley Tucci (Frank Dixon), Chi McBride (Joe Mulroy), Diego Luna (Enrique Cruz), Barry Shabaka Henley (Thurman), Kumar Pallana (Gupta Rajan) and Zoë Saldana (Dolores Torres).