https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/world/europe/russia-diplomatic-compounds.html
Russia Issues New Threats in Dispute Over Diplomatic Compounds - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Russia,Putin  Vladimir V,Trump  Donald J
July 18, 2017
430
MOSCOW — After a new round of talks failed to resolve the issue, Russia’s Foreign Ministry reiterated on Tuesday that it reserved the right to retaliate against the United States for its seizure of diplomatic property as punishment for Moscow’s meddling in last year’s presidential election.After President Trump’s victory in November, Michael T. Flynn, who went on to become the national security adviser for 24 days, prevailed upon President Vladimir V. Putin to refrain from retaliating, with the promise that United States policy toward Russia would be far more accommodating under a Trump administration.Mr. Trump, at the time president-elect, praised Mr. Putin’s restraint, posting on Twitter, “Great move on delay” and “I always knew he was very smart!”But with nothing to show for the delay so far, Russian officials have been issuing repeated statements that their patience is wearing thin.Russia began focusing attention on the two seized compounds in the lead up to the first meeting between Mr. Putin and Mr. Trump at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, on July 7.Both the Kremlin and the Foreign Ministry mentioned them frequently, hinting that the diplomatic retreats were perhaps something Mr. Trump could easily deliver as a friendly gesture for the first meeting. Mr. Putin did raise the issue with the American president, according to Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman.But with Trump associates under investigation for ties with the Russians, the president is hesitant to send any signals of weakness. So it did not happen then, either. Since that meeting, the official tone has turned more belligerent, with Russia threatening to expel American diplomats to match the 35 Russian diplomatic staff members kicked out of the United States at the same time that the two compounds were seized.On Tuesday, frustrated by the failure of a meeting the day before in Washington to make any headway on the matter, the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a blunt statement. In it, the ministry warned that “if Washington does not address this and other concerns, including persistent efforts to hinder the operation of Russia’s diplomatic missions, Russia has the right to take retaliatory measures in accordance with the principle of reciprocity.”The deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, told the news agency Interfax on Tuesday, “The fact that this issue hasn’t been settled actually poisons the atmosphere and makes a lot of things extremely complicated.”Mr. Ryabkov and the United States under secretary of state, Thomas A. Shannon, discussed the property in talks in Washington on Monday.Sergey V. Lavrov, the foreign minister, said any American preconditions for the return of the diplomatic property were unacceptable. Mr. Lavrov was asked at a news conference on Monday in Minsk, Belarus, about statements emanating from Washington that the compounds should not be handed back without getting something in return.Mr. Lavrov called the seizure “robbery in broad daylight” and said Russian control over the property was enshrined in a bilateral treaty. He blamed the continuing standoff, as Russian officials often do, on “Russophobia” in Washington that he hoped would eventually wane.Mr. Lavrov said he was sure there must be “sensible people” in the Trump administration who would realize that the seizure of the compounds and the expulsion of the diplomats were a last-ditch attempt by the Obama administration to destroy relations in a manner that the Trump administration would find difficult to fix.And on Tuesday, Mr. Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said in a conference call with journalists that “our patience is still running out.”