https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/15/arts/design/wall-street-art-show-postponed.html
Wall Street Art Show Postponed - The New York Times
Art,Birch  Simon (1974- ),Center for Arts Education,The 14th Factory (Exhibit),JPMorgan Chase & Company,Birch  Simon
April 14, 2016
3703
A sprawling pop-up art show that was set to take over almost 150,000 square feet of 23 Wall Street has been postponed and shortened because of funding issues. Simon Birch, the show’s Hong Kong-based organizer and primary artist, has raised $3 million, including $1 million of his own money, but came up short on funds for the nonprofit putting on the show.The exhibition, called “The 14th Factory,” was planned for mid-April, but will now open on May 16, for an abbreviated run. Intended to be open for four to six weeks, the show, which will be free (with a suggested donation), will run for three to four weeks. All of the art, by Mr. Birch and over 20 other artists, is being donated and will be auctioned, with proceeds going to charity.Unable to raise the money in New York — despite an advisory board that includes city luminaries like Tommy Hilfiger — Mr. Birch returned to Hong Kong to lobby friends and said he has secured an additional $1.1 million from a prominent art philanthropist who wishes to remain anonymous, with additional funds from several collectors, bringing the total to close to $1.8 million.The show is a mix of painting, sculpture and video art, themed around ideas of the expansion and collapse of empires — making its location, formerly the headquarters of J. P. Morgan & Company, and across the street from the Stock Exchange, particularly meaningful.Some pieces will be cut from the exhibition’s original plans, and the educational programming that was planned to go along with it, in conjunction with the Center for Arts Education, has been canceled.But one aspect will grow in ambition, Mr. Birch said: the New York installation will be followed by others in Los Angeles, London and then Hong Kong, where all of the components will come together in a final chapter. More funds have been pledged for those future shows, but venues have yet to be confirmed.