https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/01/realestate/how-a-co-op-divvies-up-its-shares.html
How a Co-op Divvies Up Its Shares - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Cooperatives
July 1, 2017
2858
Q. In 1981, my mother bought an apartment in a Manhattan co-op. After her death, I discovered that the maintenance was high for a one-bedroom apartment and my real estate agent agreed. Upon further investigation, I learned that an apartment on the same floor and of the same size had a maintenance that was $798 less per month than my mother’s apartment. It appears that at the time the building went co-op in the 1970s, the allocation of shares given to her apartment was not correct. What is my recourse?A. When your mother bought an apartment in a co-op, she bought shares in a corporation. Why does your mother’s apartment have more shares than another one that looks similar to hers? To get that answer, you have to go back to when the co-op was established.At that time, shares were allocated to each apartment. How those shares were divvied up is determined by unique details: How big is the apartment? What floor is it on? How much light does it get? Slicing the pie is more art than science, making it difficult to prove that a decision was wrong. “No two real estate professionals will allocate shares in the same way,” said Phyllis H. Weisberg, a chairwoman of the cooperative and condominium law practice at Montgomery McCracken Walker & Rhoads.Then there is the issue of fairness. Your mother bought her apartment fully aware of its price and its maintenance cost, based on shares. She was not misled, even if some of her neighbors paid less in maintenance. (She also had more voting leverage all those years because of her extra shares.)“The question is similar to someone who discovers they overpaid on the purchase price of an apartment and now, years after the purchase, wants to go back and reduce the purchase price,” Ms. Weisberg said.As a practical matter, reallocating shares raises all sorts of thorny legal issues. There are tax implications for the building. Moreover, the co-op has a finite number of shares. So if your mother’s estate relinquishes some of her shares, another person would have to take them, raising that shareholder’s monthly maintenance costs. Some proprietary leases require shareholder consent to make such a change. “And, needless to say, it is unlikely they would consent,” Ms. Weisberg said.