http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/09/business/international/tsipras-greece-debt.html
Greece Requests a 3-Year Loan but Is Vague on Its Financial Plans - The New York Times
Greece,European Union,Tsipras  Alexis,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),European Parliament,European Stability Mechanism,Eurozone
July 8, 2015
7455
ATHENS —  Greece, running out of money and under a tight deadline from European leaders, requested a three-year loan on Wednesday from the eurozone’s bailout fund as the country and its creditors began what could be a last effort to avert a historic rupture.But in making a formal request for new aid that it needs to avoid further defaults on its debts, Greece did not provide any details of what it would do in return to show that it is serious about strengthening the government’s finances, other than alluding generally to a willingness to make quick changes to its tax and pension systems. The government said it would provide those specifics on Thursday.Nor did it publicly describe the size of the loan it sought. Some economists estimate that Greece will need 50 billion euros (about $55 billion), or possibly more.Eurozone leaders rebuked the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, late Tuesday, before the latest loan request, for not providing a new and specific proposal to secure additional bailout money.Until Athens submits that proposal on Thursday, the final deadline the eurozone creditors have set, it remains to be seen whether Greece can finally come close enough to meeting demands for pension cuts, tax increases and other changes to secure a new bailout deal. Negotiations have gone on for five months.Without a deal, which European leaders said they would decide on by Sunday night, Greece seems destined to stumble out of the euro currency union and face an uncertain future as a bankrupt stand-alone economy.“The last-chance procedure has just started,” Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, told the European Parliament on Wednesday, shortly after Athens sent its formal request for a new bailout. If granted, it would be Greece’s third bailout since it was crippled by the financial crisis more than five years ago.Mr. Tsipras took his case to the European Parliament on Wednesday. In a defiant speech, he said that his government was determined to reach a “viable agreement” with the country’s creditors.But he also insisted that any deal should include debt relief, and he emphasized that the Greek crisis was essentially a European problem.“We want an agreement that will give a final end to the crisis and show there is light at the end of the tunnel,” Mr. Tsipras told a packed chamber in Strasbourg, France. But he said a deal could not come at any price, noting that Greece had been “transformed into a laboratory for testing austerity over the past years.”The new Greek finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, submitted the loan request to the eurozone bailout fund, the European Stability Mechanism. In an accompanying letter, Mr. Tsakalotos mentioned one of Greece’s other main goals in securing a new loan: relief from some of its staggering public debt, which is more than €300 billion.“Greece welcomes an opportunity to explore potential measures to be taken so that its official sector related debt becomes both sustainable and viable over the long term,” the letter said.The basic disagreements between Greece and its creditors have been well established through months of negotiations. Before providing additional bailout money, the creditors want Greece to show that it can strengthen its finances and handle more debt. The main points of contention involve Greece’s overburdened pension system, which has been a big drain on the government’s finances, and proposed increases to elements of the country’s value-added tax, some of which are opposed by regional and other interest groups.The Greek government, elected early this year on a platform of ending years of austerity imposed by Germany and other lenders, is pushing back against further pension cuts and higher taxes, saying they would further weaken an already crippled economy. It is also seeking a quick infusion of aid to help cover its bills and loan repayments in the short run, as well as a reduction in its debt payments for the long run.“We have ideological differences,” Mr. Tsipras told the Parliament. “We are divided on issues.”The differences are not huge in absolute terms, but they are complicated by an almost total breakdown in trust between the two sides. In its letter seeking new bailout money on Wednesday, Greece said, without offering any details, that it was ready “to immediately implement a set of measures as early as the beginning of next week” to address creditors’ demands for pension cuts and tax increases.How far Greece is willing to go will depend to some degree on Mr. Tsipras’s calculation of what the left wing of his Syriza party is willing to accept, and on whether he is willing to rely on support from opposition parties to pass any changes he puts on the table in the negotiations with creditors.Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany has already indicated that she opposes lending additional money to Greece through the European Stability Mechanism or granting it any debt relief until the Tsipras government presents an economic overhaul plan acceptable to the creditors.In the meantime, the banks in Greece remain closed and close to insolvency. The Governing Council of the European Central Bank decided Wednesday to keep Greek banks on life support.The banks have been dependent for months on emergency loans from the European Central Bank. After a conference call Wednesday, the Governing Council decided to maintain a ceiling on the emergency cash at about €89 billion, or $98 billion, according to a person with knowledge of the situation.The 25-member council, made up of the heads of eurozone central banks and the executive board of the European Central Bank, had been expected to stick with the status quo, neither increasing nor decreasing the amount of money Greek banks could borrow, as long as political leaders were still talking.But Christian Noyer, governor of the Bank of France and a member of the governing council, warned Wednesday that time was running out. The European Central Bank will have to stop providing emergency lending to Greek banks unless there is an accord with creditors by Sunday, Mr. Noyer said on Europe 1 radio.Without central bank support, Greek banks will go bankrupt, and the economy will plunge into an abyss. “The Greek economy is on the verge of catastrophe,” Mr. Noyer said.The government closed the banks last week because they were in danger of running out of cash and the European Central Bank was not willing to lend them any more than they had already received. The banks will not reopen Thursday as planned, and many economists doubt they will reopen anytime soon.The European Central Bank has avoided doing anything that would prevent political leaders from resolving the Greek crisis, and it is likely to wait as long as possible before it invokes rules that prohibit it from lending to insolvent banks.As for the government’s new loan request from the eurozone bailout fund, Michel Reijns, a spokesman for the president of the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers, said on Twitter on Wednesday that a working group would begin assessing it.Mr. Tsipras, in his speech to the European Parliament, complained that the bailout loans Greece had received since 2010, totaling about €240 billion, had benefited only the creditors.“The money that was given to Greece never went to the people,” Mr. Tsipras said, drawing a mix of booing and applause. “The money was given to save Greek and European banks.”The Greek leader declared that he was not seeking a “rupture” with Europe, but rather a “socially just and economically viable agreement without the mistakes of the past that caused a recessionary spiral.”Any deal should reflect the “strong mandate” of the Greek people, he added, a reference to the resounding rejection of proposed austerity measures in a referendum Sunday.Greece has pressed for “credible” measures in return for adequate funding and a commitment from lenders to start talks on debt relief, Mr. Tsipras said, adding, “There must be no taboos.”Mujtaba Rahman, Europe director for the Eurasia Group, a political risk consulting firm, said Wednesday evening that the chance Greece would reach a deal with the eurozone still outweighed, but only just, the chance of a failure.The Greeks, Mr. Rahman said, are already close to meeting the conditions to seal a deal on Sunday, including improving trust with the rest of the eurozone’s decision makers.There are “signs that Greek government officials, after months of procrastination, now understand the seriousness of the situation they are in and what is expected of them,” Mr. Rahman said.European officials pointed to pledges by Greece “to immediately implement” measures in areas like tax reform and pensions as a sign that the country was finally willing to move to legislate some of the changes most sought by creditors.Greece is also showing signs of easing its demands for relief on its giant loans from international creditors as a precondition for such legislation, Mr. Rahman said. Mr. Tsipras has recognized, he said, that “reforms will indeed need to be passed first if money is to be disbursed — not the other way around.”