https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/opinion/james-comey-donald-trump.html
James Comey and the Fear of Being Alone With Donald Trump - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Comey  James B,Trump  Donald J,Wray  Christopher A,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates
June 8, 2017
4510
The tone is dry and unemotional, the language is simple and clear — but make no mistake: The prepared remarks of James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, which the Senate released in advance of his sworn testimony before the Intelligence Committee on Thursday, tell a shocking story.Starting days after the inauguration and continuing until mid-April, President Trump made multiple attempts to secure Mr. Comey’s personal loyalty and to interfere with the F.B.I.’s investigations into contacts between Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser and the Russian government, as well as a broader inquiry into the Trump campaign’s possible collusion with Russian efforts to swing the 2016 election to Mr. Trump.After a meeting in the Oval Office in February, the president asked everyone but Mr. Comey to leave. Then, according to Mr. Comey, he asked him to drop his investigation into Michael Flynn, who had just resigned as national security adviser after his lies about contacts with the Russian ambassador became public. “I hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting Flynn go,” he said, according to notes Mr. Comey made immediately afterward.Mr. Comey was so unnerved, he said, he told Attorney General Jeff Sessions that he did not want to be left alone with Mr. Trump again. (Mr. Sessions reportedly would not guarantee that the president would respect that request.)The president went further the next month, asking Mr. Comey to “lift the cloud” of the broader investigation into the campaign’s Russia ties. When Mr. Comey told Mr. Trump that he was not personally under investigation, the president pleaded that he make that public. More entreaties followed in April and then, in May, Mr. Trump fired Mr. Comey.Anyone left wondering how to connect the dots got some help from the president, who a few days after the firing said on national TV: “When I decided to just do it, I said to myself ... this Russia thing with Trump and Russia is a made-up story.”On Wednesday, Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, refused to answer questions in testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee about whether Mr. Trump had pushed him to have Mr. Comey curtail the investigation of Mr. Flynn, as The Washington Post has reported.It’s hard to see how this ends well for the administration.Unsurprisingly, Mr. Trump is trying to deflect attention from Mr. Comey’s impending testimony. On Wednesday, he announced that  Christopher Wray was his pick for F.B.I. director, calling him “a man of impeccable credentials.”That’s evidently true — Mr. Wray is a former top Justice Department official and now a widely respected criminal defense lawyer. It’s also the least Americans should expect of someone seeking such a consequential post.A far more important qualification, however, is one no one will find on his résumé: the ability to protect the bureau’s independence from political meddling. This task is all the more critical when the White House is led by a man with no respect for the established barriers between politicians and law enforcement.Mr. Comey was tapped to be the F.B.I. director by President Barack Obama largely because of his reputation for independence. In 2004, when he was deputy attorney general, Mr. Comey physically intervened when President George W. Bush’s chief of staff and White House counsel sneaked into the hospital room of the ailing attorney general, John Ashcroft. They were there to extract Mr. Ashcroft’s authorization of the administration’s warrantless data collection program, parts of which Mr. Comey believed violated the law.Mr. Wray has no comparably dramatic evidence to offer, but by most accounts he is a smart and accomplished lawyer. He ran the Justice Department’s criminal division from 2003 to 2005, handling terrorism cases and corporate fraud scandals. He is a partner at King & Spalding, where he specializes in white-collar criminal defense.Mr. Wray is also a better choice than others Mr. Trump was said to be considering, including politicians like former Senator Joe Lieberman and former Representative Mike Rogers. Still, he will need to address concerns about his political connections and biases, including his role defending Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey — who at one point led Mr. Trump’s transition — in the Bridgegate scandal, and the tens of thousands of dollars he has donated to Republican candidates over the last decade.The bigger question for Americans is how Mr. Wray will respond, if he hasn’t already, when Mr. Trump comes looking for a pledge of loyalty.