https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/us/politics/kansas-republicans-democrats-elections.html
In Kansas, Where Republicans and Fiscal Woes Reign, Democrats Made Inroads - The New York Times
Kansas,Parker  Brett,Brownback  Sam,Politics and Government,State Legislatures,Republican Party
Dec. 21, 2016
2660
OVERLAND PARK, Kan. — Brett Parker, an elementary school teacher and rookie politician, was a Democrat running against a Republican incumbent in a Republican state that the Republican presidential candidate, Donald J. Trump, clinched by 20 percentage points.In spite of all that, Mr. Parker will be sworn into the Kansas House of Representatives next month, one of 13 legislative seats the Democrats picked up here.In this election year, voters across Kansas leaned firmly to the right at the federal level, but showed far more nuance when it came to their state. In parts of Kansas, they punished conservative legislators linked to Gov. Sam Brownback’s tax-cutting doctrine, instead gravitating toward moderate Republicans and Democrats like Mr. Parker who blame the governor and his legislative allies for imperiling the state’s finances and putting public schools at risk.“Their goal was very simple, and that was to associate me with Brownback,” said James Todd, the two-term Republican lawmaker Mr. Parker challenged here in suburban Kansas City. “That obviously was effective enough to beat me.”For generations, Republicans have dominated Kansas politics, and that seems unlikely to change any time soon. Many voters here believe strongly in the party’s message on issues such as abortion and gun rights and want limits on government spending. But some of those same Republicans have grown frustrated during Governor Brownback’s six-year tenure with perpetual budget shortfalls, cuts to road projects, rollbacks to social services and, especially resonant here in Overland Park, perceived budget threats to public schools.Kansas, which faces a roughly $350 million budget shortfall this fiscal year and is projected to have a larger one next year, is among 24 states recently reporting lower-than-expected revenue collections, and may serve as a cautionary tale for those other states and their political leaders.Here, conservatives attribute much of the strain to downturns in the agriculture and energy industries, both central elements in the Kansas economy. Others question whether the cuts and deficits are symptomatic of a political swing that went too far to the right.“The pendulum finally snapped,” said Brian Brown, a Republican who lives in Mr. Todd’s House district, but who spurned his own party and volunteered for Mr. Parker’s campaign.Going door to door, Mr. Brown said, some voters he met voiced frustration with Mr. Brownback, but were still reluctant to cross party lines. “I’m like, ‘I’m glad you brought that up, because I’m a registered Republican voter, and let me tell you why I’m doing this right now, walking, holding a sign for a Democratic candidate,’” Mr. Brown said.Mr. Brownback, who took office after eight years of Democratic governors, has led a rightward policy shift. He signed legislation rolling back income taxes and eliminating some business taxes, all the while assuring voters that economic growth would help make up for lost revenue.The type of growth Mr. Brownback counted on has not materialized, though, and the state’s revenue estimates have repeatedly been off by wide margins, forcing years of cuts to state agencies and reductions in government services. Mr. Brownback, who has promised to announce next month a way to deal with the latest deficit, has defended the tax cuts and criticized past government spending levels as too high.Some here have speculated that the governor might take a job in the Trump administration. A spokeswoman said Mr. Brownback was unavailable for comment.“There are certainly places where we can still find cuts and efficiencies,” said Shawn Sullivan, the state budget director, who said additional taxes and “one-time fixes” were also options. “Everything’s on the table at this point.”Distaste for the governor, combined with a decreased emphasis on social issues like abortion, created an opening for candidates like Mr. Parker, who campaigned largely on the budget and the threat he said conservative policy-making posed to public schools.“It’s hard to wrap your head around the hole we’re in,” Mr. Parker said.In Olathe, the nearby suburb where he teaches, Mr. Parker said staff layoffs, reduced janitorial service and the elimination of Spanish classes for elementary students had already taken a toll.Education and fears about more budget strain helped lift Mr. Parker and other candidates in suburban districts, where grass-roots parent groups emerged as a new political force.One group, Stand Up Blue Valley, named for a school district, endorsed Mr. Parker and several other legislative candidates, both Democrats and Republicans, who campaigned on education issues. The public schools in this affluent suburban county are considered some of the region’s best, with parents saying they moved here for the schools and are counting on continued success to maintain their property values.“People are so fed up, so tired, frustrated, of what is happening to our great state,” said Jennifer Jarrell, a former Republican precinct committeewoman who became involved with Stand Up Blue Valley.But moderates and Democrats also made gains outside suburban Kansas City, and education was hardly the only issue that drove voters to the polls. A collection of grass-roots groups called the Save Kansas Coalition pushed for a return to political centrism and brought attention to topics as diverse as Medicaid expansion and the method for selecting judges.In Hutchinson, home to about 40,000 people near the state’s middle, Patsy Terrell said a road project had been put off because of the budget woes, frustrating voters. “That means jobs, and not just jobs, but good-paying jobs, as well as updating our infrastructure,” said Ms. Terrell, a Democrat who won a first term in the Legislature, beating a 25-year incumbent.In a House district in Newton, a railroad town north of Wichita, Tim Hodge campaigned against the Brownback tax policy and unseated another Republican incumbent. “We got people who our message worked with,” Mr. Hodge said. “Those are usually people who are just struggling with life, making an hourly wage, living in a rental house. They don’t even follow politics very well.”While Democrats picked up 13 seats in the Legislature, and several moderate Republicans beat conservatives in primaries, the practical effect of the state’s shift remains uncertain. Republicans held onto large majorities in both chambers of the Legislature, and conservatives kept the most influential leadership positions. Moderate Republicans and Democrats might pass some bills by voting as a bloc, though they may not be able to overcome a veto.Clayton Barker, executive director of the Kansas Republican Party, acknowledged a widespread unease over the state’s finances, and said he believed that many of the first-time lawmakers “are going to have a very sharp learning curve on the fiscal issues facing the state.”Complicating matters, the Kansas Supreme Court is expected to rule soon on a lawsuit challenging the adequacy of state funding for public schools. The Supreme Court justices, many of whom conservatives tried unsuccessfully to oust in last month’s election, could order hundreds of millions of dollars in additional education spending.“The election happened, we moved to the center, and now the rubber meets the road,” said Patrick Miller, a University of Kansas political scientist. “Where do you find the money? What do you do about Brownback’s veto? And what do you do about the Supreme Court ruling?”