http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/10/sports/basketball/i-cant-breathe-tshirts-in-the-nba-how-jayz-lebron-james-and-others-made-them-happen.html
LeBron James, Jay-Z and More Made 'I Can't Breathe' T-Shirts Happen in the N.B.A. - The New York Times
Basketball,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Garner  Eric,Chicago Bulls,T-Shirts (Apparel),Rose  Derrick,James  LeBron,Jay-Z,Williams  Deron,Jack  Jarrett,Justice League NYC,Cleveland Cavaliers,Brooklyn Nets
Dec. 9, 2014
3573
It started with Derrick Rose and a simple black T-shirt.Before the Chicago Bulls’ game on Saturday against the Golden State Warriors, Rose wore a T-shirt adorned with the phrase “I Can’t Breathe” — three words that had become a rallying cry for protesters in the wake of a grand jury’s decision not to indict a New York police officer whose chokehold led to the death of an unarmed black man, Eric Garner, on Staten Island in July.Two days later, Rose’s quiet expression of social activism had become something much more, as an elaborate plan took shape to deliver similar T-shirts to even more high-profile N.B.A. players, including LeBron James and Deron Williams, and, on Tuesday night, Kobe Bryant.The plan, a race against the clock before the Nets’ game against the Cleveland Cavaliers on Monday night at Barclays Center, unfolded across several boroughs of the city. James, Jay-Z, the visiting British royal couple and an associate of the hip-hop impresario Russell Simmons had starring roles. So did a security guard whose lone responsibility was to help smuggle the T-shirts into the Nets’ locker room. The shirts have since become part of the national conversation.“To be honest, we never realized it would have this much traction,” said Carmen Perez, the executive director of the Gathering for Justice, a New York-based social justice organization whose youth-focused task force, Justice League NYC, has helped stage protests across the city since the Garner decision.The group’s plan emerged on Sunday when James, the star of the Cavaliers, told reporters that Rose’s T-shirt was “spectacular” and that he was looking for one of his own. Organizers at Justice League NYC had a conference call that night.Rose’s public protest had resonated with members of the group, as did James’s support of it. And with the Nets about to host a fairly large event on Monday — their game against the Cavaliers would be attended by the royal couple, Prince William and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, and more than 100 credentialed members of the news media — they saw a platform to broadcast their message about justice reform, members of the group said.The plan was simple, really: Deliver replicas of the “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirt to James and other players who might be interested in wearing them before the game. Executing that plan, though, would be far more complex, as intermediaries between Jay-Z and James would need to get involved, none of the T-shirts actually existed yet, and the game was less than 24 hours away. But those who were aware of the plan were confident.“We knew we were going to make it happen,” said Michael Skolnik, Simmons’s political director.That same night, after the conference call, Rameen Aminzadeh, a member of Justice League NYC, drafted a simple design for the text of the T-shirt, which other members of the group approved sometime after 1 a.m. The plan was in motion.Skolnik, meanwhile, knew he needed to get Jay-Z on board, largely because Jay-Z and James are friends who travel in similar social circles. And because Jay-Z was expected to attend Monday’s game with his wife, Beyoncé, Skolnik wanted to apprise Jay-Z of the T-shirt plan. So one of Skolnik’s first phone calls was to Dream Hampton, a cultural critic and writer who had collaborated with Jay-Z on his autobiography, “Decoded.”On Monday afternoon, Hampton reached out to Jay-Z and asked if he would get in touch with James. Jay-Z and James soon spoke by phone, Skolnik said.As those high-level conversations were playing out, Aminzadeh took care of a more prosaic — if equally important — item of business by rushing to NYC Customs, a printing shop in Long Island City owned by his friend Helen Mihalatos. Aminzadeh arrived at 12:30 p.m., he said, and delivered specific instructions: He needed 82 T-shirts, all of them in extra-large sizes, and he needed them as quickly as possible.Dannee LeBlang, Mihalatos’s business partner, jumped behind a manual screen-printing press and went to work, completing the job in about 90 minutes. Aminzadeh flew out the door with a box full of them. “We hustled,” Mihalatos said.It was nearing dusk when Aminzadeh, Perez and their fellow organizer Cherrell Brown gathered outside Barclays Center. Skolnik was in Manhattan with Simmons, who was scheduled to appear on a CNN program later that evening. But in addition to strategizing with James, Jay-Z had passed along Skolnik’s cellphone number to Williams, the Nets’ point guard, who texted Skolnik around 5:30 p.m. His message was concise: He and his teammates wanted the T-shirts.The final hurdle was navigating the T-shirts past arena security. The N.B.A.’s stance was clear: The league did not want its players wearing the T-shirts during warm-ups. So Williams recruited a security guard to take the large box from Aminzadeh, Perez and Brown on the Dean Street entrance of the arena, Skolnik said.It felt risky, Aminzadeh said, because the street was already flooded with police officers and other security personnel. So he tried to be discreet.“We didn’t want the whole operation to get shut down before it happened,” said Aminzadeh, who piled 38 of the T-shirts in a box, more than enough for players and both teams’ support staffs, and kept the remainder for protesters who were beginning to gather outside. He made the handoff to the security guard at 6:30 p.m.Unknown to Aminzadeh or any of his associates at Justice League NYC, an alternative T-shirt plan had been in the works for two days. The Nets’ Jarrett Jack, moved by Rose’s protest, had reached out to his representatives at Excel Sports Management on Sunday to see if they could produce a few of the T-shirts. On Monday, Jack contacted Kyrie Irving, a former teammate with the Cavaliers, and asked if he wanted to be involved.About an hour before the tip, Jack received three of the T-shirts from one of his agents and delivered them to the Cavaliers’ locker room, he said. Minutes later, before taking the court for warm-ups, James and Irving put them on.“The fact that Jarrett Jack made his own is so beautiful,” Skolnik said.The Nets, meanwhile, received their T-shirts from Justice League NYC around the same time. Williams, Kevin Garnett and Alan Anderson all joined Jack in wearing them. A photograph of them with Jay-Z before the game spread quickly on the Internet. Jay-Z did not wear one, but only because the T-shirts were enormous, Skolnik said.“He’s not going to put on a 2XL that goes down to his knees,” Skolnik said.Outside, Brown stood before a growing swarm of protesters and announced on a bullhorn that the players were wearing the shirts. The crowd cheered.“There was solidarity inside,” Brown said, “and there was solidarity outside.”Michele A. Roberts, executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, said: “Our players are members of the community. They see, hear and are affected by events — just like the rest of us. That some have chosen to give voice to recent unfortunate events and communicate their support to the Garner family is yet another reason why I and my colleagues on staff at the N.B.P.A. are proud to serve them.”The league expressed reservations, however. “I respect Derrick Rose and all of our players for voicing their personal views on important issues, but my preference would be for players to abide by our on-court attire rules,” Commissioner Adam Silver said in a statement Monday.On Tuesday, Jay-Z requested another box of T-shirts, Skolnik said — destination unknown. Justice League NYC placed an order for additional 1,000 of them, due for pickup on Friday. Skolnik said he had also been in touch with the Knicks’ Carmelo Anthony, although it was unclear whether Anthony planned to wear one at a future game.In an interview Tuesday, Jack said: “Our motive isn’t trying to get somebody indicted or get somebody thrown in jail. That’s not the issue. The issue is about us feeling safe and understanding that people are going to be able to protect us when necessary, and we won’t get harmed in the process.”