https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/fashion/mens-style/daniel-cormier-ufc-champ.html
The Understated Style of U.F.C. Champ Daniel Cormier - The New York Times
Cormier  Daniel (1979- ),Ultimate Fighting Championship,Mixed Martial Arts,Fashion and Apparel
July 10, 2017
8786
Daniel Cormier, the Ultimate Fighting Championship light-heavyweight champion and former Olympic wrestler, will defend his title against Jon Jones, a former champion, on July 29 in Anaheim, Calif. The U.F.C. bout offers plenty of tension — the two men infamously scuffled in the lobby of the MGM Grand in Las Vegas in 2014. But Mr. Cormier, 38, a native of Lafayette, La., who lives in San Jose, Calif., isn’t all brawn. Outside of the octagon, he also has finesse — in the fashion arena, at least.Shirt If I’m just kind of cruising around and going to the gym or around town, I wear a lot of Oklahoma State stuff. It’s where I went to school. My favorite is an orange Oklahoma State shirt that says “Legacy.” It’s that kind of material that feels aged, so it’s very soft. If I’m traveling, though, I’ll do a polo. I wear the ones by Ralph Lauren. My wife actually says I wear too many polos. She’s like: “Enough with the polos. You’d think you were sponsored by Polo.” But it’s kind of the perfect thing when you don’t want to be too dressed up but still want to look decently put-together. Suit I have a blue Hugo Boss suit that has a nice cross pattern on it. It’s my favorite, although not the nicest that I have. My wife and I saw “Hamilton” a couple weeks ago in San Francisco, and I wore the suit. It’s slim-fitted. I’m a bigger guy. By this point, I’ve learned I can’t wear those big old Steve Harvey suits. It’s not the 1990s N.B.A. draft. Jeans I used to wear lot of Joe’s jeans, because they’re comfortable. But then I found these jeans by Hugo Boss. They’re jeans, but they’re stretchy, and they look nice. Before, I was the guy who wouldn’t stray from light blue, dark blue or navy. Shoes I’m a huge Air Jordan guy. I have so many Jordans, but I don’t wear all the new stuff with all the new colors. I only wear the ones that Michael played in. They’re the ones that came out when I was a kid. Or, my cousin’s girlfriend works at Louboutin, so I have a whole bunch of shoes from Louboutin. But I will never wear a pair of his spiky shoes. The Louboutins I have look like regular tennis shoes but with red soles.Watches I have four TAG Heuer watches, and I have a really nice Breitling that I bought in New York. I wear that one the most. It has a big face with different time zones, and it’s a silver link band. I won’t wear anything supergaudy. Even a gold Rolex is not for me. I went to try one on, and it was just too much.