https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/business/dealbook/convictions-of-2-former-traders-in-libor-scandal-are-dismissed.html
Convictions of 2 Former Traders in Libor Scandal Are Dismissed - The New York Times
Libor (London Interbank Offered Rate),Banking and Financial Institutions,Rabobank,Allen  Anthony,Conti  Anthony
July 19, 2017
6025
A United States appeals court threw out the convictions of two former London-based traders at the Dutch bank Rabobank on Wednesday, in what had been the first American criminal case to arise from investigations into the manipulation of the interest rate benchmark known as Libor.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan also dismissed the indictment against the two men, saying that their Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination had been violated.The jury verdict on conspiracy and fraud charges against the two, Anthony Allen and Anthony Conti, in November 2015 represented the first criminal convictions in the United States stemming from the scandal over global banks’ rigging the London interbank offer rate, or Libor.The decision to void those convictions is the latest setback for prosecutors on each side of the Atlantic as they try to pursue criminal charges against individuals related to Libor. Eight former traders have been acquitted of criminal charges in Britain in the last two years.At issue in the Rabobank case was the Justice Department’s use of testimony that Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti were compelled to give in Britain as part of an investigation by the Financial Conduct Authority.The men, both British citizens, were obligated to provide statements to the British regulator in the inquiry or they could have faced imprisonment.On Wednesday, a three-judge panel of the Second Circuit found that prosecutors in the United States improperly relied on that testimony at trial and in obtaining an indictment against the men from a grand jury.“This tainted testimony was significant both at trial and in the grand jury, because it provided the only firsthand eyewitness account that refuted the defendants’ central argument for acquittal, and was therefore not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,” Judge José A. Cabranes wrote in an 81-page opinion.Michael S. Schachter, a lawyer for Mr. Allen, said that the appeals court’s decision was “a tremendous relief for Tony Allen and his family, who are now looking forward to putting this stressful chapter of their lives behind them.”Aaron Williamson, a lawyer for Mr. Conti, said they were pleased with the court’s decision. “Tony and his family can move forward without fear of being pulled apart for a year of their lives,” he said.A spokeswoman for the Justice Department declined to comment on Wednesday.The inquiry into Libor has led to billions of dollars in fines in Britain and in the United States and shook the reputations of some of the world’s biggest banks, including Barclays, Deutsche Bank, the Royal Bank of Scotland and UBS.Rabobank admitted in October 2013 to criminal wrongdoing by its employees and agreed to pay more than $1 billion in criminal and civil penalties to settle inquiries by American, British and other authorities. Its chief executive also immediately stepped down.To set Libor and other benchmark rates, banks submit the rates at which they would be prepared to lend money to one another, on an unsecured basis, in various currencies and at varying maturities. Libor is used to price more than $300 trillion in securities.Prosecutors in the United States had accused Mr. Allen and Mr. Conti of accommodating requests by traders at Rabobank to adjust their Libor submissions to benefit the bank and the traders’ positions, an argument the men contested a trial.At Rabobank, Mr. Allen was the global head of liquidity and finance and supervised Mr. Conti, a senior money markets trader who made daily Libor submissions. Mr. Allen was laid off in 2008, when Rabobank closed its London branch, and Mr. Conti left the bank in 2009, when his job was moved to the Netherlands.The United States government obtained the testimony at issue from Paul Robson, a co-worker at Rabobank who had seen it after the Financial Conduct Authority brought an enforcement action against him in Britain in 2013.The British regulator stayed its enforcement action against Mr. Robson to allow the Justice Department to proceed with a criminal investigation. Mr. Robson later pleaded guilty to a criminal conspiracy charge and agreed to cooperate with American prosecutors.He was later barred for life from the financial industry by British regulators.