https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/nyregion/city-hall-and-uber-clash-in-struggle-over-new-york-streets.html
City Hall and Uber Clash in Struggle Over New York Streets - The New York Times
Uber Technologies Inc,Car Services and Livery Cabs,New York City,Roads and Traffic,de Blasio  Bill,Taxicabs and Taxicab Drivers,Taxi and Limousine Commission,Transportation Department (NYC),Plouffe  David
July 16, 2015
3737
For months, the clash has seemed inevitable: the professed disrupters of municipal transportation policy and the chief executive of the country’s largest city government, tussling over who should rule the roads of New York City.In a few short years, the ride-hailing company Uber has swelled in influence by the day, placing thousands of new for-hire vehicles on the road.And now, the administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio is moving to halt the runaway expansion, citing a classic urban scourge to make its case: The infusion of vehicles, the city says, appears to be clogging Manhattan traffic.With a City Council vote expected as early as next week on a proposal that would place a cap on Uber’s growth, pending a study of traffic patterns, the sides have become entangled in a protracted struggle, on camera and off, over the future of mobility in the city.City officials have defended the move as a sensible reaction to unprecedented upheaval in the taxi world, where the number of for-hire vehicles has grown by more than 60 percent since 2011. The yellow-cab industry, which includes some of Mr. de Blasio’s most prolific campaign contributors, has pressured the administration to clamp down on Uber, a grave threat to owners amid the faltering values of the yellow-taxi medallion.Uber has connected the dots unsubtly.“I didn’t just fall off the turnip truck,” a top operative, David Plouffe, said this week. “I think this is less about traffic congestion than it is about political contributions.”Uber’s leaders have said the maneuver would “break” them in the city, leading to unwieldy wait times as a growing pool of passengers seeks a near-stagnant supply of cars.The company has aired television advertisements, starring Uber drivers, that portray Mr. de Blasio as an enemy to working residents, and flooded Council districts with mailers denouncing members who support the cap.Mr. Plouffe, the former campaign manager for President Obama, has been dispatched to New York City for a round of appearances and meetings, including an audience with the mayor himself at City Hall this week.And on Thursday, a “de Blasio” tab was added to the app in New York, allowing users to see projected wait times for cars if the legislation is allowed to go forward.The administration has sought to frame Uber as the bully, not the bullied. It takes more than a bit of gumption, mayoral allies said, for a company valued at more than $40 billion to cast itself as the underdog taking on City Hall.“Now we know where that ‘surge pricing’ goes,” Wiley Norvell, a spokesman for the mayor, said after the television ads began, referring to the app feature that raises passenger rates in moments of high demand. He said the company’s “ugly and disingenuous tactics” would not dissuade the city from “looking out for the public’s interest.”The legislation would limit for-hire licenses based on company base size, allowing bases with more than 500 vehicles to grow by up to 1 percent during the study period, which is to end by September 2016. Uber, which operates seven of the 10 such bases in the city, said it was currently experiencing vehicle growth of roughly 3 percent per month. Smaller bases would be subject to higher caps.At a meeting at City Hall on Monday, attendees said, Uber executives made clear that even a higher cap would be unacceptable. Anthony E. Shorris, the city’s first deputy mayor, described the company’s aversion to such regulation as so entrenched that it seemed like “some kind of religious issue.”“I mean, at some point, there’s a public good here, which is a restricted capacity of the streets of Manhattan,” Mr. Shorris said in an interview, adding, “If the company can’t accept that’s what the proper role of government is here, then we actually have a much larger disagreement.”Around the world, cities have grappled with the incursion of Uber and its competitors. There have been lawsuits in San Francisco and bans on the app across Spain, roadway-blocking driver protests in London and vehicles overturned in Paris.On Wednesday, an administrative judge in California recommended that Uber be suspended if it does not comply with local data regulations, and fined more than $7 million. Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary, Karen Hinton, emailed the news to reporters with a taunting subject line: “Uber Troubles in Hi-Tech Heaven.”To date, the skirmishes have been comparatively tame in New York. But for Mr. de Blasio, the blistering campaign in recent days has zeroed in on several politically sensitive areas.Uber has sought to stoke opposition among two of the Democratic mayor’s core constituencies: younger voters, for whom the ride-ordering app can be as essential as a MetroCard, and working-class minority residents who make up much of the driver base.And in a touch of stagecraft intended to highlight that point, Mr. Plouffe visited Harlem on Tuesday, appearing at Sylvia’s, the landmark soul food restaurant in Harlem, joined by more than a dozen community leaders, all of them black, and all of them critical of the proposed cap.The city’s rationale has also struck some skeptics as more convenient than considered. Mr. de Blasio has seldom fretted about congestion in his public life. As a councilman, he opposed a congestion pricing plan promoted by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. Since taking office, he has demurred when asked about a widely circulated successor plan cheered by transit advocates, claiming not to have read it.“When one interest group who happens also to be a campaign contributor is favored over another, it’s quite reasonable to question the motivation behind the policy change,” said Dick Dadey, the executive director of Citizens Union, a watchdog group.Aides to the mayor, whose 2013 campaign took in hundreds of thousands of dollars from the taxi industry, have chafed at any suggestion of a quid pro quo.“I’d characterize myself as independent,” Meera Joshi, the city’s taxi commissioner, said in an interview, noting, as a badge of honor, that officials across the taxi industry had found fault with her agency at times.While few have doubted the industry’s hold on local politics through the years, the present quarrel has become a crucial test of Uber’s own approach to affecting policy.Though the company says it does not make political contributions to candidates, it has been quick to open its coffers for other purposes.Since 2014, Uber has spent at least $225,000 on lobbying the mayor’s office, the City Council and the Taxi and Limousine Commission, according to city records, turning to some of the most powerful lobbyists in the city.There have been squabbles in New York, most recently a dispute in May over a since-amended plan to give the taxi commission approval authority over major app modifications. (Several tech giants, including Facebook, Google and Twitter, signed onto a letter chastising the city’s initial proposal.)Yet compared with its turmoil in some other big cities, Uber has negotiated the regulatory wringer of New York with relative ease.“So far, this has been one of their success stories,” said Arun Sundararajan, a professor at the Stern School of Business at New York University who has studied the company. “But if this goes through, it will severely restrict their ability to grow.”City officials say they have long expected to take a look at congestion, noting that a major environmental plan released in April had telegraphed the city’s worries.While the administration said that other factors — driver income, wheelchair accessibility, air quality — were also considerations for the prospective analysis, slower traffic speeds were of particular concern. From 2010 to 2014, the city said, average speeds in Manhattan fell by 9 percent, to about 8.5 miles per hour.At the same time, the number of cars entering Manhattan each day has fallen about 4 percent, according to data from the Transportation Department. The city’s hunch, officials said, is that the total number of vehicle miles traveled has risen because for-hire vehicles have acted as “supercars,” logging far more time on the road than a simple private car. Transportation experts have endorsed the theory as plausible.Still, in an interview on WNYC, the city’s transportation commissioner, Polly Trottenberg, acknowledged that “there are a lot of factors” that inform congestion, including economic conditions and construction.Uber has said it was being singled out, since no other temporary caps have been discussed.The administration, arguing that no other sector has seen such rapid growth, said the city had never regulated the number of for-hire vehicles before because its expansion had been so modest for years. New yellow-taxi medallions, by contrast, cannot be sold without an analysis of potential impact.“We’re seeing unprecedented growth,” Ms. Joshi said. “It’s difficult to study anything when the landscape is changing so dramatically and so quickly.”There are roughly 63,000 vehicles in the city’s for-hire industry, which includes black and livery cars; there are more than 13,000 yellow taxis. About 25,000 of the for-hire vehicles have arrived since 2011, the year of Uber’s debut. As of July 8, according to the taxi commission, Uber’s bases had more than 19,000 vehicles, about 65 percent of vehicles in the black car industry.Some of Uber’s competitors, like Lyft, have opposed the proposal on different grounds.If the size of the market is constrained, they say, Uber might well subsume it all.