https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/books/review/for-these-collaborators-theres-no-i-in-best-seller.html
For These Collaborators, There’s No ‘I’ in ‘Best Seller’ - The New York Times
Books and Literature
June 23, 2017
9442
TEAM TIME: If you co-write a book about magic, is that crowd-sorcery? The science-fiction writer Neal Stephenson and the historical novelist Nicole Galland have teamed up to produce a fat marshmallow of a fantasy novel, “The Rise and Fall of D.O.D.O.” — new on the hardcover fiction list at No. 11 — about a time-traveling intelligence officer and a Harvard linguist who discover that magic was once commonplace. On the back cover of early promotional copies, the authors explained their process. “Nicki made a first pass over the opening phase,” Stephenson said, “while I ran tech support, tracking the timeline on a spreadsheet and spewing out gobs of techno-gibberish when that was needed.” Galland added: “This collaboration was great fun, in part because I got to witness Neal spew out gobs of techno-gibberish, which he does very elegantly.”The novel clocks in at almost 800 pages, a fact that spurred Maclean’s Magazine recently to wonder whether long narratives are especially meaningful as an antidote to the instant gratifications of social media. “Oh, there are so many good things about reading a book,” Stephenson replied. “The practice of sustained attention is something that’s happening less and less, especially in our leisure time, so a long narrative, and one that’s this intricate, which requires that you’re always plugged in, because there are various things going on at once — I think that that’s a great exercise. I would assign this book as a brain exercise, as well as a jolly good read, but also I think there’s something so fantastically tactile about the physical act of holding the book and turning the pages, and feeling the texture of the binding, and the little movements that happen when you have to balance a book on your lap. There’s a stillness that comes from just reading off a screen that I don’t think is healthy.”HER BODY, HER SELF: “Some girls,” the philosopher Steven Morrissey once posited, “are bigger than others.” That’s the basic premise behind Roxane Gay’s new book, “Hunger,” a textured memoir about trauma, shame and body image that makes its debut at No. 8 on the hardcover nonfiction list. In it, Gay discusses the sexual assault she survived as a girl and explains her decision to bulk up afterward as a form of physical and emotional defense. “I told myself that no one was going to read it,” Gay told Rolling Stone recently. “That’s how I get through all of the writing that I do that’s personal in nature. If I think too much about it, I absolutely will chicken out.”