https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/world/middleeast/yemen-children-in-a-war-zone.html
‘We Sleep Afraid, We Wake Up Afraid’: A Child’s Life in Yemen - The New York Times
Children and Childhood,Yemen,Sana (Yemen),Bombs and Explosives,Defense and Military Forces,vis-dispatch
Oct. 11, 2016
5792
Mohammed al-Asaadi is a father of four in Sana, the capital of Yemen, which has been caught in a war between Iranian-backed rebels and Saudi Arabia for more than two years. He is a former journalist now working in communications for Unicef.My son, Yousef, calls the bombings “fireworks.” He sinks in fear when explosions wake us up from sleep. He runs to the person closest to him to hide.My little boy will be 3 in December, but he is already three wars old.During one of our evening meetings, I asked my three daughters to write about what is happening around them and posted their words on Facebook. My oldest, Kholud, who is 15, wrote:When the bombs are close enough, the shock waves shake the house badly, blowing open doors and windows. It feels as if the explosions are inside your ears. My son and youngest daughter — Haneen is 12 — wake up screaming, running in all directions through dark rooms.This video, taken by a friend, shows a bombing last month that was so close it threw us out of our beds.My wife and I have agreed on a division of roles. She takes care of our little boy, who sleeps in our room. I take care of the girls in the room next door. The first words we tell them are: “You are fine. We are all fine. The blast is far from our house. Don’t panic. We are all O.K. You are O.K.”I gather them all together and we make a group hug. If the night is particularly bad, we all sleep together.Way back when the war started, I explained to my daughters what this is all about: who is fighting whom and why. They understand that we are not a direct target for any of the fighting parties, but could be collateral damage should we happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.So we limit our movements. My children call this being “under house arrest.”School is the one place I feel they should go, despite all my fears. Simply, I am a strong believer that education is the gateway to a safer future.Asma, who is 14, is the first to spend money and the last to save it. She loves children and her friends. I cried when I read what she had written for the Facebook post.Haneen, the 12-year-old, is outspoken and creative. She is always asking what things have not yet been invented because she says she wants to invent something that will benefit everyone.Once, when I apologized for being late because I was at work helping the children of Yemen, she confronted me: “We are also the children of Yemen.” Here is an excerpt from her Facebook essay:My children were at home on Saturday when the bombs killed more than 100 people at a Sana funeral hall. I was live on BBC Arabic speaking on behalf of Unicef about the cholera outbreak. On my way back home, I saw the lines at one hospital.My children learned about the attack hours later, once they had finished all their homework.They always have questions. They asked if any of my friends had been killed.I told them one: the mayor of Sana. They were in a state of shock. I checked their homework to keep busy. But as soon as they went to bed, an airstrike rocked our house. Two more followed. I moved from their room to the middle of the house. They sleep next to each other on the same mattress, where I can hug them all if an airstrike hits the area.This is life in a war zone. Every day, you wake up to an unpleasant surprise: the death or injury of a friend or a family member. You witness the destruction of your childhood neighborhood, school and the little shop where you once bought candy.You have to live without electricity, water, fuel and social services. You don’t want to live a life where your utmost achievement is surviving another day and your ultimate pleasure is having an uninterrupted internet connection.Wars are destructive not only to towns and cities, but also to souls.