https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/24/t-magazine/fashion/kris-kim-la-garconne-moderne-home-store.html
Inside a Designer and Entrepreneur’s Pristine Apartment and Store - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,TriBeCa (Manhattan  NY),Kim  Kris,Interior Design and Furnishings,La Garconne (Manhattan  NY  Retail Store)
Oct. 24, 2016
8776
To be told you are making something out of nothing is to be criticized for being overly dramatic, and yet to make something lovely out of nothing, and with very little dramatic flourish, is a clever skill, and precisely what the entrepreneur Kris Kim does. You cannot recognize the designer behind the loose black T-shirt and flowing black linen pants she is wearing on a recent meeting, and that is how she likes it. In fact, she is the designer, and the pieces are from her label, Moderne, which she sells at her shop and 11-year-old commerce site, La Garçonne, as well as at other retailers. The Moderne line is so simple that inside the company it’s referred to as “the Nothing Label.”The pieces she makes and those of others she sells tend to be minimal and in muted colors. Kim and her team don’t like fussy buttons, colorful piping or any other overwrought details. “We’ll always buy simple, unadorned things,” she says. “Our mission is to do that, but still keep things interesting and ironic, even intellectual.”She believes people no longer want clothes that are so easy to categorize — workwear for the office, little black dress for the cocktail party — and when she began to design Moderne four years ago, she realized she “was taking the occasion out of everything. Why should we look dressed up or dressed down?” she asks. “Just dress — and look put-together.”She wants clothes that are versatile, can go anywhere and can’t peg the wearer as one particular thing, though there is a hint of the masculine in many of her pieces, and indeed, La Garçonne is French for “tomboy.”Kim came by her minimalist aesthetic the hard way: by enduring years of clutter and thoughtless design. She was born in Seoul, but her father, a diplomat, relocated frequently, bringing the family everywhere from Manila to Los Angeles to Bayside, Queens. They often lived in furnished apartments, with few objects from either their travels or their past. She remembers disliking the impersonal feel of those places, and craving a space she could make her own.For years, she was determined to fill up her personal environment with objects that held meaning, and she squirreled away souvenirs from her travels. After a particularly big shopping jaunt on her honeymoon to Morocco, she realized, “it wasn’t me.” So she began to cut back, to curate rather than collect.And indeed, both her home and her shop reflect Kim’s severely pared-back aesthetic: Her TriBeCa apartment, designed by the architect Solveig Fernlund, which she shares with her husband and La Garçonne founder, Da, and their two children, is sterile-white and almost entirely devoid of design flourishes, the closest an apartment can come to being bare without being boring.The shop, a former bakery a few blocks away, is so spare it’s practically a blank canvas: Fernlund’s Douglas fir wood shelves line the walls and simple Noguchi paper lamps hang overhead, while pieces from the Row, Vetements and Comme des Garçons fill the racks. Wide-legged jeans hang over a pair of Birkenstocks, and a black Simone Rocha sweater with prefab holes is displayed above blocky Marni heels. “There’s nothing that jumps out at you, but [the combinations] all make sense,” Kim says. “It’s harmony.”