https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/nyregion/new-york-today-workplace-style-etiquette-womens-rights-convention.html
New York Today: Flip-Flops at Work, Yes or No? - The New York Times
New York City
July 19, 2017
2380
Good morning on this brilliant Wednesday.People have strong feelings about feet.We know, because we asked New York Today readers, and an etiquette expert: Are flip-flops or open-toed shoes O.K. at the office?The etiquette connoisseur Lizzie Post, the great-great-granddaughter of the etiquette expert Emily Post, recently published a 700-page book addressing topics including manners, politeness and behavior in public.“Often, what people complain about with any kind of flip-flop or slide — when there is nothing holding a heel in the shoe — is, ironically, about the flip-flop noise, the slapping sound that accompanies that type of shoe,” she said.Karen Boldizar, 59, who works in the cosmetics sector in Manhattan, agreed. “No one wants to hear you coming a mile away with the flip-flip-flip sound of an unsecured foot in a slide or flip-flop,” she told us. Even with the heat, she called for a flip-flop ban at offices.Alison Helfferich, 33, who works in finance in Manhattan, said sandals were fine for a commute, “but once you hit the office it’s time for close-toed shoes — air conditioning means you can’t get away with, ‘But it’s so hot outside!’”Several women who responded also debated the importance of pedicures for those in sandals. Ms. Post said the polish is not nearly as vital as the cleanliness.“A pedicure doesn’t worry me as much as, ‘Are your feet dirty and grubby?’” she said. “Just like your face shouldn’t be dirty and grubby, and your hands shouldn’t be dirty and grubby.”And how do men fit into all of this?“It doesn’t appear that men’s sandals have really found a place within the work culture,” Ms. Post said. “With women’s footwear it’s become much more acceptable to have various forms of open shoes, even in the workplace, but I think that men’s footwear has yet to catch up to that point.”Slade Downs, 23, who works in construction administration in Queens, said, “I would never wear my flip-flops to work, or any open-toed shoes for that matter,” he told us. “It just feels wrong, like eating at a Times Square chain restaurant. It shows a level of naïveté that would alienate the wearer as a tourist in the workplace.”Thomas Beatty, 63, who retired from a job in hotels in Manhattan, had a much more colorful reaction to flip-flops in a professional setting.“Never!” he said. “Disgusting, filthy, revolting, repellent, repulsive, sickening, nauseating, stomach-churning, stomach-turning, off-putting, unpalatable, distasteful, foul, nasty, vomitous.”Yet Rony Patzán, 27, a Bushwick resident who works in fashion in the Financial District, said he felt fortunate to be in a city (and an industry) that allows for self-expression, even for the lowest bodily appendages.“I am surrounded by literally every type of shoe/sandal/sock in every color and fabric from every designer you can name,” he said. “I realize I’m quite lucky to have the freedom to sport any style I want, as long as they’re clean and on-trend, of course. When it comes to beating the heat and looking professionally chic around New York City — Prada or nada!”A final bit of advice from Ms. Post: “Check in with your company, and adhere to whatever their suggestions or guidelines are.”Here’s what else is happening:Sunny skies ahead — with a toasty high near 91 — and a small chance of rain and thunderstorms after 1 p.m.Clouds will roll through this evening, and things should cool down to a pleasant 76.• A growing number of undocumented immigrants without driver’s licenses are subject to detention by the Trump administration. [New York Times]• A class-action lawsuit accused Uber of failing to accommodate disabled riders in New York City. [New York Times]• In “About New York,” the columnist Jim Dwyer hangs out with the second-oldest person serving in the New York Police Department. He’s 92. [New York Times]• Ten years after a steam pipe exploded near Grand Central Terminal killing one person and injuring dozens, newly revealed court documents said Con Edison should shoulder more responsibility. [New York Times]• The Metropolitan Transportation Authority is considering whether to prohibit eating on the subway after a track fire caused by trash snarled the morning commute this week. [New York Times]• This 6-year-old golden retriever has become a social media hero after rescuing a drowning deer in the Port Jefferson Harbor in Long Island. [New York Times]• A nanny confessed that she stabbed two children to death in 2012 in a Manhattan apartment, a former prosecutor testified in court on Tuesday. [New York Times]•  Mayor Bill de Blasio wants to end a legal stalemate over a stalled $250 million arts center project at Hudson River’s Pier 55. [New York Times]• A city lawmaker plans to open a playground next month in honor of the Brooklyn-born hip-hop star Christopher Wallace, a.k.a. Notorious B.I.G. [Daily News]• Drivers across the city can now use their cellphones to pay for parking, under a payment system from the Department of Transportation. [DNAinfo]• New Jersey lawmakers will hold their first oversight hearing on Wednesday to discuss the repairs to rail lines at Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan. [NBC]• It cost the federal government more than $130,000 a month to lease space inside Trump Tower even though President Trump hasn’t spent a night there since being elected. [Wall Street Journal]• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “Help Wanted”• Scoreboard: Cardinals fly over Mets, 5-0. Yankees separate Twins, 6-3.• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Wednesday Briefing.• The Classical Theater of Harlem performs a modern take on “The Three Musketeers,” at Marcus Garvey Park in East Harlem. 8 p.m. [Free]•  … Or catch a Shakespeare in the Park production of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. 8 p.m. [Free]•  Spend your evening with an endearing alien at an outdoor screening of “E.T.” in Faber Park on Staten Island. 8:30 p.m. [Free]• Yankees at Twins, 1:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Cardinals, 7:08 p.m. (SNY). New York Red Bulls host San Jose Earthquakes, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). New York City F.C. host Toronto F.C., 7:30 p.m. (YES).• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Aug. 15.• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.The first women’s rights convention took place in New York on July 19, 1848.Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a New Yorker through and through, led the event with Lucretia Mott, in upstate Seneca Falls.The goal: to discuss the civil, social and religious rights of women in America. Attendees explored the issues over two days — Day 1, with women only, and Day 2, with men and women.One message from the meeting: “We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men and women are created equal.”Stanton’s fight for women’s rights stopped only briefly during the Civil War — when she focused her attention on helping to abolish slavery — but after the war, in 1869, she and Susan B. Anthony formed the National Woman Suffrage Association in New York City. Stanton died in 1902; women in New York State won the right to vote in 1917.New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.