http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/16/arts/music/playlist-katy-perry-rise-justice.html
The Playlist: Katy Perry’s Limp Olympics Anthem and Justice’s Grooving Return - The New York Times
Music,Perry  Katy,Justice (Music Group),Lidell  Jamie,Neville  Aaron,Martha (Music Group),Lanez Tory (1992- ),Arca (1990- )
July 15, 2016
6776
Every Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in the Playlist. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here. Like this format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com.“Victory is in my veins/I know it, I know it,” goes a line in Katy Perry’s new song, “Rise,” which will be used for NBC’s promotion and coverage of the Rio Olympics. Fair enough: that sounds like an athlete talking. But otherwise this is a song that might not be for a particular athlete in a particular contest. It is slow-footed and ominous and settles into minor chords. Its language moves beyond talk of merely winning; that would be too measurable. It speaks of being “transformed,” calling on angels and holding fast against the “madness and chaos.” Something else is going on here, something quasi-spiritual and fully grandiose. It has no specificity, rendering any given arena of play or battle beside the point. (“Can’t write my story,” she sings. “I am beyond the archetype.”) Do you feel psyched? Do you feel uneasy? BEN RATLIFFHere’s Justice, the French electronic music duo, back after a five-year gap, and doing pretty much what it does best, satisfyingly and according to formula. “Safe and Sound,” released this week, was first played without explanation or fanfare at the Sonar festival last month in a D.J. set by Busy P, the head of the label Ed Banger. It has almost exactly the same beat and medium tempo as “D.A.N.C.E,” Justice’s hit from 2007; it is six minutes of extravagant, sense-flooding disco, with popping bass lines, overdriven synths, a Chic-like string arrangement, and a choir chanting abstractly comforting instructions for its melody (“flags out, sit back/safe and sound”). BEN RATLIFFRegression — all the way back to the moment of conception — sounds like an electronic paradise in “Walk Right Back,” Jamie Lidell’s teaser for his album “Building a Beginning,” due in October. He belts out his longing for the pure love and innocence of “how my life was when it just started” over a brawny backbeat and synthesizers that start out sparse, then linger to amass harmonies and shimmery depths. It’s more than fitting that his testimonial to benevolent parentage echoes Stevie Wonder in vocal gusto and instrumental tones; Mr. Lidell knows his forebears. JON PARELESJust because Aaron Neville is rightfully celebrated as New Orleans’ quintessential ballad singer doesn’t mean that slow songs are the only thing he can do; he and his fellow Neville Brothers embrace rhythm too. “Be Your Man,” from his new solo album, “Apache,” bridges New Orleans and psychedelic Motown by way of a New York studio band with the guitarist Eric Krasno of Lettuce and Soulive, who produced the album and co-wrote the songs, and the Dap-Tones’ horn section. Mr. Neville vows devotion through the toughest circumstances — “If you got something to go through, need someone to hold you, just take my hand” — as he cannily threads his tenor through the rapid-fire syncopation; congas patter, hi-hats hiss, horns punch and keyboards and guitar chatter and scrub. It’s tenderness delivered in a rush of funk. JON PARELES“The autumn forecast’s looking dismal again/This year I’ll spend November in the house,” sings J. Cairns of the British indie-pop outfit Martha. It’s a terrible forecast, but he doesn’t even sound that bummed about it, perhaps because he, himself, is the looming rainstorm: “I know you wish for fireworks to light your July sky/I was the dampest box of matches you could ever hope to find.”In places, Mr. Cairns’s voice recalls the plaintive pleading of Saves the Day’s Chris Conley, but when halfway through, the song opens up into full-throttle punk, and so does he, joined in brittle harmony by Naomi Griffin.The song appears on Martha’s excellent new album, “Blisters in the Pit of My Heart,” full of politically and literarily inclined twee pop and DIY punk. JON CARAMANICAThe psychic tug of war between Drake, standard-bearer of the Toronto sound, and Tory Lanez, inheritor and Xeroxer of that sound, may be mostly one-sided. The two take little jabs at each other in lyrics and interviews, but one senses that any friction only serves to boost the case of Tory Lanez, whose biggest hit to date, “Say It,” is a garish, blatant ripoff of Brownstone’s 1994 smash “If You Love Me.”Being post-Drake is no crime — plenty of artists are — but improving on the titan’s moves takes both flair and gumption. And so here comes Tory Lanez’s take on “Controlla,” the lite-dancehall hit from Drake’s “Views” — the album version also featured Beenie Man, and the original, leaked version featured Popcaan.If Drake is vulnerable, it is when he dips his toes into Jamaican patois, so Tory Lanez’s decision to turn the whole affair into a dancehall song with mild hip-hop accents, as opposed to Drake’s version, in which dancehall is merely the spice, is both deliberate and ostentatious. His voice is lovely and fluttery, his lyrics are nimble and his chest is puffed. JON CARAMANICAThe latest free release by Arca, the electronic musician who co-produced Björk’s “Vulnicura,” is a continuous, sublimely disorienting 25-minute mixtape called “Entrañas” (Spanish for entrails); it lists 14 titles for its internal segments. It’s often brutal, slamming the bass and slicing with distortion, lurching sporadically to withhold the reassurance of rhythm, at one point breaking into screams. Other stretches are spooky and full of blurred, ruined grandeur. Bits of dialogue from “The Cement Garden” bring up gender stereotypes; there’s also some grunting and moaning in spots. At the end Arca sings “Sin Rumbo” (“Aimlessly”), a glacial lament awash in loss and desolation; then there are the sounds of fireworks, louder and louder. The music is jolting, even confrontational, yet haunted as well: an enigma daring anyone to solve it. JON PARELES