http://www.nytimes.com/2005/01/31/business/sbc-agrees-to-acquire-att-for-16-billion.html
SBC Agrees to Acquire AT&T; for $16 Billion - The New York Times
SBC COMMUNICATIONS INC,SBC COMMUNICATIONS,AT&T CORP,FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION,VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS,NAMES  ORGANIZATIONAL,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,CELLULAR TELEPHONES,TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Jan. 31, 2005
9817
SBC Communications last night was close to concluding a $16 billion deal for its former parent, AT&T, that would lead to the virtual disappearance of one of America's best known corporate icons and set off what promises to be a new round of competition between the Baby Bells, executives close to the negotiations said.SBC's board approved the deal while AT&T executives met far into the night trying to reach an agreement.In buying AT&T, its national network and three million corporate customers, SBC can aggressively expand into the turf of its regional Bell siblings, who themselves are grappling for ways to move beyond their borders.AT&T, the former monopoly, has been undone by cheaper Internet technology, growth in a cellphone industry where it has no role, and regulatory changes that squeezed it out of the local phone market.The AT&T brand and operations are likely to survive inside SBC, which has its roots in the Southwest. But it will disappear as an independent company that for generations provided reliable phone service to the masses and steady returns to shareholders, and at its height employed more than one million workers."AT&T was America's answer to Communism, serving everyone's needs," said James E. Katz, a telecommunications historian. "But neither Communism nor AT&T is suited to capitalism in the 21st century. Like other once-dominant players, when the technology changed, it couldn't survive."Consumers would be largely unaffected by SBC's purchase. AT&T, based in Bedminster, N.J., has stopped marketing its traditional local and long-distance services and prices for these products have been falling steeply regardless.In expanding nationally, SBC hopes to create a company that largely resembles but does not equal the monopoly popularly known as Ma Bell that was broken up in 1984. The acquisition would vault SBC past Verizon Communications, which itself became the nation's biggest telecommunications company when Bell Atlantic bought GTE in 2000.SBC is expected to pay $15 billion in stock and $1 billion in cash, an amount based on AT&T's closing price of $19.71 on Friday, the executives said. The new company will have combined annual sales of $70 billion and 212,000 employees, and it could well retain the AT&T name.The companies expect to generate about $15 billion in cost savings and new revenue, executives close to the negotiations said. The companies have not decided how many jobs they plan to eliminate. But industry analysts expect SBC to lay off large numbers of workers in AT&T's shrinking consumer division.SBC's chairman and chief executive, Edward E. Whitacre, Jr., will remain in those roles after the acquisition. David W. Dorman, AT&T's chief executive, will become president of SBC. Mr. Dorman will also be given one of AT&T's three seats on SBC's board, which now has 16 membersSBC will keep its headquarters in San Antonio.Regulators must approve the deal and they could request certain divestitures. The outgoing chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Michael Powell, however, signaled last week that the acquisition would not face stiff resistance.SBC, formerly known as Southwestern Bell, was one of AT&T's oldest affiliates. When AT&T's monopoly was broken up, the company became one of the seven regional Baby Bells.In one shot, SBC would now become the biggest long-distance carrier and the largest provider of phone and data services to corporate America. SBC also provides local phone service to more than 50 million customers in its 13 states and holds a 60 percent stake in Cingular Wireless, the country's biggest mobile phone company.In taking over AT&T's $22 billion corporate phone and data business, SBC will add a new source of revenue that will offset the decline in its residential phone business, which has been shrinking with the spread of cellphones and the Internet.With AT&T's network, SBC will gain the ability to sell services to customers outside its region, which includes California, Texas and Illinois. This threatens to turn the Bells into direct competitors instead of opportunistic allies that teamed up to fight rivals, regulators and others who have tried to loosen their grip on local service in their regions.To counter SBC's gambit, the other Bells may consider buying MCI or Sprint, which also sell services to big companies."In some ways, what the Bells are doing is defensive," said Robert Rock, a telecommunications analyst at John Hancock Mutual Funds in Boston. "The important thing is to be the prime contractor in selling to companies and you can't do that unless you provide global connectivity. They could be afraid of missing the boat" if they don't act soon to buy a long-distance carrier.The Bells also want to remain one step ahead of the cable industry that has rapidly expanded into the consumer phone and data markets, but has little presence in the enterprise market.The companies have been negotiating for days, though AT&T has had talks with SBC, BellSouth and other companies for several years. In his drive to sell the company, Mr. Dorman has sharply reduced AT&T's debts, eliminated tens of thousands of jobs and retreated from the consumer market to stem losses and to ease potential anti-trust concerns.AT&T has also spent billions of dollars to upgrade its extensive fiber optic networks that carry data and phone calls.SBC has tried to break into the corporate services market, building operations in 30 metropolitan areas outside the 13 states where it operates.But its business is a fraction of AT&T's, and without a network overseas, SBC has found it hard to win contracts from America's largest corporations.SBC might also try to steer its new found corporate customers to Cingular. SBC owns 60 percent of Cingular; BellSouth owns the rest.With the Bells trying to expand past their traditional borders in search of new revenue, the geographic demarcation that has defined their roles for the last two decades has blurred further. The companies have stakes in national mobile phone companies. With SBC likely to court companies throughout America, it risks straining its relationship with BellSouth. The two companies own Cingular Wireless.As the scramble accelerates, AT&T as it was known will become a footnote. The company has roots stretching back to 1876, three years before Thomas A. Edison introduced his incandescent lamp.From 1913 to 1984, AT&T ran a government-sanctioned monopoly that had a mandate to provide universal service. On Wall Street, it was also one of the most widely held stocks; legions of brokers recommended it to "widows and orphans" because of its reputed stability.But in the last few years, AT&T had become a shell of itself, exhausted from years of competition, mistaken strategies and new technologies that eroded its reason for being. The company is still the largest long-distance provider, but now has just 23 percent of the market, down from 85 percent in 1984.SBC and Verizon are now the second- and third-largest long-distance carriers with 12.8 percent of the market each, shares they accumulated only since they were allowed to enter the market in the late 1990's.Ma Bell's stature fell further in 2003 when Verizon replaced AT&T in the Dow Jones industrial average, the ultimate status symbol among American companies.Lehman Brothers, Evercore Partners and Rohatyn Associates worked on behalf of SBC. Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse First Boston represented AT&T.