http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/world/americas/ex-president-of-brazil-luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva-faces-charges.html
Ex-President of Brazil, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Faces Charges - The New York Times
Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Brazil,Money Laundering,Petroleo Brasileiro SA Petrobras,Workers' Party (Brazil),Rousseff  Dilma,Bribery and Kickbacks,OAS SA
March 9, 2016
6933
RIO DE JANEIRO —  Prosecutors filed charges on Wednesday against former President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, one of Brazil’s most prominent political figures, shaking the country’s already anxious political establishment.The charges, brought by prosecutors in São Paulo State, are connected to claims of money laundering and misrepresentation of assets involving a luxury apartment in the beachfront city of Guarujá. It is unclear what the specific charges are.Federal investigators say that Mr. da Silva effectively acquired the property, a claim he denies, and that O.A.S., a construction company, paid for improvements at the apartment with funds that may have come from the giant graft scheme at Petrobras, the national oil company.The charges came after Mr. da Silva, 70, was held for questioning and his home raided by the police last week.While a judge still needs to decide whether to accept the charges and put Mr. da Silva on trial, the positioning of the former president at the center of the Petrobras scandal is focusing scrutiny on him — and his handpicked successor, President Dilma Rousseff. Mr. da Silva, who was president from 2003 to 2010, still wields unrivaled sway in the governing leftist Workers Party. Mr. da Silva’s supporters have condemned the legal maneuvering against him, contending it is part of a media conspiracy to oust Ms. Rousseff and prevent Mr. da Silva from running again in 2018.In a statement, Mr. da Silva’s lawyer questioned whether the lead prosecutor in the case, Cássio Conserino, harbored political motivations.The lawyer, Cristiano Zanin Martins, also said Mr. da Silva had never concealed paying installments toward buying the apartment but decided against taking control of the property last year.