https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/09/world/middleeast/yemen-reverses-decision-to-expel-un-rights-envoy.html
Yemen Reverses Decision to Expel U.N. Rights Envoy - The New York Times
United Nations,Yemen,Saudi Arabia,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al Hussein,International Relations,Ban Ki-moon
Jan. 8, 2016
5798
UNITED NATIONS —  The government of Yemen on Friday reversed its decision to expel a United Nations representative from the country, and its envoy to the United Nations said that he hoped for “better relations” with the world body.The decision to bar the United Nations human rights official from the country came as the United Nations sharply intensified its criticism of Yemen’s government and its most powerful backer, Saudi Arabia.On Thursday, after Yemen’s announcement, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations said he condemned the move and said Yemen had run afoul of its international obligation to let United Nations representatives do their work. On Friday morning, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, called on the government to allow his representative to continue his work, calling its order “unwarranted, counter-productive and damaging to the reputation of the Government and its coalition partners.”Then, on Friday, Mr. Ban, through a spokesman, issued an unusually stinging statement against the military coalition led by Saudi Arabia that is seeking to rout rebels from inside Yemen, saying that its reported use of cluster bombs in heavily populated areas “may amount to a war crime.”By late Friday afternoon, the Yemeni government had sent a letter to Mr. Ban’s office, saying that the official, the head of the Yemen office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, a Palestinian named George Abu-Zulof, would be allowed to work in the country.The letter, sent by the Yemeni ambassador to the United Nations, Khaled Alyemany, said that “because of the fuss created around the matter and caused by media reports,” Yemen’s government had “decided to give more time to review the relationship” with the human rights office.“The problem is solved,” Mr. Alyemany, said by phone, afterward. “We hope for better relations with the high commissioner.”Mr. Alyemany said he had also heard expressions of concern from members of the United Nations Security Council.The issue of cluster bombs was first raised earlier this week by Mr. al-Hussein. His country, Jordan, is a member of the Saudi-led coalition, but he has been sharply critical of the human rights abuses committed in the conflict.Yemen accused his office of ignoring “systematic violations” by the Houthi rebels and their allies, including a continuing, bloody siege of the city of Taiz.Saudi Arabia’s conduct in the conflict in Yemen is particularly delicate for the United States, which provides intelligence and other support to the military coalition.Cluster bombs, which open in midair, are still widely used in many conflict zones around the world; indiscriminately targeting civilians can amount to a war crime. The State Department spokesman, John Kirby, said this week that American officials had spoken to their allies in the coalition and called on them to take “proactive measures to minimize harm to civilians.”