https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/world/asia/tillerson-north-korea.html
Tillerson Keeping ‘All Options’ Open if Diplomacy With North Korea Fails - The New York Times
United States International Relations,Security Council (UN),Tillerson  Rex W,North Korea
April 28, 2017
4101
UNITED NATIONS — Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said on Friday that the United States was keeping “all options” on the table if diplomacy failed to persuade North Korea to halt its nuclear weapons program.Speaking at the United Nations Security Council, Mr. Tillerson called for stiffer international sanctions against North Korea and threatened to impose sanctions on third parties that continued to cooperate with the country. He also demanded that the North dismantle its nuclear weapons program before talks could begin.“The more we bide our time, the sooner we will run out of it,” he said. “All options for reacting to future provocations must remain on the table.”He added, “North Korea must take concrete steps to reduce the threat that its illegal weapons programs pose to the United States and our allies before we can consider talks.”Mr. Tillerson’s speech was his first before the United Nations and represented stepped-up attention by the Trump administration to the growing North Korean nuclear and ballistic missile threat.China has insisted on what it calls a parallel approach, calling on the United States to stop its military buildup on the Korean Peninsula in exchange for North Korea’s suspension of missile tests. North Korea is already under a raft of stiff sanctions from the Security Council and has been found to repeatedly violate them.The United States has so far rejected China’s plan, and North Korea has yet to accept it, either.China’s foreign affairs minister, Wang Yi, called for a suspension of joint military exercises between the United States and South Korea and warned against “provocative rhetoric or action.”He also pushed back sharply against the American line that China holds the key to persuading North Korea to suspend its nuclear program. Others need to show “political wisdom,” he said.He said the resumption of talks could tamp down the nuclear threat, pointing out that since talks broke down, North Korea has stepped up its nuclear tests.Mr. Tillerson was scheduled to meet with Mr. Wang after the Security Council meeting.The United Nations secretary general, Antonio Guterres, who was called on by Mr. Tillerson to give an update on the situation on the Korean Peninsula before the other ministers spoke, said that the “absence of communication channels with the D.P.R.K. is dangerous,” using the initials for North Korea.“We need to act now,” Mr. Guterres said.The secretary of state’s appearance took place a day after President Trump told Reuters in an Oval Office interview, “There is a chance that we could end up having a major, major conflict with North Korea. Absolutely.”Mr. Trump also criticized South Korea, a crucial ally in the struggle to get the North to stop its weapons programs.In remarks that are likely to be cheered in Beijing, Mr. Trump said he wanted South Korea to pay the cost of the advanced missile defense system, which he estimated at $1 billion. And he said he intended to renegotiate or terminate a trade pact with South Korea because of a deep trade deficit with the country.