https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/13/books/review/on-being-translated-back-to-myself.html
On Being Translated Back to Myself  - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Translation and Interpreters,Writing and Writers
Jan. 13, 2017
9462
To have one’s novel translated — on one hand, an honor. On the other — you might as well be trying to have sex using another person’s body. Occasionally, this avatar exhibits somewhat stereotypical national traits. The German writes to point out inconsistencies in the original. The Brazilian never writes at all. For the Frenchman, the story dovetails with a personal saga. But at least France publishes — it’s unclear the Italians are ever going to bother.And then there was my recent trip to Estonia on behalf of my first novel, “A Replacement Life.” (Or “A Replacement Wife,” as the Estonian contract had it.) “The translation’s not very good, you know,” a professor of American literature at Tallinn University said when I arrived in October. “She translates ‘Orthodox Jews’ as ‘Russian Orthodox Jews.’” He explained this in Russian. Among the many things Americans don’t have to know is what it means to have to live in three languages. Estonians occupy a country smaller than West Virginia, so they have to speak English. A quarter of the country’s population remains ethnically Russian, a language that thrives because the Estonians are enlightened about minority integration. Then there’s the mother tongue.On behalf of the American Embassy, it was the Russian minority I was there to address: The novel’s preoccupations — the psychic legacy of Soviet life, World War II — remain dear to it. The trouble was that many Estonian Russians had not managed, or bothered, to learn Estonian, and no Russian publisher had touched my little story of Soviet horror. I’d been disappointed: The English version was too difficult for my immigrant father, and my Russian too weak for him. I speak fluently, but when it comes to literary instinct, the newspaper reads like Brodsky.The embassy had scheduled a reading in Russian, so it commissioned a translation from a local trinitarian. Soon, it arrived — a third longer than my text. Was my translator using the occasion to insert thoughts of his own? Similarly, I’d wondered whether the Frenchman, whose “Replacement Life” outlasted mine by a hundred pages, had been so overcome by the overlaps in our narratives that he’d begun amplifying my story with his. No — like French, Russian simply takes longer. (“It’s not a good language for Twitter,” as my embassy handler, a half-Russian, half-Finnish Estonian, dryly noted.)What linguistic particularity extends, cultural recognition reduces. As I read the translator’s version, I found myself cutting whole sentences. Responsibly, he had translated everything, but hardly every word was as necessary for an audience already familiar with, say, how and why the pre-revolutionary nobility fled to France. In Russian, I was finally the slayer of flab I could never quite allow to fall away in the original tongue of the novel (that is, the adopted one of my life). In Russian, I could leave the space between the lines to do half the work. Unlike English, half of Russian lived there, anyway.Things that sounded improbable and sentimental in English — a son does not recognize the skeleton at the door as his father — became moving in Russian. The unbelievable things — an entrepreneur corners the market on the best grave sites at a local cemetery — are just another day in Minsk or the many Minsks-in-exile of south Brooklyn. Because my Russian translator was unfamiliar with certain American realities — AAA is car help, not a clothing size — I also corrected infelicities. Then, starting to see better ways to suit the intentions of the English, I just started retranslating. Maybe I wasn’t so hopeless as a writer in Russian.The reading took place at Jamaica Bar, a wee-hours karaoke spot near the Old City. I marveled not only at the age range but at the size of the crowd; in New York, you’d have to pay people to show up to a fiction reading in such numbers. Then, for the first time ever, I read from my novel in Russian. Though I had written it in English, I had felt and thought it in Russian — not least because that was what most of the characters speak. I had to render this foreignness in English, but without misspelling, because after all, they weren’t misspelling the Russian. (And sometimes my American readers ask me what all I am so conflicted about.) I’d settled, in English, for nonstandard inflection and syntax. Finally, at Jamaica Bar, the novel’s diction, which, so often, never quite landed at American readings — that was the point, but the squints were hard to endure, anyway — not only landed but killed. I grew bold, I gestured, I nearly sang out.When the applause died down, a woman announced that I had gotten the words for “safety” and “revenge” wrong. Another said that where I’d meant to describe a finger as “papery,” I said “furry.” This went on for a while. Though the conversation warmed up, the evening cleared away my fantasy of a certain birthday gift for my father.But my errors made possible another kind of success. By misconjugating this and stacking the wrong suffix on that, I had given my listeners (as a woman in the audience proposed; Russians don’t rush to compliment, but they do rush to defend) the same sense of foreignness my deviations from standard English had given my American readers. My listeners at Jamaica Bar had been living in a free country for 25 years, whereas my forefathers in Brooklyn continued to exist in a pickled Soviet Union; in 2016, these people understood each other less than their shared language suggested. And my odd fate was to understand everyone, and feel fully at home with none. I was a trinitarian of my own — ex-Soviet, post-Soviet, American — whole only inside one of my books.