http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/09/theater/reviews/krapps-last-tape-with-john-hurt-at-bam-review.html
‘Krapp’s Last Tape,’ With John Hurt, at BAM - Review - The New York Times
Theater,Beckett  Samuel,Krapp's Last Tape (Play),Hurt  John,Gate Theater,Colgan  Michael
Dec. 8, 2011
6744
A command of the speaking power of silence is almost a prerequisite for performing the plays of Samuel Beckett. This is particularly true of his sparer works, in which the Irish-born playwright reduced his theatrical means to a minimum, the better to concentrate his ideas and underscore the echoing emptiness that is forever threatening to swallow his characters whole.The great British actor John Hurt begins his achingly fine performance of “Krapp’s Last Tape” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Harvey Theater with wordless moments that seem to stretch into eternity. With his hands gently placed on a worn desk, he peers out at the audience with an expression intimating that his craggy, disheveled character sees no reason to communicate anything at all. As the seconds tick past, and Mr. Hurt keeps on staring, and stares some more, we become uncomfortably aware of the heavy tread of time as it plods by.This is entirely apt, because time, in all its ornery complexity, fleeting and ponderous, slipping through the fingers even as it weighs upon the soul, is a central theme in Beckett’s 1958 one-act. In “Krapp’s Last Tape” we spend a long but philosophically fruitful hour in the company of a 69-year-old man celebrating his birthday by reassessing a passage in his life from some 30 years before, captured in amber via a tape recorder. The play is a biting rebuke to the purported comforts of nostalgia, and one of Beckett’s most piercing commentaries on the vaporous quality of happiness, so difficult to grasp in the present and impossible to keep hold of if you’re lucky enough to snatch it as it hurtles by.Mr. Hurt, who stars in the new movie “Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy,” has practically made this bleak little play into an unlikely party piece brought out for festive show. He first performed it, in this Gate Theater production directed by Michael Colgan, in Dublin in 1999, and took it to the West End in London the next year. The production returned to Dublin and London in 2006, and Mr. Hurt also starred in the film version directed by Atom Egoyan as part of the “Beckett on Film” anthology conceived by Mr. Colgan.What better occasion to revive it than for this, Mr. Hurt’s New York stage debut? (Remarkable that, and regrettable.) By now Mr. Hurt has the crusty Krapp thoroughly in his well-versed actor’s bones, and there isn’t a moment in his performance in which he is not fully inhabiting the corroded soul of the unforgettable character. The performance has only grown more prickly, funny and moving with age. (I caught the show during its first London run.)Mr. Hurt is now 71 and possesses a furrowed forehead and spiky gray hair that evoke Beckett himself in his glowering later photographs. But you quickly forget the superficial resemblance — it’s immaterial in any case — and become transfixed by Mr. Hurt”s complete command of the play and its shadowy flickering between acrid humor and bone-chilling despair.Beckett uses a strange ballet of banana consumption as a sort of comic curtain raiser, stirring us to engagement with this forbidding character. Mr. Hurt adds a clownish fillip of his own here, as Krapp playfully moves in and out of the square of bright light dividing him from the surrounding darkness. When Krapp settles down to commemorate this birthday by listening to the tape he made on his 39th, the play slowly enfolds you in its icy grip.Mr. Hurt’s evolving expressions as, weary head in hand, Krapp listens to the voice on the tape recorder, draw with absolute precision a scarifying picture of the man’s shuffling, tormenting thoughts. There is bemusement at first, as if he cannot fathom that the plummy voice was once his. This slides into contempt when he hears himself making the confident assertion that he is at “the crest of the wave.” Krapp joins in the cackling on the tape, in mortified recognition, when his 39-year-old self comments on listening to an earlier-birthday tape he had made: “The voice! Jesus! And the aspirations! And the resolutions!”Krapp’s angry fumbling at the controls make clear that the time for all that is well past. He furiously reels by the pontificating insights his younger self claims to have gleaned in the previous year, stopping only to listen in startled wonder to a description of an encounter with a woman he once loved.When Mr. Hurt’s Krapp begins a new recording, the scrape in his voice vividly shows how time has worn away even the vestiges of self-regard expressed by his 39-year-old self. “Just been listening to that stupid bastard I took myself for 30 years ago,” he snaps grimly, before going on to briefly and bitterly assess the year past, in which his singing enjoyment of pronouncing the word “spool” is described as the “happiest moment of the last half million.”Despite the vicious self-contempt Krapp expresses for all the selves he ever was — and the deeper, immutable self that he recognizes has not really changed — Mr. Hurt also makes us feel the ache of sorrow that tugs at Krapp’s soul when he hears himself describing that moment of fleeting pleasure too quickly thrown away. The new tape is yanked from the machine, the old put gently back on as Krapp sinks into himself, listening in blank amazement to his description of floating on a river after making love to the woman whom he then discarded.“We lay there without moving,” the young Krapp says, Mr. Hurt’s voice on the tape possessing an unmistakable tenderness, even lyricism. “But under us all moved, and moved us, gently, up and down, and from side to side.”Mr. Hurt’s Krapp cradled the recorder when he first listened to this passage, as if hugging it to himself for warmth. Now he stares blankly ahead as the lights slowly dim, and time ticks slowly by once again, moving under us all, but gently, inexorably moving in just one direction.KRAPP’S LAST TAPEBy Samuel Beckett; directed by Michael Colgan; performed by John Hurt; lighting by James McConnell. A Gate Theater (Dublin) production, presented by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Alan H. Fishman, chairman of the board; Karen Brooks Hopkins, president; Joseph V. Melillo, executive producer. At the BAM Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn; (718) 636-4100, bam.org. Through Dec. 18. Running time: 55 minutes.