https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/07/opinion/no-to-keystone-yes-to-the-planet.html
No to Keystone, Yes to the Planet  - The New York Times
Editorials,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Global Warming,Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,Obama  Barack,Environmental Protection Agency,Gulf Coast (US),Alberta (Canada),Oil Sands,Keystone Pipeline System
Nov. 6, 2015
5396
Nearly every mainstream climate scientist has said that a big portion of the fossil fuels now in the ground must remain there if the world is to avoid the worst consequences of global warming. That simple fact lay at the heart of President Obama’s decision on Friday to say no to the Keystone XL oil pipeline from Canada.The decision, which ends seven years of legal and political wrangling, was correct, on moral as well as scientific grounds. The pipeline, when completed, would have carried about 800,000 barrels of oil a day from tar sands in Alberta, Canada, to refineries on the Gulf Coast.In the grand scheme of things, this would add little to a global output that now exceeds 90 million barrels a day. But the cumulative impact could be huge: The tar sands contain 170 billion barrels of oil recoverable with today’s technology and perhaps 10 times that amount in potential resources. Because the proposed pipeline was seen as crucial to the exploitation of these resources, allowing it to go forward would have put the United States in the position of enabling a project that, over time, would add significantly to already dangerous levels of atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide.So Mr. Obama chose to draw a line. As he put it, “Ultimately, if we’re going to prevent large parts of this earth from becoming not only inhospitable but uninhabitable in our lifetimes, we’re going to have to keep some fossil fuels in the ground rather than burn them and release more dangerous pollution into the sky.”Mr. Obama touched on several other factors that played into his decision. One is that the United States does not need the oil. For various reasons, including big discoveries in Texas and North Dakota as well as stronger fuel economy standards, oil imports have dropped substantially over the last few years. Canada’s tar sands oil would thus add little to America’s energy security and make very little difference in the price of gasoline at the pump, which is already falling and is, in any case, determined largely by the global price of oil.Nor would the pipeline create meaningful, lasting jobs. A State Department analysis estimated that it would provide 3,900 construction jobs over a two-year period, plus thousands of support jobs, but no more than 50 permanent jobs thereafter.Saying no to the pipeline does not prevent the Canadians (and the American companies that have invested in the tar sands) from extracting the oil, which they have been doing. That extraction has already taken a huge toll on Canada’s boreal forests, which are an important storehouse of carbon. At least the United States will not be complicit in their further destruction.Next month, Mr. Obama will join other world leaders at a global summit meeting in Paris aimed at brokering an agreement among more than 190 nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Because of various initiatives undertaken or proposed by his administration to promote energy efficiency, cleaner fuels and a lower-carbon economy — most recently a new rule that would greatly reduce power plant emissions of carbon dioxide — Mr. Obama already has strong credentials on climate change. They have been made stronger still by his success over the last year in extracting pledges to reduce emissions from reluctant Chinese leaders.Rejecting the Keystone pipeline should further enhance his credibility and that of the United States on this issue. “America is now a global leader when it comes to taking serious action to fight climate change,” he said. “And frankly, approving this project would have undercut that global leadership.”