https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/28/arts/television/bachelorette-rachel-lee-kenny.html
‘The Bachelorette’ Leans on a Racial Conflict, and Nobody Wins - The New York Times
Reality Television,ABC Inc,The Bachelorette (TV Program),Race and Ethnicity,Lindsay  Rachel L
June 28, 2017
333
Another season of “The Bachelorette” is underway on ABC, and unlike Lee, The New York Times is still here for the right reasons. Our resident obsessives are following Rachel Lindsay’s love journey while playing handball in uncomfortably tight singlets. Can we steal you for a sec?JOE COSCARELLI If last week’s episode of “The Bachelorette” — in which Lee, the Nashville singer-songwriter, revealed himself to be the insufferable kindling for this season’s inevitable racial bonfire — was a bit coded in its discussion of “cultural” differences, this week’s two-night affair made things explicit. Or at least as explicit — for just a minute — as talk of white supremacy is going to get on a prime-time network juggernaut.The not-so-radical teachable moments started on Monday’s episode, with Lee attempting to needle Kenny into foolishness — and nearly succeeding. (“I’m here to mess with everybody,” Lee, who is never subtle, told the camera.) But it was in a break from the main head-to-head action that the show feinted at excavating the subtext that had Kenny so heated: The understated Will — bless his heart — somehow took upon himself the unpleasant task of explaining to Lee why his choice of language when describing his disagreement with Kenny was essentially crypto-racism.“When you call him aggressive — there is a longstanding history in this country of regarding black men in America as aggressive to justify a lot of other things,” Will said, spelling out what Kenny wouldn’t. “I don’t think he meant to play the race card; I think he truly was offended by that choice of words.” Lee, predictably, continued to harp on the playing of said “race card.”The whole exchange had the unpleasant air of an after-school special for this woke-ish pop-cultural moment, but the space between Will’s patience and empathy and Lee’s defiant petulance at least made it nearly impossible for the show to humanize the ignorant white guy. Now, obviously, Will’s history lesson got cut short and any moment that could pass for educational is rare in the “Bachelor” universe. But it did have me genuinely wondering: Is it possible that someone watching at home could have learned to think twice before glibly labeling a black man “aggressive”? I don’t mean to be naïve, but then again, I am watching a reality dating show that’s supposed to end in marriage.CARYN GANZ Nobody’s going to fault you for wanting to believe in the power of reality-TV learning, Joe. But reality shows never change. One of the most amusing paradoxes of all the “Bachelor” franchises is how much the love-seekers profess a need for trust — something not easily gained in a month of “dating” a large pool of people under circumstances that in no way resemble real life — and how little the producers earn ours. Like a “Bachelorette” newbie, I fell for the promo spot this week where we were led to believe that the show’s powder keg of uncomfortable racial dynamics would ignite.It starts with a shot of a helicopter whisking Rachel and Kenny away from their two-on-one date with Lee as Kenny shouts off screen, “Do you want a piece of me?” followed by a shot of Kenny with a bloody eye as the host Chris Harrison intones in voice-over, “It’s the shocking conclusion of an unbelievable two-night ‘Bachelorette’ event.” Then there’s Rachel’s voice, saying, “I don’t think this was fair to him, and I don’t know what I’m going to do.” Mr. Harrison’s voice returns: “You won’t believe what happens when Kenny and Lee finally settle their score,” he says, followed by a shot of Kenny crying, then a shot of Rachel crying.Let me blow your mind: This wasn’t what it seemed. Kenny and Lee didn’t fight — Kenny got bonked in the eye by a shield during a Medieval Times-inspired play fight after Lee had been sent home. Adam wound up with a bloody eye from the encounter too, but conveniently, the show never showed that footage until Tuesday night, to play up the idea that Lee and Kenny had come to blows. Rachel sent Kenny home so he could be with his daughter, whom he wept over several times; the couple hugged and left on happy terms. The footage of Rachel weeping and pacing around the set came from her eliminating Alex at the rose ceremony.This kind of deception and false advertising is nothing new for “The Bachelorette,” but playing with the idea that a racist and a black man would settle their differences via violence feels far more charged than the show’s usual editing liberties. They’re using the specter of racial violence as a ratings lure with a grotesque “will they or won’t they.” Only one black hopeful remains — Eric B., who has seemed fixated on the number of white men Rachel is keeping around. Rachel seems serious about not making race the centerpiece of her decision. But it doesn’t seem like the producers are on the same page.And pour one out for Jack, who told Rachel with a creepy grin, “I would lock the door” when she asked him what he would do if he could take her back to his Dallas hometown. “That didn’t sound great to me,” she told the camera. Farewell, Jack.