http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/06/us/phoenix-officer-who-shot-black-suspect-mistook-pill-bottle-for-gun-authorities-say.html
Police Shooting in Phoenix Fuels Protesters’ Outrage  - The New York Times
Brisbon  Rumain (1980-2014),Phoenix (Ariz),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Maricopa County (Ariz),National Assn for the Advancement of Colored People
Dec. 5, 2014
4628
PHOENIX —  The shooting death of an unarmed black man by a white police officer here on Tuesday has added new fuel to the already fiery debate over the role of race in the police use of lethal force.The man, Rumain Brisbon, 34, was delivering dinner from McDonald’s to family members on Tuesday evening in a black Cadillac S.U.V. when he was approached by a police officer who had been asked to pursue a tip about possible drug dealing involving the S.U.V.According to the account released by the Phoenix Police Department, the officer saw Mr. Brisbon take something from the back seat and told him to show his hands, but Mr. Brisbon continued toward a nearby apartment complex instead.“The officer eventually caught up to him in an attempt to detain him as part of the drug investigation,” the police account said. “The officer gave the suspect several commands to get on the ground, but he refused to comply, yelling profanities at the officer, according to witnesses. As the officer closed the distance and while attempting to detain the suspect, a struggle ensued between them.”The police and witnesses said the pair ended up inside an apartment.During the scuffle, the police said, when the officer saw Mr. Brisbon put his left hand in his pocket, he grabbed onto the hand and thought he felt a gun handle in the pocket. The officer, whom the department did not identify, shot Mr. Brisbon twice in the torso, killing him. Two women and two children were in the apartment at the time.The item in the pocket turned out to be a pill bottle containing oxycodone tablets, the police said. A semiautomatic handgun and a jar containing marijuana were found in the S.U.V.Coming close on the heels of the police killings of unarmed black men in Ferguson, Mo., and New York City, the Phoenix case has prompted a similar outcry.On Thursday night, hundreds of demonstrators marched to police headquarters here, chanting “hands up, don’t shoot” and “black lives matter,” slogans that emerged from the protests surrounding the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson. The Phoenix protesters demanded that the police release the name of the officer involved.Community leaders called off protests planned for Friday night because of threats of violence against both sides. Instead, the leaders said they would call a community meeting on Monday at a local church.Mr. Brisbon had in past years pleaded guilty to burglary, possession of marijuana and driving while intoxicated.As in other recent episodes, those who knew the victim said they did not accept the police version of how things played out. The police said they had a tip about a suspected drug deal outside a convenience store, and a police car tracked the license plate to the S.U.V. parked at the Cobblestone Apartments, where the confrontation with Mr. Brisbon took place. They pointed out that although Mr. Brisbon was not armed when he was shot, drugs and a gun were found in his car, and his arrest record depicted a pattern of behavior.The police spokesman said that while the confrontation went terribly wrong, the officer, a 30-year-old man with seven years on the force, was doing his job, following up on a report of crime.“We don’t have a duty to retreat,” said Sgt. Trent Crump, a spokesman for the police. “We have a duty to investigate.”But Mr. Brisbon’s family — and much of Phoenix’s black community — saw the shooting as a horrifying overreaction to a father of four who was carrying a fast-food dinner. That he could be gunned down at the apartment where family members were waiting seemed to confirm a suspicion that white police officers confronted with black men feel so threatened that they become too quick to shoot.“This man, no matter what he was before, at that moment he was a father carrying dinner in one hand and reaching for his keys with the other,” the Rev. Jarrett Maupin, a civil rights activist and community leader, said in a telephone interview. “He was unarmed, he did not have a weapon” when he was shot, he added.“It gives you the impression that it’s open season on killing black men,” Ann Hart, chairwoman of Phoenix’s African-American police advisory council, said in a television interview. “We need to take a deeper dive into why police officers are feeling compelled to shoot and kill as opposed to apprehend and detain, arrest and jail.”Marci Kratter, the lawyer representing Mr. Brisbon’s family, said Friday that the police narrative of the shooting did not match what she had heard from witnesses who were on the scene. She said it was premature to provide details.“We just don’t believe that things took place the way they said,” Ms. Kratter said. “Even if there was an anonymous tip that he was selling drugs from the S.U.V., which is what they say, it would be reckless for one officer to go at night to apprehend him. It wasn’t an Amber Alert, where a 3-year-old’s been abducted; it’s a drug case, where they have the license plate and the address and could do surveillance. This wasn’t an investigation, it was an execution.”Ms. Kratter said she was also disturbed that the police were not going to allow her office to have an observer present at Mr. Brisbon’s autopsy.“We’re seriously concerned that they’re trying to conceal evidence,” she said.