https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/dining/wine-school-assignment-riesling-spatlese.html
Your Next Lesson: Spätlese Riesling - The New York Times
Wines,Riesling (Wine),Germany
April 27, 2017
6138
Now that we’ve tackled a sparkling red, let’s move on to another contentious category: sweet German rieslings.Seldom will you see a style that is so beloved by critics, sommeliers and other wine authorities, yet so ignored by the public. It’s not that riesling is unpopular, though public acceptance never quite matches critical plaudits. But this particular wine, riesling with discernible sweetness, is an especially difficult sell.Partly it’s the sweetness, which even in Germany is a style in decline. For English speakers, another huge obstacle may be the German language, with its syllabic pileups.Nonetheless, we’re plunging in. These wines are too thrilling, too delicious and too versatile with food to allow us to be deterred by a bunch of umlauts. There’s no accounting for taste, of course. But you’ve got to try the wines first. And if you already think you know these wines, why not try them again? Tastes evolve.Here are the three wines I recommend:Dönnhoff Nahe Riesling Spätlese Oberhäuser Brücke 2015 (Terry Theise Estate Selection/Skurnik Wines, New York), $43Carl Loewen Mosel Riesling Spätlese Leiwen Laurentiuslay 2015 (Terry Theise Estate Selection/Skurnik Wines), $26Joh. Jos. Prüm Mosel Riesling Spätlese Bernkasteler Badstube 2015 (Rudi Wiest/Cellars International, Carlsbad, Calif.), $37Can’t find these wines, or other spätlese cuvées from these producers? Don’t worry. Dozens of exceptional wines are available. The key words to look for are “riesling spätlese,” which indicate very ripe riesling grapes fermented to leave some discernible sweetness in the wine. Avoid any spätlese also labeled “trocken,” which indicates a dry wine.Along with additional spätlese cuvées from these winemakers, other German producers to look for include: Julian Haart, Weiser-Künstler, Schloss Lieser, Schäfer-Fröhlich, A. J. Adam, Dr. Loosen, Fritz Haag, Maximin Grünhaus, Selbach-Oster, Alfred Merkelbach, Joh. Jos. Christoffel, Willi Schaefer and Leitz.I selected the 2015 vintage, which has received a great deal of hype, partly because it is now in the market. But if you find older vintages, do not hesitate to buy them. They may be even better.What to serve with these wines? Just about anything you like. Light seafood and poultry dishes would be fine, as would many spicy dishes. Why not test the frequently repeated notion that spätlese rieslings go wonderfully with Asian cuisines?Now, let me repeat the usual caution: Don’t serve these wines too cold. If they are icy, the nuances will be difficult to detect. Take the bottles out of the fridge about half an hour before serving.Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.