https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/29/world/asia/china-communist-party-propaganda.html
Chinese Communist Party’s New TV Ad Asks, ‘Who Am I?’ - The New York Times
Propaganda,Advertising and Marketing,China Central Television,Communist Party of China,Television
July 28, 2016
8261
BEIJING — “Who am I?” It’s a question people sometimes ask in moments of self-doubt, or after a wild night out.Now the Chinese Communist Party has its own heart-tugging answer.In a slick, new television ad marking 95 years since the party was founded, the question is used to promote it as a community of humble do-gooders who quietly hold China together.“Who am I? What kind of person?” a gravelly, brooding voice asks at the start of the ad, as a man stands on a beach watching the sun rise.Piano music swells. “Perhaps you’ve never thought about it,” the voice says. It might seem like the start of a drama, or a moody romance.The who-am-I question is then answered with a series of vignettes that show Communist Party members as the hardworking backbone of Chinese society.“I’m the one who leaves latest,” the voice says as a teacher tidies an empty classroom. “I’m the one who starts work earliest,” it says as a street sweeper starts the day.“I’m the one who thinks least about himself,” the voice says as an exhausted surgeon falls asleep on the floor after finishing another operation.Other scenes of selfless dedication in everyday life follow. “I’m the Chinese Communist Party, always together with you,” the voice concludes.Anyone unaware of the pervasive role of the Communist Party in controlling Chinese society might be left thinking of it as a charity or community service group, rather than a top-down organization that achieved power through revolutionary war.The ad makes no mention of Marx, Mao or even President Xi Jinping, the party’s leader, who has been prominent in many of its other recent efforts at outreach by video. Rather, it is a kind of update of the myth of Lei Feng, the selfless model soldier who was an icon of Mao-era propaganda.Since the ad appeared on Chinese television this week, many news outlets here — the party’s own — have praised the 90-second spot as a polished, humanizing makeover for an organization that many ordinary Chinese have come to see as a vehicle for self-advancement. The ad, made by China Central Television, the main state broadcaster, shows how the party’s propaganda-makers have, at times, become more savvy at speaking to contemporary audiences.“A documentary of just 1.5 minutes uses the sparsest scenes to convey the dedication and commitment of Communist Party members,” said a commentary from the Yangtze River News, a website in central China.On the internet in China, reaction has been divided, even as censors appeared to be removing any especially sharp comments. Some viewers said they felt a jolt of emotion that softened their cynicism about the party.“My heart melted as I watched,” said one comment quoted by a news report that praised the ad.But other comments online voiced undiluted skepticism. Some asked why there was no mention of corruption or other problems that have eroded public trust in the party. Others noted that, despite the images in the video, relatively few party members are street sweepers or ordinary workers.“I’m the one who’s embezzled most of your money,” said one sardonic commenter on Sina.com Weibo, a service akin to Twitter. “I’m the one that treats you well if you have money.” Many such catcalls were quickly removed.China’s Communist Party has grown into a vast organization with 90 million members. They are expected to pay their dues, attend meetings and other activities, and loyally abide by the party leaders’ demands. Membership is virtually compulsory for officials, and academics and other professions are widely expected to join. Dissent in the ranks is rare.But Mr. Xi has tried to slow growth in membership and restore the idea that members should be motivated by ideals, not careerism. The new ad fits with that theme.Not all the news for the party this week was so on message, however. On Thursday, the party’s anticorruption agency announced the expulsion of two powerful officials for graft and other abuses. One, Zhang Yue, who was responsible for law and order in northern Hebei Province, had engaged in “superstitious activities,” banqueted on the public dime, done favors in return for sex and engaged in general “hedonism,” the agency said.