https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/fashion/bianca-del-rio-the-joan-rivers-of-the-drag-world.html
Bianca del Rio: The Joan Rivers of the Drag World - The New York Times
Transvestism,Haylock  Roy (Bianca Del Rio),Television,Theater,Contests and Prizes,RuPaul's Drag Race (TV Program)
Dec. 5, 2014
7715
When asked recently to describe her trademark style, the drag performance artist Bianca Del Rio called it “erotic clown.”“Basically,” she said, “I want the most unnatural look possible.”It was late on a Friday afternoon, and Ms. Del Rio, otherwise known as Roy Haylock, was sitting in a dressing room in the Gramercy Theater on East 23rd Street, tending to her makeup and doing her hair.She wore a black zip-up hooded sweatshirt, a black Topman tank top and gray Zara sweatpants (“Plug those,” she said, “so they’ll send me some swag”). Underneath were four pairs of Capezio tights topped with nude-colored fishnet stockings.“I have to hide my candy,” said Ms. Del Rio, 39, last May’s winner of “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” as she put the final touches on the night’s outfit.She plucked a pair of eyelashes the size of butterflies from a makeup table in front of her, then began painting on her eyebrows. This required four different colored pencils as well as heaps of glitter. After that, she started in on her blond wig, which she spun and spiked and sculpted and sprayed until it took on the shape of a Calatrava building, one that could collapse and kill people at any moment.By the time she was done, the room smelled like a Florida retirement home, and an ever-larger hole had been burned through the ozone layer.On the sixth season of “Drag Race,” Ms. Del Rio beat out 13 contestants for the $100,000 grand prize (“$4 after taxes,” she said). Many looked prettier in their dresses, many could kick their legs higher, and many were better than she was at channeling the spirits of Beyoncé and Barbra and Britney.Her competitors’ somewhat conventional approaches to the grand tradition of men in dresses mirrored some past seasons, when winners like Tyra Sanchez and BeBe Zahara Benet strode to victory not by lampooning womanhood — and divadom — but by approximating it.Ms. Del Rio, according to one of the show’s executive producers, Randy Barbato, succeeded precisely because she went the opposite route.“It sometimes feels like drag has evolved into something polished and P.C.,” Mr. Barbato said. “Bianca reminds people that it should also be funny and dangerous and challenging.”And Ms. Del Rio is reaching a much bigger fan base as a result.After 20 years of scrounging around in relative obscurity, first designing costumes for shows in New Orleans (where she’s from) and then doing small-time gigs in the club XL in New York (she moved here about a decade ago and now rents a $2,000-a-month apartment in Hell’s Kitchen that’s “the size of a closet”), Ms. Del Rio has become an in-demand celebrity on the global gay scene.She hosts nightclub openings in cities as far away as London and performs her cabaret act at nearly sold-out spaces all over the United States. There she hurls insults at her surprisingly diverse audience, which regards her as a kind of Joan Rivers in drag and embraces her undiscriminating discriminations.“People line up to be offended,” the drag performer Lady Bunny said in an interview. “They cheer.”Certainly, that was what they did on that Friday afternoon as Ms. Del Rio began her victory lap with the start of her “Rolodex of Hate” tour.Ms. Del Rio slipped into a black velvet dress and headed out front to do meet-and-greets with a long line of ticketholders.One man in his 20s was of Lebanese descent and came from Salt Lake City. Another was from Recife, Brazil, and promptly asked why the tour was not headed there.“You get me a gig in your rain forest and I’m ready to go,” Ms. Del Rio replied. “Did you actually come here for this? You are insane.”As the man walked away with an autograph, Ms. Del Rio moved on to a pair of 40-something lesbians from D.C. and a woman in her 20s from New Jersey.“It’s all right,” Ms. Del Rio said, referring to the Garden State. “We all have things we’re ashamed of.” (The woman laughed.)Around 7 p.m., having just about worn out the Sharpie being used to sign nearly 100 people’s merchandise, Ms. Del Rio headed back to the dressing room, changed into a red sequined gown (think: Ronald McDonald by way of “Dynasty”) and headed upstairs to begin her set.The content was unrepentantly filthy and included a monologue about having had an affair with her uncle while she was still a minor (“I had many good years with that man”), a shout-out to a black drag queen who had shown her the ropes early on (“the Toni Morrison of her day”) and one very politically incorrect joke about Asians that she refused to apologize for when people in the audience actually booed. (“I can say that,” Ms. Del Rio said. “My hair’s from China.”)The show ended around 8 p.m., and Ms. Del Rio again retired to her dressing room. This time, she got pensive, almost philosophical.There had been several jokes at her parents’ expense, but Ms. Del Rio did not seem worried about offending them when the show hits her hometown this month.“I’m their star child,” she said. “The tides change.”With much of the tour selling out, might she consider hiring a makeup artist so she can sit back and relax before going on stage?“No,” she said. “It sounds grand, but really it’s awful. It’s like having sex with the lights off and then you turn them on after and go: ‘Aaah! That’s not what I wanted.’ ” (Ms. Del Rio, for the record, is single.)She took a pair of pantyhose from her duffel bag, dabbed on some rubbing alcohol and began removing the smudges from her fingernails.Her iPhone was buzzing with text messages from friends, including one from Courtney Act, Ms. Del Rio’s runner-up on “Drag Race.”It read, “I hope you break both your legs and wind up in the E.R.”“Perfect,” Ms. Del Rio said.Waiting on the other side of the door were the drag performers Sherry Vine and Joey Arias, who came to offer congratulations.Ms. Arias has not been always been a fan of “Drag Race,” saying that it is too dominated by people impersonating Britney Spears and Madonna.But she said she began watching it again last season because of Ms. Del Rio, whose victory, she believed, was a shot across the bow, an indication that drag may be about to get more interesting and more outrageous again.“She pushed herself way out there in a way that’s different,” Ms. Arias said. “She’s fast and alert and not politically correct. If she was a boy, it wouldn’t work, but she’s so alien looking, so out there, that you’re hypnotized. It all just comes together. I love her.”