https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/09/opinion/the-politics-of-appointing-justices-to-the-court.html
The Politics of Appointing Justices to the Court - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Appointments and Executive Changes,Johnson  Lyndon Baines,Fortas  Abe,Goldberg  Arthur J (1908-90)
June 8, 2014
8594
To the Editor:Re “The Supreme Court Blunder That Liberals Tend to Make,” by David Leonhardt (The Upshot, June 3):Of course the Supreme Court justices are highly political. These are human beings with great intelligence and usually big egos.The question then becomes, Can these people with sound political ideologies overcome their personal pleasure in staying on the bench knowing that sometimes it is best to leave the work for others rather than damage what they have accomplished? Do they continue to satisfy themselves, or work for the common good of those of the same political ideology?This is where ego and ideology become conflicted. Chosen for life, the justices endure for many generations, and therein lies the dilemma: Does ego trump political ideology? As much enjoyment as one may get at a party, there is a time to leave without causing trouble for the hosts.BRADLEY IAN BERGER Manalapan, N.J., June 3, 2014 To the Editor:David Leonhardt, in discussing Democratic failures to assure that departing liberal Supreme Court justices would be replaced by Democratic appointees, rightly refers to President Lyndon B. Johnson’s failed nomination of Abe Fortas as chief justice as “one of the most consequential blunders in modern American politics.” But the blunder started earlier.In 1965, Johnson sweet-talked Justice Arthur Goldberg into retiring to become United States ambassador to the United Nations so that Johnson could appoint Fortas to his seat. Johnson told Goldberg that he would have great influence in ending the Vietnam War, but Johnson refused to consult Goldberg in his new post while continuing to rely on Justice Fortas in foreign affairs.The story goes back further. In December 1960, Paul Freund of Harvard Law School blundered, on the advice of his mentor, Justice Felix Frankfurter, when he rejected the newly elected President John F. Kennedy’s offer to become solicitor general. There is good reason to think that if he had taken the position, he and not Goldberg would have been appointed to the Supreme Court when Frankfurter retired in 1962.I was in Freund’s office during his telephone call with Frankfurter, and he discussed the matter with me.NORMAN DORSEN New York, June 3, 2014The writer, a professor of law at New York University, was a law clerk to Justice John Marshall Harlan II, 1957-58. 