http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/08/us/after-outcry-a-top-official-resigns-at-komen-cancer-charity.html
After Outcry, Karen Handel Resigns From Komen - The New York Times
Handel  Karen C,Komen  Susan G  for the Cure,Planned Parenthood Federation of America,Breast Cancer,Abortion,Suspensions  Dismissals and Resignations,Brinker  Nancy Goodman
Feb. 7, 2012
8563
Karen Handel, a former Republican candidate for governor in Georgia who joined the Susan G. Komen for the Cure foundation last year, resigned Tuesday as senior vice president for policy just days after the foundation reversed its decision to largely end its financial support for breast cancer screenings at Planned Parenthood affiliates amid an uproar.Ms. Handel, who opposes abortion and called for eliminating government money to Planned Parenthood during her 2010 campaign, was among the organization’s senior leaders who helped persuade Komen’s board to change its policy late last year. The change resulted in a halt of grants to 19 of Planned Parenthood’s 83 affiliates, which received nearly $700,000 from the Komen foundation last year.By restoring Planned Parenthood’s eligibility for grants on Friday, the Komen foundation, the nation’s most influential breast cancer advocacy organization, sought to quiet the criticism that engulfed it last week after its decision to cut contributions to Planned Parenthood became public. Until the controversy, Komen had been seen as a nonpartisan organization that raised large amounts of money from supporters across the ideological spectrum.But there were new signs this week that the political divisions over Planned Parenthood — which provides abortions, contraceptives and a range of health services to women at hundreds of clinics across the country — would continue to be an issue for Komen. Mitt Romney waded into the debate on Monday during an interview with the conservative talk show host Scott Hennen, saying he did not think the foundation’s executives should have changed their mind over cutting the support to Planned Parenthood.Ms. Handel noted in her letter of resignation to Nancy G. Brinker, Komen’s chief executive and founder, that she was unhappy over having been portrayed as singlehandedly driving the decision to cut the financing.Ms. Handel said that the decision had been “fully vetted by every appropriate level within the organization,” and that the discussion about Komen’s changing its relationship with Planned Parenthood because of pressure from abortion opponents predated her arrival at the organization last April.“I am deeply disappointed by the gross mischaracterizations of the strategy, its rationale and my involvement in it,” Ms. Handel said. “I openly acknowledge my role in the matter and continue to believe our decision was the best one for Komen’s future and the women we serve. However, the decision to update our granting model was made before I joined Komen, and the controversy related to Planned Parenthood has long been a concern to the organization. Neither the decision nor the changes themselves were based on anyone’s political beliefs or ideology.”Former Komen employees said the organization and its affiliates had been grappling with complaints in recent years from abortion opponents who threatened to disrupt Komen events and to boycott sponsors because of the financial support given to Planned Parenthood.Roman Catholic bishops in Ohio called upon their parishioners last summer to boycott running races sponsored by Komen because, in addition to the Planned Parenthood grants, the group gave money for breast cancer research to medical centers doing stem cell research.The steady drumbeat of criticism from abortion opponents was troubling to senior leaders, including Ms. Brinker, former employees of Komen said.But Komen’s board members and senior leaders did not anticipate the public outcry over their decision to cut support for Planned Parenthood. The move shocked many longtime supporters, who expressed unhappiness that Komen was bowing to political pressure and that the result might lead to services being cut to low-income women.At the same time, abortion opponents praised Komen’s move and created their own social media campaign on Facebook, Stand with Komen. But after Komen changed its mind, some anti-abortion leaders called on people to no longer support the foundation. In a statement on Tuesday accepting Ms. Handel’s resignation, Ms. Brinker used language suggesting that Komen was trying to restore confidence among supporters that it is a nonpartisan organization focused on its mission “to find a cure and eradicate breast cancer.”“We have made mistakes in how we have handled recent decisions and take full accountability for what has resulted, but we cannot take our eye off the ball when it comes to our mission,” Ms. Brinker’s statement said. “To do this effectively, we must learn from what we’ve done right, what we’ve done wrong and achieve our goal for the millions of women who rely on us.”Although Komen reversed its decision on Friday, criticism of the organization continued over the weekend and included a Twitter campaign started on Super Bowl Sunday called #takebackthepink aimed at pointing people to other ways to support breast cancer research.Komen’s decision even prompted Ford, a longtime sponsor, to buy advertising on Twitter saying it did not believe that politics should be involved in breast cancer research. And members of MoveOn.org and two other organizations delivered petitions, signed by nearly 850,000 people, on Tuesday afternoon at Komen’s headquarters in Dallas calling on the organization to continue to financially support Planned Parenthood.