https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/14/us/politics/brownback-leads-kansas-in-sharp-right-turn.html
Brownback Leads Kansas in Sharp Right Turn - The New York Times
Brownback  Sam,Elections  Governors,Kansas,Republican Party,Series,Elections  Governors,One-Party Rule (Series)
Feb. 13, 2014
8443
TOPEKA, Kan. —  Sam Brownback took office as Kansas’ chief executive more than three years ago, promising a conservative revolution. By all accounts he has kept his promise.Mr. Brownback, 57, has overseen the largest income tax cuts in state history, an expansion of gun rights, restrictions on abortion, sharply reduced welfare rolls, increased voter-registration scrutiny and a paring of state government bureaucracy. To accomplish his goals, he helped push the Republican-majority Legislature further to the right by working to oust moderate Republicans, deepening a longstanding rift within the state’s G.O.P.“We believe this is a strategy that builds a strong state in the future on the red state model,” Mr. Brownback said in an interview in his Capitol office here. “I think we are doing this aggressively and I think you’re going to see some very good things moving forward. It’s not as if we haven’t tried the blue state model, because we have.”But revolutions come with risks, not least because change comes so fast. Single-party control got things done here, but it also ignited an intraparty struggle, as the governor learned last year when some of his allies resisted the higher sales tax rate he requested to balance the state’s books. And while many Kansans remain in Mr. Brownback’s corner, moderate Republicans and Democrats are loudly expressing their anger. With Mr. Brownback facing re-election, voters will be assessing a mixed scorecard of achievement.The Kansas economy is growing, but like the nation’s, it remains sluggish. Elementary school students are testing well, yet the achievement level of black pupils is slipping. And while income taxes have been slashed, the poorest Kansans have seen their tax burdens increase with the elimination of tax credits. As a result, this year’s campaign for governor is shaping up to be more competitive than the one in 2010, when Mr. Brownback was swept into office with 63 percent of the vote.Paul Davis, a Democrat and the House minority leader, who is challenging Mr. Brownback, is hoping to ride a wave of discontent by focusing on education. Mr. Brownback has been heavily criticized for enacting huge tax cuts at a time when schools are not funded at the constitutionally mandated level. Advocates of increased school funding have sued, and the case is now before the state Supreme Court. But the governor and the Legislature have vowed to ignore any ruling that requires them to increase spending to a specific amount, asserting that elected lawmakers, not judges, should make those decisions.“He has really set things up on an ideologically based model designed for his own political reasons, to try to gain him a good deal of attention nationally,” Mr. Davis said of the governor. “I don’t think people have reacted very well to that.”Some of the most heated criticism has come from fellow Republicans — those with more centrist views who say he abandoned them when they faced primary challengers two years ago. A handful of senators lost their seats, including the former Senate president.While Mr. Brownback’s supporters say he is more of a mediator than an imperial presence, opponents say he declines ideas that deviate from his ideology.Even as his bullishly conservative agenda has unsettled the state’s political equilibrium, Mr. Brownback maintains the gregarious, faith-driven manner that has defined him since his days as a United States senator, long-shot presidential candidate and hero of the country’s Christian right.In the Senate from 1996 to 2011, he vigorously opposed abortion, promoted low taxes and less government, and worked against the genocide in Sudan, which won him praise from some liberals. In Kansas, Mr. Brownback has argued that he is not beholden to ideology. He has, for instance, championed wind energy, supporting the renewable energy production requirement — something conservatives in the state have wanted to eliminate — and he signed legislation to help conserve water in the Ogallala Aquifer.Kansas has a long history of moderation. It entered the Union as a free state more than a century and a half ago after years of bloody battles against pro-slavery insurgents. The state’s economy — founded on cattle, wheat and other crops — has been balanced more recently by aviation and technology. While the political power currently resides with the far right, this home state of Bob Dole and Dwight D. Eisenhower has a history of being governed from the center. It has elected five Democratic governors over the past 50 years, and many of the Republicans who ran the state called themselves moderates.This election year, voters will have a chance to decide whether they still feel comfortable with having strayed from a centrist course. Some political analysts say Mr. Brownback is favored to prevail even though his approval ratings have dropped over the years.Neil Newhouse, a Republican pollster who has worked for Mr. Brownback, said that given President Obama’s roughly 35 percent approval rating in Kansas, it would be difficult for any Democratic challenger to beat an incumbent Republican.Mr. Brownback’s signature achievement as governor has been eliminating income taxes for almost 200,000 small businesses and deeply cutting individual income taxes. He said that the Kansas economy was already showing signs of moving forward because of the cuts. Unemployment fell to 4.9 percent last December, the lowest level in more than five years and lower than the national average of 6.6 percent in January. When he started his term in January 2011, the state had $876 in the bank; now there is more than $700 million in cash reserves and Kansas personal income, a measure of family earnings, is growing. The state had more than 15,000 new business filings in 2012, a record, and sales tax receipts have risen.“It’s working,” Mr. Brownback said, sporting black cowboy boots as he lounged on a green nailhead-trim love seat in his office. “I can tell you where you would’ve been had we not changed the policies. You’d be having higher unemployment, you’d continue to have out-migration in the state of Kansas. You wouldn’t have this level of job growth taking place. You would not have this number of new business formations in the state of Kansas, and you’d still have a broke state government.”But there is far from universal agreement. Personal income and gross state product are growing at a slower rate than the national average. And the state’s nonpartisan legislative research department has projected that the budget will face a $213.6 million shortfall in fiscal 2017, in large part because of the deep tax cuts that are expected to cost the state about $3.9 billion over the next five years.Social service supporters say the governor has failed to help poor Kansans. Under the theory that the best form of welfare is a job, the Brownback administration has made it more difficult for poor families to get welfare — the number of people receiving it has dropped by nearly 45 percent since he took office. But there is no evidence that those people are finding work. The childhood poverty rate has gone up slightly under his watch, though the trend started before he took office.Advocates for the poor were outraged last year when the agency overseeing public assistance proposed making the state’s benefit card bright red, something the advocates said would only serve to shame recipients. A different design was eventually chosen. (Although there was never an intent to shame anyone, Mr. Brownback said, “I could see the point of the people that were opposed to that color.”)“I believe he really, honestly cares,” about the poor, said State Senator Oletha Faust-Goudeau, a Democrat. But she added, “Actions speak louder than words. I’m hearing one thing, but something else is being done.”Mr. Brownback also entered office with a goal to increase fourth-grade reading proficiency. Although the state has remained among the top five in the nation, the share of Kansas’ black fourth graders reading below a basic level rose to 53 percent last year from 44 percent in 2009, before the governor took office.Mr. Brownback said that while he empathized with struggling Kansans, far too much money had gone into the welfare system with lackluster results, so it was time to change the model, focusing instead on education, employment and family.Those who know Mr. Brownback say that his concern for the poor can be easily overlooked. A convert to Catholicism, he often opens meetings with a prayer asking for wisdom. He occasionally serves meals or packs of food to poor families at the Topeka Rescue Mission.“The thing that’s remarkable about him, to me, is how sincere he is with the people that he talks to, whether it be a staff member, a volunteer or a recipient of services,” said Barry Feaker, the mission’s executive director.One thing that few question is Mr. Brownback’s passion for his home state. He describes Kansas in soaring, sentimental language. During his State of the State address he said that Kansas was “leading an American renaissance.” He said Kansans were at the fore of fighting moral injustices — equating the bloody abolitionist battles that became known as “Bleeding Kansas” with the “Summer of Mercy” anti-abortion protests in Wichita two decades ago.“A Kansas purpose is how I describe it,” Mr. Brownback said in an interview. “Here, you got a mostly rectangular state, in the middle of the country, about three million people, no mountains, no ocean, a lot of wind. O.K., so what’s so special? But then you look at what’s happened in the history of this state, and it’s an incredible place.”