https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/24/magazine/notes-on-the-hip-hop-messiah.html
Notes on the Hip-Hop Messiah - The New York Times
Music,Rap and Hip-Hop,Jezebel (Blog),Slate (Magazine),Eminem,Hill  Lauryn,Lamar  Kendrick,Nas,Rakim
March 24, 2015
6789
The hip-hop messiah is both real and not real. He — and with the possible exception of Lauryn Hill, it has always been a “he” — is real in the sense that every five years or so, whenever hip-hop feels too boring, or, worse, too corporate, an artist will be appointed as the spiritual future of the form.But the hip-hop messiah is also a prospective title: When he’s anointed, it’s not for the work he’s already done, but more for the work he should do. He must create something that feels as though it has grown organically out of his city, but that is at the same time universal. His work must feel political, but not overtly political. He should be an example and a savior to the young black people who listen to his music. It’s an impossible role to inhabit — at least while the hip-hop messiah is alive.A partial list of hip-hop messiahs and the approximate years of their reign:Rakim – 1987-1990Nas – 1994-1996Biggie – 1995-Tupac – 1993-Eminem – 2000-2003 (with qualifications)Kendrick Lamar – 2012-Shortly after Kendrick Lamar released “good kid, m.A.A.d city,” his 2012 major-label debut, he was anointed the latest in the line of hip-hop messiahs by the critics, enthusiasts and solemn ex-rappers who determine these things. Like Nas – a one-time messiah himself – Lamar, a scrawny 25-year-old from Compton, was a visual poet. You can see Compton — the burger stands, the lights of the police cruisers, the 405 freeway — in every track of “good kid, m.A.A.d. city,” just as you can see the dice games, project hallways and parks of Queensbridge in Nas’s “Illmatic.”Like Tupac, Lamar could effortlessly juxtapose his feelings of worthlessness with a bravado that was magnetic, inspiring. His rapping was so virtuosic that he almost seemed bored by his own skill, trying out new styles just because he could during guest appearances on other M.C.s’ albums. Most important, he had that rare blend of raw talent, empathy and confidence that made every song, no matter how sad, ring with the kind of hope that you felt as a knot in your chest. Nas, in his prime, had the talent, Tupac had the empathy, Rakim had the confidence. In Lamar’s songs – like “Sing About Me, I’m Dying of Thirst,” maybe the finest the form has ever produced – you could hear all three knocking together.“good kid, m.A.A.d city” was not only nakedly emotional, but also unexpectedly self-aware, with Lamar probing what his inevitable celebrity might mean. On the track “m.A.A.d city,” he raps:These lines laid the groundwork for Lamar’s new album, “To Pimp a Butterfly.” He anticipated his messiah status even before it was bestowed on him and pushed back against the social burden placed on artists who, by virtue of their talent, are expected to lift up their communities. At the same time, he acknowledged the reality of this responsibility.In the final moments of the “good kid, m.A.A.d city” track “Real,” we hear a phone message from Lamar’s mother. “Tell your story to these black and brown kids in Compton,” she says. “Let ’em know you was just like them, but you still rose from that dark place of violence becoming a positive person. But when you do make it, give back with your words of encouragement and that’s the best way to give back to your city.” In “m.A.A.d city,” Lamar seems to imagine himself as the local bard, one who doesn’t have to answer to the white world or the music industry. He doesn’t seem to want a wider, ambassadorial role, doesn’t want to be the artist whom white kids play for their parents — the rapper whose “intelligence” is a “relief.”On “To Pimp a Butterfly,” Lamar steps into a new role, one that feels shaped, in part, by the burdensome expectations placed upon him as a hip-hop messiah. In some ways, this was inevitable – every anointed rapper eventually has to move away from the memories of childhood to tell other kinds of stories. But few have done it as abruptly, and with as sharp a move from the personal to the explicitly political.The new album is a thicket of inspirational, historical references; you’ll find critical race theory, George Clinton, Nelson Mandela, Richard Pryor, Exodus 14, respectability politics and six separate levels of meta-analysis about the meaning of Lamar’s success and messiah status. It seems almost designed for parsing in a college classroom. As Clover Hope pointed out in an excellent essay for Jezebel, the accumulation of all these black references washing over the listener creates its own mood, its own emotional timbre. But what you won’t find on “To Pimp a Butterfly” are the engaging storytelling and descriptive eye that brought Lamar’s Compton to life on “good kid, m.A.A.d. city.”In the song “Mortal Man,” Lamar returns to, and updates, the questions he asked his fans in “m.A.A.d city” :The distance between these questions and the ones Lamar asked in “m.A.A.d city” reveals his expanding ambitions, and also how those ambitions have changed. He is no longer heeding his mother’s call to tell his story “to these young black and brown kids from Compton;” instead, he’s become more interested in embracing the long history of black storytelling. The local bard, it seems, has left home.“To Pimp a Buttefly” is a pilgrimage into blackness, but it’s also a pilgrimage back into the idea of Lamar-as-hip-hop messiah. At the end of “Mortal Man,” Lamar finally steps out of his dense thicket of references for a conversation between himself and Tupac. (Reviving Tupac has become its own odd industry in recent years. This exhumation was done by taking audio of an interview Tupac gave two years before his death in 1996 and splicing it together with Lamar’s new interjections.) They talk about the limits of black strength, the possibility of revolution and the exhaustion of young black men. Lamar asks Tupac what he thinks of the future of Lamar’s generation.“It’s gonna be murder,” Tupac says. “It’s gonna be like Nat Turner, 1831, up in this mother—, you know what I’m saying. It’s gonna happen.”“That’s crazy, man,” Lamar says. “In my opinion, the only hope we kinda have left is music. Vibrations.”This is the closest “To Pimp a Butterfly” comes to clarity. If, as Lamar tells Tupac, music is the only hope left and “vibrations” are the key, the experimentation found on “To Pimp a Butterfly”could be seen as a spray of different frequencies. And yet even the conversation feels conceptual and referential – Lamar mostly defers to Tupac and ends the exchange with an extended metaphor that helps explain the title of the album. The excitement you feel while listening to it comes from the idea of the two talking, not from what’s actually said. And while there’s no quarter or equivocation on Tupac’s end, you can’t help but wish Lamar had more to say than “That’s crazy.”Over the past few days, I’ve listened to “To Pimp a Butterfly” at home, on the train, on a plane, while eating dinner and while watching a basketball game at night. Each time, when I start feeling bored or listless, I’ll stare down at my phone and try to find the one track that will snap me back to attention. On “Illmatic,” it was “Memory Lane” or “Life’s a Bitch.” On Notorious B.I.G.’s “Ready to Die,” it was “Warning” or “Suicidal Thoughts.” On “good kid, m.A.A.d city,” it was “Sing About Me, I’m Dying of Thirst.” There isn’t a track like that on “To Pimp a Butterfly.” And while the album was clearly intended as something more than a collection of iTunes singles, it is disappointing that a work with so much musical complexity lacks the emotional texture of “good kid, m.A.A.d city.” Part of the considerable genius of that album lies in how effortlessly Lamar weaves together the careless fun of “Backseat Freestyle” and the despair of “I’m Dying of Thirst” into a seamless story of one day in Compton. This album is the opposite. It’s effortful, with a touch of piety.Many of the first critical responses to “To Pimp A Butterfly” pleaded for more time to figure out what, exactly, Lamar was doing. In Slate, Carl Wilson wrote, “It’s too soon to say whether ‘To Pimp a Butterfly’ is a more satisfying album.” In The Fader, Rawiya Kameir wrote, “God knows how long it will be before any of us fully grasp the stacked meanings, extended metaphors and shrouded complexities of Kendrick Lamar’s ‘To Pimp A Butterfly.’ Definitely weeks, probably months.” There seemed to be a reluctance, especially among white critics, to straightforwardly criticize the album. (“How should white listeners approach the ‘overwhelming blackness’ of Kendrick Lamar’s brilliant new album?” read the deferential subheadline to Wilson’s review.) This caution is a testament to Lamar’s talent, but also to the power that comes with his messiah status: Critics seem afraid to say much about this album because they want to believe in him too, even when what’s in front of them doesn’t exactly deliver on their expectations.Lamar, himself, might not quite know what he has created. There is a hoarder’s mania to this album – he seems to have gathered every idea and influence he could find without too much care for what all that clutter reveals, knowing only that there is something beautiful in it. When he homes in on what exactly that is, hip-hop will have another classic. Until then, we will have to be satisfied with watching him make an exciting but still-unfinished transition.Which is just as well. Not every album needs to feel like it was handed down from the mount. The ones that try to are usually either a mess of shoddy uplift and shoddy politicking (Nas’s “It Was Written”) or inward-facing rage (Eminem’s “The Marshall Mathers LP”). There’s a hint of both in “To Pimp a Butterfly,” and while Lamar’s talent and thoughtfulness elevate him clear of those sorts of misfires, the problem with messiah status is that it converts all of its holders, whether they come from Queensbridge, the Bronx, Atlanta or Compton, into the same figure. Like the best narrative poets, Lamar has a genius for wringing uncommon emotion out of highly wrought verse. The hip-hop messiah, by contrast, will always be antipersonal.