https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/dining/picnic-park-fried-chicken.html
Grab Your Picnic Baskets: The Party’s Moving Outside - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Picnics,Chickens
June 26, 2017
1812
A picnic may sound like an old-fashioned pursuit, best suited for the romantically tangled characters of a 19th-century novel. But on a recent Sunday in a park in Red Hook, Brooklyn, a dozen families unpacked platters of food for the kind of generous, unfussy picnics you may actually want to join.Marisol and Angel Morales live in a small second-story apartment but wanted to entertain a party of 30 or so people outdoors in the sun. The couple arrived with a broom to clean up the plot of concrete and grass they had chosen in nearby Coffey Park. They came prepared because that morning, their son had been up early to scout out a good spot and report back.The couple lugged an extra folding table and chairs so that they could play dominoes, a large plastic cooler on wheels full of food, and the most important accessory for outdoor entertaining, according to Ms. Morales: a fully charged wireless speaker.Throughout the afternoon, the speaker blasted Marc Anthony, Big Pun and the “Frozen” soundtrack. Regardless of the song, Mr. Morales, who is 65 and moved to New York from Puerto Rico as a teenager, often broke from conversation with family and friends to dance a few steps, a gold Sphinx pendant swinging on his chest.“We didn’t want to feel lonely,” he said, gesturing to the crowd growing around him, “so we just kept inviting more and more people.”Ms. Morales, 54, a party planner who makes custom decorations, knows the importance of advance work. She had cooked a big platter of macaroni with ground beef the night before, and woke up extra early to make her arroz con gandules, generously seasoned rice with pigeon peas. She picked up trays of grilled chicken ordered from a nearby restaurant and set all the food out family-style, nudging guests to remove the lids and help themselves as they arrived.“I don’t bother serving everyone,” said Ms. Morales, who keeps her picnics casual, with no set eating time — an arrangement that works especially well for her grown children and their toddlers. “We don’t need to wait for everyone to eat, and we don’t need to all sit down at the same time. That’s the best part.”Marnie Hanel is a journalist in Portland, Ore., who wrote the 2015 book “The Picnic: Recipes and Inspiration From Basket to Blanket” with Jen Stevenson and Andrea Slonecker.“It’s a classic way to entertain,” Ms. Hanel said in a phone interview, “but it also addresses a lot of modern obstacles to entertaining.”Ms. Hanel first embraced picnics when she lived in an apartment in New York City. “It’s no coincidence that’s where I started,” she said.Like the Moraleses, and so many others in small apartments, Ms. Hanel didn’t have the luxury of private space, so she turned to the city’s public space.“In the Instagram age, people are so intimidated by entertaining that we often fall back on restaurants for big groups,” she said. “But that can be so expensive, and it’s tough to organize everyone for a reservation.”Making the meal a potluck, and shifting it outside, instantly made things more affordable and communal. It was also a way to accommodate more people.“For those with food restrictions or allergies, they can bring some of their own food,” Ms. Hanel said.And unlike at a formal dinner, there is no need to consult with the host about special requirements. “People with small kids can just stop in and leave when it’s convenient, according to their nap schedules, and you can bring the dog,” she said.To keep food cold, a hard plastic cooler is ideal, but Ms. Hanel has improvised. A plastic wagon filled with ice will keep bottles of beer and wine cold. So will a picnic basket when it’s lined first with a trash bag.“Don’t forget a few trash bags,” Ms. Hanel cautioned. “I love specialty equipment, but the only thing that can make a picnic terrible is not being able to get rid of dirty things.” When gathering once a month with friends to picnic, she finds that the most commonly forgotten items tend to be trash bags, serving spoons and a sharp knife.Fried chicken is ideal picnic food, and Ms. Slonecker, a food stylist and former culinary instructor, developed a recipe for “The Picnic” in which the meat is brined with Lapsang souchong, a smoky tea, then breaded with cornmeal and fried.Others may have their own methods, such as frying boneless pieces of meat coated in Japanese bread crumbs, then sandwiching them in biscuits with hot honey butter. Biscuits can make an ideal vehicle for chicken tenders, but a soft dough should be worked slightly to yield a firmer biscuit that won’t crumble to pieces. And hot sauce and pickles should arrive on the side, to prevent a mushy breading or biscuit.However you make the chicken, maintaining its crunch is key. “Humidity is the enemy of crispness,” Ms. Slonecker said. “Anytime you’re trapping in heat as it’s cooling, you’re ruining that crispness.”A common mistake she sees in serving cold fried chicken is overseasoning. “When you eat foods that are hot, the perception of flavors is not as full,” she said. “But as things cool, you’re really able to detect more taste, more flavor and more saltiness.”Ms. Slonecker recommends frying chicken in the morning and letting it cool uncovered at room temperature. Using a wire rack will enable the breading to cool quickly, with air circulating around it, so that no part gets soggy. If kept uncovered, the chicken will even keep some of its texture overnight. But for optimal crunch, Ms. Slonecker advises taking it to the picnic the same day.Back at Coffey Park, Nancy Feliciano had received a distressing text message. “My niece who’s supposed to bring the fried chicken?” she said. “She only just woke up!”Ms. Feliciano, 53, grew up across the street from the park, where she played as a child. She had arrived at 8 a.m. to beat the competition. “You get here any later, and all the picnic tables are gone,” she said.She found a seat and waited for everyone to arrive, popping open an umbrella during a rain shower, and at one point taking a pamphlet from a passing Jehovah’s Witness just to have something to read.Ms. Feliciano’s tips for a successful picnic are to plan the menu in advance, to share the work, and to send someone to the park early to stake out a location. A week earlier, she was editing a master list of who was bringing what.Her nephew was on baked ziti duty. Her sister was charged with arroz con gandules. Her niece planned to bring a cold pasta salad made with crab meat, and juice for the children. Another family member was making orange-tinted pasteles filled with turkey and scrambled eggs. Ms. Feliciano would take care of the potato salad.By the afternoon, everything was set up, except for the fried chicken. One youngster who had been sent running home for silverware, and then to the bodega down the block to pick up cold drinks, was refusing to go for anything else.“You know what?” Ms. Feliciano said. “That’s fine. We got everything we need.”Recipes: Fried Chicken Biscuits With Hot Honey Butter | More Picnic DishesAnd to Drink ...A lot of wines will go beautifully with this dish, but nothing goes better with fried chicken than sparkling wine. That still gives you plenty of choices. Champagne is the obvious one, and it would be wonderful. This is not the time for expensive vintages or luxury names. A good nonvintage bottle would be just right, served in tumblers, paper cups or whatever. You could also drink a less expensive champagne-style sparkling wine from the United States or Italy, or try something completely different. Good cava from Spain would be delicious. So would a sparkling Vouvray or other chenin blanc from the Loire Valley. Pétillant naturel, a sparkling wine made the old-fashioned way, would be perfectly in keeping with an informal picnic. Not in the mood for fizzy wine? Try Muscadet, fino sherry or cold pilsner. ERIC ASIMOVFollow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.