https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/world/americas/state-department-war-crimes-office-closing.html
War Crimes Office May Be Closed in State Dept. Reorganization - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,State Department,Tillerson  Rex W
July 18, 2017
62
WASHINGTON — The State Department office charged with combating war crimes may become the latest casualty of Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson’s plans to restructure his department, former American officials said on Tuesday.Human rights advocates seized on the proposal as another example of what they assert is the Trump administration’s indifference to human rights outside North Korea, Iran and Cuba.They also say that shutting the Office of Global Criminal Justice, as the war crimes bureau is officially known, would hamper efforts to publicize atrocities and bring war criminals to justice.“The promise of ‘never again’ has proven hard to keep,” said Stephen J. Rapp, who led the office during the Obama administration. “If this Office of Global Criminal Justice closes, it will become even more difficult.”Mr. Tillerson has not made final decisions on how to restructure the agency, a State Department spokeswoman said, adding that the goal is not to play down war crimes but to make the department’s efforts more effective, including in combating atrocities.“There are no predetermined outcomes,” the spokeswoman, who under State Department rules would not be identified, said in a statement. “We want to make sure that the responsibility for an issue is appropriately placed and aligned with the resources it needs to meet its mission.”Though the State Department insists that a final decision has not been made, a former official said that Todd F. Buchwald, who succeeded Mr. Rapp at the war crimes office, had told his staff that he was being reassigned by Mr. Tillerson’s team and that the office’s responsibilities would soon be transferred to the State Department’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor.The war crimes office has modest resources. It has a staff of about a dozen and an annual budget of about $3 million, and it has generally been run by an envoy appointed by the president.Mr. Rapp came to the office with considerable experience: He served on an international tribunal on the atrocities in Rwanda and prosecuted war crimes in Sierra Leone before President Barack Obama appointed him to lead the office in 2009, making him the ambassador at large for war crimes.Mr. Rapp also played a major role in arranging for one of Syria’s most important defectors to provide thousands of photographs to the F.B.I. of detainees who had perished in President Bashar al-Assad’s prisons.In the two decades that it has existed, the office has played an important role in bringing perpetrators to justice. Mr. Rapp worked behind the scenes to press Kosovo to accept its new human rights tribunal. The office also pushed Senegal to try Hissène Habré, the former dictator of Chad.But its fate has been caught up in the broader review that Mr. Tillerson has introduced to streamline decision-making at the State Department and by the Trump administration’s proposal to cut the agency’s budget by 31 percent.The State Department spokeswoman said the agency was assessing “the utility of the nearly 70 special representatives or special envoys” who she said were often separated from the topical experts in the agency’s bureaus. The proposal to close the war crimes office was first reported by Foreign Policy.Tom Malinowski, who served as the State Department’s top human rights official during the Obama administration, said it was important that the war crimes office and the person running it retained the stature to deal with international war crimes tribunals and senior foreign officials.“They are not just advocating for accountability for war crimes; they are actively working to bring perpetrators to justice,” he said. “So you need somebody to run it who has the stature of a former prosecutor, a former judge or who is a recognized expert.”“If all they do is take this office with its current resources, staff and ambassador and shift it elsewhere in the department, that’s not so big a problem,” he added. “But if the point is to downgrade it and strip it of resources, that would be a big setback.”