http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/07/opinion/five-ways-republicans-are-threatening-voting-rights.html
Five Ways Republicans Are Threatening Voting Rights - The New York Times
Voter Registration and Requirements,Voting Rights Act (1965),Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government,Blacks,Republican National Committee,Republican Party,Trump  Donald J,Illinois,North Carolina,North Dakota,Ohio,Southern States (US),Virginia,Wisconsin,Discrimination
Nov. 7, 2016
2800
Donald Trump has been claiming for months now that Tuesday’s election will be “rigged.” But the only ones threatening the democratic process are Mr. Trump, with his thinly veiled calls for voter suppression, and Republicans in state governments doing their utmost to keep minority voters from the polls. Below are five ways the candidate and the Republican Party are working to suppress voting this year, drawn from recent editorials:Voter ID lawsRepublicans have repeatedly raised concerns about voter fraud — which is essentially nonexistent in the United States — as justification for voter ID laws that disproportionately affect poor people, minorities and students.This year will be the first presidential election since the Supreme Court struck down a major part of the Voting Rights Act in 2013, meaning many areas with a history of racial discrimination in voting would no longer have to clear new voting laws with the federal government. After that decision, several states enacted new restrictions, including voter ID laws.There’s some good news, though: A North Dakota judge in August ordered the state to stop enforcing its voter ID law, which could have disenfranchised nearly 4,000 Native American residents. Courts in Wisconsin, Kansas and Ohio have also dealt blows to voter ID laws.Early voting restrictionsIn North Carolina, where a court in July struck down a 2013 voter ID law whose restrictions took aim at black voters, Republicans on local election boards are busily cutting back early and Sunday voting hours, which are disproportionately used by African Americans.Limiting automatic registrationGov. Bruce Rauner of Illinois in August vetoed a bill that would have allowed automatic voter registration at motor vehicle offices and added as many as two million new voters to the rolls starting in 2018.Disenfranchising people with convictionsAlmost six million Americans will be denied the right to vote on Tuesday because of criminal convictions. Many of them are victims of laws enacted in Southern states specifically to disenfranchise African-Americans. Three-quarters of Americans believe people who have served their time should have their voting rights restored, but Republicans in Virginia and elsewhere are fighting to keep people with convictions from voting.Condoning voter intimidationAs Republicans at the state level ramp up voter suppression efforts, Mr. Trump has been telling his supporters to watch “certain areas” on Election Days, essentially inviting them to intimidate minority voters.  While the Republican National Committee has said it doesn’t condone voter intimidation, it has also made it “very clear that the R.N.C. is in full coordination with the Trump campaign.”Voters who run into problems or have questions on Election Day can call 866-OUR-VOTE, a nonpartisan hotline, for help.