https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/23/nyregion/fifth-avenue-presbyterian-church-restoration.html
Restoring a Cross High Above Manhattan, Stone by Stone - The New York Times
Restoration and Renovation,Manhattan (NYC),Architecture,Historic Buildings and Sites,Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church,Vertical Access
Aug. 22, 2016
9025
The great Celtic cross of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, which usually soars 286 feet nearer my God than thee, was lashed to the scaffolding that encloses the church’s brownstone spire. It was so hard to make out among the metal struts that I didn’t recognize it at first.“Where’s the cross?” I asked, after climbing an open-air stairway high above Midtown Manhattan.Derek Maddalena, the church’s director of facilities, pointed to the cross-shaped object behind me, with the four quarters of a distinctive Celtic ring at its base. He salved my embarrassment by confessing he had asked the same question the first time he reached the top of the scaffolding.The 10-foot-tall cross, made of eight-inch-wide bronze plates treated with gold leaf, was installed in the early 1960s. At the time, a steel structure was constructed within and anchored to the brownstone spire. Besides supporting the estimated 350-pound weight of the cross, the inner structure contains a tremendous counterweight — four steel balls, hooked to one another, weighing a total of one ton — that prevents the cross from blowing over in high winds.Reconstruction of this pinnacle was not originally part of the current $9 million restoration project.But after work began last summer, elements of the support structure, including the anchors, were found to be badly rusting.While there was no imminent threat that the cross would topple, the church decided to take advantage of the fact that it was cocooned in scaffolding to address the problem. This June, the cross and the upper 18 feet of the spire — about 60 stone blocks in all — were dismantled. That allowed workers from Deerpath Construction Corporation to replace the rusting elements of the support structure with stainless steel.On the day of my visit, John Hovanec, Chris Ironside and Zachary Robinson were navigating the tight confines of the uppermost scaffold level, resetting stones that had been removed, inspected and — when necessary — repaired or replaced. They were so close to the top that the spire was only a few feet wide. Mr. Robinson could sit on the top stone course at one side of the steeple and reach across to the other.From this quiet aerie, the lion heads along the cornice of the 23-story Peninsula New York Hotel, across West 55th Street, almost looked close enough to feed.Emerging from the brownstone spire was the slender steel post to which the cross will be returned. The job is to be finished in October.Robert Henn, the chairman of the property administration committee on the church’s board, said that allowances for financial and scheduling contingencies were enough that the additional work on the spire would not affect the anticipated cost and timing of the overall restoration.Four years ago, chunks of the church’s 141-year-old brownstone facade fell onto the roof of the adjoining Henri Bendel store. The architectural firm Ford3, the structural engineering firm Robert Silman Associates and the investigation and testing firm Vertical Access, which sends inspectors up on ropes and boatswain’s chairs, took a close look.Their conclusion was that it was time for a full-scale restoration of the brownstone on the north tower, next to Bendel, and on the south clock tower, which is topped by the Celtic cross that symbolically conjures the church’s Scottish heritage. The project includes cleaning, restoring and releading the clear exterior windows. These correspond with stained-glass windows inside the sanctuary but are separated from them by several feet.The tower clock is also undergoing repair. Happily, it is being preserved as a purely mechanical device, driven by a weight that is wound up every week and allowed to drop slowly. The weight itself, Mr. Maddalena told me on the ground, consisted of a “box of rocks.” I laughed at his description. Then I reached the inside of the clock tower. It is, in fact, a box of rocks.To find a durable brownstone that most closely matched the original, Deerpath salvaged remnants of an abandoned railroad trestle in Newark and turned to a quarry in the Shandong province of eastern China. The work of replacing or repairing more than 1,000 stones was monitored through an app called Fieldwire, which allowed the architects, engineers, inspectors and contractors to share information on the status of every single piece of brownstone.But at the end of the day, the job depended on skills as old as the centuries.“You’ve got to touch every stone,” said Katherine Frey, a preservation architect at Ford3. “Tapping and scratching. Hear a hollow sound and you’ll be able to tell there’s some detachment. Sometimes, I feel like I’m a dentist looking for cavities.”Mr. Maddalena overheard her. “In a patient with 1,000 cavities,” he added.