http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/19/us/politics/in-partisan-vote-house-acts-to-limit-abortions.html
In Partisan Vote, House Approves Ban on Abortions After 22 Weeks - The New York Times
Abortion,United States Politics and Government,House of Representatives
June 18, 2013
8566
WASHINGTON —  The House of Representatives on Tuesday approved the most restrictive ban on abortion considered by Congress in a decade, a largely symbolic vote that laid bare the deep ideological differences between Democrats and Republicans.The measure, which would ban abortion after 22 weeks of pregnancy based on the medically disputed theory that fetuses at that stage of development are capable of feeling pain, passed in a 228-to-196 vote that broke down mostly along party lines. Reflecting how little common ground the two parties share these days, just six Republicans voted against the bill; six Democrats voted for it.“I’m not waging a war on anyone,” said Kristi Noem, Republican of South Dakota, offering a rejoinder to the Democratic assertion that Republicans have waged a war on women, a line of attack that harmed conservative candidates in 2012. “Regardless of your personal beliefs, I would hope that stopping atrocities against little babies is something we can all agree to put an end to.”The bill has no chance in the Democrat-controlled Senate and was put forward by the House Republican leadership in response to demands from anti-abortion lawmakers.The tableau in the House chamber on Tuesday was intentionally far different from the scene last week at a meeting of the House Judiciary Committee at which all 19 of the Republicans arguing for and then voting to approve the bill were men. Republican leaders made sure that their female members were front and center for the debate this time.Representative Virginia Foxx, a North Carolina conservative and Tea Party favorite, and Representative Marsha Blackburn, a longtime abortion opponent from Tennessee, were assigned to manage the floor debate. Representative Candice S. Miller of Michigan and Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, one of the Republican conference’s more moderate members, controlled the gavel.But the simple math was difficult to ignore. Only 19 of the 234 Republican House members are women. Nearly all of them spoke on Tuesday. Only three Republican men were allowed to participate in the debate. Notably, Trent Franks of Arizona, the bill’s sponsor who last week caused an uproar after claiming that instances of pregnancy after rape were “very low,” said nothing from the floor.Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, Democrat of New York, brought with her a blown-up photo of the Republican side of the room during last week’s Judiciary Committee meeting. Gesturing to it with her hand, she cried out, “Where were the women?”As politically charged as the debate was, it was also at times heavy with emotion. Ms. Foxx nearly broke down in tears at one point.“May we mourn what abortion reveals about the conscience of our nation,” she said, her voice quivering as she noted that none of her colleagues had acknowledged that half of those aborted are female. “We go to extraordinary lengths to save not only human beings but even animals because we value life so much. However, there are many who do not hold the unborn in the same esteem.”Even if Democrats believed the political upper hand was theirs as they used the issue of reproductive rights to portray their opponents yet again as hostile and indifferent to the needs of women, it was clear that the question at hand — the termination of pregnancies that are five months or more along — was an uncomfortable one.At a news conference Tuesday morning led by Democrats who favor abortion rights, the mood quickly turned tense after two journalists tried to press the representatives about their support for late-term abortions. Representative Diana DeGette of Colorado cut off questions after being asked whether she would draw the line at legal abortion later in pregnancy. “The Supreme Court has spoken, and this bill is unconstitutional. Next question,” she said.The debate was marked by graphic descriptions of abortion procedures and medical claims. Representative Michael C. Burgess, a Texas Republican who practiced as an obstetrician before joining Congress, appeared to suggest that male fetuses are capable of fondling themselves.“They have movements that are purposeful,” Mr. Burgess said during a debate of the bill during the House Rules Committee meeting on Monday. “They stroke their face. If they’re a male baby, they may have their hand between their legs. I mean, they feel pleasure, why is it so hard to think that they could feel pain?”Democrats used the debate to mock Republicans’ claims that their focus was on the economy and job growth. They repeatedly interrupted the floor proceedings to make rhetorical jabs that were masked as parliamentary inquiries, like asking when the House was scheduled to take up the student loan interest rate bill or why a Republican member of the Judiciary Committee was not managing debate on the bill, which is customary.“Another day without a jobs bill, another day without a budget agreement, another day ignoring the top priorities of the American people,” said Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader. “Once again Republicans refuse to listen.”Speaker John A. Boehner called the legislation “the most significant pro-life legislation to come before Congress since enactment of the ban on partial-birth abortions. We have a moral obligation to defend the defenseless, and we will continue to fight to ensure our nation’s laws respect the sanctity of unborn human life.”