https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/sports/nba-draft.html
N.B.A. Draft: Analysis of Every Pick and Trade in Round 1 - The New York Times
Draft and Recruitment (Sports),Basketball,National Basketball Assn
June 22, 2017
3605
The story of the 2017 N.B.A. draft was youth, with a record-setting 16 freshmen taken in the first 30 picks, compared with just two seniors.Washington’s Markelle Fultz (No. 1, Philadelphia) got things rolling as the leader of an elite group of young point guards that also includes Lonzo Ball (No. 2, Lakers), De’Aaron Fox (No. 5, Sacramento) and Dennis Smith (No. 9, Dallas). And after the point guards were off the board, the night was spent discussing the league’s current favorite attributes: length and long-range shooting.While the various young players selected all represent huge potential, the Minnesota Timberwolves may have been the biggest winners thanks to a trade for the veteran All-Star Jimmy Butler of the Chicago Bulls. Butler barely squeaked into the first round when he came out of Marquette in 2011, but Coach Tom Thibodeau molded him into one of the game’s most spectacular two-way players. Butler and Thibodeau will now be reunited following a trade in which the Timberwolves got Butler and the draft rights to Creighton’s Justin Patton in exchange for Zach LaVine, Kris Dunn and the draft rights to Arizona’s Lauri Markkanen.Here’s a pick-by-pick analysis of the first round:Markelle Fultz, 6-foot-4 Point Guard, Washington19 years oldFultz averaged 23.2 points, 5.9 assists and 5.7 rebounds a game in his lone season at Washington. He was an effective shooter from 3-point range, connecting 41.3 percent of the time, but struggled from the free-throw line, where he was a 64.9 percent shooter. His decent height and long arms allow him to defend shooting guards, and his playmaking is strong enough to make him a true point guard on offense. His game could use some refinement but he is the best player in a strong draft class.Quotable: “Coming in, I want to win rookie of the year. I got a pretty high goal for myself: I want to be the M.V.P. I set my goals high because I want to put in a lot of work to achieve them.” — Fultz, on his personal goals.How he fits: Fultz is an intriguing player to pair with Ben Simmons, the Sixers’ 6-10 point forward. Both are excellent playmakers, and as they learn the N.B.A. game together they can work on developing an offense that lets them share that burden while developing their scoring ability. Put them with Joel Embiid and Dario Saric and you have one of the most intriguing young cores in basketball.Marc Tracy: For the second year in a row, the No. 1 pick played his sole college season at a nontraditional basketball power that couldn’t even be bothered to make the N.C.A.A. tournament. Last year it was Ben Simmons, from L.S.U., going to the 76ers. This year it is Fultz, from Washington, going to ... the 76ers. I would be lying to you if I said Fultz was on my radar much while covering college basketball last season, other than as the likely No. 1 overall pick. It strikes me as not a great look for the college game when this happens. It’s more fun when the top pick is a Karl Anthony-Towns (Kentucky) or an Andrew Wiggins (Kansas), as in past years, when the casual fan probably watched them play at least a game or three.Want the big sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.Lonzo Ball, 6-6 Point Guard, U.C.L.A.19 years oldBall is a Jason Kidd-like passer (he set a U.C.L.A. single-season record with 274 assists) who complements his playmaking with a clunky-yet-effective jump shot. He has excellent size for a point guard, is considered an incredibly smart player for his age, and would be a top prospect with or without his father’s hype machine. No one questions his playmaking ability, but there is some uncertainty about whether his unusual jumper, which allowed him to shoot 41.2 percent from 3-point range, will translate to the N.B.A. game.Quotable: “It’s probably a target on me, but I don’t really care about it.” — Ball, on how off-court drama, largely created by his father, could affect him.How he fits: The SoCal local, who played his college ball in Westwood, was simply too much to pass up for the Lakers, and they made room for him in the backcourt by sending D’Angelo Russell (the No. 2 pick just two years ago) to Brooklyn. The Lakers are still a work in progress, but Ball’s ability to create opportunities for teammates should immediately make Julius Randle and Brandon Ingram better players.Marc Tracy: Lonzo Ball, you may have heard of him. I am earnestly looking forward to next season, when we will actually get to see how he stacks up in the NBA. He ran UCLA’s offense — which was high-tempo, utilized a stretch-four in T.J. Leaf, and prized spacing — to the tune of the most efficient in college basketball. Only an unjust pairing against Kentucky in the round of 16 prevented the Bruins from going further in the N.C.A.A. tournament. I think his court vision will make him a good fit for the N.B.A., and I think being the most buzzed-over draft pick since ........ Kyrie? LeBron? Iverson? ..... makes him a good fit for the N.B.A.’s most glamorous franchise.Jayson Tatum, 6’8” Small Forward, Duke19 years oldA long wing with a standing reach of nearly 9 feet, Tatum profiles as a future two-way star, and with his shooting improving steadily from all spots on the floor he could truly be a star. He needs to continue to develop his long-range shooting, and could stand to add some serious weight to a wiry 204-pound frame, but his ability to play the 3 in some situations, and the 4 in small-ball lineups, will make him intriguing to many teams.Quotable: “We’ve all grown up together and played against each other for so many years. And now just to be entering the N.B.A. at the same time, it’s kind of fun.” — Tatum, on how many of his fellow lottery picks are also freshmen.How he fits: The Celtics did not need a dominant playmaker like Markelle Fultz thanks to the presence of Isaiah Thomas, but adding a player like Tatum who can fill out their frontcourt while helping the team create some offense even when Thomas is on the bench makes the trade with the 76ers a good move for both clubs. And in typical Danny Ainge fashion, he got the player he wanted and an extra draft pick to use next year.Marc Tracy: I watched Josh Jackson and Jayson Tatum about three or four times last season, respectively with Kansas and Duke, and count me in the minority that would pick Tatum over Jackson. And count the Boston Celtics along with me! I get why most disagree — Jackson is the very model of a modern N.B.A. wingman. But there were times when Tatum created shots off the dribble — with stylish moves and an incredible fadeaway — that made me leap out of my seat (well, except at Duke’s Cameron Indoor Stadium, which is packed so tightly that reporters literally can’t leap out of their seats). It’s almost like the Celtics, who through savvy management were able at once to secure the top overall pick (which they then traded to the 76ers) AND the No. 1 seed in the Eastern Conference, know what they’re doing.Josh Jackson, 6’8” Small Forward, Kansas20 years oldJackson’s maximum effort comes up a lot in discussions about his future, with Coach Bill Self saying he is as prepared for the N.B.A. as any player he’s ever coached. More of a large shooting guard than a small power forward — DraftExpress pointed out an eerie similarity between his measurements and Andre Iguodala’s when the veteran swingman came out of Arizona — Jackson’s intensity is a blessing and a curse. He made headlines in a bad way when he was accused of vandalizing the car of a women’s basketball player while also threatening the player. If he can put those issues behind him, he is a work in progress with an incredibly high ceiling.Quotable: “I bring a lot of toughness, versatility. I can guard a lot of positions. I play a lot of positions. Having me out there I feel like would help improve the team’s defense overall.”How he fits: The Suns needed a perimeter player to work with Devin Booker and Jackson falling to them creates a perfect match of player and team. He should be able to step right in and compete for the young Suns.De’Aaron Fox, 6’4” Point Guard, Kentucky19 years oldFox made a strong case for his viability as a top prospect when he scored 39 points against Lonzo Ball in the N.C.A.A. tournament’s Round of 16, and it was no fluke as he led Kentucky in scoring in each of the team’s postseason games. He is a fast point guard with quick hands and a strong grasp of how to create shots for others. He’s drawn comparisons to John Wall, but the complete lack of long-range shooting in his freshman season (he shot 24.6 percent from 3-point range) is alarming in today’s game.Quotable: “We get a little tired of it, but it’s fine. We’re both point guards. We’re going to play against each other in the N.B.A. Off the court, we don’t talk about basketball.” — Fox, on his friendship with Lonzo Ball and he deals with the constant comparisons between them.How he fits: Even after trading away DeMarcus Cousins, the Kings are mostly set with big men, so adding an offensive force like Fox at point guard will be a key step in a rebuilding process that probably still has a long way to go. But considering the meager Kings offense, Fox may put up big numbers immediately.Marc Tracy: Fox played point guard for John Calipari — just like Derrick Rose, Brandon Knight, and John Wall. It’s good pedigree, in other words. The Wildcats had the N.C.A.A. tournament group of death, starting with Wichita State in the round of 32, and finally came up short versus eventual champion North Carolina, 75-73, in the Round of 8. We are journalistically obligated to mention that his father has been beefing with LaVar Ball.The Minnesota Timberwolves made one of the biggest moves of the off-season so far, sending Zach LaVine, Kris Dunn and the No. 7 pick to the Chicago Bulls for all-star Jimmy Butler and the No. 16 pick. The deal reunites Butler with Coach Tom Thibodeau, who developed the raw talent into an All-Star player who thrives on both ends of the court. While LaVine has flashed tremendous potential, Dunn was a disappointment last season and Minnesota seemed to need another veteran to get to the next level. Butler will team with Karl-Anthony Towns and Andrew Wiggins on an intriguing young team.How he fits: Butler gives the team veteran leadership as well as superstar-level play on both ends of the court. A six-year veteran and three-time All-Star, Butler has scored 20 or more points a game in each of the last three seasons, and had one of his best overall seasons this past year, with averages of 23.9 points, 6.2 rebounds, 5.5 assists and 1.9 steals a game. He is efficient offensively and can be suffocating defensively, giving the Timberwolves’ young core a player to emulate.Jonathan Isaac, 6’11” Forward, Florida State19 years oldIsaac spent a postgraduate year at IMG Academy, which would have allowed him to technically go prep-to-pro, but he chose instead to enroll at Florida State. As a result of that decision, he is the first Seminole to be selected in the top-10 since Indiana took George McCloud with the 7th pick in 1989. He is still figuring out his large frame (he grew seven inches while in high school), and can be bullied by heavier players, but he is a mobile forward who can pass, shoot and rebound.Quotable: “When I first get into the league, my body is going to be the main focus. I want to become a more consistent shooter. A tighter handle. A better playmaker. Pretty much everything.” — Isaac, on what he needs to work on to thrive.How he fits: The Magic simply needed talent, and couldn’t afford to be picky about position, so Isaac fits the bill perfectly as the top player left on most draft boards. He’ll join a roster that includes plenty of other athletics players in search of the right position.Marc Tracy: This is a big boost for the Seminoles. Tallahassee will never not be a football-first town, but under Leonard Hamilton the ‘Noles have really recruited above their weight in recent years. The problem is they play in the super-conference that is the Atlantic Coast. They were upset by Xavier in the second round of the tournament.Lauri Markkanen, 7’ Power Forward, Arizona20 years oldMarkkanen averaged 15.6 points a game for Arizona thanks to a freakish shooting ability for a player his height. He shot 42.3 percent from 3-point range on nearly 4.5 attempts a game, but is large enough and skilled enough to score in the post as well. All of that work on offense has left plenty of room for improvement on defense, where he struggles as a rim protector and defender overall. He played for the Finnish U-18 and U-20 national teams and is following in the footsteps of his father, Pekka, who was a longtime member of the national team.Quotable: “I’ve been dreaming of this moment my whole life. But at the same time, I know this is just the beginning and I have to get to work. It’s going to be great. I think my family in Finland is more nervous than I am.” — Markkanen on his expectations for draft night.How he fits: The Bulls will be a brand-new team with the trade that got them this pick, sending Jimmy Butler to Minnesota. But with Kris Dunn and Zach LaVine providing newfound backcourt depth, Markkanen is a solid addition to their front line.Frank Ntilikina, 6’5” Point Guard, Strasbourg (International)18 years oldNtilikina (pronounced NEE-lee-KEE-nuh) is a French-born point guard with a host of physical gifts that have yet to be fully realized on the court. He is tall for a point guard — with a reportedly 7-foot wingspan — but despite a high-energy style he is still considered a subpar finisher at the rim and he is not a consistent shooter from outside, either. The other side of that equation is that he has spent time facing stiffer competition than most college freshmen, so he may have an easier adjustment to the athleticism of the N.B.A. He will get endless comparisons to Denver’s Emmanuel Mudiay.Quotable: “It’s been different, but not difficult. I was just playing basketball and trying to win a championship. I think that’s what we play for.” — Ntilikina, on how hard it was to miss out on opportunities to work out with teams while his European club was still playing.How he fits: Ntilikina was not the top player available on every draft board, but his versatility as a player, and his openness to the Triangle offense made him a solid pick for the Knicks. He will continue the team’s commitment to a European core, with the Knicks already featuring Kristaps Porzingis and Willy Hernangomez, even if Porzingis has been dangled in various trade scenarios.Want the big sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.Dennis Smith Jr., 6’2” Point Guard, North Carolina State19 years oldSmith’s averages of 18.1 points and 6.2 assists a game probably undersell how impactful he was when he was at the top of his game. But drama with N.C. State’s coaching ranks created some inconsistency and left some to wonder about how checked in he was, because purely on talent he is among the draft’s top few players. With a strong frame for a shorter player, an ability to get to the basket, and above-average ball-handling, he should be able to contribute immediately even if it takes time for him to learn an N.B.A.-quality jump shot.Quotable: “I’m an attacker from the point guard position. I’m ultracompetitive and I just want to win games.” — Smith, when asked to describe himself as a player.How he fits: The Mavericks needed a long-term solution at point guard and Smith was the best one on the board, and has the potential to dramatically outplay his draft positions if he reaches his potential. He is not a finished product, but will likely enjoy creating shot opportunities for the ageless Dirk Nowitzki.Marc Tracy: Dennis Smith Jr. will always hold a special place in my heart, because I got to watch him lead the mediocre Wolfpack to its first victory over Duke at Cameron since 1995 (not a typo!). At the end of the game, up 2, he got the ball, took it down the court, and slammed it home. It didn’t matter — the clock had expired — but it was awesome. I’d say the crowd roared, but, again, we were at Duke.Zach Collins, 7’ Power Forward/Center, Gonzaga19 years oldCollins will stay in the Pacific Northwest thanks to a trade with Portland for a package that includes the No. 15 and 20 picks. In Portland he would join Jusuf Nurkic in trying to balance out a team that had been dramatically guard-heavy until Nurkic’s arrival mid-season. Measured at a true 7 feet in shoes, Collins is the first one-and-done player in Gonzaga history. He’ll have to rely on scouts to sing his praises, since he didn’t start for the Bulldogs and played just 17.3 minutes a game, thus limiting his ability to put up eye-popping statistics. It is hard to project averages accurately, but if you simply double his averages, he would get 20 points, 11.8 rebounds and 3.6 blocks a game in 34.6 minutes. His main area of improvement is in his ability to stay calm and out of foul trouble.Quotable: “I’d say I’m a little bit of a cross between — not as good as them, but in terms of the type of game — Dirk (Nowitzki) and Tim Duncan. Tim on the block was so fundamental. And Dirk, the way he can shoot it. I try to incorporate that in my game as well.” — Collins, on which N.B.A. players he would compare himself to.How he fits: While drafted by Sacramento, multiple media reports have said Collins will be traded to Portland for a package that includes the No. 15 and 20 picks. In Portland he will join Jusuf Nurkic in trying to balance out a team that had been dramatically guard-heavy until Nurkic’s arrival mid-season.Marc Tracy: Zach Collins was not a super-major part of the Bulldogs team that made it to the championship game, and was an even smaller part of the game itself, where they lost to North Carolina, 71-65. The problem? Too many fouls! He fouled out in just 19 minutes of play in the championship game! I would continue to worry, as Collins will be lanky compared to the average N.B.A. big man. But if you are an N.B.A. team and you want a big guy who can stretch the floor — which is to say, if you are any N.B.A. team — then Collins is the prototype of what you’re looking for.Malik Monk, 6’3” Shooting Guard, Kentucky19 years oldAn old-fashioned shooting guard with highlight-reel leaping ability and an ability to score at will, Monk averaged 19.8 points a game. He has a long-range stroke that led to him making 104 of 262 3-point attempts as a freshman (39.7 percent). His 754 points set a record for a Kentucky freshman and are the fourth-highest in school history. The problems come on defense, where his size leaves him too small to defend most shooting guards despite solid instincts in terms of creating opportunities with steals and blocks.Quotable: “Yes, I feel comfortable playing point guard or shooting guard. We had De’Aaron Fox in college, so I was fine.” — Monk on whether he could switch positions in the N.B.A.How he fits: The Hornets are set on the front line with Cody Zeller and Frank Kaminsky, so adding a shooter of Monk’s level should give them some space to work with on offense. He also provides some of the excitement that Zeller and Kaminsky are lacking.Marc Tracy: Monk was incredibly fun to watch — always a threat to score 30 or even 40. The best scorer in the high school class of 2018 (whoever that is) just watched him go here and figured, “Hey, maybe Calipari will let me score that many, too. I’ll put in my eight months in Lexington and then get up onstage in the early part of draft evening.”Want the big sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.Luke Kennard, 6’6” Shooting Guard, Duke21 years oldA lefty who finds ways to score all over the court, Kennard unexpectedly overtook Grayson Allen as Duke’s most reliable scorer. He averaged 19.5 points a game while reaching double-figures in 35 of the Blue Devils’ 37 games. Kennard is probably a liability on the defensive end, as he has just an average wingspan and is not particularly quick, but he does enough in terms of passing, rebounding and effort to keep himself on the court even if more athletic guards occasionally get the better of him.Quotable: “I think one of the big things for me is that I just need to work on my strength. I think that will help me on both offense and defense.” — Kennard, on whether his defensive ability will hold him back.How he fits: A sophomore! Kennard broke the streak of freshmen and international players, but he may not have to contribute right away since Detroit’s starting lineup is mostly set. Kennard fills a need for depth at shooting guard and can be a reliable scorer off the bench.Marc Tracy: “They’re not booing you, they’re cheering Luuuuuke!” This was true, though. Luke Kennard was increasingly a stalwart for Duke, a team with ostensibly bigger names. Until Duke was bounced by South Carolina in a Round-of-32 upset, Kennard was leading Division I in minutes played. Really good example of playing into a high draft spot.Donovan Mitchell, 6’3” Shooting Guard, Louisville20 years oldMitchell spent his second year of college doubling his scoring average while also improving in rebounds, assists, steals, and blocks. He also added a 3-point shot that had previously been absent. He is probably too small to play shooting guard for many teams, and not quite refined enough to play point guard, but with a work ethic and a tenacious approach to the game, he may be able to overcome those issues. It is not hard to figure out why he was one of the few prospects to participate in the scouting combine, since he recorded the top marks in three-quarter court sprint and standing vertical leap (36.5 inches).How he fits: In a deal reported by The Vertical, the Nuggets traded this pick to Utah for Trey Lyles and the No. 24 pick. The Jazz had a need for a good shooting guard to play alongside George Hill, and moving up to get Mitchell solved that problem immediately.Bam Adebayo, 6’10” Center, Kentucky19 years oldOne of the few bigs in the draft who will not have to immediately add size just to survive, Adebayo had a strong freshman season in which he let his coachability bring him to new heights. He is not a natural on offense, but averaged 13 points a game thanks to an ability to finish at the rim and the intelligence to understand his place in the team’s offense. Whether he can score at the pro level is an open question.Quotable: “My mom never drove. She used to walk to work. I remember just having a basketball in my hands 24/7. When she walked to work, I used to meet her. It [the basketball] was just always with me.” — Adebayo, on realizing in 7th grade that he dreamed of being a professional basketball player.How he fits: The Heat didn’t necessarily need a center with Hassan Whiteside there, but Adebayo could potentially play alongside the dominant big man since he will stay out of his way on offense and take some burden off him on defense.Marc Tracy: Adebayo was injured for a portion of his time with Kentucky, which is probably the only reason he wasn’t drafted in the top 10. And if he is anything like prior Kentucky bigs like Anthony Davis and Karl-Anthony Towns, he will be a good value at this spot.Justin Jackson, 6’8” Small Forward, North Carolina22 years oldThe draft’s highest-rated junior, Jackson averaged 18.3 points a game last season, but more important he improved his long-distance shooting to the point where he shot 37 percent from 3-point range on 7.1 attempts after shooting 29.7 percent on 2.7 attempts a game in his freshman and sophomore years. That may not make him a reliable threat from outside in the N.B.A., but it expanded the view of him as a scorer, which to that point had him limited to midrange shooting with occasional work in the paint.Quotable: “The thing I’ve learned most from him is preparing for everything. Whether that’s before or after a game, in life, always try to be as prepared as you can for whatever situation you’re going to be in. That’s helped me a lot.” — Jackson, on the best advice he got from Coach Roy Williams.How he fits: Practically a veteran in this freshman-heavy draft, Jackson may have officially been selected by the Trail Blazers, but he is on his way to the Kings as one of the two picks the team got in exchange for the No. 10 selection (Zach Collins). Jackson fills a need at small forward for Sacramento and will join De’Aaron Fox in a rookie class for the Kings that is looking very impressive.Justin Patton, 7’ Center, Creighton20 years oldPatton was the Big East freshman of the year thanks to a solid season for Creighton in which he was the team’s second-leading scorer while he paced the team in both rebounds and blocks. He was a remarkably efficient scorer, with an absurd 67.6 field goal percentage, but he’s not the typical big who is afraid to be away from the basket. A late-bloomer in terms of size, he still has a long way to go in learning the finer aspects of being a center.Quotable: “My versatility and ability to put the ball on the floor. That’s always been something I was very good at.” — Patton, on something people have yet to see from him.How he fits: With a pick acquired from the Bulls in the Jimmy Butler trade, the Timberwolves got a center to replace Nikola Pekovic who can possibly allow Karl-Anthony Towns to slide over to power forward.D.J. Wilson, 6’10” Power Forward, Michigan21 years oldHis development took longer than expected, but Wilson averaged 11 points and 5.3 rebounds a game as a junior, which was enough production to get teams interested in the tall and athletic forward who could develop as a solid defender. He has a lot of work to do on offense, and will not be an instant hit, but he could develop into something useful.How he fits: Another tall player for the Bucks, Wilson was a bit of a reach with higher-rated players still on the board, and may take a while to catch up to the team’s developing young core.T.J. Leaf, 6’10” Power Forward, UCLA20 years oldMore of a European big man than a typical power forward, thanks to the tutelage of his father, Brad Leaf, who played internationally, T.J. is a good shooter and a smooth passer who has a working set of post moves to complement those skills. He may not be quite strong enough to succeed in the paint.How he fits: It is disarray in Indiana, with Paul George on the trading block and the team having needs all over the court. Leaf offers an unusual combination of size and skill, but was a reach with more accomplished players like John Collins and Jarrett Allen still on the board.Marc Tracy: Leaf’s father exposed him to the passing-and-shooting European-style big men who are now what every N.B.A. team covets. T.J. now plays the same way. On a team with Lonzo Ball, Leaf led the Bruins in scoring.John Collins, 6’10” Power Forward, Wake Forest19 years oldAn old-fashioned double-double machine, Collins averaged 19.2 points and 9.8 rebounds a game in his sophomore year, putting together a stretch of four consecutive 20-10 games. He showed improvement at the free-throw line over his freshman season and projects as a good rim protector, though he will need to work hard on his fundamentals and stay out of foul trouble.Quotable: “I think I’ve already proved to most teams that I have the ability to score in and around the post. For me, showing them that I can expand my game away from the basket has been big.” — Collins, on his shooting demonstrations during workouts with prospective teams.How he fits: Collins had been the top player available on most draft boards for quite a while. He will bring his scoring and rebounding to the rebuilding Hawks, who just traded away Dwight Howard and are facing the prospect of Paul Millsap leaving as a free agent. He may not win many games for a while, but Collins should be able to put up some numbers in an offense led by Dennis Schroder.Harry Giles, 6’11” Center, Duke19 years oldDespite horrible injuries to both knees limiting Giles’ ability to showcase his ability at the college level, he declared for the draft and will hope that his size, ability to finish at the rim, and his shot-blocking was enough for the Kings to take a chance.How he fits: The Kings used the No. 5 pick on De’Aaron Fox and then turned the No. 10 pick into Justin Jackson and Giles thanks to a trade with Portland that has yet to be officially announced. Giles is by far the biggest risk of the three, but the Kings probably figured they could gamble on his high potential since they have already added two rookies that should make an impact almost immediately.Terrance Ferguson, 6’7” Shooting Guard/Small Forward, Adelaide19 years oldFerguson skipped college to get paid in Australia instead, and in 30 games for Adelaide he averaged 15.1 points a game against older professional players. He excels when playing as a big guard, and is a good defender on the perimeter, but he’s not strong enough to compete as a forward at this point.How he fits: Russell Westbrook may be one of the best players in the game, but a first-round exit showed he needs some help. Ferguson is not really the shooter the team desperately needs but he is a good defender who offers more offense than Andre Roberson, who is a free agent.Jarrett Allen, 6’11” Center, Texas19 years oldAllen is an enormous center, with long arms making him bigger than his 6-foot-11 height, and huge hands (they were measured at a combine-high 9.5 inches) that help him be a top-notch rebounder. Despite the size, he is still considered a serious athlete and has enough mobility, and a solid midrange jumper, to survive in the rapidly-evolving league that has fallen out of love with traditional big men. He could stand to put on some muscle, and is a brutal shooter from the free-throw line, but most of the flaws in his game are fixable if he’s willing to work hard.Quotable: “Personally, I think I can help all of them. Every team has an area that I can offer some help.” — Allen, on what teams he would be able to help.How he fits: Allen had been the top player left on most draft boards for quite a while, so the Nets seemingly got a bargain with the 22nd pick. They may have found a reasonable replacement for Brook Lopez, who left in the D’Angelo Russell trade. If Timofey Mozgov is healthy enough to play, that will take some pressure off Allen to develop immediately.OG Anunoby, 6’8” Forward, Indiana19 years oldAnunoby was a breakout performer in the 2016 N.C.A.A. tournament, but injuries in his sophomore year limited him to 16 games. He was only able to put up 11.1 points and 5.4 rebounds a game in limited minutes this season. It is unclear how much a knee injury will affect him going forward, but at his best he is a good rebounder and a reliable defender who can contribute on offense despite not being much of a shooter.Quotable: “I’m feeling great right now. No pain, doing a lot more. I think it should be October or November, back on the court.” — Anunoby, on where he is at in his recovery from a knee injury.How he fits: The Raptors will have to wait for him to be 100 percent, but he adds some depth to the frontcourt alongside Jonas Valanciunas and may eventually be the player Toronto was hoping DeMarre Carroll would be when they signed him as a free agent. His presence shouldn’t affect the team’s decision-making on Serge Ibaka’s free agency, since they are dramatically different players.Tyler Lydon, 6’10” Forward, Syracuse21 years oldA floor-spacing forward who excels from distance but is not lost when he ends up inside, Lydon has two solid years of college under his belt and does a lot of little things right, which should endear him to coaches. He may not have much to offer on the defensive end other than occasion blocks, but he’s likely ready to contribute offensively immediately.How he fits: Acquired in a reported trade with Utah that will bring this pick and Trey Lyles to Denver in exchange for the No. 13 pick, Lydon will join an innovative offense led by emerging superstar Nikola Jokic. He’s yet another player with size and a wide-range of offensive skill to further bolster an emerging team.Anzejs Pasecniks, 7’2” Center, Gran Canaria (International)21 years oldAn enormous Latvian, Pasecniks will get a lot of comparisons to Kristaps Porzingis, but he plays as more of a traditional big man with little offensive skill at this point in his development, despite being one of the older players in the draft. He runs the court well, and is a good athlete, so he is a project for a team that thinks they can mold him into something that takes advantage of his size.How he fits: The Magic already selected Jonathan Isaac with the No. 6 pick, and while they picked up Pasecniks, there are reports that he will end up in Philadelphia once a trade can be finalized.Caleb Swanigan, 6’9” Power Forward/Center, Purdue20 years oldNot an eye-popping athlete, Swanigan turns the ball over too much, but he rebounds, he passes, he shoots well for a player his size and he makes free-throws. The result of all of that was a sophomore season in which he averaged 18.5 points and 12.5 rebounds a game.How he fits: Portland already added frontcourt help in Zach Collins, but in a nod to that being the team’s biggest weakness, they also used a first rounder on Swanigan, who is all results and very little flash, but should fit in with Collins and Jusuf Nurkic well.Kyle Kuzma, 6’9” Power Forward, Utah21 years oldKuzma can compete as a small forward or as a power forward thanks to good size, good playmaking, solid rebounding and adequate defense. Averages of 16.4 points and 9.3 rebounds a game are more impressive when you consider he played through an ankle injury this season.How he fits: Kuzma will head to the Lakers as part of the D’Angelo Russell trade. He goes to a team that will let him play his way into N.B.A. shape since they are mostly set at forward in their starting lineup. He also offers options if Julius Randle doesn’t live up to his projections.Tony Bradley, 6’10” Center, North Carolina19 years oldBradley still has a long way to go to be a productive player, but he declared for the draft once he was convinced he would be a first-round pick. Teams liked his size, his rim protection and his toughness, but there are concerns about his athleticism and his post game.How he fits: The Lakers did not have a need for this pick with Lonzo Ball and Kyle Kuzma already taken by them, so they are moving this selection to the Utah Jazz in a trade that will reportedly give Los Angeles the No. 30 and No. 42 picks. In Utah, Bradley will be a backup for Rudy Gobert, where he can learn under a player who is among the finest rim protectors in the game.Derrick White, 6’5” Guard, Colorado23 years oldWhite started college as an undersized point guard but is now up to a solid 6-foot-5, which may intrigue teams that missed out on the glut of top point guards in the draft. He averaged 18.1 points and 4.4 assists a game as a senior and is a good enough shooter that teams can be patient as his ball-handling develops.How he fits: It is the Spurs, so even if you have not heard of White, expect him to be good sometime soon. Shooting guard was somewhere the team definitely needed some depth and while White is not particularly tall, he should be big enough to compete at the position and showed a scoring ability in his senior year that will be intriguing on a team that sometimes looked stagnant on offense.Josh Hart, 6’6” Shooting Guard, Villanova22 years oldHart’s senior year at Villanova included averages of 18.7 points and 6.4 rebounds a game, but it’s defense where he tends to make his mark. An excellent rebounder despite not being a large player, Hart passes well, is a decent enough shooter, and comes from a winning program.How he fits: The third 1st rounder of the year for the Lakers, Hart could get on the court thanks to his focus on defense, which could be a nice change if Brandon Ingram continues his slow development in the N.B.A. With the luxury of being able to swing for the fences thanks to the earlier selections of Lonzo Ball and Kyle Kuzma, the Lakers passed over several players who were ranked higher than Hart to get a player they thought had a lot of potential despite some concerns about his athleticism.Want the big sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.