https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/15/fashion/beyonce-grammys-peter-dundas-fashion-label.html
A Designer Launches a New Line With a Little Help From Beyoncé - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Dundas  Peter,Knowles  Beyonce
Feb. 15, 2017
3378
To have Beyoncé as a client is to have the world’s eyes fixed on you.When Peter Dundas, then the creative director at Emilio Pucci, dressed Beyoncé for the Met Gala in 2011, fashion blogs raved. When he designed outfits for her tours, fans showed up wearing homemade versions. When, while creative director of Roberto Cavalli, he created a lemon-yellow tiered dress, movement-permitting enough that she could take a baseball bat to a lover’s car window but glamorous enough to look good while doing so, it spawned parodies and homages. First James Franco was spotted in a matching one. Then Tituss Burgess, in a trailer for the new season of Netflix’s “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt.”“That’s a testimony to when something reaches a large audience — you have the imitations as well,” Mr. Dundas said, speaking by phone from Los Angeles. “Having a laugh is always great.”Things look great at present for Mr. Dundas. After leaving Roberto Cavalli in October, he has now launched, or more accurately, teased, a new collection under his own name. On Sunday evening, when Beyoncé took the stage of the Grammys to perform a medley of songs from “Lemonade,” she was dressed as a gold-encrusted goddess out of an Erté fantasy, in the first outfit to carry the Peter Dundas label. Fifty embroiderers in India had worked to make sure it was ready for her in time, stitching in images of cherubs, lyrics and even her own face.“The response has been really great,” Mr. Dundas said. “Above and beyond anything I expected. It gives a lot of energy for the continuation.”At the moment, the continuation is all. Mr. Dundas announced the creation of his own line, to be helmed along with his partner in life and business, Evangelo Bousis, on Instagram, in tandem with the show. He worked with Beyoncé’s stylist, Marni Senofonte, trading references and inspirations (the Yoruban goddess Oshun, the Venus de Milo, Byzantine crowns and Art Deco) to create the gold gown she performed in, as well as the veil in which she accepted one of her two Grammys. (There was also the red-sequined gown in which she spent the remainder of the night. Beyoncé does not limit herself to one look an evening.)“Beyoncé is so sexy and so beautiful, how do you show that without looking too overt?” Ms. Senofonte said. “Peter has always been able to capture that, in everything he’s done for us.”He is also, she added, one of the few designers whose finished work comes back looking exactly the way he sketched it.Mr. Dundas has a long history of working with the singer. (Even so, he said, there was the particular challenge of designing custom looks for a woman pregnant with twins. “I would see measurements and say that’s impossible,” he said, “and she would show me and say it was very much possible.”) He has created costumes for her tours (including the Mrs. Carter Show tour and her recent Formation tour), and, while at Emilio Pucci, dressed her for the Met Gala in 2011 and her performance at the presidential inauguration in 2013.“I love dressing Bey,” he said. “I couldn’t think of a better first person to wear it.”Mr. Dundas and Mr. Bousis, who split their time between London and New York, are working to formalize the new label and interviewing investors. As of now, they have not disclosed when and where it may be revealed.“We’re still evaluating the different possibilities for how to present ourselves,” he said. “I don’t think it necessarily has to be a traditional fashion show during a traditional fashion week. I love doing fashion shows but I think today you have to have an open mind to what feels fresh and what is close to your own DNA. I think there are different options. Maybe it’ll start with a fashion show and go to something else, but it might go the other way around as well.”It did not escape his notice that the Grammys took place right in the middle of fashion week. Even without a show, he hijacked many of the headlines.