https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/sports/tennis/nadals-strategy-in-paris-body-blows-then-a-knockout-punch.html
Nadal’s Strategy in Paris: Body Blows, Then a Knockout Punch - The New York Times
Tennis,French Open (Tennis),Nadal  Rafael
June 8, 2017
6522
Rafael Nadal is a redirection machine.Nadal has surged into the French Open semifinals again without coming close to dropping a set. He has won 61 percent of his baseline points (250 of 413), a surprisingly high percentage, especially for Nadal, considering he came very close to taking the Australian Open title this year while winning just 52 percent of his baseline points.The key for Nadal from the back of the court in Paris has been his fearsome forehand. This year, his game is all about changing direction, and then thumping a forehand down the line for a winner. Nadal has played five right-handed opponents so far, with points typically building through the Ad court, as Nadal directs his forehand crosscourt — to his opponent’s comparatively weaker backhand side.With this particular strategy, he is initially looking to force a backhand error. If the opponent survives that test, Nadal then uses his lethal combination of spin, power and depth to extract a weaker, shorter ball that he can fire down the line to end the point.The strategy is very much like that of a boxer. Throw the body blows first. Trade groundstrokes. Then look for a knockout shot.Of Nadal’s 61 forehand groundstroke winners, 44 (72 percent) of them have been directed to the opponent’s forehand side. Of those 44, 31 (70 percent) were struck straight down the line. This is the ultimate endgame for Nadal on clay: soften the opponent up with crosscourt blows, and then finish with a single, unanswerable blow.Another key aspect of Nadal’s forehand prowess is to make contact with the winner standing inside the baseline. The image of Nadal is well known. He stands far back to return serve, then runs side to side deep behind the baseline, exhibiting his amazing defensive skills.But the offense typically happens a lot further up the court. Nadal has made contact with 56 percent of his forehand winners while standing inside the baseline. He starts back, but always looks to finish forward.Nadal’s forehand strategy is also predicated on a war of attrition. The average rally length when Nadal finishes the point with a forehand winner so far at Roland Garros this year is seven shots. The average rally length when his opponent hits a forehand winner against him is much lower: 4.6 shots.The Nadal forehand strategy becomes crystal clear when one counts how many rallies that end in a forehand winner actually reach double digits. Nadal has hit a forehand winner in 16 points where the rally length was 10 shots or more. In similar rallies, opponents have hit only two.What is the strategy lesson? If you don’t attack Nadal early in the point, there is almost no chance you will be able to attack him later.Nadal also is more likely to hit a forehand winner when he is serving. Thirty-five of Nadal’s forehand winners (57 percent) have come in his own service games. Over all, Nadal has hit a forehand groundstroke winner 18 times as an approach shot, looking to finish the point at the front of the court. With a winner from there, no volley is required.Nadal’s opponent in Friday’s semifinals is the 23-year-old Austrian Dominic Thiem. Thiem has actually hit more forehand winners than Nadal so far: 83, including 21 against Novak Djokovic in the quarterfinals. For that reason, expect Friday’s match to be decided on the forehand side.