https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/05/arts/television/louis-ck-young-stephen-colbert.html
Stephen Colbert Was ‘Like an Alien’ Before He Was Famous, Louis C.K. Says - The New York Times
C K  Louis,Colbert  Stephen,Fallon  Jimmy,Kushner  Jared,Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Spicer  Sean M (1971- ),Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program)
April 5, 2017
3761
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.Louis C. K. scolded Jimmy Fallon last week for a pretty “dumb thing” he said on “The Tonight Show.” (Mr. Fallon seemed to be saying, over and over, that napping wasn’t a form of sleeping.) This week Louis C. K. aimed his playful scorn at Stephen Colbert. He said the “Late Show” host was just a weird, nerdy kid when the two worked together on “The Dana Carvey Show” years ago.Louis C. K. told the audience what it was like casting both Steve Carell and Mr. Colbert on the “Carvey” show.Trevor Noah pointed out that President Trump has been relying more and more on his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. He’s tasked him with overseeing Middle East policy, responding to the country’s opioid epidemic and reforming the criminal justice system, as well as coordinating the visit this week by Xi Jinping, the Chinese president.Some analysts are saying Mr. Trump favors Mr. Kushner because of his loyalty more than his skill set.“Phenomenal”:Almost as phenomenal:Mr. Colbert follows his Louis C. K. interview with another comic: Steve Martin makes a special guest appearance on “The Late Show” on Wednesday.In the age of Black Lives Matter, James Baldwin seems to have finally taken his place in the top tier of America’s pantheon of seminal writers and thinkers. (The film “I Am Not Your Negro,” in theaters now, is only the most recent example of his relevance.) Now a debate about how to honor his legacy has erupted in southern France. A group of Baldwin lovers is trying to turn the house where he lived for almost two decades into a writers’ retreat, but some members of his family question whether the people spearheading the effort can represent Baldwin’s legacy. Even the lead organizer, who is white, has called herself “an imperfect candidate for this job.”