https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/opinion/what-is-right-for-baby-charlie-gard.html
What Is Right for Baby Charlie Gard? - The New York Times
Life-Sustaining Support Systems  Withdrawal Of,Great Britain,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Gard  Charlie (2016- )
July 6, 2017
2760
To the Editor:Re “Dispute Over British Baby’s Fate Draws In President and Pope” (front page, July 4):Three British courts as well as the European Court of Human Rights have agreed that it is ethically right to override the parents’ wishes and remove life support from their 11-month-old son, Charlie Gard, who has a rare, incurable and ultimately fatal neurological disease. The reason given is that it is in the child’s “best interests” to allow him to die.The Court of Human Rights said “it was most likely Charlie was being exposed to continued pain, suffering and distress” and that exposing him to futile treatment “would offer no benefit, and continue to cause him significant harm.” But this reasoning is open to serious question.It is difficult, if not impossible, to assume correctly that patients with devastating brain damage are truly suffering or in pain. Presumably, if Charlie’s physicians felt that he was in pain, they would treat it aggressively.While there might be other arguments to remove life support in this tragic case — and doing so would not be unethical if the parents chose to do so — the suffering or pain argument does not hold water. And as for what is in this infant’s best interests, society must think twice before arrogating to itself the power to override the assessment of parents and determine that their child is better off dead than alive.KENNETH PRAGER, NEW YORKThe writer is director of medical ethics and a professor of medicine at Columbia University Medical Center.To the Editor:President Trump’s better angels emerged in his tweet defending Baby Charlie, who is afflicted with a terminal disease.But there are many like us, grandparents hoping beyond hope, that our 6-year-old grandson, Adiv, will emerge whole from his battle with a rare genetic neurological disorder. The creativity and devotion of the medical team at Cornell; the 24/7 presence of his father until he was struck by a similar disease; and the love of his mother, siblings and friends, enable Adiv to outlive other victims of his disease.Facing an unknown future, we are, thank God, neither homeless nor indigent, but we are dependent on the willingness of fellow citizens to share extraordinary medical costs through Medicaid.Would President Trump’s angels and his conscience really allow him to deprive millions of fellow citizens of the protection of medical insurance and Medicaid? As we struggle with medical challenges, President Trump, are we really not as worthy as Baby Charlie?(RABBI) SAUL J. BERMAN, SHELLEE BERMANNEW YORKRabbi Berman teaches Jewish medical ethics at Yeshiva and Columbia Universities.To the Editor:It is completely irrational to try to keep Baby Charlie, who has no future, alive. This child will simply exist with no chance for any kind of human relationship.To withdraw all forms of life-sustaining treatment is simply a humane act as well as saving large amounts of scarce medical expenses in the millions that can be used to aid those who can be helped.Keep this child alive to what end? It would be a life artificially kept alive, a miracle of modern technology but a failure as a human reality.To remove life-sustaining treatment from this child is not murder; it is simply an act of kindness and humane sympathy.PETER J. RIGA, HOUSTONThe writer, a former priest, is a theologian.To the Editor:President Trump tweeted that he would be “delighted” to help little Charlie Gard. If only our president demonstrated such enthusiasm for providing health care to vulnerable children here in the United States.Nearly five million children with special health care needs (and over 35 million American children) rely on Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program to get preventive and lifesaving treatments. The cuts to these programs proposed by Mr. Trump and Congress threaten the lives of these children and the livelihoods of their parents.As we consider the ethics of the Gard case, we would also do well to remember that budgets are moral documents.ELLEN SHAW, BROOKLYNThe writer is a pediatric nurse practitioner.