https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/29/us/georgia-governor-rejects-bill-shielding-critics-of-gay-marriage.html
Georgia Governor Rejects Bill Shielding Critics of Gay Marriage - The New York Times
Georgia,Deal  Nathan,Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Freedom of Religion,Religion-State Relations,Law and Legislation
March 28, 2016
3580
ATLANTA —  In a striking defeat to religious conservatives, Gov. Nathan Deal of Georgia said Monday that he would veto a bill intended to protect critics of same-sex marriage.“In light of our history, I find it somewhat ironic that some in the religious community today feel that it is necessary for government to confer upon them certain rights and protections,” Mr. Deal said at the State Capitol, where he had faced intense pressure from the bill’s supporters and critics.“If indeed our religious liberty is conferred upon us by God, and not by man-made government, perhaps we should simply heed the hands-off admonition of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.”Mr. Deal, a Republican in his second term, announced his decision less than two weeks after the General Assembly easily approved House Bill 757, which its supporters named the Free Exercise Protection Act. The vote tallies from March 16, when the House of Representatives and the Senate considered the bill over a stretch of just hours, suggest that Mr. Deal’s veto will probably stand, but Republicans said that they were discussing the possibility of a special session to challenge the governor’s decision.Shortly before Mr. Deal spoke, the outcome of last week’s special legislative session in North Carolina moved into federal court. There, a coalition of individuals and civil liberties groups filed a challenge to a measure that overturned local protections for gay and transgender people. Critics of the law, which bars transgender people from using public bathrooms that do not match the sexes stated on their birth certificates, said the measure violated the Constitution and federal anti-discrimination laws.That lawsuit might stretch for many months, and companies have already warned that the North Carolina law may endanger the state’s prospects for new or recurring business. With his veto here in Georgia, Mr. Deal most likely sidestepped the type of economic backlash that Indiana faced last year after its governor signed a so-called religious liberty measure. (After a national outcry, Indiana officials rewrote the law.) A number of businesses and sports organizations, including Coca-Cola and the National Football League, had warned Mr. Deal, explicitly or implicitly, that a decision to support the bill could jeopardize economic opportunities in Georgia.The Georgia bill was intended to offer protections to faith-based groups if they, absent certain conditions, refused to provide “social, educational or charitable services that violate” their religious beliefs. The measure also would have allowed such groups, without legal repercussions, to avoid hiring anyone whose religious beliefs conflicted with those of the organizations.Gay rights groups argued that the bill would have cloaked discrimination as a form of religious liberty.Mr. Deal’s decision left the bill’s supporters, most of them Republicans, dismayed.“We control all the constitutional offices, we control the legislature, and today, the governor has turned his back on millions and millions of people who have very real concerns about what their religious freedom looks like in the wake of a very fluid legal environment,” said State Senator Josh McKoon, a Republican.Proponents of the bill, some of whom had urged supporters to lobby Mr. Deal, argued that the measure would not have allowed discrimination, and they said that it would have offered necessary reassurance to people frustrated or even frightened by the United States Supreme Court opinion last summer that recognized a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.“The message that’s been sent by this veto is essentially that it’s open season on people of faith in Georgia,” Mr. McKoon said.Critics, who had organized their own campaign, said they were elated at what they believed was a landmark legislative victory that sent a message to lawmakers in the Deep South.“Today, Governor Deal heard the voices of Georgians, civil rights organizations, as well as the many leaders in the entertainment industry and private sector who condemned this attack on the fundamental rights of L.G.B.T. people, and he has set an example for other elected officials to follow,” Chad Griffin, the president of the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights group, said in a statement.Some of the most influential names in Georgia business also welcomed Mr. Deal’s decision. The Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce said Mr. Deal’s “thoughtful deliberation and consideration on this issue has led to an outcome that preserves Georgia’s positive business climate, encourages job growth and sustains our quality of life, and is truly in the best interest of all Georgians.”Critics of the North Carolina bill relied on many of the same themes, even as they turned to the courts. In a lawsuit, filed in a Federal District Court, opponents of the North Carolina law said it “violates the most basic guarantees of equal treatment and the U.S. Constitution.”Graham Wilson, a spokesman for Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina, said in a statement on Monday that “the governor respects the right of any legal challenge; however, he does not respect the continued distortion of the facts by the groups challenging this law and by many members of the state and national media.” Mr. Wilson said the governor, a Republican, would “counter a coordinated national effort to mislead the public” and defend “a common sense resolution to local government overreach.”The bills that moved through the legislatures in Georgia and North Carolina this month reflect the continuing unease about gay rights among many people in the South, where religious values have an outsize influence on public policy. There were also displays of the tensions between residents of the largest cities in those states, in places like Atlanta and Charlotte, and the millions of people who live in more rural communities.In Georgia, the bill that Mr. Deal will veto emerged after weeks of negotiations and warnings, and its swift passage set into motion sweeping campaigns to pressure the governor, who must also reach a decision about a proposal concerning firearms on college campuses. Message logs, obtained through an open records request, showed that Mr. Deal’s office had received thousands of comments about the two measures.Even if lawmakers do not return to Atlanta for a special session, the clash about religious liberty is already poised to re-emerge and might shadow Mr. Deal until his term ends in 2019. Standing outside Mr. Deal’s office on Monday morning, Dave Baker, the executive director of the Faith and Freedom Coalition of Georgia, which supported the legislation, said, “We’re going to continue to press to make sure that we have the same protections in our state law that citizens in other states have.”But the governor, at least on Monday, said he had little reason to approve the proposal that conservatives like Mr. Baker championed.“I do not think,” Mr. Deal said, “that we have to discriminate against anyone to protect the faith-based community in Georgia, of which I and my family have been a part of for all of our lives.”