https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/dining/bep-ga-review-vietnamese-restaurant-chinatown.html
At Bep Ga in Chinatown, It All Begins With Chicken - The New York Times
Restaurants,Bep Ga (Manhattan  NY  Restaurant),Chinatown (Manhattan  NY),Vietnamese-Americans
June 8, 2017
6097
The sign is blank. On either side, the awnings are in Chinese, yellow characters on red and red on yellow, but above Bep Ga, there is only a rectangle of ballerina pink, so pale in the noon sun, it’s almost white.Peer at it long enough, and outlines of old letters start to manifest under the paint: “Bubble Tea, Vietnamese Sandwich, Rice Roll, Dumpling.” Trucks unload along this block of tenements overlooking the skinny island of Sara D. Roosevelt Park in Chinatown, leaving buckets of dishwashing powder and boxes of eggs on the curb. But inside Bep Ga, it is pink and quiet.The restaurant, all two tables of it, opened in March. It follows Bep, which started out in 2009 as a Mondays-only pop-up at a coffee shop in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and now runs five nights a week. Where Bep (which means kitchen) serves a small number of Vietnamese classics, Bep Ga is wholly devoted to chicken (ga). “I like how in Vietnam, you want one dish, you go to one place,” said the chef An Nguyen Xuan, who works the stoves at both spots, Bep Ga by day and Bep by night.A Frenchman, Mr. Xuan spent years in finance before becoming a chef. His parents — his father is from Thanh Hoa in northern Vietnam, his mother from the city then known as Saigon — settled in Paris, home to the largest population of Vietnamese in the West, in the late 1960s.Every dish at Bep Ga begins with chicken poached in a hot bath of ginger (“lots of ginger, the grandmothers say,” Mr. Xuan said), then slipped in the steamer. The poaching liquid becomes the base for pho, loaded with the rest of the chicken (head, feet), spices that blur the line between flavor and fragrance, and enough fish sauce to give it a satisfying undertone of murk.In intensity, pho ga cannot rival pho bo, which is made with roasted beef bones, demands longer simmering and is, at its best, deeply animal. Set that expectation aside: Mr. Xuan’s version is restorative, light in body and frank in flavor, testifying to the use of the more obscure chicken parts. The noodles are supple, the herbs bountiful, cilantro alongside more emphatic culantro. A hard-boiled quail egg discloses a yolk as heavy as cream. On the side come corners of lime, tiny wheels of Thai bad chiles with clinging seeds and Thai basil, to be creased between the fingers before tossing in.Mr. Xuan’s aunt taught him to make com ga Hoi An, a relative of Hainanese chicken rice, with more herbs and heat. Here, it is a sprawl of turmeric-tinged rice — cooked in pho broth with kaffir lime leaves for brightness and a spoonful of chicken fat “for shine,” Mr. Xuan said — and delicate chicken under whorls of pickled red onions, crispy garlic shards and rau ram leaves with their sunny tang. This is pretty, but the alchemy lies in the humble saucer of nuoc cham, chunky with garlic and ginger. It’s meant to be poured over the rice; I mourned the last drop.The two remaining dishes are salads: pho ga kho, essentially pho with the broth on the side, the noodles and chicken veiled in a sauce in which soy is subjugate to fish sauce and ground ginger, and goi ga, shredded cabbage attended by more rau ram and cilantro, nuoc cham and a squeeze of lime that lets in a little pulp. Both are subdued, but refreshing.All may be chased with cafe sua da, coffee black as coal churned with condensed milk until it tastes of smoke and chocolate, and soda chanh, lime and seltzer with a preserved, shriveled plum sinking to the bottom, leaking salt.The space, once a bakery selling banh mi, has its original floor tiles, studded with pebbles. Diners sit on the kind of faded red plastic stools found everywhere in Chinatown. Vines creep down from above. When the door is open, the breeze catches paper napkins and makes them fly.Under the register, a shelf is lined with bottles of fish sauce (“our salt,” Mr. Xuan said) and muoi chanh ot, a potent blend of lime, salt, chile and sugar, made in Nha Trang, on the coast of southern Vietnam. It’s not to be used recklessly; Mr. Xuan said that he would daub a little on the side to eat with rice. But he offers it because Americans “will put sauce with anything,” he said. “Especially hot sauce.”Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.