http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/31/arts/design/31kokoschka.html
Modernity Met With Hope and Despair at the Neue Galerie - The New York Times
Art,Kokoschka  Oskar,Neue Galerie
July 30, 2009
9347
The jewel-box repository of German and Austrian art known as the Neue Galerie has organized “Focus: Oskar Kokoschka,” a nice, small exhibition of works by this Viennese Expressionist. More a taste-whetter than a substantial introduction, it presents six of the early oil-on-canvas portraits that made his reputation before World War I and about 40 works on paper, including book illustrations, drawings, watercolors and posters.The show’s cumulative effect is a feverish mix of hope and despair, an anguished reaction to humanity’s plight in the tightening grip of modernity. That tension is vividly suggested in a wood-paneled room where the portraits preside over a lavish display of tableware, furniture and jewelry designed by Josef Hoffmann, Dagobert Peche, Koloman Moser and other players in the Wiener Werkstätte movement.The presentation of the paintings in this busy environment is annoying at first. They are hung too high, and all the gleaming objects are distracting. You wonder how the paintings would look in a clean, white, well-lighted room.But then you begin to appreciate the paradoxical relationship between the paintings and the designer ware. While the objects suggest the heights to which a new, acutely formal kind of imagination could rise, the paintings bespeak the spiritual anxiety of eminent citizens and celebrities who all too soon would be engulfed by the conflagration of World War I.In the earliest and most compelling works, Kokoschka  (1886-1980) painted the faces of his sitters with small, wiggly strokes and in sickly colors so they look as if they’d had their skin peeled off. With their bony, veiny, weirdly gesturing hands, they resemble extras from a remake of “Night of the Living Dead.” (Oscar Wilde’s “Picture of Dorian Gray” also comes to mind.) The gaunt, hollow-eyed “Martha Hirsch (Dreaming Woman)” projects an eerie, erotic charm, while her male counterparts look like Frankensteinian madmen.With such pictures, Kokoschka made a place for himself near the start of a long tradition of moralizing portraiture — from Ensor to Ivan Albright to Peter Saul — in which grotesque distortion stands for sickness of the soul.Hanging in a separate gallery, the works on paper give a broader, albeit still partial sense of Kokoschka’s career trajectory. The earliest pieces are dreamy, flat, sharply outlined book illustrations that he produced in 1907 while he was involved with the Wiener Werkstätte. Soon he abandoned illustration for Expressionism. Rendered in watercolor and charcoal with a loose, impulsive touch, “Christian Love (Alma Mahler and the Artist)” (1913) depicts Kokoschka as a little boy and his lover, the widow of the composer Gustav Mahler, as a zaftig matriarch in the forest. (Kokoschka’s most famous painting, “Bride of the Wind” (1913), is an allegorical vision of himself and Alma Mahler amid fluttering drapery. It hangs at the Kunstmuseum Basel in Switzerland.)The drawings include charcoal portraits that have much of the snarly intensity of Kokoschka’s paintings and life studies of a scrawny, nude, tweenage girl that call to mind Egon Schiele, albeit with less overt eroticism. In watercolors from the 1920s, Kokoschka painted with wide brushes, creating broad, blurry images of young women. The later decades of his career are not covered by this show.Though radical in its own way, Kokoschka’s art was the opposite of the Cubist and Constructivist works that artists like Picasso, Mondrian and many others were producing in the teens and ’20s. In contrast to their quasi-rational, analytic abstraction, Kokoschka’s paintings asserted energies of the body, the emotions and intuition, as though modern consciousness could be ushered back to a primitive, Edenic state. That impulse reached its zenith in American Abstract Expressionism and faded with the rise of cool art in the 1960s and wised-up Postmodernism in subsequent decades.Then the style was revived by Julian Schnabel and other Neo-Expressionists in the 1980s, and it continues to thrive in various species of grunge art. As long as technocratic empires rule the world, the psychological dissent that Kokoschka helped pioneer will never go away.