https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/sports/basketball/wnba-players-protests.html
In a Pioneering Moment for the W.N.B.A., Players Unite in Protests Over Injustices - The New York Times
Women's National Basketball Assn,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Basketball,Women and Girls,Discrimination
Oct. 15, 2016
3631
After the Liberty’s game against the San Antonio Stars on July 10, five players stood together in the media room at Madison Square Garden, explaining why they had shed their league-mandated warm-ups to wear T-shirts that addressed recent fatal shootings by and of police officers.Forward Swin Cash was asked if the protest was a one-time decision, or if there would be a continued message delivered by players throughout the season, the W.N.B.A.’s 20th. Cash did not have an answer.The actions by the Liberty and a similar display by the Minnesota Lynx the previous night moved players who were nervous and fearful into uncharted territory. Some had prayed for guidance. But as the season progressed, their voices did not waver and players throughout the league expressed a nearly universal agreement that they had a duty to confront the issues of race, violence and policing in America.One month before San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick became the center of a national debate over athletes’ rights to protest at sporting events, W.N.B.A. players provided the opening salvo in a story that has come to dominate the American sports landscape. Entering the season, the W.N.B.A. looked to celebrate the players and moments on the court that defined the league’s first 20 seasons. As it turned out, perhaps no moment better signified the progress that women’s professional basketball has made than this season’s peaceful protests aimed at furthering discussion of the social issues confronting the nation.“When people talk about the summer, you can’t talk about Kaepernick and all these things without talking about the unity of the W.N.B.A.,” said Cash, who was a vice president of the players’ union. “Our diversity and what we stood for and what we continue to stand for, I think it’s bigger than what any league has done.”Ann Meyers Drysdale, a vice president of the W.N.B.A.’s Phoenix Mercury and the N.B.A.’s Phoenix Suns, has witnessed the evolution of female basketball players speaking out about injustice. She played in the Women’s Professional Basketball League — known as the W.B.L. — in the late 1970s and early ’80s, when players rarely voiced their concerns even as the male-dominated ownership sent them to charm school.“Certainly I respect the players and what they are standing up against,” Meyers Drysdale said. “I also think it’s important they’re spoken to, to find out why they’re protesting.”This season, the Mercury were one of three teams fined by the league for wearing black T-shirts as a protest against violence. Those fines were later rescinded. Late in the season and during the playoffs, Mistie Bass and Kelsey Bone of the Mercury took the protest further by kneeling during the national anthem.Meyers Drysdale said that during her career, she was sometimes apprehensive about addressing perceived wrongs facing female athletes.“I think women are a little bit more willing to stand up, but I know women are intimidated still because their jobs are kind of on the line more than the guys are,” she said.Donna Orender, the former W.N.B.A. president who played during all three W.B.L. seasons, said she was “really proud” to see players united in their stand this season.“Playing in the W.B.L., we were grateful to get a paycheck, but we weren’t going to complain about anything,” Orender said. “The threat was always it would be taken away.”Although other N.F.L. players have supported Kaepernick, few of his teammates have joined his protests. Matthew Walker, division chair of sport management and associate department head at Texas A&M, said unified demonstrations by athletes made a greater impact. Camaraderie, he suggested, makes a message resonate with a larger populace.Even as the W.N.B.A. finals between the Los Angeles Sparks and the Minnesota Lynx draw to a close, the issues of the summer remain on the players’ minds. Like most W.N.B.A. players, in the winter Bone competes overseas, where salaries are higher. But she committed to a shortened season in China this year so she could return in January to help deal with the clean water crisis in Flint, Mich.Bone arrived in China on Monday and already feels frustrated watching news unfold in the United States.“I didn’t want my protesting to be looked at something that was disrespectful,” Bone, who has spent almost half her time over the past three years in Turkey and China, said by telephone last week. “I’ve been to several different countries across the world, and the one thing that remains true is I’m an American and I’m proud to be one. I had to ask though, Is America proud of people that look like me?”Cash said that while the W.N.B.A. did not receive the media coverage of the N.F.L. or N.B.A., the significance of the actions by players in her league should not be overlooked. Many of the protests involved teams’ entire rosters, including international players.“This season had the 20th anniversary, Olympics gold medals, the play of Nneka Ogwumike, Tina Charles, but there’s no way you can’t think about the protests and the impact of W.N.B.A. players,” Cash said.For Carolyn Swords, the Liberty’s center and the team’s union representative, this season’s off-court events may have been a watershed moment for the league. “I was astonished by the breadth of response to our protests,” she said from Poland. “Friends called me to say that their co-workers were discussing the latest news. Teammates and friends from my teams overseas sent messages of encouragement. More people were speaking about the W.N.B.A. at that time, and the positive response was incredible.”