https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/11/style/lower-east-side-effortlessly-cool.html
Lower East Side, Effortlessly Cool - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Shopping and Retail,Lower East Side (Manhattan  NY),Coffeehouses,Travel and Vacations,New York City
Nov. 10, 2016
4149
Start south of Delancey Street on Orchard and slowly make your way north. It’s easy to spend a full day here, as there are also numerous galleries. The Tenement Museum (103 Orchard Street) is also not to be missed. It offers excellent tours of the neighborhood that provide an even more immersive experience.If there is such a thing as the perfect housewarming gift, chances are it can be found at Coming Soon (37 Orchard Street). It is part gallery showcasing furniture and home accessories, part great gift store. Favorites include pots by Group Partner ($65), incense burners and ashtrays by Concrete ($90), Regime de Fleurs Perfume ($165 to $325) and the Luxe Domino Set ($115 to $180).Next door but sharing the same address (37 Orchard Street) as Coming Soon is La Petite Morte, or LPM. It specializes in ’90s vintage and designer clothing, but you’ll also find new clothing and accessories from up and coming designers such as Stickybaby and Tzuji. The Stickybaby line is handmade and designed in Brooklyn by Amanda Litzinger and consists of T-shirts and bomber jackets emblazoned with phrases like “Take Me Home,” “Miss You Bad” and “Regular Girl.” LPM is also known to host free concerts outside the shop, giving the stretch of Orchard below Hester Street the atmosphere of a block party.If it’s warm, and you’re lucky enough to see an empty table outside Dudley’s (85 Orchard Street), grab it. You will find an all-day menu with Australian-influenced food like smashed avocado on seven-grain toast ($8) and the Bronte Burger (a seasoned beef patty with sweet chili sauce, mayo and cheese; $12). So take time out and soak up the atmosphere. Should you sit inside, you will find the scene lively and inviting (a high seat along the window allows you to continue to take in the outside). You may even run into Steve Aoki, a part owner.You may not have heard of Claudia Gold, but maybe you know her by her other name, Claw Money. Her graffiti is stamped all over downtown. Her store, Claw & Co. ( 101 Delancey Street), which opened in 2015, mixes fashion and graffiti, much as the Lower East Side mixes the old New York with the new. The hip-hop inspired shop carries her line, Claw & Co., which includes not only apparel like crewnecks, T-shirts and caps but also racks of rare vintage finds like military and denim-patch jackets and lots of fun accessories. You’ll also find collaborations, such as Claw x Fila and Shut x Claw. These are pieces that you won’t find anywhere else. You can also pick up a Claw Money work of art (starting at $500). In keeping with the small-business vibe of many Lower East Side stores, some days you may even see Ms. Gold herself. Receipts for purchases are handwritten, which adds an old-school charm.Affordable and art are two words that aren’t usually linked. At Objectify 139 (139 Essex Street), the two concepts fuse seamlessly. The store has modestly priced prints, books and art objects. The stock rotates often, and while you won’t find Warhols, Basquiats or Avedons here, you will find an impressive array of work from up-and-coming artists and Instagram favorites like Eric T. White, David Brandon Geeting, Rachel Levit Ruiz and Chad Moore. The candles by Maria Candanoza come in shapes like the Statue of Liberty and kissing girls ($15 and up).When the chill starts to settle in, there’s nowhere else I’d rather be than in front of a fireplace. Hotel bars are often disrespected, but the one at The Ludlow (180 Ludlow Street) should not be. With its oversize couches in front of a fireplace, the Lobby Lounge is where I’ll end up on any trip to the Lower East Side once the weather gets cold, and so should you. Cocktails are about $18; there’s never any pressure from the staff to hurry up and leave.It’s refreshing to come upon small, independent stores like Ellen (123 Ludlow Street). While the hours may be inconsistent (the owner, Ellen Koenigsberg, suggests sending her a text before you show up at 917-386-7899), you will always find Ellen herself behind the counter. In what may be the most underrated vintage store in the city, there are beautiful pieces from Céline, Saint Laurent, Sonia Rykiel and more. You’ll find a piece or two you can’t live without, and you’ll be so drawn in by Ellen’s warm personality that you will stay awhile, talking about subjects like how her store has managed to survive since 2002, or her adopted daughter. You can tell she is firmly entrenched in the Lower East Side community by how many people stop in to say hello. That’s what sets the neighborhood apart from many others.You’ll find pieces at the Frankie Shop (100 Stanton Street) that are very affordable. On a recent visit, everything was between $50 and $350. There are streamlined coats, pants and shirts from Rachel Comey and C/meo Collective, shoes from Miista and T-shirts from Bleach (I recently found a Bleach “Chanel” T-shirt here). While big stores with lots of options make me anxious, Frankie is a dream with a small but solid selection, and only one of each item out on the racks. Come here to stock up on your effortlessly cool, downtown-girl pieces.Next door is El Rey Coffee Bar & Luncheonette, at 100 Stanton Street. It has some of the neighborhood’s best coffee and healthy food and is open for lunch and dinner. My favorites here include the chickpea soup ($12) and the avocado pita with hummus, arugula, cucumber and za’atar ($11). Wine and beer are also served. To offset the dose of healthy, one of El Rey’s sister businesses includes the nearby Morgenstern’s Finest Ice Cream (2 Rivington Street), which has a line out of the door no matter the time of year.Just as it seems to be the norm for many boutiques to now double as coffee shops (American Two Shot at 135 Grand Street; Saturdays Surf at 31 Crosby Street) or even bars (the Dressing Room at 75A Orchard Street), Green Fingers Market, 5 Rivington Street, doubles as a plant nursery and clothing boutique. Whether it’s cacti, succulents, orchids, air plants, ferns, rubber trees or snake plants, there are plants to fit any kind of plant owner — even people like me who have thrown out orchids thinking they have died when they have actually just finished blooming and have gone into their resting period. Please wish me luck with my housewarming present to myself: a fiddle-leaf fig that I named Phyllis. Green Fingers also has a great stock of Pendleton shirts, vintage Levi jackets, leather bags and wooden charms. Come for plants and you may also leave with Japanese-made housewares and a handmade light or two.