https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/13/realestate/dangerous-windowsills.html
Dangerous Window Boxes - The New York Times
Windows,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Flowers and Plants
May 13, 2017
8862
Q. I live across the street from a row of six-story brownstones in Park Slope, Brooklyn. The brownstones are co-ops, with multiple apartments. Residents living in many of the units hang window boxes with flowers and plants on the sills of their windows. These clay or concrete containers do not appear to be securely attached to the building, and they stay outside year-round, regardless of the weather or wind conditions. Is it legal and safe for people to leave these planters outside on high windowsills directly over pedestrian walkways and trash containers? A. Last month, an 8-year-old boy was killed in Marine Park, Brooklyn, when he tried to retrieve a ball from a ceramic window box, causing the box to pull loose and fall on him. Although other homes on his block had similar window boxes, it reveals that anything sticking out of a window — not just a flower pot — could be hazardous.“These planters can pose a serious safety risk,” said Deborah B. Koplovitz, a real estate lawyer in the New York office of Anderson Kill.At the same time, window boxes are a common fixture in New York, bringing color and a bit of nature to people’s homes. And it might be difficult to convince the New Yorkers who use them to pull those miniature gardens inside.But whether it’s a flower pot, an air conditioner or patio furniture, property owners are required to properly secure any items placed on their facades or balconies. Anyone with a window box could (and should) hire a handyman to drill or cement them in place. If you see a hazard, call 311.You could also contact the co-ops across the street, which might have policies regarding objects placed on window ledges. “No co-op should permit its residents to place any item on a windowsill,” Ms. Koplovitz said.Write letters to the boards and the managing agents of those co-ops, expressing your concern for the safety of the general public.