http://www.nytimes.com/1998/06/25/business/communications-giant-the-deal-with-cable-deal-at-t-makes-move-to-regain-empire.html
COMMUNICATIONS GIANT: THE DEAL; WITH CABLE DEAL, AT&T; MAKES MOVE TO REGAIN EMPIRE - The New York Times
TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC,AT&T CORP,LIBERTY MEDIA CORP,FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION,HINDERY  LEO J JR,ZEGLIS  JOHN D,KENNARD  WILLIAM E,MALONE  JOHN C,ARMSTRONG  C MICHAEL,APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES,CABLE TELEVISION,COMPUTERS AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS,MERGERS  ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES,TELEVISION,INTERNET AND WORLD WIDE WEB,PRICES (FARES  FEES AND RATES),TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
June 25, 1998
9812
Correction AppendedThe announcement yesterday that AT&T would acquire the nation's No. 2 cable television company, Tele-Communications Inc., for $31.8 billion in stock drew an initially favorable response from regulators but a concerned reaction on Wall Street.In the most ambitious result yet of Congress's 1996 deregulation of the telecommunications industry, the two companies said they wanted to begin selling digital phone and data service over the cable system by the end of next year but would not commit yesterday to a firm timetable. The companies said they would begin to bundle and jointly market each other's existing services even before the deal closes.The hectic pace of communications mergers has raised hackles recently on Capitol Hill and at the Federal Communications Commission. But yesterday the commission's chairman, William E. Kennard, reacted favorably to the AT&T announcement, suggesting the deal could enhance competition and thus force down prices for long distance and high-speed Internet access.''These companies bring some synergies that are quite compelling,'' Mr. Kennard said. ''They're not direct head-to-head competitors, but both of them have said in the past that they want to offer a package of services to consumers. If through the combination they are able to bundle services and be more competitive with the incumbent providers, it's a good thing.''Even the regional Bell companies that would face competition from AT&T in areas served by TCI's cable system found something positive in the deal -- another argument for why the Government should let them into the long-distance market.But investors were less enthusiastic. AT&T's shares fell $5.375 yesterday, to $60, on fears that the company's stock would be diluted in the deal and on concerns that AT&T may be moving rashly. Investors were also turned off by the complexity of the deal and its undetermined financial details.Under terms of the deal, AT&T will also assume TCI's debt of about $11 billion. The $31.8 billion purchase price also does not include $5.5 billion in cash AT&T will pay to repurchase shares AT&T issued to TCI in a previous transaction and to acquire its interest in a cable-modem venture that delivers high-speed Internet data over television cables. But in announcing the deal, the companies added these amounts to their calculation of the value, for a total of $48.3 billion.Combining AT&T's financial muscle and nation-spanning communications network with Tele-Communications' wires into millions of homes would create a communications behemoth with a reach unrivaled since AT&T spun off its local phone operations in 1984 in an antitrust settlement with the Federal Government.But it is only the most recent of several behemoth-creating marriages in the communications industry. Since the Telecommunications Act of 1996 was signed two years ago, huge mergers have become almost common, with the seven local Bell phone companies consolidating into four and the MCI Communications Corporation agreeing to be acquired by Worldcom Inc. for $37 billion.But while it will be some time before current TCI customers can plug their television cables into telephones, a deal between AT&T and TCI could be the first to make a concrete difference in how everyday consumers purchase and use communications services.By giving AT&T an electronic path into millions of homes and apartments, an acquisition of TCI could create vibrant competition in the market for local telephone service for the first time since AT&T's predecessor was led by Alexander Graham Bell.Tele-Communications and its affiliates have run wires past about a third of the nation's households. So even after acquiring the cable giant, AT&T would not necessarily have a clear path into the local market for most of the nation's consumers. And it is not entirely clear how difficult and expensive it will be to adapt Tele-Communications' cable networks, which are generally designed to transmit information in only one direction, for use in two-way data and voice communications.But that is what C. Michael Armstrong, who took over as AT&T's chairman just last November, intends to do.The financial imperative for AT&T is clear. Among the company's largest expenses today are the fees it pays to local phone companies for beginning and ending long-distance calls. By owning an end-to-end network, AT&T could avoid those charges for people who used TCI's cable system for phone service.But yesterday Mr. Armstrong emphasized the deal's potential to increase competition.''If this doesn't deliver on the promise of the Telecom Act of '96, I've just missed my bet,'' he said in an interview yesterday.Mr. Armstrong said he was sending a message to the Bell companies: ''We intend to show up.''Using telecommunications jargon for the local phone business, he added, ''Also, many in Washington had some doubt that AT&T was serious about pursuing the $110 billion local exchange business, and this mutes that.''The regional Bell companies, meanwhile, used the deal as an opportunity to press regulators to allow them into the long-distance market.''In light of this news, Federal regulators need to act swiftly to drop restrictions that are keeping U S West from fully serving customers in markets such as long distance and data networking,'' U S West Media Group, which, like TCI, is based in Denver, said in a statement.Mr. Kennard said that his review would hinge on the details of the companies' plans, which he had not yet seen. But his positive comments were a far cry from the reaction AT&T received the last time it tried to break into local markets through acquisition.After news emerged last summer that AT&T was engaged in negotiations to acquire SBC Communications Inc., the Bell company that provides local phone service in much of the West, Reed E. Hundt, then the commission's chairman, called such a deal ''unthinkable,'' in part because it would begin to resurrect the old AT&T.Mr. Kennard, in contrast, called AT&T's acquisition of TCI ''eminently thinkable.''TCI had a preliminary agreement to be acquired by the Bell Atlantic Corporation in 1993, but that deal fell apart, in part because of antitrust concerns. The two common communications pipelines into homes are the phone wire and the cable television wire. If it had acquired TCI, Bell Atlantic would have eliminated a potential competitor.Gene Kimmelman, co-director of the Washington office of Consumers Union, a consumer advocacy group, said the deal held promise, but he added a note of skepticism about AT&T's stated intention of competing for local phone business.''This is the deal that is the make-it-or-break-it for the Telecom Act,'' he said. ''This is the first proposal for cross-industry competition.''Using industry shorthand for telephone calls, he added: ''Every effort to use the cable wire for telephony has been less than successful. I'm concerned that AT&T maybe is buying the cable cash cow and milking it for profits and hoping -- hoping -- that it can be used for telephony.''Tele-Communications is in the first phase of a $1.7 billion project to upgrade its networks to offer advanced service, though many experts believe that the investment will not be sufficient to allow TCI to deliver both telephone and data services.What is more, John C. Malone, TCI's chairman, said his company had little chance to buy the asset it needed most for the future: a widely recognized brand in telephone service.Under the terms of the deal, holders of TCI's series A stock would receive 0.7757 share of AT&T. Holders of the cable company's series B stock, including Mr. Malone, would receive 0.8533 share of AT&T stock.AT&T's shares closed on Tuesday, before news of the acquisition emerged, at $65.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, making the deal worth $50.71 for each share of TCI -- a better than 31 percent premium over TCI's closing price on Tuesday of $38.6875.AT&T expects to finish the deal in the first half of next year. The company said the acquisition would dilute its earnings for the first two years after the deal's completion but would add to its earnings after that.Mr. Malone would join AT&T's board and remain chairman of Liberty Media, TCI's programming subsidiary, which would remain under his control.AT&T would fold TCI's cable assets into its consumer business and spin off that unit as a new subsidiary. John D. Zeglis, AT&T's president, would become chairman of the consumer unit, while Leo J. Hindery Jr., TCI's president, would become the unit's chief operating officer.Mr. Armstrong would remain at the helm of AT&T, which would retain the company's network operation and the units that sell services to business customers and to other communications carriers.The idea for the merger was planted last November when Mr. Armstrong visited Mr. Malone to discuss ways the two companies could work together, the two men said.The two companies began final negotiations just last Tuesday, they said. Several days ago, a small team of executives from both companies holed up with their advisers to hammer out the details of an agreement, said a person close to those talks. By Monday, Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Malone were spending long hours at the offices of AT&T's Manhattan law firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, in face-to-face meetings hashing out final details.Earlier this month, AT&T held preliminary discussions with America Online Inc., the nation's leading provider of access to cyberspace, about a merger, but the on-line service was not interested in such a deal.Mr. Armstrong sidestepped a question about whether the collapse of the America Online talks was related to the beginning of the TCI  discussions.In addition to the Wachtell law firm, AT&T was advised in the negotiations by Goldman Sachs & Company and by Credit Suisse First Boston. Tele-Communications was advised by Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette and by the law firms of Baker & Botts, Sherman & Howard and Richards, Layton & Finger.Correction: June 29, 1998, Monday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Thursday about an agreement by AT&T to acquire Tele-Communications Inc. misidentified a regional Bell telephone company that was quoted on its reaction. It is U S West Inc. (U S West Media Group, the former cable unit of U S West, was spun off earlier this month and is now an independent company called Mediaone Group Inc.)