http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/12/sports/tennis/wimbledon-2015-serena-williams-defeats-garbine-muguruza-and-closes-in-on-grand-slam.html
Wimbledon 2015: Serena Williams Defeats Garbiñe Muguruza and Closes In on Grand Slam - The New York Times
Tennis,Williams  Serena,Muguruza  Garbine,United States Open (Tennis),Wimbledon Tennis Tournament
July 11, 2015
1940
WIMBLEDON, England —  Three years had passed since the Wimbledon champion’s trophy was last in her possession, so Serena Williams had some fun with it.She held it high on Centre Court with both strong arms (classic). She balanced it on her head like a book in a 1950s charm school and walked with it (unconventional). At one stage, she even playfully declined to hand it back to a Wimbledon official (understandable).“At the beginning of the year, this is the one I really wanted to win,” Williams said. “So that was the first thing and the main thing on my mind.”Winning Wimbledon — which Williams has now done six times — is normally a sufficient thrill on its own. And Saturday’s 6-4, 6-4 victory over Garbiñe Muguruza of Spain, which made the 33-year-old Williams the oldest Wimbledon singles champion of the Open era, was a remarkably pleasant contrast to her dark and disorienting experience at the All England Club a year ago.In 2014, she lost in the third round in singles here and then stumbled around the grass in a doubles match before retiring. She cited a virus, yet was going through a difficult off-court period as well, according to her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou.But Williams has proved nothing if not resilient during her increasingly phenomenal career — coming back from major health scares, downward tennis spirals, family troubles and tragedy, particularly the 2003 murder of her half sister Yetunde Price.Williams’s mental strength, at this stage, looks much more like a fact than a subject of debate, and she will now need to test its limits again as she chases the ultimate tennis achievement — the Grand Slam — at this year’s United States Open.“You better ask all your questions about the Grand Slam, because it will be banned soon,” she said, with a laugh, to a small group of reporters shortly after her victory.With her victory at Wimbledon, Williams now holds all four Grand Slam singles titles — the so-called Serena Slam, which she also achieved over two seasons in 2002 and 2003.But neither that run nor this one was the true Grand Slam, which requires a player to win the Australian Open, the French Open, Wimbledon and the United States Open in the same calendar year.Only three women have managed it: Maureen Connolly in 1953, Margaret Court in 1970 and Steffi Graf in 1988.For the first time since Graf, someone will arrive at Flushing Meadows with the first three legs of the Grand Slam completed. Unlike Graf, a German, Williams will be playing at home.“It would be really good to have this opportunity to go into New York being American with that amazing New York crowd,” Williams said. “Hopefully, people would be really cheering me on, to like push me over the edge and give me that extra strength I need to go for this historic moment.”At this stage, history has become Williams’s major muse and only real rival. She is now 39-1 this season, although she has had plenty of anxious moments. The latest was her third-round match at Wimbledon, when she was two points from defeat against Heather Watson, a fast and unseeded British player with a clever game plan.But Williams righted herself and then defeated three former No. 1 players — her sister Venus, Victoria Azarenka and Maria Sharapova — before overcoming Muguruza, a tall and big-hitting 21-year-old appearing in her first Grand Slam final who had upset Williams in the second round of last year’s French Open.Despite the routine score line this time, victory did not come easily. Muguruza displayed few signs of nerves and plenty of clarity of purpose in the opening phase of the match and took a 4-2 lead in the first set before Williams grabbed the momentum.Williams double-faulted three times in the opening game and lost her rhythm again as she served for the title at 5-1 in the second set.With the Centre Court crowd strongly behind the underdog Muguruza, the Spaniard managed to break Williams twice in a row, saving a match point in the ninth game, and getting back on serve to 5-4.But the rally (and the rallies) would soon end there as Muguruza lost her serve at love, missing a forehand wide on Williams’s second match point.It was unclear initially whether Muguruza planned to challenge the call, but the ball had landed clearly out. No challenge came, and the chair umpire Alison Hughes haltingly pronounced the words: “Game, set and match, Miss Williams.”“It was hardly her best match of the tournament, but it was the match she needed to win, and she did it,” said Mouratoglou, who has helped Williams win eight of the past 13 major singles titles since joining her team before Wimbledon in 2012.As for the Grand Slam, he said: “She’ll have stress at the U.S. Open. But she showed again here that even when she had stress, she managed to shake free and win. It’s one of her characteristics.”Muguruza handled the moment rather well herself on Saturday, attacking Williams’s second serve effectively. But she has little margin for error in her big game. Though her fighting spirit remained intact, the errors eventually piled up, and like so many talented women before her, she had few clever answers to Williams’s world-class power serving, even if Williams has served much better. (She finished with eight double faults and a 54 percent first-serve percentage.)“In warm-up, my serve was off,” Williams said. “I just didn’t feel my serve today.”But she still hit enough spots and corners under great pressure to break the family tie with Venus Williams, who has won five singles titles at the All England Club. Venus watched from the players box on Saturday as her sister held aloft the sterling silver platter known, by chance, as the Venus Rosewater Dish.There are no plans to rename it the Venus and Serena Rosewater Dish, but the Williamses have combined to win 11 of the past 16 titles here.Plenty more tennis dignitaries were in the Royal Box on Saturday, including Martina Navratilova, who was a younger 33 when she won the last of her nine Wimbledon singles titles in 1990.As for Muguruza, she was gracious and teary in defeat, becoming particularly emotional when she received an extended ovation at the trophy ceremony.“I wondered, ‘Have I made all these people feel what I felt on court?’ ” she said.This was Serena Williams’s 21st Grand Slam singles title, putting her just one behind Graf, whose 22 are the best of the Open era, and three behind Court, who won a total of 24.Williams won her first in 1999 at the United States Open, fighting her way through a draw of her elders to create quite a surprise. But she has endured like few athletes in any sport, although she has company in her own sport with Roger Federer playing in Sunday’s men’s final at age 33 against Novak Djokovic.“If I can do it, God knows he can do it,” Williams said.But only Williams still has a chance at the ultimate tennis achievement this year: the Grand Slam.“There’s a reason,” she said, “that it’s been 27 years since it’s been done.”