https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/us/politics/republican-debate-donald-trump.html
Preparing for Debate, Republicans Test Themselves Against Donald Trump - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Trump  Donald J,Republican Party,Bush  Jeb,Fox News Channel,Walker  Scott K,Cruz  Ted,Rubio  Marco,Carson  Benjamin S,Perry  Rick
Aug. 1, 2015
7397
Jeb Bush is spending hours in sessions from Florida to Maine preparing policy answers for Thursday’s first Republican debate — but he is also being mindful to avert any display of disdain for the man he will stand beside, Donald J. Trump, who has infuriated Mr. Bush by criticizing Mexican immigrants. (Mr. Bush is married to one.)Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin is crafting one-minute answers and 30-second rebuttals in case Mr. Trump or others continue attacking him as a flip-flopper on Common Core education standards and as a weak jobs creator, testing lines in mock debates with advisers playing Mr. Trump and other candidates.Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Ben Carson are determined not to let the debate on Fox News become about Mr. Trump, practicing to steer the conversation to national security, entitlement reform and health care — which might implicitly plant doubts about Mr. Trump’s knowledge on those issues.These intensive preparations, described by advisers and friends of the top candidates, reflect the preoccupation that many Republican candidates have with Mr. Trump, whose taste for lacerating his rivals with provocative language has made him the most unpredictable force on a presidential debate stage in years. Mr. Trump has risen quickly to the top of several polls, challenging or erasing the long-held leads of Mr. Walker in Iowa and Mr. Bush in New Hampshire, and he enters the debates with far greater name recognition and personal wealth to draw on than the other candidates, who cannot afford to leave the debate in a diminished state.“No one knows how much the moderators are going to ask us about Donald Trump, let alone what Trump is going to say, so the preparations are warped by the Trump factor,” Mr. Carson said in an interview. “What most of us will be looking for is any opportunity to turn the conversation into something meaningful, rather than about one man.”Most of the Republicans are wary of taking on Mr. Trump because he seems impenetrable, yet they also do not want to look weak in the face of his attacks. The best they can hope for is that Mr. Trump will attack their biggest perceived opponent; one ally of Mr. Cruz, who is running hard in Iowa, said he would like nothing more than for Mr. Trump to continue criticizing the Wisconsin record of Mr. Walker in hopes of weakening him in Iowa.“You only attack the king if you can kill him; otherwise you leave him alone, because the king will kill you,” said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster. “So the candidates better have something good ready if they come after Trump. Or they might try to find a way, in their responses, to remind Trump of something that another candidate said that really bothered him.”Stagecraft is critical, especially for Mr. Bush and Mr. Walker, since they are expected to be standing on either side of Mr. Trump and often in the same camera shot. Advisers say they are confident that Mr. Bush and Mr. Walker will not scowl or stiffen in reaction to anything Mr. Trump says, but rather will seek opportunities to look and sound more presidential than he does — and like the strongest opponent to Hillary Rodham Clinton, should she become the Democratic nominee.With an unusually large lineup of 10 candidates expected onstage, there will be less time to speak than usual; most campaigns assume that each candidate will get eight to 10 minutes to answer questions and make rebuttals. Every minute spent talking about Mr. Trump is a minute they will lose to sell themselves to skeptical voters. (The participants will be announced sometime after polling analysis is completed on Tuesday evening; the Fox News hosts Bret Baier, Megyn Kelly and Chris Wallace will be asking the questions.)But there may be an exception to the strategy of minimizing Mr. Trump as a focal point, advisers say. Should he say something highly inflammatory — for example, about Mexicans again — candidates may look timid if they fail to call him out.Rick Perry, the former governor of Texas, may have the most at stake — if he qualifies for the debate, an uncertain prospect given that Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio could edge him out for a spot based on the polling. Mr. Perry has described Mr. Trump as a “cancer on conservatism,” even challenging him to a pull-up contest, and knows he needs to stand up to Mr. Trump on the debate stage as well.“Anyone who will offer a criticism of Trump elsewhere but is afraid to do it to his face will do themselves great damage,” said Steve Schmidt, a Republican strategist, recalling the damage that Tim Pawlenty, a former governor of Minnesota, did to himself in 2011 after declining to repeat his criticisms of Mitt Romney’s health care policies to Mr. Romney’s face in a debate.Mr. Trump, in an interview, laughed when asked if he was preparing for Thursday’s debate. While he said that his years of television work, “The Apprentice” on NBC, gave him great comfort in front of the camera, he also contended that he had an advantage over most of his rivals: He would be speaking his mind at the debate rather than trying to recall prepared answers or angling for ways to score points against a rival.“I am who I am, and I think that will be good enough,” he said. “You know, I may have far more money than anyone, but I see the people who go out and spend money on pollsters, and they can’t make a comment until they test it. I don’t have a pollster, and I’m not going to have a full-time pollster. If pollsters are so good, why is Hillary doing so badly in the polls?”Actually, Mrs. Clinton leads other Democratic candidates, but she has far weaker numbers, as does Mr. Trump, when it comes to overall favorability, honesty and trustworthiness.Most of Mr. Bush’s practice sessions have involved sitting around tables with advisers and focusing on policy rather than standing at a fake podium and coming up with zingers aimed at Mr. Trump. People close to Mr. Bush expect him to be attacked for his positions on the Common Core standards and his support for a pathway to legal status for illegal immigrants. Whether the attacks come from Mr. Trump or anyone else, Mr. Bush intends to coolly deliver a ready response, highlighting what he sees as his consistency on these issues in an implicit jab at rivals like Mr. Rubio, who backed away from an immigration overhaul plan he once supported in the Senate.Given that polls are being used to decide who is invited to the early debates, uncomfortable or gaffe-filled performances carry more danger than in past races.“First and foremost, a candidate has to have confidence in their message and their ability to deliver that message, because viewers will see that — or they’ll see when you don’t have that,” said Stuart Stevens, a Republican strategist whose firm is advising Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey.Among the leading Republicans, Mr. Walker has gone to some of the most elaborate lengths to prepare over the past month, having advisers standing at podiums and playing Mr. Trump and everyone else who could be on the debate stage. Advisers say Mr. Walker is ready to respond to questions or rivals’ attacks against him as insufficiently conservative on illegal immigrants (he once favored a path to citizenship for them) and abortion (he ran a re-election ad last year saying he supported legislation that would leave the decision to a woman and her doctor.)An unexpected challenge for the candidates: finding a convincing stand-in for Mr. Trump who can authentically channel his bravado and testiness (not to mention his hair, advisers said).Yet preparation is only one part of a successful debate strategy. Mr. Schmidt noted that the most devastating lines from past debates were the result of listening closely and waiting for the right moment to attack — like Ronald Reagan’s “there you go again” comment to Jimmy Carter in 1980 and Lloyd Bentsen’s “you’re no Jack Kennedy” riposte to Dan Quayle.“The best thing is for candidates to be ready to strike at opportunistic moments as soon as they hear them,” Mr. Schmidt said. “There are very few instances where candidates score points by striking first; it’s more often the counterpunch. If Trump starts brawling at Jeb, Jeb has to listen for the best way to hit him back, and hit him hard.”