https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/theater/oslo-broadway-review.html
Review: ‘Oslo’ Fills a Large Canvas in a Thrilling Production - The New York Times
Theater,Rogers  J T,Sher  Bartlett,Oslo (Play)
April 13, 2017
6755
Some works of art cry out for large canvases. Though it is sparing in its use of scenery or anything approaching spectacle, J. T. Rogers’s “Oslo,” an against-the-odds story of international peacemaking, is undeniably a big play, as expansive and ambitious as any in recent Broadway history. So it is particularly gratifying to announce that it has been allowed to stretch to its full height in the thrilling production that opened on Thursday night, directed with a master’s hand by Bartlett Sher.This rich drama of quixotic politics fills to the bursting point its capacious new home at the Vivian Beaumont Theater. Staged (and admired) last summer at the Lincoln Center Theater’s smaller downstairs space, the Mitzi E. Newhouse, “Oslo” has now become the colossus it was always meant to be, while giving an even sharper focus to the urgent behind-the-scenes intimacy at its fast-beating heart.The production’s newly enhanced scale matches the aspirations of not only the play’s author but also its protagonists. That would be Terje Rod-Larsen and Mona Juul, the (very real) Norwegian husband and wife who in the early 1990s initiated the series of secret peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization that led to the Oslo Accords, a fleeting moment of bright hope in an enduringly dark realm of conflict.Terje (embodied here by Jefferson Mays) was then director of the Fafo Institute for Applied Social Sciences; Mona (Jennifer Ehle), an official in the Norwegian Foreign Ministry. Their approach in bringing together two seemingly irreconcilable sides was rooted in the theory of gradualism (as opposed to the more traditional model of totalism), which is far less academic and more emotional, and common-sensical, than it sounds.As Terje explains early in the play, “This new model — my model — is rooted not in the organizational but the personal,” with each point of contention addressed separately, by specific individuals as themselves, not as the forces they represent. Or, as he later says, “It is only through the sharing of the personal that we can see each other for who we truly are.” This process shapes not only the negotiations depicted here but also the play itself.How Mr. Rogers — who met with Mr. Rod-Larsen and Ms. Juul during his obviously extensive research — puts theory into practice is a marvel of both expository efficiency and exciting showmanship, by which a big picture is revealed to be a composite shot of precisely defined, imperfect individuals. “Oslo” features a vast cast of characters, of widely varied temperaments and ideological stripes. Yet somehow, by the end, this production’s vital ensemble makes you feel you have come to know every single one of them.In the opening scene, at a dinner party at the couple’s apartment in which gossip is the stuff of history books, Terje describes meeting the Israeli statesman Yitzhak Rabin, who at first comes across as a sputtering clown. “Six months later, Rabin is prime minister, and I am a fool,” says Terje. “Why? Because I saw one side of this man and assumed this meant I knew all of him.” Overcoming such assumptions gives “Oslo” its shape and substance.Michael Yeargan’s set is stark, a paradigm of luxuriously austere Scandinavian chic. Personalities are what furnish the rooms of “Oslo,” much of which takes place in a chateau 30 miles south of its title city. Furniture is summoned — and in many cases, directly pushed — into place by Terje and Mona, whose roles in the political and dramatic schemes of things are established at the very beginning.Terje is the theorist, and a pontificator with a peacock streak; Mona is the expediter and interpreter — not just for the diverse participants in the peace talks, but for the audience as well. In both capacities, she exudes a quiet but commanding serenity that defuses tensions and restores perspective.It is she who orients us in place and time, which shift (and even double back) frequently; her sustaining clarity within a labyrinthine narrative mirrors that of Mr. Rogers. Everyone falls a bit in love with Mona. And with Ms. Ehle, a two-time Tony winner, doing some of her most subtle and refined work ever, this seems inevitable.Terje is portrayed with more ambivalence, and Mr. Mays (who won his Tony for the one-man tour de force “I Am My Own Wife”) expertly locates both the fatuous egotism and the heroic intelligence in his character. We understand exactly why, in moments of high stress, Terje becomes the butt of hostile jokes among the negotiators; we also grasp completely why these same men insist on his continuing to lead the talks, even when a more official and high-ranking moderator is proposed.The actors who embody the participants in a two-steps-forward, one-step-back process that mostly (and improbably) occurred over a concentrated nine months are all first-rate. Each is giving a finely detailed performance — and in some cases, several performances — that feels both true to and larger than life. That includes everyone from T. Ryder Smith as the Norwegian foreign minister Johan Jorgen Holst to Henny Russell as the adored cook at the chateau, whose waffles become a sword of peace.But there are at least four people onstage, in addition to Terje and Mona, to whom you come to feel as close as if you had been talking to them one on one. Among the Israeli characters, they are Yair Hirschfeld (Daniel Oreskes, who later shows up as the foreign minister Shimon Peres), a jokey, anxious professor of economics from Haifa, and Uri Savir (an explosively animated Michael Aronov), a Foreign Ministry director who seems to see himself as a cross between Mick Jagger and James Bond.On the Palestinian side, there’s Hassan Asfour (Dariush Kashani), a blustery delegate who wittily finds a Communist aperçu for every occasion. As the P.L.O. finance minister Ahmed Qurie, Anthony Azizi delicately charts a progression from chill impenetrability into warm accessibility that mirrors the great arc of the play.“Between our peoples lies a vast ocean,” he says near the beginning of the talks. And Mr. Sher — aided by an ace team that includes Donald Holder (lighting) and 59 Productions (projections) — makes inspired use of the considerable breadth of the Beaumont Stage to convey the distance that must be crossed. So as we watch the unlikely friendship that develops between Mr. Azizi’s and Mr. Aronov’s characters, we are pulled, as it were, from a long shot into a close-up, a proximity that feels both hopeful and heartbreaking.At the play’s end, we are told that this cross-cultural friendship survived. The peace engendered by the Oslo Accords did not. Yet at a moment when virulent divisions of race and religion plague not only the Middle East but also countries around the world, including ours, this resonant drama echoes E. M. Forster’s dictum, “Only connect,” and wonders why — oh, why — that can’t be possible.