https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/world/americas/venezuela-protests-green-cross-volunteer-medics.html
Green Cross Volunteer Medics, on the Frontline of Venezuela’s Protests - The New York Times
vis-multimedia,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Volunteers and Community Service,Caracas (Venezuela)
July 13, 2017
1166
A teenage boy lay on the ground after a clash with the police.“Médico, médico!” a young man screamed through the thick fog of tear gas at a protest in Caracas, Venezuela.The medics he was calling for, known as the Cruz Verde or Green Cross, have become a regular fixture at violent clashes between opposition protesters and government forces. At least 90 people have died since the demonstrations began in April, and the volunteer medics have found themselves treating a range of injuries, from major head wounds to minor scrapes.Video showed Green Cross volunteers crowding around the injured teenager, Neomar Lander, 17, and carrying him out of the worst of the fighting.Mr. Lander later died.But group organizers say they treat dozens of patients daily, and believe that the first aid they deliver has been crucial in saving lives. The Venezuelan economy’s near-collapse has devastated medical facilities and supply lines, and limited state-run emergency care at demonstrations, according to the group.The volunteer group of young doctors and medical students has become a symbol of how Venezuelans are trying to replace critical government functions.Federica Davila, a medical student who helped found the Green Cross, said demonstrators surround the volunteers before every protest, singing and praying over them for protection.“It’s an amazing experience because we start walking around with the team, and while we walk people just start clapping and crying,” Ms. Davila said.Ms. Davila and a handful of medical students from Central University of Venezuela organized in 2014 to respond to earlier anti-government demonstrations, where they saw the need for additional volunteers on top of the local ambulance corps.“A group of friends decided that they wanted to help,” Ms. Davila said. “What better way than just do what we know to do and practice every day?”She said that the group’s cross was a nod to the well-known symbol for first aid, but that members had chosen “Green” for a name to differentiate themselves from the International Red Cross.They are organized and methodical when they arrive at each protest, Ms. Davila said, setting up several “zones” where they can assess people in need of care.“We walk with the protesters accompanying them, we walk all together in one line,” Ms. Davila said. “Each leader of the group has a flag, and we wave it so people can see where we are if they need medical attention.”The group doesn’t align with a particular political party, though some of the authorities see them as part of the protest movement. The volunteers sometimes find themselves at odds with the police and the National Guard members deployed to protests.She said some of the authorities let them help people “and even sometimes let us assist them when they get injured,” Ms. Davila said. “But others are very violent and make us leave.”Ms. Davila described how in the earliest days of the protest, the volunteers had to use their nails to pick debris from wounds. “We had nothing, not even gauze,” she said.The group has donation boxes set up in public spaces, and support from Venezuela and other countries has kept supplies well stocked.Many of the volunteers are students in their 20s. Dozens of qualified doctors have also joined their ranks, which number around 200 in Caracas. They have smaller affiliated groups that attend protests around the country.But getting in the middle of the protests is dangerous, and several Green Cross medics have been injured. At least one was killed while volunteering.Paúl René Moreno, 24, died after he was hit by an armored vehicle at a protest in the northwestern city of Maracaibo in May.During his funeral, his fellow volunteers laid their white and green helmets on his coffin.With the demonstrations drawing huge crowds and occurring so frequently, risks to the medics have grown.“It’s very hard to go to the streets, and as you go to help those people, you are at risk as well,” Ms. Davila said. “You are exposed as well. You are in the middle of this, kind of, crossfire.”