https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/movies/santoalla-review.html
Review: Modern-Day Conflicts Creep Into Idyllic ‘Santoalla’ - The New York Times
Santoalla (Movie),Missing Persons,Verfondern  Martin,Pool  Margo,Becker  Andrew,Mehrer  Daniel,Documentary Films and Programs,Movies
July 18, 2017
6159
Galicia is a mountainous region in northwestern Spain, nestled above Portugal. In the late 1990s, a Dutch couple, Martin Verfondern and Margo Pool, post-hippie types looking to carve out a place for themselves far from the modern-day rat race — to get off the grid, as some say today — found an isolated village there whose name, Santa Eulalia, has over the years been compressed to Santoalla. At the opening of this documentary with the same name, directed by Andrew Becker and Daniel Mehrer, it’s plain that things did not work out as planned for the couple: Home-video footage shows Martin approaching a neighbor who calmly raises the handle of a farm tool and brings it down on the camera, causing the recording to go black.Ms. Pool narrates this chronicle, talking about how her husband disappeared in 2010, as Mr. Becker and Mr. Mehrer jump around in time. The couple are initially portrayed as sympathetic. Their only neighbors in Santoalla are the Rodriguez family, made up of the quiet patriarch, Manolo (he’s the camera smiter); the chatty, religious wife, Jovita; and their two sons, the voluble Carlos and Julio, who suffers from mental disorders.At first these families get along reasonably well. As the filmmakers introduce more archival footage, Mr. Verfondern comes across as less laid-back as he initially seemed. His plans for developing his land into some utopian retreat often run afoul of the Rodriguezes, and a dispute over shared forest areas leads to a courtroom battle. Soon the families aren’t even speaking to each other. Then Mr. Verfondern vanishes, seemingly without a trace. At this point the narrative deliberately goes slack as Ms. Pool weighs her options. “Santoalla” ends with the mystery solved. The threads that remain hanging imbue this peculiar story of paradise lost with a tragic resonance.