https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/arts/television/donald-trump-jr-lawyer-alan-futerfas-late-night.html
Donald Trump Jr.’s Choice of a Lawyer Raises Eyebrows on Late Night - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J Jr,Brzezinski  Mika,Scarborough  Joe,O'Brien  Conan,Noah  Trevor (1984- ),Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Daily Show with Trevor Noah (TV Program)
July 12, 2017
463
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.The story of the moment is Donald Trump Jr.’s meeting last year with a Russian lawyer who, he was told, had information that could damage Hillary Clinton. He agreed to the meeting in an email exchange that’s now been made public.He’s retained a lawyer of his own. And the president’s son is not this lawyer’s first colorful defendant, as Conan O’Brien and Jimmy Kimmel explained on Tuesday.Stephen Colbert and Trevor Noah each insisted that the latest developments should settle the question of whether the Trump administration colluded with Russia.Mr. Colbert held up a smoking gun. Mr. Noah went with a somewhat different metaphor.Joe Scarborough and Mika Brzezinski of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” who were subjected to personal insults by the president on Twitter last month, spoke to Stephen Colbert on Tuesday. Mr. Scarborough, a former congressman, revealed that he was leaving the Republican Party.Conan O’Brien’s recurring Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin characters were interrupted by a loose-lipped third party.Beyoncé and Jay-Z named their babies ... what?John Oliver, whose “Last Week Tonight” took a break last week, joins Stephen Colbert on “The Late Show” on Wednesday. Those two will probably be breaking the Trump Jr. news all the way down.Our TV critic has some feel-good advice: Have you been warned that the series you’ve been meaning to binge-watch only gets good in the second season? Well, there’s nothing wrong with starting there.