https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/05/arts/television/lifetimes-unreal-recycles-a-producers-dark-experiences.html
Lifetime’s ‘UnReal’ Recycles a Producer’s Dark Experiences - The New York Times
Television,Shapiro  Sarah Gertrude,Lifetime Television,Reality Television,Single Persons,The Bachelor (TV Program),UnReal (TV Program)
July 2, 2015
1343
After six seasons of working as a producer on “The Bachelor,” Sarah Gertrude Shapiro was facing a breakdown. “I wasn’t thinking suicide, but I was close,” she said. “I wanted to burn my whole life down.” Ms. Shapiro, an avowed feminist, had somehow become an expert at manipulating female contestants behind the scenes to get “good television” for the reality dating show.“I used to think the cost of my soul was $5 million,” she said, curled up on a velvet divan at the Trump Soho hotel. “Like, what would it cost me to torture another woman? But it turns out it was $1,500 a week without benefits.”Now Ms. Shapiro has her own TV series, “UnReal,” a dark new Lifetime drama set behind the scenes of a fictional “Bachelor”-esque reality show called “Everlasting.” And the protagonist, a producer named Rachel Goldberg (Shiri Appleby) is afflicted by a similar self-loathing. The first time we see her, she is lying on the floor of a limousine at the feet of a group of women in ball gowns while wearing a fraying T-shirt emblazoned with the slogan  “This is What a Feminist Looks Like.” “We wanted Rachel’s conflict to be right on her chest,” said Ms. Shapiro, who created the show with Marti Noxon, a veteran television writer and producer.“UnReal” is imbued with conflict not only because of its subject matter, but because it is on Lifetime, a network not typically known for complex or gritty dramas. Though the cable network has dabbled in original scripted series, it has been known recently mostly for unauthorized biopics of pop stars and campy movies about nostalgic TV properties like “Saved by the Bell.”“It definitely feels like a turning point show for us,” said Rob Sharenow, Lifetime’s executive vice president and general manager. “We haven’t really had characters like this on air.”Two of those characters, Rachel and Quinn (Constance Zimmer), work together to produce “Everlasting” and are constantly making murky moral choices in the process. Both women seem trapped; they are making a product that they know exploits and demeans women, yet they are exceedingly good at it.“We genuinely are writing two strange female antiheroes,” said Ms. Noxon, who started out as a writer for “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” and went on to write and produce shows including “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Mad Men” and “Glee.” “They are both in a mental prison where they think they have no other choice than to do this job.”The job, as depicted in “UnReal,” is a nefarious one, and Ms. Shapiro and Ms. Noxon said that it does not stray too far from what actually happens on reality dating shows. (Some viewers might find it entertaining on Monday nights to watch “The Bachelorette” on ABC and then switch over to Lifetime for “UnReal.”) According to Ms. Noxon, who was interviewed in the hotel room with Ms. Shapiro, producers routinely “starve out” the contestants, cutting them off from the outside world to create heightened tensions.. “The women are hot-boxed,” she said. “They are put in a house with no media, no music, no books, no magazines, nothing. Just each other and booze. So they literally develop a Stockholm syndrome, where the only way you get out is through the bachelor. By the end a lot of these women think they really are falling in love.“No matter what their intent was, they come in thinking they are just there to play the game, and then by the end they are out of their minds,” Ms. Noxon said.Ultimately, “UnReal” is a morality play about reality television, and whether it is helping or hurting the people who are caught up in it as contestants or as behind-the-scenes employees. In dealing with domestic abuse, eating disorders, infidelity and girl-on-girl crime, it might be the closest thing to complexity in “television for women,” to use Lifetime’s own catch phrase, that the network has produced.The channel did address dark issues in the past, but in the form of heavy-handed made-for-TV movies about kidnapping and teen pregnancy. That’s why Ms. Shapiro was doubtful about bringing the show to Lifetime to begin with. “My dream would have been to pitch to HBO or Netflix,” she said. “I spent a lot of time asking other people in the industry if I should take the deal, because Lifetime scared me.” (Potential viewers appear to share their hesitation. While the show has been lauded by many critics, the first and second episodes drew 815,000 and 707,000 viewers, fewer than the show’s lead-in on the Lifetime schedule, the comedy-drama “Devious Maids,” which had more than one million viewers both weeks.Ms. Shapiro grew up in Santa Barbara, Calif. She earned her bachelor’s degree at Sarah Lawrence College and then took a job as an assistant to the photographer and director David LaChapelle in Manhattan. Weary of life in New York, she returned to California and landed a job with the WB reality series “High School Reunion.” Ms. Shapiro’s contract bound her to work on any reality shows created by Telepictures.When executives informed her that she would be transferred to ABC’s “The Bachelor,” produced by Telepictures, for its third season, her initial reaction, she said, was: “Hell no. I told them, sorry, but I am a feminist. This would be my nightmare. Then they asked me to read the fine print.”After six seasons with that show, Ms. Shapiro was despondent. “My morality became unnavigable,” she said. She managed to get out of her contract and moved in 2005 to Portland, Ore., where she landed a job in advertising . On the side she wrote a short film and then applied to the American Film Institute’s Directing Workshop for Women for assistance to make it.The result was “Sequin Raze,” which laid much of the groundwork for “UnReal” and was screened at the South by Southwest Festival in 2013. In the film, a dating-show producer (Ashley Williams) tries to manipulate an ousted contestant (Anna Camp) into having a meltdown on camera. The film is depressing and twisted, a tone Ms. Shapiro hoped to maintain when a Lifetime executive, Nina Lederman, contacted her after seeing it to talk about a possible series.Thinking that Ms. Noxon would be an ideal co-creator, Ms. Lederman pressed her to watch the short film. During what Ms. Shapiro and Ms. Noxon described as a “perfect first date” over sushi, they agreed that the only way to tackle the subject of reality TV was with a show that did not pull punches. “Women want to watch the dark stuff,” Ms. Noxon said.The television writer and producer John McNamara, a friend, “gave us the best review,” she said. “He said, in the future, when anthropologists are trying to figure out what we were now, they will look at reality shows to see who we thought we were. But they will look at your show and say, that’s who we really were.”