https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/13/world/what-in-the-world/newfoundland-is-big-on-bologna-fried-stewed-and-baked-as-a-cake.html
Newfoundland Is Big on Bologna: Fried, Stewed and Layered Like a Cake - The New York Times
Maple Leaf Foods Incorporated,Meat,Cooking and Cookbooks,Bologna,Newfoundland (Canada),The Bologna Cookbook (Book),Phillips  Kevin (Author)
Jan. 13, 2017
8216
From the start, Newfoundland has been all about fish. European settlers didn’t go there for the scenery (rugged) or the weather (always changing, often dreadful) — they went for the cod, and later the haddock and other valuable fish that were once so abundant on the nearby Grand Banks.But for as long as anyone can recall, the island’s favorite food has had nothing to do with the sea. Newfoundlanders have a voracious appetite for, of all things, waxed bologna.Canada’s largest bologna producer, Maple Leaf Foods, estimates that the province’s 530,000 residents put away 4.2 million pounds of bologna a year.In much of North America, bologna is one of the least respected of processed meats, seen as fit only for a ho-hum sandwich. But in Newfoundland, it is an all-purpose protein suitable for any meal.“If I don’t have bologna in my fridge, I’ve nothing to eat,” said Kevin Phillips, the author of “The Bologna Cookbook.”Mr. Phillips, a retired army warrant officer, grew up in a family that operated a general store in Cape St. George, a fishing town where hardly any of the catch was eaten locally; it all went for salting and sale to bring in cash. Families tended to be very large and feeding them wasn’t easy. Newfoundland’s terrain and climate are poor for farming and meat brought from afar was expensive.All that made “the big stick,” a 9.7-pound bologna sausage encased in wax, the shop’s big seller. Less affluent families would settle for a large chunk each week rather than a whole stick, Mr. Phillips said, and “every now and then an old lady came in for slices.”Though the tradition seems unassailable, Maple Leaf still feels a need to actively promote bologna in Newfoundland. It even has a mascot, the pink and cylindrical Mr. Big Stick, who appears regularly in parades and at community events.Ask Mr. Phillips to describe in words how Maple Leaf bologna tastes, and he is stumped. But whatever the flavor is, it hasn’t changed since he was a child, he says, though the texture has. “I’m not going to say rubbery, but it was a dense texture,” Mr. Phillips said of the old stuff. “Now it’s a little bit softer.”He amassed 400 bologna recipes for his cookbook, twice as many as he could use. Bologna-wrapped stuffed prunes with havarti and bologna cake made the cut; so did bologna stroganoff. But that is not what people usually do with their big sticks. The most frequently served dishes, he said, are bologna stew and fried bologna with mashed potatoes, green peas and gravy.He offered a stern word of caution: “Never, ever, ever try to cook bologna with the spice curry. It will not work. You will spit it out, it’s horrible.”