http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/24/us/shooting-at-lafayette-la-movie-theater.html
Gunman Kills 2 and Himself at Movie Theater in Lafayette, La. - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Grand Theater (Lafayette  La),Lafayette (La),Houser  John Russell (1955- ),Johnson  Jillian (1982-2015),Breaux  Mayci Marie (1993-2015)
July 23, 2015
7875
LAFAYETTE, La. — Three people died and nine were wounded after a gunman opened fire in a movie theater here on Thursday night, officials said. The gunman was among the dead.The shooting took place shortly before 7:30 p.m. during a showing of the comedy “Trainwreck” at the Grand Theater in Lafayette, a 16-screen multiplex on one of the busiest thoroughfares in the city. Chief Jim Craft of the Lafayette Police Department said that police officers entered the theater complex while the shooting was going on. When they got inside the theater, they found the gunman dead of a self-inflicted wound.Chief Craft said three people were killed, including the gunman, and the wounded had been taken to nearby hospitals. The conditions of the wounded, he said, “range from non life-threatening to critical.”The victims ranged from teenagers to people in their 60s, the chief said. One victim was in surgery, he said, and “was not doing well.”Chief Craft, who described the crime scene as “pretty chaotic,” said a handgun was used in the attack. He did not release the name of the gunman, and he said it was too soon to know his motive.The chief said the police had determined the identity of the gunman and found that he had a criminal history, “but it looks like it’s pretty old.” Addresses in Louisiana and several other states had been found for the gunman, the chief said.Not sure that he is from Louisiana, Chief Craft said, “I think he’s from out of state.”Sgt. Brooks David of the Louisiana State Police said the gunman was a 58-year-old “lone white male.”The investigation inside the theater was briefly halted late Thursday night when the police found the gunman’s vehicle and found what they said was a “suspicious package” inside. A bomb squad was called, and early on Friday, the vehicle’s windows and trunk were blown up. The car was to be towed from the lot.Sergeant Brooks said a suspicious backpack and other small items found in the theater were being examined. A robot was brought in for use in the investigation.The dead would not be removed from the theater, Sergeant Brooks said, until it was determined that it was safe for investigators and the coroner to enter.An apartment complex behind the theater was evacuated as a precaution, the police said.Tanya Clark, 36, who was at the theater to see another movie, was at the concession stand with her three children when she saw people run screaming through the lobby.“I thought it was just a joke,” said her son, Robert Martinez, 17. “People were screaming.”He said that a woman in her 60s ran past them shouting that she had been shot in the leg. He saw blood pouring down her leg, he said.Ms. Clark said she grabbed her 5-year-old daughter and ran, leaving her purse and phone on the concession stand counter.“I just grabbed her arm,” she said. “In that moment, you don’t think about anything. That’s when you realize that your wallet and phone are not important.”Paige Bearb, a moviegoer who was in a theater next to the one where the shooting took place, said, “We could hear people screaming next door.”An alarm soon sounded, and she ran outside.“As we were running for our car, I could see people with gunshot wounds and one lady bleeding from the leg with a T-shirt wrapped around it,” she said.At the request of the police, a spokesman for Lafayette General Health, which runs a number of hospitals in the region, declined to comment on Thursday night.Col. Michael Edmonson, the superintendent of the Louisiana State Police, said there was no information to indicate any relationship between the gunman and any of the victims. He said that roughly 100 people were inside the auditorium at the time of the shooting.Chief Craft said the Lafayette Police Department had increased security at other theaters in the city as a precaution.President Obama was briefed on the shooting while enroute to Africa for a visit, the White House said, and asked aides to keep him updated on the situation.Gov. Bobby Jindal, who traveled to the scene of the shooting on Thursday night, described it as “senseless.”“When these kinds of acts of violence happen in a movie theater, when there’s no real good reason why this kind of evil should intrude on the lives of families who are just out for a night of entertainment, I know a lot of us are horrified and shocked,” Mr. Jindal said.He added: “This is an awful night for Lafayette. This is an awful night for Louisiana. This is an awful night for the United States.”Mr. Jindal said that he had spoken to two teachers who were wounded in the shooting. One “literally jumped” on top of the other to shield her, he said, potentially saving her life. One of the teachers who was shot in the leg “had the presence of mind to pull the fire alarm and save other lives” after she had been wounded, he said.Lafayette, an oil and gas hub, has about 125,000 people and is Louisiana’s fourth-largest city. It is on Interstate 10 about two hours west of New Orleans and one hour west of Baton Rouge, the capital.