https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/nyregion/in-new-york-new-jersey-and-connecticut-heading-to-the-polls-after-a-dejecting-campaign-season.html
Voting in the New York Region After a Dispiriting Campaign  - The New York Times
Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  Governors,State Legislatures,United States Politics and Government,Grimm  Michael G,Astorino  Robert P,Cuomo  Andrew M,Foley  Thomas C,Malloy  Dannel P,Connecticut,New Jersey,New York State
Nov. 4, 2014
7752
With voters in a sour and surly mood after a campaign season many found dispiriting, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York appeared poised to win re-election, although probably not with the sweeping mandate he had once hoped for, and Gov. Dannel P. Malloy of Connecticut remained locked in a tight struggle with his Republican rival.Setting up the prospect of a bitter end to an already bitter contest, the Connecticut vote was complicated by reports of polling irregularities in Hartford, a city that is a key base of support for Mr. Malloy, a Democrat.The governor filed a petition to keep the polls open an extra hour, arguing that scores of people had been turned away in the morning because polling stations were not ready to open. A judge ordered that two polling places be kept open an extra half-hour.In addition to the selection of the governors in the two states, voters across the region went to the polls to decide a host of other contests that could shift the balance of power both locally and nationally.The issues driving the campaigns have ranged from serious concerns about public corruption and environmental policy to more esoteric debates, like whether the nation should return to the gold standard.The unhappy national mood, over concerns about issues like the economy and national security, was evident in dozens of interviews with voters in the New York area.Even as campaigns spent millions of dollars to blanket the airwaves with ads, many people said they were voting out of a sense of duty rather than excitement.“It’s going down, the whole country,” Margaret Casey, 84, said outside a polling station in Howard Beach, Queens. Ms. Casey took a dim view of the current political leaders. “They are filling their pockets with money and telling you lies,” she said.Still, she voted.“I’m going to do my best to keep going, to do the right thing,” she said. “Got to have some honest people out there.”In one of the most closely watched races in the region, voters on Staten Island and in a part of Brooklyn were deciding if they would send  Representative Michael G. Grimm back to Congress, even though he is facing trial on a 20-count indictment on federal fraud charges. Mr. Grimm, a Republican who became a subject of public derision after threatening to throw a television reporter from a balcony in the Capitol, has maintained his innocence and is scheduled to go on trial in February.His Democratic challenger, Domenic M. Recchia Jr., has run a campaign plagued by gaffes and missteps.Suzette Salmeron, who was voting in the St. George neighborhood of Staten Island, said that despite the poor campaign run by Mr. Recchia, she could not vote for Mr. Grimm.“We have a lot of issues on Staten Island, and we need someone we can trust,” she said. “How can you support an individual under that much investigation?”But others said that they would stick with Mr. Grimm.At New Dorp High School, some voters said they were still impressed by his performance after Hurricane Sandy and said he was no worse than many others in Washington.“I know he’s a crook, but he’s good in the office,” Ali Ramovic said. “Plus, we’ve had sleazier politicians in this borough.”In New York’s race for governor, Mr. Cuomo, the Democratic incumbent, had maintained a healthy lead against his Republican challenger, Rob Astorino, the Westchester County executive, in a race distinctly lacking in drama.Rosemary DeGennaro, 57, an assistant principal at a Long Island school and a Republican, said she had voted for Mr. Cuomo, but without enthusiasm.“Not that I like him either,” Ms. DeGennaro said. But she said she felt that Mr. Cuomo had not done a bad job and she did not want to risk change.Mr. Cuomo, who arrived with his girlfriend, Sandra Lee, to vote at the Presbyterian Church of Mount Kisco, in Westchester, sought to play down expectations for an overwhelming victory.“I can’t tell you how many people come up to me and say: ‘I’m not going to vote. You’re so far out ahead,’ ” he told reporters.Mr. Astorino kept up his criticisms of Mr. Cuomo on Tuesday as he cast his ballot at an elementary school in Hawthorne. He said the Cuomo campaign had shown itself to be “vile,” “desperate” and “panicked.”Mr. Cuomo ran a relatively sedate campaign, which was cause for concern among Democrats worried that a low turnout by the party faithful could bolster the chances of Republicans running for Congress.The New York State Senate was also in play, with Democrats hoping to take back control of the legislative body, giving them even more control in deciding the agenda in Albany.Perhaps the most compelling race in the region was run in Connecticut, where Governor Malloy was engaged in a fierce battle with Thomas C. Foley, the Republican challenger.The two men faced off four years ago, and Mr. Malloy narrowly prevailed, by about 6,400 votes out of 1.46 million ballots cast.This election was expected to be similarly close, and the early problems at polling stations in Hartford were particularly worrying for Mr. Malloy. “In a community where we get 90 percent of the vote, that’s concerning,” he said.The importance of the race to Democrats was highlighted when President Obama called in to a Connecticut radio show on Tuesday afternoon urging people to go back to the polls if they had been unable to vote earlier.The two candidates’ personal animosity was palpable at times as they sparred in a long series of debates.The governor has tried to cast Mr. Foley, a former private-equity executive from Greenwich, as detached from residents’ economic anxieties and in thrall to right-wing interest groups, like the National Rifle Association.But despite strong job growth in recent months, Mr. Malloy continued to be received tepidly by many voters.The opportunity for Republicans to retake Mr. Malloy’s seat in a deeply Democratic state drew national party leaders like Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey to Connecticut.In New Jersey, Democrats have had a hold on the Senate seats since 1978, and Senator Cory A. Booker, a former Newark mayor, looked likely to extend that record.His Republican challenger, Jeff Bell, called for a return to the gold standard, a message that did not seem to have resonated widely with voters.