https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/world/americas/brazil-president-temer-corruption.html
Brazil’s President, Michel Temer, Embroiled in New Corruption Scandal - The New York Times
Corruption (Institutional),Politics and Government,Brazilian Democratic Movement Party,Lima  Geddel Vieira,Temer  Michel (1940- ),Brazil,Calero  Marcelo
Nov. 25, 2016
5005
RIO DE JANEIRO — A new corruption scandal was engulfing the fledgling government of Brazil’s president, Michel Temer, on Friday after a former minister in his cabinet accused him of exerting pressure to assist a top political ally in a property deal.As Brazil’s political class reels from a period of extraordinary turmoil, the latest scandal is shaping into the most acute crisis facing Mr. Temer, 75, since he rose to power six months ago after the impeachment of his predecessor, Dilma Rousseff.The former minister, Marcelo Calero, who was in charge of culture, told federal investigators that Mr. Temer had pressured him to overrule a heritage preservation measure halting the construction of a luxury tower in the northeastern city of Salvador. The ally of Mr. Temer, Geddel Vieira Lima, who held the title of government secretary, had invested in an apartment in the development. Mr. Vieira Lima submitted his resignation on Friday morning, apologizing and explaining in a letter to Mr. Temer that he was leaving the government for the good of the nation.Leading opposition figures in the capital, Brasília, said on Thursday night that they would seek the impeachment of Mr. Temer over the claims. Mr. Temer’s office acknowledged in a statement that he had discussed the matter on two occasions with Mr. Calero, but insisted that the president had merely sought “technical” solutions to the problem.Reports that Mr. Calero had secretly recorded his discussions with Mr. Temer shook the political establishment, opening the possibility that the Supreme Court could begin an investigation. Mr. Temer was already on the defensive over claims by Ms. Rousseff that her ouster was an illegal usurpation of power.“If the recording shows that the president acted for the private interests of a minister against the public heritage, then the Temer presidency is over,” said José Roberto de Toledo, a columnist for the newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo.The scandal comes as outrage grows over efforts by allies of Mr. Temer in the scandal-plagued Congress to grant amnesty to themselves and to other legislators in corruption cases involving political campaigns. Mr. Temer himself was found guilty of violating campaign finance limits in a case that could make him ineligible to run for office for eight years.Mr. Temer’s Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, a centrist group that is tilting to the right, is also under fire after the arrest on graft charges of leaders including Eduardo Cunha, the powerful former legislator who engineered Ms. Rousseff’s impeachment, and Sérgio Cabral, the former governor of Rio de Janeiro who helped the city land the Summer Olympics.Signaling the potential for even more turmoil, pressure is growing on another leader in Mr. Temer’s party, Renan Calheiros, the head of the Senate, who is battling multiple claims of corruption including a case in which he is alleged to have allowed a lobbyist for a construction company to pay child support for Mr. Calheiros’s son from an extramarital affair.Mr. Temer and his party were allies of the leftist Workers’ Party for more than a decade before breaking this year with Ms. Rousseff and her mentor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who was president for eight years, starting in 2003.Mr. Vieira Lima, the official with the investment in the real estate venture in Salvador, was already under investigation in connection with a corruption scandal around the national oil company, Petrobras. Mr. Temer had insisted that the inquiry should not prevent Mr. Vieira Lima from remaining in his cabinet, where he held one of the most influential positions in the executive branch.Mr. Temer was already grappling with low approval ratings as his administration struggles to repair an ailing economy mired in its most severe downturn in decades. Various ministers in his cabinet, including an anticorruption minister and a planning minister, have resigned after secret recordings showed they tried to thwart federal graft investigations.