http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/25/theater/reviews/25bran.html
Romeo and Juliet - Theater - Review - The New York Times
Theater,Shakespeare  William,Public Theater,Ambrose  Lauren,Greif  Michael,Wendland  Mark,Holder  Donald,Welch  Christopher Evan,Manheim  Camryn,Friedman  Michael,Sosa  Emilio,Isaac  Oscar,Cristofer  Michael,Pendleton  Austin,Henry  Brian  Tyree,Alladin  Opal,Odera  Owiso,Colman  Dan,Bartenieff  George,Ekulona  Saidah  Arrika,Acme Sound Partners,Trujillo  Sergio,Romeo and Juliet (Play)
June 25, 2007
2016
A battle of the elements is being pitched at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, where “Romeo and Juliet” opened last night in a terrifically exciting new production, starring Lauren Ambrose as a Juliet truly to die for.On the one hand there’s water, lots of it, in the form of a big, baffling pond that stretches across the stage, presumably for symbolic purposes, something to muse upon in perplexity as the actors slosh through it in rubber boots. On the other hand there’s the fire that rages in the blood of every performance, a conflagration so consuming that it threatens to turn the show into a collective funeral pyre.Great news: Fire wins.Most of the advance word about this four-alarm retelling of the ultimate tragic love story, directed by Michael Greif, has centered on the body of water (70 feet round, one and a half inches deep) that has been made on the stage by the designer Mark Wendland. It looks great, reflecting twilight and moonlight as evening bleeds into night. But to be honest, it doesn’t make much sense for either dramatic or poetic purposes.For maritime Shakespearean endeavors like “The Tempest,” “Twelfth Night” or even “The Comedy of Errors,” turn on the taps all you want. But for “Romeo and Juliet,” a play famous for its imagery of flame and lightning?I’m not going to pretend that Mr. Greif justifies his watery conceit. But he doesn’t let it bog down the real, dangerous business of the title characters’ love either.Too often in recent years the Public Theater’s Shakespeare in the Park has been overwhelmed by high-concept approaches that fit its casts like strait-jackets. (Remember the tsunami-shaped stage for “Twelfth Night” a few years ago?)In “Romeo and Juliet”  all the performances are so focused and purposeful that no oversize puddle is going to deter them in their zealous course.For what Mr. Greif and his cast have achieved, and what most productions of “Romeo and Juliet” fatally lack, is a sense of infectious, instinctive urgency. Blood is boiling in everybody’s veins, whether from love or hate or an addling cocktail of the two, and it breeds impulsive action.Led by Ms. Ambrose and Oscar Isaac as a Juliet and Romeo whose theme song would never be “You Can’t Hurry Love,” this production advances with hotheaded speed, even when it’s standing still.“Too rash, too unadvis’d, too sudden, too like the lightning,” words with which the perceptive Juliet characterizes her newly discovered passion, apply throughout the show. It’s a tempo that inevitably makes for bad ends and wonderful drama.Mr. Greif and his designers — who include Emilio Sosa (costumes) and Donald Holder (lighting) — have turned Verona into a cross-cultural watering hole that suggests Venice mixed with Marrakesh and Seville, a place of open-air produce markets (convenient for food fights) and flamenco dancing (good for checking out the erotic chops of potential partners).Quick-Temper Town would be a good nickname for this restless, bustling Verona. Mr. Greif plants storm signals even in the prologue, spoken not with the usual cosmic sadness by an anonymous narrator but in high dudgeon by Mercutio (Christopher Evan Welch), Romeo’s wild and crazy best friend.Then immediately the stage is alive with fighting, as the rival teams of Montague and Capulet pelt one another with oranges. When Escalus (Timothy D. Stickney), prince of Verona, steps in to tell his rowdy citizens to calm down and make nice, he’s wasting his breath. The plague that the dying Mercutio will later wish on the town has already infected it: a contagion of high spirits and fierce mood changes that is usually the lot of adolescents but has here spread to all generations.Ever since Franco Zeffirelli conquered countercultural youth with his swoony 1968 film version, the orthodox approach to “Romeo and Juliet” has been as a portrait of pure, victimized young love, the kind pop balladeers always whine about. But Mr. Greif, who did very well by doomed romance in directing the landmark musical “Rent,” sees his leading characters not as victims of their culture but as reflections of it.It is clear in this context that when Romeo and Juliet instantly fall for each other, and then hightail it to the wedding chapel, they’re just doing what comes naturally in Verona. Haste — a word that crops up a lot in the text — is the watchword for everyone’s behavior.Since a man walking too fast is apt to stumble, as Romeo’s foolish mentor Friar Laurence (Austin Pendleton) points out, speed can be as much an occasion for comedy as for tragedy. Mr. Greif adroitly milks both aspects of the equation, while showing us how one segues into the other.He doesn’t let velocity get in the way of clarity or emotional depth. Nor is anyone playing just the poetry here. Mr. Welch’s galvanizing Mercutio steers the famous Queen Mab speech from lyrical whimsy into the reefs of real madness, shadowed by sexual jealousy.As Juliet’s Nurse, the excellent Camryn Manheim (late of the series “The Practice”), talks fast and bawdily because it’s a way of pushing through the darkness in life, and she makes it clear that such pragmatism comes at a personal price. Mr. Pendleton’s Friar Laurence is an overgrown Boy Scout who can’t wait to fix things. And a brilliant Michael Cristofer finds a bipolar ferocity in Juliet’s father that makes his scenes with her, unusually, among the strongest in the play.Mr. Isaac, last seen in the park as Proteus in “Two Gentlemen of Verona” two years ago, is sweetly and convincingly in thrall to his Juliet, a clumsy, overgrown puppy with the loyalty of a one-owner dog. But it’s Ms. Ambrose who gives the production its devastatingly torn heart.Best known as the petulant Claire in “Six Feet Under,” Ms. Ambrose, who recently appeared on Broadway in “Awake and Sing!,” makes Juliet into a compelling bundle of mixed instincts. Even at 14, she’s the smartest person in Verona, capable of analyzing exactly what’s happening to her. Had she lived, she might have been a Viola or Rosalind, a Shakespeare heroine to tutor brash men in the finer arts of loving.But because she is 14 (and you don’t doubt it), Juliet leads not with her head but her hormones. Every line she utters is infused with equal amounts of intelligence and impetuosity. She has enough erotic life force for both herself and Romeo, but Mr. Isaac gallantly contributes his share. And without a hint of the now usually obligatory nudity, this couple can make a drawn-out kiss light up the night, as Michael Friedman’s mood-enhancing (but never mood-pushing) music swells in the background.Red-haired and luminously pale, this Juliet is a such a brightly glowing candle that the water motif at last makes perfect sense in that final, fatal scene in the Capulet family tomb. It takes a whole lot of water to quench such a flame. But, ah my friends, before then, it gave a lovely light.ROMEO AND JULIETBy William Shakespeare; directed by Michael Greif; sets by Mark Wendland; costumes by Emilio Sosa; lighting by Donald Holder; composer, Michael Friedman; sound by Acme Sound Partners; fight director, Rick Sordelet; choreographer, Sergio Trujillo; production stage manager, Michael McGoff; general manager, Nicki Genovese; associate producers, Peter DuBois, Heidi Griffiths and Mandy Hackett; director of production, Ruth E. Sternberg. Presented by the Public Theater, Oskar Eustis, artistic director; Mara Manus, executive director. Shakespeare in the Park, at the Delacorte Theater, Central Park; (212) 539-8750. Through July 8. Running time: 2 hours, 45 minutes.WITH: Lauren Ambrose (Juliet), Oscar Isaac (Romeo),  Christopher Evan Welch (Mercutio), Dan Colman (Paris), George Bartenieff (Montague), Saidah Arrika Ekulona (Lady Montague), Owiso Odera (Benvolio), Michael Cristofer (Capulet), Opal Alladin (Lady Capulet), Brian Tyree Henry (Tybalt), Camryn Manheim (Nurse) and Austin Pendleton (Friar Laurence).