http://www.nytimes.com/1996/02/28/nyregion/recalling-a-life-ended-with-a-bus-bombing.html
Recalling a Life Ended With a Bus Bombing - The New York Times
TEANECK (NJ),MIDDLE EAST,JERUSALEM,ISRAEL,HAMAS,DUKER  SARA,EISENFELD  MATTHEW,BOMBS AND BOMB PLOTS,TERRORISM
Feb. 28, 1996
7298
Correction AppendedTwo days before Sara Duker was killed by a suicide bomber in downtown Jerusalem, a couple of postcards arrived at the home of the Moffets, whose children she used to baby-sit.One child, David, got a picture of a turtle, and his sister Justine a picture of a coral reef. "Two separate cards because you understood kids, and how they are about receiving mail of their own," said their mother, Perry Lynn Moffett, one of the four speakers who eulogized Ms. Duker during her funeral today.You mentioned how nice it would be if we wrote back to you," she said. "This letter is all I can manage now Sara. I am so sorry."The 1,000 mourners filling the Beth Sholom Congregation and spilling into the street were moved repeatedly to tears and occasionally to laughter by the four speakers grappling with the sudden, violent death of Ms. Duker and her fiance, Matthew Eisenfeld.Ms. Duker, 22, is to be buried on Wednesday alongside Mr. Eisenfeld, 25, in his family plot in Avon, Conn. His relatives attended her hourlong funeral today. Gov. Christine Todd Whitman and Colette Avital, the Israeli Consul General in New York, also were present.Mrs. Moffet, who in the 1960's was the Barnard College roommate of Arline Duker, Ms. Duker's mother, told the congregation that she tried to imagine the young couple just before the bomb erupted on their Jerusalem bus on Sunday morning, killing 27 people."I like to think you were holding hands at that moment," Mrs. Moffett said. "To try not to hate, that is the hard part, for we have been robbed of your presence and the gifts you would have been given the world."Kenneth Berger, the rabbi of the Conservative synagogue, recalled the first time that Ms. Duker, who graduated from Barnard summa cum laude last May, appeared together with Mr. Eisenfeld, a rabbinical student from the Jewish Theological Seminary of America on Broadway and 122d Street in Manhattan."The congregation was abuzz, wanting to know who the young man was," the rabbi said. "Even at a glance they seemed like such a wonderful couple, made for each other."Tal Weinberger, 22, a classmate of Ms. Duker's from the Frisch School in Paramus, N.J., a yeshiva whose students often study in Israel, said no one even  considered the possibility of being killed there despite the violence swirling around the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations."No one even thought of it as an issue," Ms. Weinberger said. "It was like being in New York -- some places are safe and some places are not."Ms. Weinberger had also studied at Yale with Mr. Eisenfeld. "Nobody can picture that they will not be around any more," she said, her voice later breaking and many in the congregation weeping when she said she could not imagine events in her own life, like her marriage, without Ms. Duker.Ms. Weinberger said Ms. Duker had been so shy in high school -- in evidence only when she skewed the curve on a test, for example -- that the yearbook editors had considered just leaving empty quotation marks by her picture.But Ms. Duker chose a lyric by an Israeli singer, Naomi Shemer, saying, "Everybody travels down the road to its end, but I am walking alone." By that, she wanted to point out that she always tried to follow her own conscience.Ms. Weinberger cited the example of essay contests that Ms. Duker tried to win to gain enough money to join Mr. Eisenfeld in Jerusalem. The essay demanded  by one secular Jewish group was to answer the question of what is wrong with the Jewish faith. Ms. Duker, knowing her entry would be doomed, wrote her essay around the theme that Jews do not talk enough about God anymore.Dr. Ismar Schorsch, the chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary, told the mourners that the couple embodied what is best about young American Jews. "To be Jewish today is to strive for self-definition, to reject being defined by default."Before the service, Ms. Duker's mother read a brief statement in front of the temple, flanked by her two surviving daughters, Tamara, 20 and Ariella, 14, as well as by Dr. Leonard Eisenfeld and his wife Vicki and their daughter, Amy, 22."The Duker and Eisenfeld families hope that the beautiful way that our children lived will be remembered much more than the way that they died," said Mrs. Duker, adding that the two would want peace efforts redoubled.At the end of the service, both families followed the coffin, draped in a black velvet cloth embroidered with the Star of David, out of the building and into the hearse that would transport it to Connecticut.As the mourners dispersed, the first drops of rain began to fall from what had been a bright blue sky. Dr. Nahum J. Duker, a cousin of Ms. Duker's who had  been crying silently during the ceremony, made his way slowly from the temple toward his car. "She was at once a lively intellect and a gentle soul, a rare combination," he said.Correction: February 29, 1996, Thursday      Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the funeral of Sara Duker, a New Jersey resident who was killed in the bus bombing in Jerusalem on Sunday, misstated the death toll from the attack. The dead numbered 24, including the bomber, not 27; 3 other people died the same day in a separate bombing.