https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/arts/design/carrying-on-a-legacy-of-early-american-collecting.html
Carrying On a Legacy of Early-American Collecting - The New York Times
Art,Museums,Wunsch  Noah,Wunsch  Eric Martin,Gramercy Park (Manhattan  NY),Mapplethorpe  Robert,Pettibon  Raymond,Dial  Thornton
July 6, 2017
9332
Noah Wunsch’s one-bedroom apartment in the Gramercy Park neighborhood of Manhattan was once used as storage for the overflow of antique American decorative arts collected by his grandfather Eric Martin Wunsch, an engineer and benefactor to museum design collections who died in 2013. In the home of the younger Mr. Wunsch, who runs digital and marketing strategy for Sotheby’s, traces of his grandfather’s legacy remain.A massive, empty 18th-century frame hangs over an ornate Federal-period bookcase, flanked by a pair of miniature 1810 wax portraits by the German artist John Christian Rauschner. Models of cranes made by Silent Hoist, an industrial engineering company started by Mr. Wunsch’s great-grandfather, who emigrated to the United States from Austria, populate the space.“My grandfather started collecting in his early 20s,” said Mr. Wunsch, 28, who has inherited the gene and likes to mix in his own contemporary art and design acquisitions, including three macabre takes on Victorian interiors by the young Ireland-based painter Genieve Figgis; a Robert Mapplethorpe portrait of a downtown rocker; and a mod, geometric acrylic flower vase by Shiro Kuramata. “Being the child of an immigrant, collecting, for my grandfather, was a way for him to own his American heritage.”Mr. Wunsch and his brother, Eric, took the reins of the Wunsch Collection after their grandfather’s death. They have lent his most valuable pieces to the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, and they host events for their contemporaries, in hopes of building awareness of early American and contemporary design. “We want to make it feel more accessible to young people,” Mr. Wunsch said. “We believe in crossing genres. That’s when you get the most interesting representation of who you are.”Here are edited excerpts from a recent conversation with Noah Wunsch.Has your grandfather’s approach to collecting inspired you?Absolutely. He would study something to death to make sure he fully understood the genre. I’m an obsessive reader and always make sure I educate myself on anything I’m interested in. I try to respect the way my grandfather collected while also listening to my own tastes. I think there’s something really interesting about having these abstract pieces by Eric Mack, a contemporary artist who usually works in textile, along with early American decorative and a work by Thornton Dial, an outsider artist.This drawing of a stooped figure is an unusual Thornton Dial, quieter than his typical work.You can see it as a very sad piece or a very hopeful piece. The figure is carrying a heart. He’s burdened. It’s a question of whether he is longing for someone or whether he has just been broken by someone.What was an important early acquisition?The Raymond Pettibon zines are one of the first purchases my brother and I made together. We bought 15 of them from an auction house in Los Angeles for $1,000. Normally the zines go for $400 each. In the earliest days, I collected punk T-shirts rather aggressively, and Pettibon did the Black Flag T-shirts, the Minutemen — all those and their iconic albums. My brother and I at one point commissioned an illustrator to make a T-shirt line. We gave her a bunch of Pettibon books and said, “You just need to study these.”How do you tend to find things?I scour all the auction pages to see what they’re offering. If there’s something I like, I cross-reference eBay, 1stdibs and the galleries themselves to see if the prices are any better. I found this highly stylized Kuramata vase at a gallery in Japan that deals with radical design, and it was much more reasonable than I expected. I threw away a bunch of clothing to fit it into my suitcase so I could dodge the shipping charges.What’s on your current wish list?I’m always looking for more Kuramata. One of his cafe chairs, that’s on my list. There’s a Jean Prouvé swing-jib arm lamp that I love, but it’s too expensive.Is there any advice you give to other young collectors?Buy what you like. If you think you’re making a good investment, kudos. But if you’re not and you don’t like the piece, then you’ve just got an ugly painting that reminds you of the bad investment every single day.