https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/22/sports/basketball/wnba-players-fined-over-shirts-worn-in-aftermath-of-shootings.html
Players Criticize W.N.B.A. For Fines Over Shirts Worn to Underscore Shootings - The New York Times
Basketball,Fines (Penalties),Women's National Basketball Assn,Blacks,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,New York Liberty,Indiana Fever,Phoenix Mercury,Uniforms,Attacks on Police,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots
July 21, 2016
232
Players from the Liberty and the Indiana Fever spoke out in dismay Thursday after the W.N.B.A. fined them for wearing T-shirts intended to raise awareness in the aftermath of recent shootings by and of the police.Three teams, the Liberty, the Fever and the Phoenix Mercury, had been fined $5,000 and each player involved had been fined $500 for wearing the shirts this month during warm-ups.After a game Thursday in New York, in which the Liberty lost to the Fever by 82-70, players from both teams steered away from questions about basketball and instead spoke about what they felt was a lack of support from the league.“It’s unfortunate that the W.N.B.A. has fined us and not supported its players,” Liberty guard Tanisha Wright said. “We feel America has a problem with the police brutality with black lives around here, and we just want to use our voices and use our platform to advocate for that.”Liberty forward Swin Cash said: “We would just hope that the league would be more open to working with the players because the majority of our players are passionate about this. It’s something that has to change, and if we can use this platform, we’re going to do that.”Tina Charles, a center for the Liberty, posted on Instagram: “Today I decided not to be silent in the wake of the W.N.B.A. fines.” She added, “My teammates and I will continue to use our platform and raise awareness for the Black Lives Matter movement until the W.N.B.A. gives its support as it does for breast cancer awareness, Pride and other subject matters.”Shortly after the fines were reported, the W.N.B.A.’s president, Lisa Borders, said in a statement, “We are proud of W.N.B.A. players’ engagement and passionate advocacy for nonviolent solutions to difficult social issues but expect them to comply with the league’s uniform guidelines.”Liberty players on July 10 wore black T-shirts during warm-ups bearing the words #BlackLivesMatter and #Dallas5, references to the shooting deaths of black men by the police and to the fatal shooting this month of five Dallas police officers.“We realized this is a problem and something has to change,” center Kiah Stokes said at the time. “We just wanted to get a shirt that we could mourn the lives that were lost and brings awareness to show this is happening at an alarming rate for black people.”Cash said, “I don’t think you can play basketball, have a platform that we have and not be able to be a voice for people that are voiceless.”“At the end of the day, the worst case it’s going to have is that you will be fined, correct?”In three games after the 10th, the Liberty switched to plain black T-shirts for warm-ups. After news of the fines on Thursday, the team returned to approved warm-up shirts ahead of the day’s game.Similar shirts worn by Minnesota Lynx players on July 9 led several off-duty police officers working security at the game to walk out.The league had reminded players of the rules earlier this week. The three teams fined had all worn shirts after the reminder.“I am absolutely in favor of players speaking out and speaking from the heart about whatever issues are important to them,” N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver said when asked about the W.N.B.A. shirts at a Board of Governors meeting this month.Silver stopped well short, however, of condoning uniform violations as a means of drawing attention to those issues.“My preference would be that players adhere to our uniform rules, both in the N.B.A. and the W.N.B.A.,” he said, adding, “I would greatly prefer that the players use the platform they’re given, social media, press conferences, media in locker rooms, however they want to do it, to make their political points of view be known.”Carmelo Anthony, the Knicks forward, voiced support for the W.N.B.A. players.He said he saw no reason to fine them. “You should want to support them,” Anthony said.He added: “Everybody has their own freedom of speech if they decide to use the platform to do that. I don’t see no reason for anybody to get fined.”He referred to N.B.A. players such as LeBron James, Kobe Bryant and Derrick Rose, then of the Chicago Bulls, wearing “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirts in 2014 in the wake of the death in New York of an unarmed black man, Eric Garner, after he was choked by a police officer. The officer was not indicted, sparking protests.“The N.B.A. was very supportive of that,” Anthony said, “so I don’t see what this would be any different.”The players had the support of their union, but Silver said at the time, “I respect Derrick Rose and all of our players for voicing their personal views on important issues, but my preference would be for players to abide by our on-court attire rules.”The shirts did not return after Silver’s statement, and no fines were announced.