http://www.nytimes.com/2000/01/14/nyregion/now-mayor-says-is-time-to-build-up-under-and-all-around.html
Now, Mayor Says, Is Time to Build Up, Under and All Around - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,EAST RIVER PARK (NYC),NEW YORK JETS,GIULIANI  RUDOLPH W,STADIUMS,OLYMPIC GAMES (2012),STATE OF THE CITY MESSAGE (NYC),TAX CREDITS,TAXATION,PUBLIC WORKS,PARKS AND OTHER RECREATION AREAS,ATHLETICS AND SPORTS,ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS,OFFICE BUILDINGS,FOOTBALL
Jan. 14, 2000
2932
In using his annual State of the City address to offer a shopping list for economic development, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday ranged across a spectrum of projects, real or only dreamed of, including such diverse public works as improvements to the East River Park and tax incentives for new offices in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Queens.As it has done for years, the mayor's address provided a forum to promote Mr. Giuliani's most ambitious development scheme for Manhattan, construction of a sports stadium on the West Side rail yards, a $2 billion project that he said could be designed to attract the 2012 Olympics. He also reiterated his hope for a new freight tunnel between Staten Island and Brooklyn, a goliath undertaking -- estimated to cost $1 billion to $4 billion -- that would provide the city with its only direct rail link to the west.But while Mr. Giuliani's grandest proposals varied little from what he has sought for years, and face daunting hurdles in environmental review, his commitment to several smaller initiatives appeared calculated to take advantage of a robust economy and to encourage new construction in the next two years.''We're now a city that is growing up all over again,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''And we're leaving, hopefully, some really beautiful things behind for people.''Leading the mayor's list yesterday was a plan by the city for park improvements that he said would give ''the East River the same attention as the Hudson River is getting.'' His project would follow extensive improvements by the Hudson River Park Conservancy, which has created a waterfront esplanade in Lower Manhattan.In an interview, the city's parks commissioner, Henry Stern, said that the plan was to spend at least $5 million in 2001 to redevelop the East River Park, which runs from 12th Street to Montgomery Street. The initial improvements would include the addition of athletic fields, a recreation center with bathrooms and repairs to a seawall, he said. In the future, the city could extend the park as far as the Battery with additional land or esplanade space.Two other plans presented by the mayor would steer development to the boroughs outside Manhattan. The largest would offer tax credits for new construction and renovation of office space -- extended by City Hall since 1995 to the Lower Manhattan financial district -- to downtown Brooklyn, Long Island City and the Fordham Road commercial corridor in the Bronx.''It makes sense to do this now,'' said Steven Spinola, president of the Real Estate Board of New York, an industry advocacy group. ''When Manhattan gets as hot as it is, it creates a strong reason for tenants to move to the other boroughs.''Mr. Giuliani also announced a plan for a new development in the Bronx, involving a planned $110 million recreation and shopping complex on a site now occupied by the Kingsbridge Armory. The city would contribute $30 million for environmental work on the site, at Kingsbridge and Jerome Avenues. A New York City development firm, RD Management, would finance the remainder of the project, according to officials of Economic Development Corporation.The Kingsbridge Armory, a former homeless shelter that has been vacant for years, is owned by New York State, which has offered it to the city for development, said Michael Carey, president of the development corporation. He said he expected the city to begin preparing the site for development in the next three months.In what would rank as the city's most ambitious public improvement in decades, the mayor urged the construction of a rail-freight tunnel under New York Harbor to ease truck traffic and the pollution and congestion it creates.Mr. Giuliani offered few leads on new sources of financing, or advances in architecture or engineering.City lawyers and officials are preparing a detailed environmental impact statement on the proposal to be submitted to several federal agencies in March, in hopes of securing financial aid from Congress.But the plan for a rail tunnel faces huge hurdles both because of its costs and the layers of review by agencies responsible for New York Harbor, including state and federal environmental authorities, the Army Corps of Engineers and the Federal Maritime Administration.The mayor also repeated his long-standing proposal for a stadium complex on the West Side with only slight revisions, saying that the project would now cost an estimated $2 billion, and could provide a home for both the New York Jets and the 2012 Olympics.In an interview, a senior adviser to the mayor said yesterday that the mayor's hopes for a new stadium had taken on an urgency because he very much wanted the groundwork to be laid before he leaves office. That would give Mr. Giuliani less than a year if he is elected to succeed Daniel Patrick Moynihan in the United States Senate.The official said that City Hall, working with a group of business people already preparing a bid to the United States Olympic Committee, would approach the committee with a proposal -- including architectural drawings of a stadium -- within a year.