http://www.nytimes.com/1998/04/11/theater/theater-review-a-down-to-earth-iago-evil-made-ordinary.html
THEATER REVIEW; A Down-to-Earth Iago, Evil Made Ordinary - The New York Times
ROYAL NATIONAL THEATER,SHAKESPEARE  WILLIAM,REVIEWS,THEATER,OTHELLO (PLAY)
April 11, 1998
6750
If you had just walked into the war room, where matters of grave international importance were under discussion, you probably wouldn't notice him, any more than you would a simple wooden chair. He's one of several soldiers, the second  from the left, and in his khaki uniform, standing immobile at attention, he blends right into the sand-colored column behind him.A functional looking fellow, stout, stolid and homely, no doubt good at executing the commands of his superiors with efficiency and minimal fuss. Someone you can rely upon without having to think too much about. His name, by the way, is Iago. And if the urge strikes him, he could destroy your life, with that same unassuming competence and command of all things practical.Has the nemesis of the Moor of Venice ever seemed so utterly ordinary, so familiar as he does in the Royal National Theater's spellbinding interpretation of ''Othello''? As portrayed by the brilliant English actor Simon Russell Beale, in the touring production from London now at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Iago emerges as all the more chilling for being cut from the cloth of everyday life.He's the ultimate disgruntled employee, a military version of the fabled postal worker who suddenly erupts into homicidal violence after a lifetime of servitude. The difference, of course, is that Mr. Russell Beale's Iago works from stealth, using the very thing that has turned him rabid, his status as an invisible underling, as a fatal weapon. Bosses who see this crafty, seamless performance may not sleep for some nights afterward, thinking about the quiet clerk, secretary or executive assistant they thought they knew so well.The ostensibly motiveless evil of the man who, along with Richard III, is Shakespeare's most malignant villain has obsessed scholars  for centuries. But in this fluent and sure-footed production, beautifully directed by Sam Mendes and set in the 1930's, you don't spend much time scratching your head and wondering why Iago behaves so viciously.He's a festering have-not, tired of being passed over for promotion and watching other, less accomplished men enjoy expensive liquor, good cigars and beautiful women. And the grim course of events he initiates and oversees, with an especially ingenuous Othello (played by David Harewood) at its helpless center, comes to seem like an all too natural confluence of character and circumstance.Indeed, there is a deeply organic quality about the entire evening; unlike many smart and stylish productions of Shakespeare these days, this one doesn't allow you to separate the text from the director's vision of it. There's no feeling of an imposed interpretation or commentary. The story holds you like that of a first-rate crime novel in which nearly every detail seems contingent on the others. And speaking of things criminal, one should report that this exceptional production runs at the Academy only through tomorrow, and that every seat has been sold.On the surface, this ''Othello'' would appear to be drawing from a rather shopworn bag of tricks. Resetting Elizabethan drama in the Fascist era has become commonplace in recent years, with such eminent examples as the National's ''Richard III'' and Cheek by Jowl's ''Duchess of Malfi.'' So, for that matter, has looking into the military psyche to explain Shakespeare's warrior heroes and villains, as in Ian McKellen's masterly portrayals of Richard III and Iago.But Mr. Mendes, who is also responsible for the current hit revival of ''Cabaret,'' and his designer, Anthony Ward, have infused these conceits with a beguiling freshness and immediacy, and they miraculously avoid any anachronistic clash of elements. The elegant, two-tiered setting, which suggests a neoclassical courtyard and makes adroit use of louvered partitions at the back of the stage, is simplicity itself, but it is also richly evocative of a controlled world of martial order and colonial rule.Paul Pyant's exquisite lighting brings to mind the moody art direction of Bernardo Bertolucci's movie, ''The Conformist,'' and the shadowy landscapes of film noir and Graham Greene's wartime novels. Yet this is no coolly stylized interpretation. Muscular emotions, underscored by the percussive pulse of Paddy Cunneen's music, are what drive this ''Othello,'' not just the sexual jealousy of the Moor but the even more potent jealousy of the man he most trusts.The production begins, boldly and unusually, with Iago in full vitriolic spleen, as he discourses heatedly on his hatred of Othello to the hapless fop Roderigo (Crispin Letts), whose love for the Moor's bride, Desdemona (Claire Skinner), Iago will use to his own purposes. A note of raw animosity, the source of everything that follows, has been struck. It is all the more disconcerting, then, to see Iago retreat so effortlessly into the woodwork once his commanding officer shows up.The strapping, handsome Mr. Harewood, last seen in New York as Antony to Vanessa Redgrave's Cleopatra, is an ideal foil to Mr. Russell Beale's Iago, at least in the production's first half. He is as conspicuous as Mr. Russell Beale is invisible, a man of majestic presence and unthinking frankness. He has the slight self-consciousness of the exotic outsider. (It makes sense that he is the only performer on stage who rolls his r's.) But he is clearly born to command. And when he describes the travel stories he used to woo Desdemona, with an infectious, childlike wonder, you can understand why she fell in love with him.This Othello is also a man who, to his detriment, can focus on only two things: his duties as a soldier and his love for Desdemona. Iago, his aide-de-camp, is to him simply a convenience in dealing with these obsessions, someone who will spring to life when he snaps his fingers and fetch his luggage and escort his wife.Mr. Russell Beale uses this perception of Iago as practicality incarnate to devastating advantage. Everything he says (to other people, that is) seems to smack of solid common sense, even when he reaches the point of telling Othello that it would be better to strangle his wife than to poison her. Similarly, in the famous speech where he tells Roderigo to ''put money in thy purse,'' he repeats the phrase like a folksy, adage-spouting uncle.If the second half of the production falters slightly, it is because the young Mr. Harewood must take over in ways he can't quite manage yet. His transition into a jealousy-crazed beast, under the spell of Iago's poisons, evolves compellingly, and his moment of epileptic seizure is genuinely distressing. But he is too overwrought and unvaried in the grand, pathetic soliloquies to let their eloquence have their full effect.The supporting cast, by and large, is superb, although the clownish desperation of Mr. Letts's Roderigo wears thin. Colin Tierney's Cassio has just the right patrician snobbery and swagger to inspire Iago's resentment, and James Hayes and Clifford Rose, in parts that are usually forgettable, specifically and subtly conjure a whole military class ethos. Ms. Skinner is a first-rate, heartbreakingly vital Desdemona, balancing a spoiled girl's willfulness with an innocent, lovestruck conviction.Every bit as good is Maureen Beattie as the earthy Emilia, Iago's wife and Desdemona's lady in waiting. When she kisses her unresponsive husband with infinite, forlorn hunger, you know all you need to know about this couple's relationship and its telling contrast to that of Othello and Desdemona. And her horror in the final scene, when she realizes the extent of Iago's malice, gives the production its true emotional climax, even more than Mr. Harewood's explosive sorrow.That the audience has been privy throughout to Iago's demonic game plan doesn't diminish the impact of his unmasking. Mr. Russell Beale's soldier's soldier has never seemed less than credible in his dealings with others. And even in self-revealing moments, as when he contemptuously comments on his social superiors while swilling down the fine brandy they have left behind, he feels like someone you might have met before. You actually understand this villain's point of view, which, of course, is the scariest thing of all.OTHELLOBy William Shakespeare; directed by Sam Mendes; designer, Anthony Ward; lighting by Paul Pyant; music by Paddy Cunneen; movement director, Jonathan Butterell; sound by Simon Baker; fights, Terry King; costume supervisor, Christine Rowlas Well, stage manager, Kim Beringer. Royal National Theater of Great Britain, presented by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Bruce C. Ratner, chairman of the board; Harvey Lichtenstein, president and executive producer. At the Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn.WITH: David Harewood (Othello), Simon Russell Beale (Iago), Claire Skinner (Desdemona), Roderigo (Crispin Letts) Colin Tierney (Cassio) and Maureen Beattie (Emilia).