https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/nyregion/police-seek-motive-in-bronx-officers-shooting.html
Police Seek Motive in Bronx Officer’s Shooting, as Killer’s Sister Offers Perspective - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Bonds  Alexander (1982-2017),Familia  Miosotis (1969-2017),Mental Health and Disorders,Police Department (NYC),Bronx (NYC)
July 6, 2017
2152
Alexander Bonds spent the afternoon on the Fourth of July at the home of his sister, Ryan Kearse, in the South Bronx. Though he had been struggling recently with the effects of schizophrenia and depression, he was having one of his better days, Ms. Kearse said in an interview.She had hoped he would spend a quiet evening with her, but as night fell and fireworks started to fly, he insisted on joining the celebration.“I’m going to go out and chill,” she said he told her.Where he went and what he did over the next several hours is now the subject of intense scrutiny as investigators try to understand what could have motivated him to pull out a Ruger .38 handgun and shoot a New York police officer in the head as she sat in a mobile command post parked at East 183rd Street and Morris Avenue. The officer, Miosotis Familia, a 48-year-old mother of three, was pronounced dead a few hours later. Mr. Bonds, who tried to flee, was shot and killed by officers responding to the gunfire.Ms. Kearse said she does not know what happened to her brother from the time he left her house, around 5 p.m., to 12:30 a.m., when the fatal shot was fired.But by about 10 p.m. something had gone wrong. That, police officials say, was when a woman identified as Mr. Bonds’s girlfriend made three 911 calls in quick succession. She described Mr. Bonds, 34, as acting erratically, though not violently.Crucially, she told the 911 dispatcher that Mr. Bonds did not have a weapon, Robert K. Boyce, the Police Department chief of detectives, told reporters on Thursday.Even so, Chief Boyce said, an ambulance and an officer from the Emergency Service Unit, specially trained for encounters with people with severe mental illness, were dispatched to the area to look for Mr. Bonds. They never found him.At some point, Chief Boyce said, Mr. Bonds and his girlfriend got into a taxi and left the area. When they got out, the two split up. She went back to Mr. Bonds’s apartment. How Mr. Bonds spent the next two hours is unclear.The killing of Officer Familia plunged the Police Department into mourning. But it was the predatory nature of the shooting that seems to have most shaken her colleagues. Officer Familia was sitting in the cab of her truck, filling out paperwork, when Mr. Bonds walked up, drew a gun and fired. Surveillance video showed that he had walked by the vehicle at least once before the shooting.Speaking at the Police Academy in Queens on Thursday, Commissioner James P. O’Neill, sought to reassure new recruits that their decision to become police officers was the right one.There will be “truly terrible days, days like we had yesterday, where pain and grief push you down to a point you’re not sure if you can get back up,” Commissioner O’Neill told the 524 men and woman, who had long been scheduled to be sworn in on Thursday.“You’ll get back up because the work of Police Officer Familia is not finished,” he said. “You get back up because it’s our job to finish it, as cops.”Mayor Bill de Blasio tried to reassure officers in a different way. City Hall announced on Thursday that it would allocate $1.3 million to retrofit command vehicles, like the one Officer Familia was in, with ballistic protection. This comes on top of $17 million the city allocated to similarly equip patrol cars after the 2014 ambush-style killing of two officers who were sitting in their patrol car in Brooklyn.So far, more that 2,000 patrol cars have been fitted with some kind of ballistic protection, according to the department.Asked at a news conference about the need for additional protection for officers, Commissioner O’Neill said Mr. Bonds was ultimately responsible for the officer’s death. “Let’s make no mistake about it,” he said. “Officer Familia is dead because of one reason and one reason only.”Mr. Bonds’s sister, Ms. Kearse, said in the interview that she sympathized with Officer Familia’s family but wanted it known that she too was grieving.“I’m so sorry for your loss,” she said. “I lost, too.”Over the last year, Ms. Kearse said, she struggled to help her brother control his mental illness. He was admitted into Bellevue Hospital Center for mental health treatment at least once in the last year. And a week before the shooting, he checked into St. Barnabas, but he was released after only a few hours. In a statement issued Thursday evening, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said he had ordered a review of the hospital’s handling of Mr. Bonds.Ms. Kearse said the death of a son at birth a year ago might have exacerbated her brother’s condition. (Mr. Bonds also had a 14-year-old daughter.) But she also blamed his experiences in prison — where he spent eight years on a robbery conviction — for the psychotic breakdowns that he seemed to be experiencing with greater frequency. While there, she said, he was often put in solitary confinement. At times, she said, prison staff members would call her mother so that she could try to calm him down.Ms. Kearse said her brother also complained of broken ribs sustained in an altercation with guards.On Thursday when Ms. Kearse went to a corner store that she frequents, a woman there who knew her singled her out and condemned her brother for his actions.Ms. Kearse pleaded for understanding. “My brother was sick,” she said she told the woman. “And y’all didn’t know that.”