https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/28/arts/music/lil-yachty-21-savage-review.html
Lil Yachty and 21 Savage: Atlanta Shows a Range of Hip-Hop - The New York Times
Rap and Hip-Hop,Lil Yachty (Rapper),Gucci Mane (1980- ),21 Savage (Rapper),Atlanta (Ga),Music,21 Savage
July 27, 2016
7348
Every year, XXL magazine, the leading hip-hop publication, publishes its Freshman issue, in which its editors crown 10 up-and-coming rappers. It’s become something of a state of the union for emergent hip-hop movements, and the selection process helped the magazine become the first mainstream rap outlet to acknowledge the impact that the internet has on hip-hop taste.This year’s freshman class was eclectic and wide-ranging, including a pair of Atlanta rappers working at opposite ends of the genre’s creative spectrum: the schoolboy crooner Lil Yachty and the hardened tough 21 Savage. A video interview filmed for the package underscored their differences: Lil Yachty, hair in his signature red braids, noted that the rappers in this year’s class are young: “I just got out of high school,” he said, gleefully. Cut to 21 Savage, with a tattoo of a dagger between his eyes, who good-naturedly retorts: “I ain’t go to high school. I was in juvenile.”Later, Lil Yachty asserts that everyone selected for the group has his own sound. “I make positivity music,” he said, then added, “the opposite of 21.” 21 Savage grabbed the alley-oop and put down the dunk. “Yeah,” he said. “I make murder music.”That both Lil Yachty and 21 Savage are thriving at the same time is a testament to their hometown’s wide influence, and its increasingly centerless sonic approach. Both released new projects recently: 21 Savage has “Savage Mode,” a mixtape made in collaboration with the producer Metro Boomin, and Lil Yachty has “Summer Songs 2,” his second mixtape this year.“Summer Songs 2” deepens the deluge of Lil Yachty music during the last eight or so months. He has a vivid signature approach: sing-rapping with heavy digital manipulation, somewhere way past the saccharine Auto-Tuned warble of T-Pain, in an outlandishly naïve voice. It’s as if storytime at the children’s bookstore went rogue, or the inverse of a Kidz Bop song. “We are the youth!” he exults on “Intro (First Day of Summer),” both emphasizing his novel sound and acknowledging how it must come off to the uninitiated: “I’m playing through your house like a doorbell and you hate it.”Lil Yachty’s excellence doesn’t originate in his choice of words, or even in the rhythm he delivers them — he has created an alternate universe in which traditional narratives of rap excess are reframed as fantastical kiddie stories. His gun talk sounds like the musings of a wide-eyed outsider. His simile choices — “just got a new bitch, white with a little black like dice” — are appealingly bizarre. And on the whole, his songs are dreamlike and entrancing, from the soothing lullaby “Idk” to the deeply inspiring “Life Goes On.” Dipping into his pseudo-falsetto, he recalls the woodlands specter Bon Iver.When Lil Yachty tries straightforward rapping, as on “For Hot 97” — an implicit retort to criticisms of his rapping skill — he’s less centered, and less convincing (though the boast “money so old, check its colon” is hilarious). And even if “Summer Songs 2” is, on the whole, less effective than “Lil Boat,” the mixtape he released in March, it too takes the toughness of Atlanta hip-hop and repackages it with a sweet, sticky taffy coating.Following the mid-to-late-2000s reign of T. I. and Young Jeezy, hard-edge street rappers have had a more difficult time gaining wide attention. That’s partly because of the seemingly ubiquitous influence of the Atlanta rapper Gucci Mane, the most effective tweaker of hip-hop orthodoxies in the 2000s.Gucci Mane’s influence hovers over both these artists, though more abstractly than directly. Lil Yachty has mainlined Gucci Mane’s vocal quirk — a penchant for odd rhyme structures cloaked in unlikely melodies — and distended it to absurdist lengths; he has also signed with the label owned in part by Coach K, one of Gucci Mane’s former managers. And 21 Savage released an EP last year called “Free Guwop,” in honor of Gucci Mane, then still in federal prison.While in recent years Atlanta has had a string of impressive street-oriented rappers from Trouble to Alley Boy to Peewee Longway, not one has risen as quickly as 21 Savage. In part, that’s because he’s benefiting from the same sort of internet-driven interest as Lil Yachty. Online fame doesn’t discriminate: A street rapper with visual flair can be just as much an object of fascination as an art-school-esque outsider.“Savage Mode” is committedly grim. Metro Boomin, responsible for so much triumphalist music in partnership with the Atlanta kingpin Future, restrains himself to a set of beats telegraphing slow, meaningful menace. They’re an apt fit for 21 Savage, who’s given to short, clipped phrases delivered with a hiss. “They say crack kills,” he deadpans on “No Heart,” before shrugging, “My crack sells.”That song, bleak and relentless, is one of the mixtape’s best. “Seventh grade I got caught with a pistol, sent me to Panthersville,” he raps, referring to his time in juvenile detention. He then relates, in unprintable fashion, what eighth and ninth grade were like.Many of this mixtape’s songs — “Bad Guy,” “No Advance,” the title track — are like this. But at the end, 21 Savage softens his approach. “Feel It” is a love song, a pledge of fealty to a dedicated woman: “All my dog ways, had to put them in the kennel.” And the album’s closer, “Ocean Drive,” starts as a story about a rough childhood — “My uncle taught me how to scrape the bowl/ And my auntie still smoking blow” — but metamorphoses into something more transcendent. The hook, rendered with melody and digital effects, is optimistic, as if 21 Savage has heard a small part of Lil Yachty that he can use for himself.