https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/opinion/israel-syria.html
Why Israel Can’t Support a Cease-Fire in Syria - The New York Times
Syria,Israel,Iran,Netanyahu  Benjamin,Assad  Bashar al-
July 19, 2017
747
TEL AVIV — The cease-fire in southwestern Syria that went into effect last week is, of course, good for many Syrians who are tired of six years of butchery. Still — and this is almost painful to admit — under the current conditions, the cease-fire could be problematic for Israel. Stopping bloodshed is a noble act and something that Israel, like every decent country, wants to see. But it is no substitute for a strategy, and unless the United States develops a strategy for Syria, the cease-fire could undermine Israel’s security and further destabilize the entire Middle East.The United States and Russia are the cease-fire’s main architects. Jordan is also a party to it. Israel was consulted behind the scenes but had no official part in the agreement. Still, the agreement concerns a territory in which Israel has crucial interest: the border area between Syria and the Israeli-controlled Golan Heights. In this narrow strip of land, rebel forces that oppose President Bashar al-Assad of Syria still hold their ground. Reportedly backed by Israel, some of the more moderate rebel groups prevent forces influenced or controlled by Iran from getting too close to Israel’s border, one of Israel’s biggest security concerns.In the short term, the new cease-fire freezes this state of affairs. Israel controls the Golan Heights; the rebels control the border area; Mr. Assad’s forces, backed by Iran and its proxy Hezbollah, sit a few miles to the east, away from the Israeli border. If this were a permanent arrangement, Israel would have reasons to be pleased with it.Unfortunately, almost no Israeli strategist or military planner believes that this arrangement will hold for long. Either new fighting will erupt or, without sufficient oversight, the cease-fire will erode into nonexistence. Israel is following Iran’s patient game, and what it sees is Iranian and Hezbollah operatives in the area between Damascus and the Golan Heights. It sees a gradual process that ultimately strengthens Iran and its proxies, and leaves them in charge of strategic areas in Syria, including right on Israel’s border.The way Israel sees it, the cease-fire is thus a gain for Mr. Assad, a despicable and dogged warrior who once again proved all prophecies of his imminent doom to be premature. It is a gain for President Vladimir Putin of Russia, a calculated meddler, who proved all prophecies of Syria’s soon becoming “Russia’s Vietnam” to be ridiculously shallow. It is a gain for Iran, whose advance amid the gradual surrender of the Islamic State makes a mockery of vows to contain its growing influence. It is a loss for Israel.A delicate cease-fire can hold only under robust supervision. But there is no potential supervisor that Israel can trust. It does not trust Mr. Assad, whose dependence on Iran is well established. It does not trust Hezbollah, Israel’s enemy and Iran’s proxy. It does not, of course, trust Iran. These actors all have one goal in mind: to gradually erode the rebels’ hold on the border area, until it collapses.But Israel also does not trust an international force to guard the area. Its long history with such forces, including those stationed on the Golan Heights, has taught it that these supervisors have no staying power when things get tough. And Israel does not trust Russia to prevent Iran from reaching the border. Russia’s interests are never clear, and its alliance with Iran in Syria makes it even more suspicious. Mr. Putin is reasonably attentive to the concerns raised by Israel — and the channels of communication between the countries are functioning well — yet Israel finds it hard to believe that the Russians can be swayed to contain the advance of Iran, on whose cooperation it relies to ensure Mr. Assad’s survival. In fact, it is not just Israel. Former American diplomats, interviewed by Foreign Policy, raised similar concerns and doubted that Russia can guarantee the cease-fire.There are no other candidates to administer the cease-fire. And Israel, of course, is no candidate either. Its leaders keep proclaiming their “red lines” in Syria. These include, as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told his cabinet, “preventing Hezbollah from gaining force in Syria by means of acquiring advanced precision weapons, preventing Hezbollah from establishing a ground force presence near our border and preventing the establishment of an Iranian military presence throughout Syria.” Israel insists that, as Defense Minister Avigdor Lieberman recently said: “We retain exclusive responsibility for the security of Israeli citizens, and therefore our freedom of action is absolute. We will do everything that is needed.”But “freedom of action” is never “absolute.” Actions by Israel can get more complicated if they lead to the collapse of a cease-fire brokered by two superpowers. They can get more complicated if Russian forces appear on Israel’s border to manage the cease-fire. They can get more complicated if the United States fails to persuade Russia to contain Iran’s ambitious plans for advancing its control over Syria. In that case, Israel could find itself boxed into a tough spot: having to act and risk a devastating clash involving Iranians, Lebanese, Syrians and Russians — or frustratingly seeing Iran achieve yet another of its objectives by placing itself on Israel’s doorstep.Israeli planners believe that there is only one good solution to this strategic problem: for the United States to go back to being a superpower. Namely, to involve itself not just in the worthy cause of temporarily ending a current war, and not just in the important objective of defeating the Islamic State. The United States, being the indispensable superpower, must invest in the more calculated planning aimed at preventing a potentially more dangerous war. It must have a strategy for Syria.