https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/us/politics/trump-steel-tariff.html
U.S. Trade Partners Watch Warily as Trump Considers Steel Tariffs - The New York Times
International Trade and World Market,Customs (Tariff),Protectionism (Trade),Steel and Iron,Trump  Donald J
July 7, 2017
1606
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is expected any day now to make its long-awaited decision over whether to slap tariffs on steel imports. Doing so would be a provocative move that could simultaneously lift the spirits of President Trump’s most ardent supporters while angering trade partners.The tariffs could very well provoke a global trade war that could make all sides poorer.It’s an unusual time for a protectionist retreat by the United States as a number of major industrialized countries work on their own free trade pacts. This week, Europe and Japan reached a landmark free trade agreement before the G-20 summit, and Mexico and China, two of the United States’ largest trading partners, have been mulling their own deal.Mr. Trump and his economic team delayed a decision on steel in recent weeks as the president weighs conflicting counsel from factions of his nationalist and globalist advisers.For weeks, trade lawyers, industry leaders and members of Congress have been anxiously awaiting the recommendation from the Department of Commerce. They view it as a moment that will illuminate whether Mr. Trump is ready to make good on his campaign promises to protect flagging American industries with tariffs. Among those most on edge are economists, many of whom have been uneasy about Mr. Trump’s unorthodox views on trade because they have seen the damage from such actions before.They hope the president is bluffing.“If he actually pulls the trigger, it could be highly disruptive to world trade,” said Stephen Moore, a Heritage Foundation economist who advised Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign and helped craft his economic plan. “It’s not even going to really work in terms of helping American workers.”In April, Mr. Trump signed an executive order calling for a sweeping investigation by the Department of Commerce into whether steel imports were harming national security, employing a rarely used section of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. The findings would give the president backing to impose import restrictions or tariffs on foreign-produced steel.The United States imported 30.1 million metric tons of steel last year, making it the world’s largest steel importer, according to the International Trade Administration. Canada, Brazil and South Korea are the three biggest exporters to the United States.To those Trump advisers who are fearful about the fallout of steep steel tariffs, history is the most compelling argument for holding their fire. In 2002, another Republican president took action to protect the steel industry in the face of excess production of steel around the world. It did not end well. President George W. Bush imposed tariffs of up to 30 percent on most types of steel imported from Europe, Asia and South America for three years, ostensibly to give the domestic industry time to stabilize.The move was quickly challenged at the World Trade Organization, which later declared that the tariffs were illegal. The European Union was given the authority to impose $2 billion in retaliatory sanctions against American products. Europe threatened to target exports from states such as Michigan and Florida — crucial political battlegrounds — and 21 months after levying the tariffs, Mr. Bush backed down and rescinded them. Those who worked in the steel industry were angered that a president who had promised to protect them had buckled under international pressure.Economists who were embroiled in that episode, and those who recall it ruefully, view it as a cautionary tale for Mr. Trump.“There were many more workers who used steel to make things in the U.S. than who actually made the steel,” said Phillip L. Swagel, an economics professor at the University of Maryland who was a senior economist for international trade during Mr. Bush’s first term. “Many more communities have the potential to be affected by higher prices for steel.” However, the perceived political need to do something overrode economics.Studies conducted after the tariffs were lifted showed that while they were in place, they led to higher steel prices and job losses in other machinery and metal equipment industries. Domestic steel makers also cut costs and consolidated. A report commissioned by the Consuming Industries Trade Action Coalition found that higher steel prices led to a loss of 200,000 jobs across the country in 2002 and $4 billion in lost wages.While the struggling steel industry is craving protection from global competition, other industries have warned of the potentially harmful ripple effects. In late May, the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association warned in a letter to the Department of Commerce that steel tariffs would mean higher prices for their customers.“Protecting and providing for the defense of the United States is always of the highest priority,” the group wrote. “So too, however, is ensuring the strength and competitiveness of our national economy.”Tariffs would also have a disruptive impact on global supply chains. It is possible that a blanket tariff could lead to a global glut of steel, as exporters around the world flood other markets to make up for the diminished market in the United States.Michael Strain, an economist at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, worries that retaliation from China and Europe to any steel tariffs would be particularly painful for American exporters and could lead to job cuts when Mr. Trump is trying to bolster employment and labor force participation.While the steel industry, which Mr. Trump promised to revive, could benefit, other industries such as construction and housing would probably suffer. Many of the workers in these industries and the consumers who buy their goods are likely to be the types of moderate-income voters who backed Mr. Trump.“It will hurt the people it’s designed to help through higher prices,” Mr. Strain said. “Ultimately the economy will lose.”On Friday, Cecilia Malmstrom, the European trade commissioner, warned the Trump administration against taking measures that would penalize European steel exporters. She declined to say what measures Europe would take in retaliation or what specific United States exports could face higher tariffs.“Barriers on steel imports would be very bad for the E.U., as European businesses and workers could be affected very heavily and jobs would be threatened,” Ms. Malmstrom said in an email. “As we haven’t seen the proposal yet, we will first have to check whether the measure is in compliance with W.T.O. rules.”“If global trade rules are not upheld, the E.U. will retaliate, but I cannot say now exactly how and when. We understand that the U.S. has concerns about overcapacity in China but we don’t think this is the right way to go, as you cannot fight protectionism with protectionism,” she added.Mr. Trump’s impulsiveness is another reason for worry. While Mr. Bush backed down after the W.T.O. verdict, a Trump administration with an “America First” mentality may be less amenable to a ruling handed down by bureaucrats in Switzerland. The fear is that Mr. Trump could abandon the trade organization entirely, essentially unraveling an institution that has been instrumental in lowering trade barriers over the past two decades.“The big concern with the Trump administration is their commitment to the W.T.O. system and whether it bothers them to have the system weakened,” said Chad P. Bown, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.So far Mr. Trump has lived up to his reputation for being unpredictable when it comes to trade. He threatened to terminate the North American Free Trade Agreement, before reversing himself and agreeing to renegotiate its terms. He withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, but Wilbur Ross, his commerce secretary, has since praised the defunct pact as a strong starting point for future negotiations.Mr. Trump’s aides have offered mixed signals about how he will handle steel imports, suggesting on some occasions that he prefers a politically satisfying blanket tariff and at other times hinting that he will take a more targeted approach. The president offered little clarity on Monday, when he wrote cryptically on Twitter: “Don’t like steel & aluminum dumping!”Mr. Moore, the Heritage Foundation economist, said that during a visit to South Korea this week he found a palpable anxiety about the possibility of Mr. Trump imposing a hefty steel tariff. For a country that is the world’s third-largest steel exporter, it would be a damaging proposition.But Mr. Moore was optimistic that Mr. Trump would ultimately settle on a more temperate and targeted approach, and that the threat of tariffs would win the United States concessions at the negotiating table, with the bluster leading to a better deal.“In the end, I think Trump’s bark will be worse than his bite on trade,” Mr. Moore said, hopefully.