http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/02/sports/tennis/although-a-roof-is-planned-its-a-waiting-game-for-fans-and-players.html
A Roof Is Planned, but It’s a Waiting Game for Fans and Players - The New York Times
Tennis,United States Open (Tennis),Billie Jean King National Tennis Center,Stadiums and Arenas,Weather,Ashe  Arthur  Stadium,Armstrong  Louis  Stadium (Queens  NY)
Sept. 1, 2013
9048
With ominous daggers of lightning on the Weather Channel’s Web site, dark clouds scudding across the sky and rumors of cloudbursts in the vicinity, most people at the United States Open cannot help but obsess about Teflon flaps covering the main stadium and the reassuring plock-plock-plock of tennis being played.Dryness is still three or four years away, but the biggest player at the Open so far is neither male nor female, champion nor upstart, but rather the retractable roof promised by 2016 or 2017.“I don’t know how much difference it makes to the players,” Andy Murray, the defending champion, said of the proposed roof after winning his match Sunday. “There’s 128 players in the draw. It will help 10, 15 players, but it doesn’t help everybody.”Then Murray added: “But for the tournament, it’s great. It’s great for TV. It’s great for people that have tickets to come and watch, as well. And it means also that the tournament, you know, most likely will get finished on time.”Nothing wrong with any of that. After a seeming monsoon age caused the men’s final to be postponed to a highly anticlimactic Monday in each of the past five years, people carped: why can’t the Open be like Wimbledon and the Australian Open, which have roofs, or at least the French Open, which has plans for one?Then, like a bolt from the blue, the United States Tennis Association announced on Aug. 15 that it now had a plan for a retractable roof over bulky Arthur Ashe Stadium and another over the future Louis Armstrong Stadium, perhaps in 2018.Rafael Nadal of Spain said last week that it is “not normal, finishing a tournament on Monday.” It is nice, he said, to finish a tournament on a Sunday.Nadal’s opinion is correct. Monday should be ceded to American football. Everybody wishes the Ashe roof were here right now to avoid the ludicrous scene last Wednesday when just about all tennis stopped while directly across Roosevelt Avenue the Mets and Phillies pitched and batted in a sprinkle.The slightest spritz from the sky can stop tennis, and mess with the tortured minds of players, who live nomadic lives and are used to long stupefying delays in airports, hotels and locker rooms.“We were checking the radar a little bit before the match and it did look like we had a couple of hours of dry,” said Bob Bryan, after he and his twin, Mike, rallied for a three-set doubles victory Sunday in the first match of the day in Ashe Stadium. Nobody wants to be cooped up for hours.Juan Martín del Potro can empathize. “We’ve been at the locker room preparing the match like three, four times a day, then the rains coming again,” del Potro of Argentina said Wednesday after his match, originally scheduled for the day session, finally concluded after 4 hours 13 minutes, and deep into the evening.Sloane Stephens, the American who had a nice run here before hitting the brick wall named Serena Williams on Sunday, recalled her ordeal Wednesday: “Literally, every 10 minutes they kept saying: ‘If Murray plays long, we’ll move you. If it rains, we won’t.’ ”“I’m like, ‘Oh, my God, it’s horrible,’ ” Stephens said. “I never started that late. It was definitely a long experience. But I played good. Maybe I should do that more often.”What was the toughest challenge in waiting? “Finding something to do,” Stephens said. Her solution? “I warmed up. I ate. I looked on Instagram, trying to figure out what picture I was going to post tomorrow. I literally had nothing to do. I was on my phone talking to my mom. Random stuff.”With a tropical storm, hurricanes and showers affecting the last five tournaments, fans began to feel like canaries in the coal mine — the first victims of some new danger. Last year, Danny Zausner, the chief operating officer of the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, asked CompuWeather to look into the U.S.T.A.’s long-held premise that late August and early September are a relatively dry time in Queens.The fact is, the Open, formerly an amateur event known as the Nationals, has had its share of delays over the decades, some of them epic. The U.S.T.A. devotes three full pages of its media guide to delays, including the hurricane that roared across Long Island into Connecticut in 1938 and killed more than 500 people. Tennis resumed six days later, with the finals played on Sept. 24.Is the weather getting more damp this time of year? Could five straight men’s finals on Mondays be blamed on humankind’s energy-burning machines?The answer from CompuWeather was, “The weeks of 8/20, 8/26, 9/3 and 9/10 are the 20th, 13th, 11th and 16th driest weeks of the year (respectively) according to the 1981-2010 climate average. That said, the data does support some high precipitation amounts during a few weeks in the recent years of 2008, 2010 and 2011.”The report stresses that “a wide variability in precipitation” can take place from year to year. The study concluded: “At the moment the past few years would be considered an anomaly based on the limited data sample to support an increase in the normal amount of precipitation for future years.”Though it may not be a tangible product of global warming, the rain has still shown the U.S.T.A. was belatedly pursuing a retractable roof after failing to do so when Ashe Stadium was built for the 1997 Open. The huge stadium is four times the size of Centre Court at Wimbledon, partly to accommodate two tiers of dead-zone luxury boxes, and cannot bear a roof because of the weight of the stadium.The problem is that the Flushing Meadows area is a salt marsh, later used as a municipal dump made famous as The Valley of Ashes in Fitzgerald’s “The Great Gatsby.” Ashe is built on pilings — 150, 200 feet deep, ultimately hitting bedrock.By 2009, the U.S.T.A. was asking another firm to design a roof, but the original team that had designed Ashe — the Rossetti architectural firm of Southfield, Mich., and Ahmad Rahimian, the structural engineer, chief executive of WSP Cantor Seinuk of New York — did not give up.“They took it rather personally,” Zausner said, recalling how the two firms came back with proposals for an eight-legged structure outside the stadium, which could bear a retractable roof of heavy-duty Teflon that is designed to last 30 years and withstand 99-mile-per-hour winds, and remain closed in the winter to keep snow out.One little discovery: to keep condensation from forming inside the Teflon roof, the Open will need air conditioning, which will not score points with the green lobby. But Zausner said air conditioning would only be needed when there is rain during the two-week Open and could be handled with portable generators.The two roofs will “take care of 80, 90 percent of the fans,” in Zausner’s words. The attendance figures are staggering — a record day-session attendance of 38,120 on Sunday.Zausner says the future campus could handle as many as 10,000 more paying customers what with the two roofs — a scary thought, but at least fans won’t have to run for cover when it rains, the way they do now. The weather forecast was showing jagged scattered lighting storms into Tuesday. Where is that roof when we may need it?