https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/22/world/asia/donald-tsang-sentence-hong-kong.html
Donald Tsang, Former Hong Kong Leader, Gets 20 Months for Misconduct - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Politics and Government
Feb. 22, 2017
6660
HONG KONG — A former leader of Hong Kong was sentenced to 20 months in prison on Wednesday for misconduct in public office, a development in a high-profile trial that has again brought attention to the cozy ties between the city’s political elites and business tycoons.Donald Tsang, who was the chief executive of Hong Kong from 2005 to 2012, is the highest-ranking former official in the city to be put behind bars.Mr. Tsang was found guilty last week over his failure to disclose his interests when his cabinet was considering a broadcasting license application by a Chinese property developer from 2010 to 2012.A jury concluded that Mr. Tsang had deliberately concealed his plans to lease a three-story penthouse from the developer, Wong Cho-bau, when the developer’s company was seeking government approval for several applications, including one for a digital audio broadcasting license. The applications were approved.Mr. Tsang is planning to appeal his conviction, his wife, Selina Tsang, told reporters outside the High Court after the sentencing.“Today is a very dark day. The entire family is disappointed and upset,” she said.The conviction and sentencing are sure to tarnish the legacy of Mr. Tsang, who had served in public office for 45 years, including seven as chief executive, the city’s top political office.“Never in my judicial career have I seen a man fallen from so high,” said the judge in the case, Andrew Chan Hing-wai, according to the public broadcaster RTHK.Mr. Tsang, 72, faced a maximum sentence of seven years in prison for misconduct in public office. Taking into account his life in public service, the judge cut the original sentence to 20 months from 30 months.He was acquitted of another charge of misconduct over failing to declare that an interior designer he nominated for an official honor had renovated the penthouse, in the neighboring Chinese city of Shenzhen, at below market rates.The jury failed to reach a majority verdict on a corruption charge that accused Mr. Tsang of accepting advantage — the refurbishment of the apartment — from Mr. Wong in return for approving his company’s license application. The charge is set to be retried in September.In 2014, Mr. Tsang’s deputy, Rafael Hui, was convicted of misconduct in public office in another high-profile trial over dealings with a billionaire property tycoon.