https://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/18/world/americas/uruguay-senate-approves-first-trimester-abortions.html
Uruguay Senate Approves First-Trimester Abortions - The New York Times
Uruguay,Law and Legislation,Abortion,Mujica  Jose,Decisions and Verdicts
Oct. 17, 2012
9130
SÃO PAULO, Brazil — Uruguay’s Senate approved a bill on Wednesday that allows women to have abortions during the first trimester of pregnancy for any reason, opening the way for one of the most sweeping abortion rights laws in Latin America.The bill, approved by Uruguay’s 31-member Senate by a 17-to-14 vote, had been narrowly approved in September by the country’s lower house. While some prominent political leaders in Uruguay have opposed the measure, President José Mujica has supported it. Alberto Breccia, a top aide to Mr. Mujica, said Wednesday that the president had no plans to veto the bill, almost ensuring that it would become law by early November.The abortion measure points to the political changes under way in Uruguay, which has a population of 3.3 million. In another debate closely followed in Latin America, Mr. Mujica, a former guerrilla, is also pushing for the legalization of marijuana.Other nations, namely Communist-led Cuba and Guyana, the English-speaking South American country with fewer than 1 million people, have also legalized abortion. Elsewhere in the region, Colombia has eased a ban on abortion, allowing it in cases including rape, incest and when a woman’s life is in danger, while Mexico City legalized abortion in 2007.Uruguay’s bill has furthered the debate about abortion legislation in Latin America, a bastion of Roman Catholicism and a region where evangelical faiths are growing rapidly. The bill effectively legalizes abortion in the first trimester, permits abortion through 14 weeks of pregnancy in cases of rape and allows later-term abortions when a woman’s health is at risk.Still, the bill approved by Uruguay’s Senate came after a pointed debate among legislators, producing a compromise that disappointed both abortion rights groups and opponents, who have vowed to carry out a referendum to overturn the legislation. Legislators carefully worded the bill, describing it not as legalization of abortion but as a decriminalization measure.The legislation requires a woman to explain her desire to have an abortion to a panel of at least three people, including a gynecologist, social worker and mental health professional, who must discuss abortion-related health risks and alternatives including adoption. After meeting with the panel, a woman must then reflect for five days before finally opting to have an abortion.“We accomplished what was possible,” said María Elena Laurnaga, a legislator who helped win approval of the bill. She said the legislations generated “the conditions for all women to exercise their right to a safe abortion.”The measure in Uruguay is already emerging as reference point in parts of Latin America, where debates are intensifying over abortion. In Brazil, Latin America’s largest country, abortion remains illegal in most circumstances; it is allowed only in cases of rape, an anencephalic fetus or when a woman’s life is in danger.In Argentina, Uruguay’s neighbor, the high court ruled last week that a woman rescued from a prostitution ring be allowed to have an abortion, after an anti-abortion group had won an injunction from a Buenos Aires court minutes before she was scheduled to begin the procedure at a hospital.Argentina’s high court had previously ruled in March that women who have an abortion after being raped will no longer be prosecuted. But women in Argentina still have to seek a medical evaluation and a court’s permission to carry out the procedure.The Legislature of Buenos Aires narrowly approved in September a bill allowing women to have an abortion in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, and it allowed girls under the age of 14 to seek an abortion without obtaining parental consent. But Mauricio Macri, the mayor, vetoed the bill.