http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/15/obituaries/byron-r-white-supreme-court-justice-for-31-years-dies-at-84.html
Byron R. White, Supreme Court Justice for 31 Years, Dies at 84 - The New York Times
United States,Supreme Court (US),Greenhouse  Linda,Politics and Government,Suits and Litigation,Legal Profession,United States Politics and Government
April 15, 2002
1505
Byron R. White, the football legend who became one of the longest serving justices of the United States Supreme Court, died today in a Denver nursing home of complications of pneumonia. He was 84 years old. He retired from the court nine years ago and was the only living former Supreme Court justice.When he retired after 31 years on the court, he was the last veteran of the liberal era of Chief Justice Earl Warren. But despite his status then as the court's sole remaining Democrat, he was in many ways more at home in the conservative era of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.After his retirement, Justice White sat occasionally as a visiting judge on federal appeals courts and served in 1998 as the chairman of a special commission set up to study the structure of the federal appellate system. Last year, in failing health, he closed the chambers he maintained in Washington and moved with his wife, Marion, back to their native Colorado.A national sports hero, Rhodes scholar, successful lawyer, triumphant political organizer and director of Robert F. Kennedy's Justice Department — Byron R. White had been all of these before his friend, John F. Kennedy, named him to the Supreme Court in 1962.Only 44 years old at the time of his appointment, Justice White was one of the youngest people ever named to the court, and his tenure of 31 years was one of the longest in the court's history; among 20th-century justices, only Hugo L. Black, William O. Douglas, and William J. Brennan Jr. served longer.President Kennedy, calling his nominee "the ideal New Frontier judge," said that Byron White "excelled in everything he has attempted." That was an understatement about a life that had a storybook quality — so much so that his decades on the court sometimes appeared more an anticlimax than a crowning achievement.The son of parents who never graduated from high school, raised in a small Colorado town and educated on scholarships, Byron White was a classically gifted scholar-athlete who outshone the competition in both dimensions. He was the only person to become both a member of the National Football Hall of Fame, to which he was elected in 1954, and a law clerk to the chief justice of the United States.In the full glare of national publicity, the young Byron White juggled his two worlds to a degree that would be inconceivable today. In 1938, having deferred his Rhodes scholarship for a semester in order to play a season of professional football with the Pittsburgh Pirates (later called the Steelers), he received the National Football League's highest-ever salary ($15,800) and led the league in rushing — a feat he duplicated two years later, when he took a semester off from Yale Law School to play for the Detroit Lions.A stellar law school career — interrupted for Navy service during World War II as well as for football — was capped by a year as a law clerk to Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson during the court's 1946-47 term. Only 15 years later, Byron White became the first Supreme Court law clerk to then return to the court as a justice.His own judicial legacy remained a complex and somewhat ambiguous one. He never achieved the stardom or public recognition on the Supreme Court that he had received earlier — not that he sought either at any point in his life. An authentic celebrity in an era before fame became an everyday commodity, he was also the most reluctant of celebrities, viewing with intense distaste, which remained with him the rest of his life, the media speculation that attended his every move as a young man. His dislike of the nickname "Whizzer," which the sportswriters had bestowed on him and which he could never quite manage to shake, was legendary."Byron would have been just as happy — I think he might have preferred — if he played with 21 other players in an empty stadium," one of his University of Colorado teammates commented many years later to Justice White's biographer, Professor Dennis J. Hutchinson of the University of Chicago Law School.A thesis of the biography, "The Man Who Once Was Whizzer White" (The Free Press, 1998), was that a driving force of Byron White's adult life was the effort to "seal off his athletic past" and to be accepted on his chosen terms, as a lawyer. The book's title referred to an incident early in 1961, when Mr. White, the new deputy attorney general in the new Kennedy administration, was having lunch in a restaurant near the Department of Justice. "Say, aren't you Whizzer White?" the waitress asked. After a moment, he replied in a soft voice: "I was."Joining the court at the height of its liberal activism under Chief Justice Earl Warren, he was often in dissent during his early years as a justice and assumed a position of influence only after a series of appointments by Republican presidents shifted the court in a more conservative direction. "Eventually, the court changed, society changed, the issues changed," Kate Stith Cabranes, a Yale Law School professor and one of his former law clerks, said after his retirement. "Byron White didn't change."He cast dissenting votes in Miranda v. Arizona, the 1966 landmark decision that required a police officer to inform a suspect in a crime of his or her right to remain silent and to consult with a lawyer, and in Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to abortion. Although he gradually came to accept the Miranda doctrine, Justice White never reconciled himself to Roe v. Wade and continued to dissent as the court applied and reaffirmed that decision over the years.He found himself much more at home in the conservative 1980's and 1990's, writing majority opinions that cut back on the scope of federal civil rights laws, that upheld state laws prohibiting homosexual sex between consenting adults, and that permitted prosecutors to use evidence obtained with defective search warrants.But no ideological label ever fit Justice White comfortably. Committed to the use of federal power to eradicate the legacy of school segregation, he wrote majority opinions upholding wide-ranging desegregation orders for Northern school districts and affirming the power of federal judges to order a school district to increase taxes to pay for the school improvements necessary to make an integration plan work. "In many ways he has been the pre-eminent nationalist on the court in the modern era," Professor Stith Cabranes wrote.He also believed that with power came accountability, filing a strong dissent from a 1982 decision that gave presidents of the United States absolute immunity from suits for damages for their official actions. He dissented from the court's 1983 decision in the Chadha case, which invalidated the legislative veto, a device widely used by Congress to block executive branch actions. "The history of separation-of-powers doctrine is also a history of accommodation and practicality," he wrote, objecting to the majority's insistence on maintaining the barrier between legislative and executive power.The difficulty in categorizing him came in part from the fact that Justice White was motivated not by ideology in the conventional sense but by a multifaceted vision of the American system that included a strong yet politically accountable federal government and, at the same time, a Supreme Court that deferred to judgments reached by Congress and the executive branch. "Judges have an exaggerated view of their role in our polity," he said once.Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, a Yale Law School classmate who later served with him in the Kennedy Justice Department, recalled in an article marking the justice's 25th anniversary on the court that his friend's hallmark both as a student and as a judge was "a healthy skepticism — a probing questioning of premises and an insistence on conclusions reached by small and visible steps in a rational process as opposed to giant leaps of faith."Mr. Katzenbach wrote that Justice White's work on the court reflected his "belief that hard work and determination can lead to success, and a lack of sympathy for those who abuse power and privilege as well as for those who whine about bad luck." These views, Mr. Katzenbach wrote, "tend to make him tough on those in government or out of it who don't respect and comply with law."Justice White's own luck, at key moments of his life, was splendid. As a young man, he encountered John F. Kennedy twice within a few years: once at Oxford, where both were studying just before the outbreak of World War II, and again in the Pacific in 1942, where both were Navy lieutenants. It was Lieutenant White, an intelligence officer, who was assigned to write the official report of the sinking of Lieutenant Kennedy's torpedo boat, PT-109, by a Japanese destroyer. The two men, 10 days apart in age (Kennedy was the elder), established a bond that eventually resulted in Mr. White's Supreme Court appointment.Byron Raymond White was born June 8, 1917, in Fort Collins, Colo., and grew up in Wellington, a small town in northern Colorado where his parents moved soon after his birth. His father, Albert White, was a branch manager for a lumber supply company and also served as mayor. As a child, Byron worked in the nearby sugar beet fields. His first job in the fields, at the age of 6, paid $1.50 a day."There was very little money around Wellington," Mr. White said at the time of his Supreme Court appointment. "I suppose you could say that by the standards of today we were all quite poor, although we didn't necessarily feel poor because everyone was more or less the same. Everybody worked for a living. Everybody."The University of Colorado offered a scholarship to the top student in the graduating class of every high school in the state. As the first in his five-member senior class, Mr. White accepted the scholarship. His brother Sam, also a top student and athlete, a Rhodes scholar who later became a doctor, had preceded him there by four years.At Colorado, he excelled both in class, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his junior year, and in sports, where he starred in basketball and baseball as well as football, winning a total of seven letters as well as all-conference honors in every sport he played. The Colorado football team was undefeated in his final season, and Mr. White, who was a star punter and passer as well as a halfback, led the nation in scoring, rushing and total offense. By the time he graduated, as valedictorian of the class of 1938, the national press had long since discovered Whizzer White and was filled with speculation about his prospects.Awarded a Rhodes scholarship for study at Oxford, he deferred his departure until the spring semester to play a season with the Pittsburgh Pirates. He led the National Football League in rushing, with 567 yards in 11 games.He began studying law at Oxford in January 1939 but returned to the United States soon after World War II began in September. He entered Yale Law School that fall and earned the highest grades in the first-year class, but he turned down an editorship of the Yale Law Journal and took a leave of absence to play football with the Detroit Lions. He played for two seasons, and again led the league in rushing in 1940.After the United States entered World War II, he joined the Navy as an intelligence officer and served in the South Pacific for nearly four years. Returning to Yale Law School, he received his degree in 1946 and moved to Washington to begin his year as a law clerk. John Kennedy was also a new arrival to Washington in 1946, beginning his career in Congress, and the two men were soon reunited.Also that year, he married Marion Stearns, his college sweetheart. She was the granddaughter of a Colorado governor and the daughter of Robert L. Stearns, the dean of the law school at the University of Colorado and later the university's president.In 1947, the Whites returned to Colorado. He joined a Denver law firm, Lewis, Grant, Newton, Davis & Henry (now known as Davis, Graham & Stubbs), remaining there for 14 years and thriving in a general commercial practice that brought him often into court. His clients ranged from individuals with zoning disputes to IBM and other major corporations that were expanding into the West. His partners liked to tell about Mr. White's first criminal case, in which he successfully defended a man charged with passing a bad check. He then accepted the client's thanks and his check — which turned out to be worthless.Mr. White was repeatedly invited to run for office during this period, but he resisted any serious involvement in politics until John Kennedy, now a senator, asked him for help in the early stages of his campaign for the White House in 1960. Mr. White organized Colorado-for-Kennedy clubs and brought the state's delegation to the Democratic National Convention into the Kennedy column. At the request of Mr. Kennedy's brother, Robert, he then took charge of the national Citizens for Kennedy organization during the general election campaign.President-elect Kennedy offered Mr. White the job of deputy attorney general, the No. 2 position in the Justice Department that Robert Kennedy would head as attorney general. Mr. White was in charge of the day-to-day administration, recruiting lawyers for top positions, overseeing the department's initiatives in Congress, and taking an active hand in selecting nominees for 70 new federal judgeships that Congress had recently created.With the civil rights struggle accelerating in the South, Mr. White monitored federal efforts to quell the growing violence that accompanied the freedom rides, sit-ins and marches. He went to Alabama to supervise 400 federal marshals and deputies sent to restore order in the state in May 1961.President Kennedy learned in March 1962 that Justice Charles E. Whittaker had become mentally disabled and was about to leave the court. The president considered several potential nominees, but Byron White was always his top choice. Mr. White expressed little enthusiasm when first Mr. Katzenbach and then Robert Kennedy called him to test his interest, but he agreed to accept the appointment.The choice, announced on March 31, was a popular one. The Senate confirmed the nomination on April 11 and on April 16, Mr. White took his seat as an associate justice. When he retired 31 years later, he was the only remaining justice to have been appointed by a Democratic President.The change from his active life in the world of law and politics was abrupt. In a 1988 speech, Justice White said somewhat plaintively that life on the court had its "excruciating" aspects. "Where else can one be so isolated and alone, yet turn from hero to heel or from heel to hero in just 10 pages or so?" he asked. "Where else does the telephone ring so seldom?"It took him barely two months to file his first dissenting opinion, in which he struck a tone and expressed a viewpoint from which he would hardly ever waver. The case was Robinson v. California, in which a 6-to-2 majority declared unconstitutional a California law that made it a crime for a person to be a narcotics addict, even in the absence of proof of the sale or possession of illegal drugs. Making the "status" of addiction itself a crime violated the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment, the majority ruled.It was the first time the court had used the Eighth Amendment to overturn a state criminal conviction. Justice White's dissenting opinion said, in part: "I fail to see why the court deems it more appropriate to write into the Constitution its own abstract notions of how best to handle the narcotics problem, for it obviously cannot match either the states or Congress in expert understanding."Justice White was often inclined to support the prosecution in criminal cases, but that was only one theme to emerge in this early opinion. The other was the court's duty to defer, except in the face of an express constitutional provision to the contrary, to the policy judgments reached by institutions of government that were directly responsive to majority will. At most, in his view, the court's job was to ensure that the rest of government functioned as it was intended to.In dissenting opinions, he often warned the court against "the unrestrained imposition of its own, extraconstitutional value preferences," as he said in dissent in a 1986 case that reaffirmed the right to abortion. His original dissenting opinion in Roe v. Wade said: "As an exercise of raw judicial power, the court perhaps has authority to do what it does today; but in my view its judgment is an improvident and extravagant exercise of the power of judicial review that the Constitution extends to this Court." If he had any personal views on the abortion question, he never expressed them.In contests between federal authority and state power, he almost always voted for the federal side, perhaps applying lessons learned during his service in the Justice Department dealing with recalcitrant Southern governors. Another legacy of that period might also have been his consistent votes to protect and expand voting rights and to sustain the authority of the federal government — though not necessarily the authority of other levels of government or of the private sector — to remedy racial discrimination.In disputes between the government and the press, he took the government's side, writing a series of majority opinions in the 1970's that rejected any argument by the press of the need for special treatment. For example, his opinion in Branzburg v. Hayes in 1972 rejected the argument that the First Amendment shielded journalists from having to disclose their confidential sources to a grand jury. A majority of the states subsequently passed laws providing such protection as a matter of state policy.Although he joined the majority opinion in New York Times v. Sullivan, the 1964 decision that created a First Amendment shield for the press against libel suits by public officials, he later said he regretted his vote. "It is difficult to argue that the United States did not have a free and vigorous press before the rule in New York Times was announced," he wrote in a 1985 opinion.In a First Amendment case that did not involve the press, he dissented from the court's 1989 decision in Texas v. Johnson that the burning of an American flag as a political protest was constitutionally protected expression and could not be punished as a crime.At the same time, he disagreed with the majority in a 1991 case, Barnes v. Glen Theater, which upheld an Indiana law that banned nude dancing. In Justice White's view, the banned performances were a form of expression deserving of First Amendment protection. "That the performances in the Kitty Kat Lounge may not be high art, to say the least, and may not appeal to the court, is hardly an excuse for distorting and ignoring settled doctrine," he wrote in a dissenting opinion. "The court's assessment of the artistic merits of nude dancing performances should not be the determining factor in deciding this case."The impatience that Justice White expressed in that opinion with efforts by the government to control private behavioral choices was not apparent in his majority opinion in Bowers v. Hardwick, the 1986 decision that rejected a claim of constitutional protection for consensual homosexual sex. The 5-to-4 decision upheld a Georgia law making homosexual sodomy a crime. Given that half the states maintained similar criminal prohibitions, Justice White wrote, the argument for a fundamental constitutional right to engage in homosexual sex "is, at best, facetious."His opinion continued: "Nor are we inclined to take a more expansive view of our authority to discover new fundamental rights imbedded in the due process clause. The court is most vulnerable and comes nearest to illegitimacy when it deals with judge-made constitutional law having little or no cognizable roots in the language or design of the Constitution."When the court does so, he said, "the judiciary necessarily takes to itself further authority to govern the country without express constitutional authority."Bowers v. Hardwick was probably the one opinion of Justice White's that was best known to the general public. An opinion that was less well known, but that many scholars regarded as his most important in terms of the subsequent development of legal doctrine, came in 1976 in a racial discrimination case called Washington v. Davis.That case was a challenge to a standardized examination used by the District of Columbia police department for recruiting and promoting police officers. While there was no proof that the department intended to screen out black candidates, the test had a discriminatory effect, with blacks failing it at four times the rate of whites.The question for the court was whether this discriminatory impact violated the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection. The answer, provided in Justice White's majority opinion, was no; proof that the government was intentionally discriminating, not just taking action that happened to have a discriminatory effect, was an essential element of a violation of the Constitution's equal protection guarantee, the court said.Washington v. Davis was sharply criticized by civil-rights advocates. It proved to be an influential opinion in a variety of contexts, shifting the focus of the court's scrutiny of government behavior to the government's purpose rather than the ultimate result.Justice White wrote important decisions in the criminal law area throughout his tenure on the court. He joined the majority in 1972 that invalidated the nation's death penalty laws, as well as the majority opinions four years later that permitted capital punishment to resume under state laws restructured to overcome the court's original objections. In 1977, he wrote the majority opinion in Coker v. Georgia, holding that the death penalty was an unconstitutional penalty for rape.His majority opinion in United States v. Leon in 1984, permitting prosecutors to use some evidence that was obtained illegally but in "good faith," accomplished a major objective of the Justice Department under President Ronald Reagan. But he also voted against the federal government often enough that his position could never be taken for granted. For example, he wrote the majority opinion in a 1992 case, Jacobson v. United States, overturning a child pornography conviction on the ground that the government had induced the defendant into buying material that he would not have bought on his own.Justice White completed his opinion-writing assignments quickly and usually carried more than his share of the workload during a Supreme Court term. His majority opinions tended to be spare and compressed to the point of obscurity, devoid of the rhetorical flourishes that he seemed to save for his dissents.Virtually alone among the justices, he frequently dissented in writing from the decision not to hear a case. In another singular practice, he refused to read portions of his opinions from the bench, announcing only the result but sharing none of the rationale with the frequently baffled courtroom audience. Asked why he did not participate with the other justices in the public opinion-reading ceremony, he once replied that he considered it a "waste of time."He could be gruff and intimidating on the bench, asking probing and sometimes disconcerting questions of the lawyers arguing their cases, and rarely tipping his hand as to how he thought the case should come out. He often tried to help inexperienced lawyers focus their argument, but he could be openly exasperated if they did not even know enough to grasp his helping hand. Then he would swivel in his chair and turn his back on the floundering lawyer. But a clever parry to one of his questions could bring an appreciative grin.Justice White and his wife lived in the Virginia suburbs of Washington. They regularly attended the ballet and other events at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Well into his 60's, Justice White played basketball with his law clerks in the Supreme Court gym, and they described him as an aggressive and competitive player.Those very traits linked the justice that Byron White became to the prepotent athlete he had been, in the view of Prof. John C. Jeffries Jr. of the University of Virginia Law School. Writing in the University of Chicago Law Review in 1999, Professor Jeffries remarked on "how closely White's strengths and weaknesses as a judge echoed his talents as an athlete." "A keen sense of contest dominated both contexts," he maintained. "In both, White was tough, hard-driving, and utterly purposive. In both, he shunned doubt. The openness, unguardedness, and sympathy for opposing concerns that were missing from White the judge would have disadvantaged White the athlete. The frank admissions of uncertainty or indecision so rarely encountered in White's opinions would have been seen as weakness in football — or worse, as whining excuses for poor performance."Professor Jeffries concluded: "Ironically, the Supreme Court may also have been the one environment that could obscure White's enormous strengths."Justice White announced his retirement on March 19, 1993, choosing early spring rather than the traditional end-of-term announcement in late June in order to provide time for a successor to be comfortably seated in time for the next Supreme Court term. President Clinton chose Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who was confirmed quickly, taking her seat on Aug. 10, 1993, well in time for the court's opening on the first Monday in October.Justice White broke with tradition in declining to hold a farewell press conference. Instead, he made public a letter to his colleagues, in which he thanked them for their friendship and announced his intention to sit from time to time as a visiting judge on the federal appeals courts. "Hence, like any other court of appeals judge," he said, "I hope the court's mandates will be clear, crisp, and leave those of us below with as little room as possible for disagreement about their meaning."