https://www.nytimes.com/1997/11/06/arts/arts-abroad-in-vienna-where-else-a-show-on-art-and-insanity.html
Arts Abroad; In Vienna (Where Else?), a Show on Art and Insanity - The New York Times
VIENNA (AUSTRIA),KUNSTFORUM,BRUGGER  INGRIED,MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS,ART
Nov. 6, 1997
9348
Given the recent vogue for art by the insane and the fact that early 20th-century Vienna was the hothouse for psychoanalytic thought, the season's major art show here, ''Art and Insanity,'' seems a natural fit of idea and place.But the original notion for the exhibit, which pulls together 350 works from around the world from the 17th century to the present, did not come from a grand plan.About three years ago, a Viennese psychiatrist dropped in to see Ingried Brugger, a director of the Kunstforum, and suggested a show of paintings by his patients. Ms. Brugger said she listened politely but explained that the Kunstforum had been established 15 years ago as a showcase for exhibits of great artists: van Gogh, Turner and the like. ''But then we thought: No one has ever shown the historical connection between art and insanity,'' she said.She kept in touch with her new psychiatrist friend to learn how schizophrenics felt and expressed themselves, then combed the great collections at home and abroad for what has become a pioneer and popular show.What she found ranges from 17th-century sculptures from the art collection of London's well-known mental hospital, Bethlem Hospital (known as Bedlam), to a newly discovered Austrian artist, Emanuel Navratil, who died in an insane asylum in 1956. The show includes two works by Gericault, two portraits by Vincent van Gogh and drawings and paintings by mentally ill patients from the 1920's collection of a Heidelberg psychiatrist, Karl Prinzhorn.Staging the show was a break from a shadow of Vienna's past. Because Hitler equated modern art with madness, there has been a lingering nervousness about showing art of the insane, Ms. Brugger said.''When I was preparing the exhibit, some older people said, 'You are breaking a taboo,' '' Ms. Brugger, who is 37, said. ''But we're a new generation.''By the old definition, it would be highly dangerous to show the work of one of Austria's most revered modern artists, Egon Schiele, in an exhibit that deals with the insane. Needless to say, Schiele is prominently displayed in this show: as a sane artist fascinated by the concept of madness and in particular the bold body language of hysterics. Schizophrenia was named in 1911, the year Schiele did his doubled-headed self-portraits.Ms. Brugger has placed some order on an unwieldy topic by dividing the show into three clear subjects: first, works about the insane, followed by art of the insane and finally the merging of art by the insane into contemporary art. She was eager to show not only work by artists who were mentally disturbed, she said, but also art by the sane about the insane. It wasn't always so easy to categorize artists. There was often lively discussion. What should they do about van Gogh? ''I think van Gogh was very afraid of being insane, but his work isn't that of insanity,'' Ms. Brugger said. While he was in an insane asylum, van Gogh painted two intense portraits, both of mentally ill male patients, and they are seen in the opening gallery.Among the first images in the show are two white stone sculptures. The two reclining men, one chained and naked and called ''Raving Madness,'' the other covered in a loincloth and called ''Melancholy Madness,'' were borrowed from the Bethlem Art and History Collections in London and are believed, Ms. Brugger said, to be among the first representations of insanity in art. The subjects were patients in the Bethlem Hospital. Another early portrayal of the insane is ''The Rake's Progress'' by Hogarth, in which the artist draws a horrifying scene: two primping, self-absorbed women amusing themselves with a visit to the ward of a mental hospital to stare at the inmates.The centerpiece of the show comes from a selection of drawings and paintings from the collection of Dr. Prinzhorn, who began as a student of art history and in the 1920's became a psychiatrist who worked with psychotic patients. His book, ''Artwork by the Insane,'' in the 1920's brought the first serious attention to the intrinsic merit of works by the insane.In the next gallery, Ms. Brugger has hung works by Adolf Wolfli, the Swiss farm laborer who spent the last 35 of his 66 years in an insane asylum. ''He was really mad, the first insane artist of our century,'' said Dr. Brugger, showing large canvases patterned with scribbled caricatures and macabre skulls that give some idea of the inner world of madness. Max Ernst took a copy of Dr. Prinzhorn's book to Paris, thus introducing the Surrealists to art from the asylum.Ernst, Paul Klee, Salvador Dali and Antonin Artaud form the core of the segment on the influence of the insane on 20th-century art.One of the last paintings of the show is a family portrait done in vivid oils: yellows, pinks and ochers. The luxurious lashings of brush strokes look closer to styles of the 1980's than 1908.Was the artist, Richard Gerstl, now recognized as one of Austria's significant modernists, sane or not? The portrait is of the Schoenberg family -- Arnold, the composer, his wife, Mathilde, and their four children. The faces have been gouged out by the artist, and their features are almost indistinguishable.Shortly after completing the painting, Gerstl committed suicide. He had had an affair with Mrs. Schoenberg. ''The painting shows some kind of psychotic crisis,'' Ms. Brugger said. ''But I have no real diagnosis for the painting. But I do know he committed suicide at the age of 28.''