https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/31/world/asia/myanmar-president-htin-kyaw.html
President of Myanmar Urges Patience in Move Toward Democracy - The New York Times
Myanmar,Htin Kyaw,Aung San Suu Kyi,National League for Democracy (Myanmar),Inaugurations
March 30, 2016
8223
NAYPYIDAW, Myanmar — Myanmar’s new president called for patience in the pursuit of full democracy after his inauguration on Wednesday ended more than half a century of rule by the military and its allies.“We have to work for a Constitution that is in harmony with democratic values,” the new chief of state, U Htin Kyaw, said in a speech. “This is a political ambition that people have wanted for a long, long time. We have to be patient.”Mr. Htin Kyaw is a close ally of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who led their party, the National League for Democracy, to a landmark victory in elections in November. She is barred from serving as president by the military-drafted Constitution, but the party has pushed to allow her to take the top post.Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi was also sworn in on Wednesday as a minister in the new government. She will lead four ministries: education, energy, foreign affairs and the presidential office.Myanmar was ruled by the military for more than 50 years after a coup in 1962. But the armed forces will keep a powerful position in the new government, holding the vice presidency, three ministries and a guaranteed 25 percent of seats in Parliament. Senior Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, the armed forces chief, attended the inauguration ceremony with his deputy, Gen. Soe Win.“The most difficult challenge for the new government is the military,” said U Oo Hla Saw, a member of the lower house for the Arakan National Party. “Every single development here depends on whether the military will be tolerant or hard-line.”The new government will push for national reconciliation and an end to military conflicts with ethnic groups, Mr. Htin Kyaw said.“We will try to work for development and progress of the livelihood and living standards of the majority of people,” he added.