https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/26/nyregion/portal-bridge-presents-northeast-rail-commuters-with-a-104-year-old-problem.html
104-Year-Old Portal Bridge Presents $900 Million Problem for Rail Commuters - The New York Times
Bridges and Tunnels,New Jersey,Amtrak,Railroad Accidents and Safety,Railroads,Infrastructure (Public Works),Delays (Transportation),Transportation,Transit Systems,New Jersey Transit
Sept. 25, 2014
8690
It carries more passenger trains than any other railroad bridge in the Western Hemisphere, yet few people beyond those who rely on it have heard of it. It goes largely unnoticed, unless something goes wrong, which happens with irritating frequency. After all, the bridge is 104 years old.Every time it swings open to let a boat pass is a test of early-20th-century technology that can snarl train travel from Boston to Washington, the nation’s busiest rail corridor. And over the years, because it is partially made out of wood, it also has proved to be quite flammable.To the tens of thousands of commuters on the hundreds of trains that cross it going to or coming from New York City, the Portal Bridge is infamous.Since the start of last year, the bridge has been blamed for about 250 delays on the rails, according to New Jersey Transit, which is its heaviest user.Even in an era when so much of the nation’s infrastructure is in a state of disrepair, the Portal Bridge stands out. Everyone agrees that it is in desperate need of replacement, but no one has come up with the money for a new crossing. Two recent significant delays caused by the bridge have focused attention on Amtrak’s stalled effort to obtain the nearly $1 billion needed to replace the creaky bridge.Each day, about 450 trains carry more than 150,000 riders over the Portal, a fragile choke point that crosses the Hackensack River halfway between Manhattan and Newark.Every time its center section opens to let a tugboat push a barge full of sludge downriver, there is a reasonable chance that a lot of people will be late for work — or dinner — with delays radiating out from Pennsylvania Station in New York and stretching from the nation’s capital to Massachusetts.When the bridge’s name is uttered in official announcements or in email alerts, riders know that frustration lies just around the bend.“If you’re on the train and they say Portal Bridge, you know you’d better make other plans,” said Patrick Williams, who commutes to Midtown Manhattan from Long Branch, N.J. “It usually means big delays for thousands of people.”Most of those delays are measured in minutes, but when serious problems arise, the backups can last for hours. That is what happened twice over the summer when the bridge failed to swing back into place, delaying trains for as long as 45 minutes during the evening rush.A few weeks earlier, wooden fenders beneath the bridge caught fire just after 6:30 p.m., forcing Amtrak officials to cut power to the bridge. In the 70 minutes it took to extinguish the fire and reopen the bridge, 31 trains had been delayed and an additional 21 had been canceled. Commutes to New Jersey suburbs that would take just over an hour took three hours.The bridge is largely made of steel, but it has burned before: In 2005, a sparking wire set the fenders ablaze, shutting down all train travel on Amtrak’s mainline in the region overnight.Within Amtrak, which owns and operates it, the Portal is known as the “Achilles’ heel of the Northeast Corridor,” said Drew Galloway, assistant vice president for planning and development. “There are maintenance crews there around the clock. But you can only do so much to a century-old swing bridge.”For something built in 1910, Mr. Galloway said, “structurally, it probably is in reasonable condition.” But, he added, its mechanical and electrical systems are “reaching the end of their useful lives.”Indeed, the bridge, expected to last 100 years, is swinging on borrowed time. Federal transportation officials have recognized its precarious state for many years, and they have a plan to replace it with a two-track bridge tall enough for boats to pass under it.But that plan carries an estimated price of $900 million, none of which has been lined up yet. Mr. Galloway said Amtrak was pushing the project, with New Jersey Transit as its local partner. New Jersey Transit, which operates commuter trains and buses throughout the state, split the $32 million cost of the preliminary engineering of a replacement with Amtrak and also paid $12 million for its final design.When the governor of New Jersey, Chris Christie, a Republican, announced that New Jersey Transit was canceling its plan to build rail tunnels under the Hudson River to Manhattan, he criticized Democratic elected officials for failing to include funding for a new Portal Bridge in that project. In 2011, Mr. Christie said he had let federal officials know that New Jersey was prepared to contribute a “significant amount of money” toward a new bridge.“There can’t be high-speed rail between New York and Washington without a change at the Portal Bridge,” Mr. Christie said then.In fact, since a train derailed on it on a Saturday morning in late 1996, the Portal Bridge has lowered the speed of trains approaching and leaving New York to 60 miles per hour. Several cars of that train, which was carrying mail, wound up falling from the tracks into the marsh below. No one was killed, but 43 passengers and crew members on two trains were injured.Federal investigators determined the cause was a failure to return the rails to the right position after the bridge swung open for a tugboat. Before an opening, the tracks on the bridge’s deck must be raised so they can safely swing over the fixed segments that lead up to them. Getting the tracks lined up again has proved so tricky, and the traffic over the Portal is so heavy, that the Coast Guard has limited the times of day when boats can request an opening.Bill Sheehan, the founder of Hackensack Riverkeeper, an environmental advocacy group, described the Portal as “decrepit” and said he favored the plan for a taller bridge, even though commercial use on the river had declined over the years.The only regular river traffic comes from the tugs that push barges of sludge from the Bergen County Utilities Authority complex in Little Ferry to a sewage treatment plant in Newark, Mr. Sheehan said. But with its deck just 23 feet above the mean high water line of the river, the bridge is too low for even a fishing boat with a flying bridge to pass under, he said.“The problem with this 100-year-old bridge is when something breaks, they literally have to go back to the machine shop and make a new part,” Mr. Sheehan said. “There isn’t a Bridges ‘R’ Us that has what they need.”