https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/15/world/europe/greek-crisis-dulls-appetite-for-euro-in-countries-waiting-to-adopt-it.html
Greek Crisis Dulls Appetite for Euro in Countries Waiting to Adopt It - The New York Times
Euro (Currency),European Union,Greece,Poland,Czech Republic,Hungary,Europe,Romania,Bulgaria,Denmark,Eurozone,Croatia,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- )
July 14, 2015
7479
WARSAW — Once, it was an exclusive club that nearly all of Europe aspired to join. Now, in the wake of Greece’s latest financial crisis and the hard-line response from many of the Continent’s powers, becoming a partner in the European common currency seems less and less appealing to many of the countries lined up for their chance.From Poland to the Czech Republic to Hungary and points farther south and east, joining the euro is increasingly seen as rife with risks and costs — including a substantial surrender of sovereignty — that outweigh the benefits. And while many of the countries that have not yet adopted the single currency had doubts before the Greek crisis flared, the heavy penalties incurred by Athens to stay in the eurozone have made the trade-offs even clearer and the political leanings against membership more pronounced.The qualms about partnership in the currency raise further questions about the ability of the European Union to maintain momentum toward its long-held and oft-stated goal of ever-closer union. More than any other policy, the single currency was intended to bind the members economically and politically while reducing the chances of conflict, and the decline in enthusiasm for the union has tracked a more general reassessment of European integration.The doubts are now playing out primarily in the countries that most recently joined the European Union, primarily in Central and Eastern Europe. Lithuania became the 19th and newest adopter of the euro in January.Poland has the largest European Union economy that has not adopted the multinational currency, excluding those, like Britain and Denmark, that have decided to opt out of the eurozone.The governing party in Poland, Civic Platform — whose members include Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council — has long favored a move to the euro, but lately has taken a decidedly more cautious tone.“I have never said I would adopt the euro,” Prime Minister Ewa Kopacz said in a recent interview on state television. “Not today, not tomorrow, not in five years. We will introduce the euro when it will benefit Poles and Poland.”The right-wing Law and Justice party, whose presidential candidate, Andrzej Duda, was just elected to a five-year term, has made its aversion clear.“We reject this bad idea unless you want Poland to become a second Greece,” said Beata Szydlo, the party’s candidate for prime minister in parliamentary elections this fall. “Unless the eurozone deals with its own problems, there should be no discussion about Poland adopting the euro.”With such political attitudes hardening, the prospect of Poland’s or any other country’s adopting the euro anytime soon appears quite remote, said Sebastian Plociennik, an analyst for the Polish Institute of International Affairs who focuses on European integration and economic issues.“I think it will not happen not only in the next five years,” he said. “We need to think about the perspective of at least 10 years.”This euro wariness was echoed this week in capitals throughout Central and Eastern Europe.“Euro, yes, but there is no rush,” said Ales Michl, the chief economic adviser to the minister of finance in the Czech Republic.Eventually, the Greek crisis might inspire changes in the monetary union that would make embracing the euro more beneficial, said Lubomir Lizal, a member of the Czech National Bank’s board. “But it is too early, in the height of the crisis, to predict any aftermath changes.”Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, has long opposed a quick move to the euro, and the question had largely fallen from public discourse long before the standoff between Greece’s new left-wing government and the proponents of fiscal austerity in Brussels and Berlin.Like other countries that have joined the European Union since 2004, Hungary had to promise to adopt the euro at some point, but the exact timetable was left to the individual nations.“Hungary is supposed to join, but not in the foreseeable future,” said Zoltan Kovacs, Mr. Orban’s chief international spokesman. “We haven’t set any deadline. It opens Hungary to a lot of advantages not to adopt the euro, such as keeping control of our taxation and fiscal policy.”Other countries, struggling more financially, worry that adopting the euro will put them in the position of underwriting Greece’s fiscal irresponsibility. The nations that use the euro, along with the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank, are Greece’s major creditors.“We would also have to give money to Greece,” Boiko Borisov, the prime minister of Bulgaria, the union’s poorest member, said late last month. “The poorer would give to the richer. I do not see the logic in that.”But even if Bulgaria and other struggling countries decided to move forward, the Greek crisis may make current eurozone nations less eager to accept them as members.“I think Greece will be a lesson to the eurozone itself,” Ivailo Kalfin, Bulgaria’s deputy prime minister, said in an interview this week. “The appetite for accepting new countries will decrease.”Croatia’s new president, Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic, said in April that the country would adopt the euro within five years, but this was swiftly shot down by the prime minister, Zoran Milanovic, who said such promises were unhelpful. In any event, Croatia is lagging in efforts to institute the kind of fiscal reforms required to qualify for the euro, and public opinion toward the currency has plummeted since the Greek crisis erupted.Romania had set 2019 as a target date for adopting the euro, but few believe this is a realistic goal. Mugur Isarescu, the governor of the National Bank of Romania, said last week that he could see the process taking 10 more years.“Romania’s G.D.P. is 52 percent of the European Union average,” said Ciprian Dascalu, the chief economist for macroeconomic research at ING Bank Romania. “We need to reach 70 percent in order to cope with adopting the euro. Greece is a lesson in how an unprepared country can cope badly.”Zoltan Pogatsa, a political economist who teaches at the University of West Hungary, said the greatest benefits to joining the eurozone came from undertaking the financial reforms required to become a member. Once that stability is achieved, he said, it may be wiser to keep the local currency and peg it to the euro, as Denmark has done.“This way, you preserve your option to devalue, and you do not fall under the technocratic dictatorship of austerity,” he said.In Poland, with parliamentary election campaigns heating up, closer integration with Europe is likely to become a significant issue. The conservative governing party has long taken a pro-Europe stance, while the even more conservative opposition has been much warier of further European entanglements.“We will try to stay away from the eurozone as long as possible,” said Witold Waszczykowski, a former deputy foreign minister who now represents the opposition party in Parliament. “We must clarify the situation inside the zone and improve our own economy first. I don’t think, at the moment, we can even predict when we will be in a position to adopt the euro.”One of the few political voices in Poland pushing for a more rapid embrace of the euro is Ryszard Petru, a former chairman of the Association of Polish Economists, who has founded a new movement of young professionals called ModernPL, which  hopes to take a free-market message into the fall elections. “The problems of Greece are not due to euro adoption but to bad, populistic politics,” he said.A good case could be made for moving more quickly toward the euro, Mr. Petru said, but it will be some time before that will be politically possible in Poland. “It is unrealistic to think about euro adoption in the next five years, no matter what happens in Greece,” Mr. Petru said. “I would say it is a song of the future.”