http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/09/arts/design/world-trade-arts-center-design-barbra-streisand.html
Arts Center at Ground Zero Has a New Design, and Barbra Streisand in Charge - The New York Times
Culture (Arts),World Trade Center (Manhattan  NY),Lower Manhattan Development Corp,Perelman  Ronald O,Perelman  Ronald O  Performing Arts Center,Streisand  Barbra,Music
Sept. 8, 2016
9013
LONG-DELAYED plans to build a performing arts center at the World Trade Center site moved forward on Thursday when officials unveiled a new design for the building and announced that Barbra Streisand had been elected chairwoman of the board.A performing arts center was an important feature of the architect Daniel Libeskind’s 2003 master plan for the site’s redevelopment, but that element languished, becoming one of the last big pieces of unfinished business in rebuilding the World Trade Center after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Then the project was revived in June with a $75 million donation from Ronald O. Perelman, the billionaire businessman.Now, just before the 15th anniversary of the attacks, plans for the complex, to be called the Ronald O. Perelman Performing Arts Center at the World Trade Center, are taking new shape. The New York architecture firm REX, selected after a more elaborate plan by Frank Gehry was shelved, has released its conceptual design. Its proposal contains three small theaters that can be combined in various configurations to produce and stage theater, dance, music, opera and experimental works, and can serve as a space for the Tribeca Film Festival each spring.Ms. Streisand said in a statement that the center would “vibrate with theater, music, dance and film, and bring life to this hallowed ground.”The delicate balance needed to build a vibrant theater complex next to a somber memorial will be reflected in the unusual exterior of the cube-shaped 90,000-square-foot building. The Perelman Center is to be wrapped in thin sheets of translucent white marble encased in glass, giving it a solemn look in daylight but an amber glow from within at night.“The building really has a double life: During the day it has an appropriate stateliness, stone stateliness addressing the memorial,” said Joshua Prince-Ramus, the principal of REX. “Then at night it dematerializes, and the activity within starts to get revealed through the facade.”The building is estimated to cost $243 million, said Maggie Boepple, the center’s president and director. In addition to Mr. Perelman’s gift, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation has committed $100 million in federal funds. Ms. Boepple said that a new round of fund-raising was being started for the center, which aims to open in 2020.Mr. Prince-Ramus said that translucent marble had been used at the Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library at Yale University and at a church in Switzerland. But he said that his plan called for using much thinner slices of the marble — he hopes to get it from the same Vermont quarry used for the United States Supreme Court building and the Thomas Jefferson Memorial — which would infuse the inside of the building with natural light by day and give a porous sense to the exterior by night.While earlier plans called for having a big cultural institution as an anchor tenant — groups discussed included the old New York City Opera, the Signature Theater Company and the Joyce Theater — current plans call for the center to work with other companies to produce and present work in its three theaters, which can individually seat 499, 250 and 99 people, but which can be combined into one theater that can seat 1,200.Jenny Gersten, the center’s consulting producer, said that the site would contain an all-day cafe in the lobby and spaces for the neighborhood that could be used for activities like yoga classes or voting during elections, while allowing companies to create works. “We’re really a birthplace,” she said, “and not just a showcase house.”