http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/09/books/review/b-j-novaks-book-with-no-pictures-and-more.html
B. J. Novak’s ‘Book With No Pictures’ and More - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Byrne  Richard,Novak  B J,McDonnell  Patrick (1956- ),Hall  Kirsten,Bingham  Kelly,Zelinsky  Paul O,This Book Just Ate My Dog! (Book),A Perfectly Messed-Up Story (Book),Circle  Square  Moose (Book),The Book With No Pictures (Book),The Jacket (Book),Tolstikova  Dasha,Perfectly Messed-Up Story  A (Book),Book With No Pictures  The (Book),Jacket  The (Book)
Nov. 6, 2014
1319
Have your kids gone meta? Do they call their neighborhood jungle gym a “play structure”? Do they mix and match their dress-up garb — a tiara here, firefighter’s boots there — with a sense of mischief that might, unnervingly, be termed “ironic”? Have they spotted the clown at the neighbor’s birthday party removing his wig and slinking out the side door? They’re probably not ready for the labyrinthine tricksterism of David Foster Wallace or Spike Jonze. But on the evidence of a recent spate of highly self-conscious picture books, it would seem that the suspended-disbelief state of early childhood is adapting to the wink-wink, nudge-nudge sensibility of our moment. It’s not surprising. There has long been a strain of subversion in picture books — think of Maurice Sendak and Tomi Ungerer, among others — alongside the dominant anodyne snuggliness of the form. Now, sophisticated cheekiness appears to have gone mainstream. These five specimens of reinvention deftly pop the bubbles of their own illusory worlds, drawing attention to the artifices of their norms and aiming to teach children to become not just book lovers but pint-size “consumers of text.” The best of these books, luckily, manage to find fresh magic in demystification, and to delight kids while spinning the heads of their grown-up companions.The endpapers of “This Book Just Ate My Dog!” by the British writer and illustrator Richard Byrne, are covered with the repeated apology “I promise not to be a naughty book,” written out in a simulation of an errant child’s scrawl. In its opening spread we find elfin, round-faced, shabby-chic-dressed Bella prancing across the right-hand page, and leading a friendly cow-like dog, situated on the left-facing page, by a leash. “Bella was taking her dog for a stroll across the page when” (turn the page) “something very odd happened.” Half the dog vanishes in the space between the two pages — the crease book designers call “the gutter.” Odd things do indeed transpire when one reads books. On the next spread, as Bella yanks the leash, the dog disappears entirely. The two sides of the book are not continuous with each other, and Byrne has transformed the fold between them into a kind of portal, emptying to an imagined nether region. All who try to make the crossing — a concerned friend, emergency vehicles, even perplexed Bella — vanish through the book’s exposed scaffolding. To set matters straight, the reader is enlisted to twist the irreverent book sideways and shake its characters out of oblivion, a moment of participatory theater that feels like its own bit of naughty fun.“A Perfectly Messed-Up Story,” by Patrick McDonnell, also concerned with boundary-breeching, unfolds on classically metafictional terrain. An amorphously shaped, pajama-clad boy named Louie sets out to be a character in an ordinary picture book, “skipping merrily along” and singing “Tra la la,” when his path is interrupted by gobs of food descending from an unseen reader. Louie is indignant. “Who would eat a jelly sandwich while reading my book?” As the abuse continues — dirty fingers, orange juice and crayon markers besmirch the page — Louie addresses his condition with world-weary tones of pathos. “I’m just in a messy old book that will end up in some garage sale,” he says, in what might be considered a “Toy Story” moment, if not a Brechtian one. The pleasures of watching a book depart from its conventions and address its sticky-fingered reader will tickle even the littlest postmodernist. The peanut butter stains don’t hurt.Kelly Bingham and the illustrator Paul O. Zelinsky are on a mission to raise awareness of genre to a level of madcap chicanery. Their first book together, “Z Is for Moose,” imagined a collision between a poker-faced alphabet book and a goofy animal romp. This one, “Circle, Square, Moose,” purports to be a benign primer in geometry — a “shapes” book — opening with a spot-on parody of a pablum-textured instructional voice. Before long, though, the rambunctious moose tres­passes onto the text and tramples its decorum. The comedy is rather broad, but reaches a pitch of surreal delirium as a zebra and a crazed cat join the fray. Adults who have slogged like prisoners through the pieties of self-serious picture books will find the anarchy refreshing; kids will recognize the mash-up world they were born into.B. J. Novak’s “The Book With No Pictures” is the most conceptually radical of these books, doing away altogether with the medium’s defining element: There’s not an illustration to be found here. Novak, a writer and actor best known for his role on “The Office,” spoofs the reverent silence of visually lush, text-free books like Tao Nyeu’s “Wonder Bear” and Jerry Pinkney’s “The Lion and the Mouse,” making the refreshing and contrarian case that words alone have sensory and imaginative vibrancy to spare. “It might seem like no fun to have someone read you a book with no pictures,” admits a page of black type set against a blinding white background. What’s fun, though, is to be let in on trade secrets. “Here is how books work,” the confiding typeface continues. “Everything the words say, the person reading the book has to say.” An aging semiotician might approve this recognition of the reader’s complicity with a book’s invisible agenda. For his part, Novak exploits the seeing-through device with abandon. The (presumably adult) reader is made to sing, issue nonsense sounds, extol the superiority of the child who is being read to, and say things like “I am a monkey who taught myself to read” (the favorite moment in my home). It’s a raucous and illuminating gag, a formalist free-for-all, even if it wears a bit thin on repeated readings.The main character of “The Jacket,” the first picture book by Kirsten Hall and the illustrator Dasha Tolstikova, is named Book. Book is a teal rectangle with soft, wide-apart eyes and a pencil stroke of a smile, uncannily resembling the cover of “The Jacket” itself when the jacket has been removed. This book is a revelation, seamlessly blending the cleverness of its conceit with the virtues of captivating storytelling. Book is lonely until he is discovered by a reader, “the girl,” in whose hands he finds his place. Such bliss can’t last, though. For “the truth was that there was someone else whom the girl really loved, too” — her dog, Egg Cream, represented as a shaggy blur. Book is nearly put out of commission by his rival, until the girl repairs him through a creative act that completes both Book’s jacket and “The Jacket” (the book). It’s as poignant as it is smart. The beauty of Tolstikova’s pastel-tinged illustrations, whose manner changes from page to page and suggests both childlike simplicity and a quiet mastery of modernist color and design, shows there’s more to a book than its concept.