https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/us/transgender-students-and-bathroom-laws-in-south-dakota-and-beyond.html
Transgender Students and ‘Bathroom Laws’ in South Dakota and Beyond - The New York Times
Transgender and Transsexuals,Bathrooms and Toilets,Law and Legislation,Discrimination,South Dakota
Feb. 25, 2016
975
The South Dakota Legislature approved a bill this month that would require public school students to use bathrooms and other facilities that correspond to their biological sex, defined in the bill as “a person’s chromosomes and anatomy as identified at birth.”Under the measure, schools would need to find other accommodations for transgender students, whose gender identity does not correspond with the biological sex they were born with. If the legislation is signed by Dennis Daugaard, the state’s Republican governor, South Dakota will become the first state to enact such a law, and transgender students, their parents and their supporters criticize it as discriminatory.On the other side of the debate, some schools say allowing transgender students to use the bathroom of their choice could violate the privacy of other students.“I developed the bill because I don’t want my four daughters to shower with people with male anatomy,” Fred Deutsch, the Republican state representative behind the bill, told The Rapid City Journal.Yes. In 2014, the Education Department’s Office for Civil Rights issued guidance saying that transgender students are protected under Title IX, a federal law that prohibits sex-based discrimination in federally funded education programs. The guidance defines discrimination against transgender people as actions “based on gender identity or failure to conform to stereotypical notions of masculinity or femininity.”Still, schools have challenged the Education Department’s mandate. In one notable example, a school district in Illinois was forced to find accommodations for a transgender student who wanted to use the girls’ locker room, but only after the Education Department threatened to strip the district of its Title IX funding.The district, Township High School District 211 in Palatine, Ill., maintained that its policy prohibiting the student from using the girls’ locker room was not against the law, and said that the privacy concerns of 12,000 other students were also important.Yes. Debates over such measures have erupted in several states and cities, particularly in the past year. The local disputes highlighted a stark contrast with strides toward greater acceptance and exploration of gender identity in the mainstream, perhaps best illustrated by Caitlyn Jenner’s coming out on the cover of Vanity Fair.In some cases, the measures were anti-discrimination laws. For example, in Charlotte, N.C., on Monday, lawmakers passed a city ordinance that would allow transgender customers to use the bathroom of their choice, according to The Associated Press. Gov. Pat McCrory, a Republican, warned that the decision would create public safety issues.Last year, voters in Houston repealed an ordinance banning discrimination based on several “protected characteristics,” including gender identity. While sex and religion were among the other characteristics in the proposed ordinance, the vote against it seemed to focus on the prospect of transgender people in bathrooms corresponding with their gender identity, according to The Texas Tribune.Other facilities, from the White House to the Utah Museum of Fine Arts in Salt Lake City, have created gender-neutral restrooms (and signage for them).Schools in Illinois, California, Idaho, Maine, Nevada and Missouri have faced cases, and lawsuits, in which students felt discriminated against for not being able to use the bathrooms of their choosing. These disputes often stand in contrast with other moves that are seen as advancements, such as allowing transgender students to be called by their chosen name or participate in gendered sports.Often, a transgender student and the student’s supporters will call for the student to be able to use the bathroom of his or her choice. Parents sometimes respond by pulling their children out of school, as parents in Idaho did after a transgender girl was allowed to use the girls’ bathroom. And sometimes, other students get involved: In Missouri, when a transgender girl fought to use the girls’ locker room and bathroom last summer, her peers gathered outside the school to protest her.In other cases, schools are adapting without attracting national attention: Miraloma Elementary School in San Francisco began making space for gender-neutral restrooms last year.“We have students on the gender spectrum,” the school said on its website. “Converting most of our bathrooms to gender neutral benefits all students of every grade level and creates a safe and supportive environment for all of our students.”Supporters of the transgender community have protested the legislation in South Dakota on social media, mobilizing under the hashtags #HiFromSD and #HB1008 to share their thoughts.Several famous supporters have also gotten involved. On Twitter, Ms. Jenner has shared an American Civil Liberties Union petition urging Mr. Daugaard to veto the bill. Laverne Cox, an actress and longtime advocate of transgender people, shared a photo on Instagram of Thomas Lewis, a transgender South Dakota student who said he often left school during his lunch break to use the bathroom at home.“We should be creating safer, nurturing environments for our children, not more hostile ones,” Ms. Cox said in her post.Most likely. The state law would conflict with federal rules already in place. Adam P. Romero, senior counsel and Arnold D. Kassoy scholar of law at the U.C.L.A. School of Law’s Williams Institute, wrote in an email, “The South Dakota law, which looks to the student’s sex assigned at birth and thus prohibits transgender students from using the restroom that corresponds to their gender identity, would clash with the Department of Education’s interpretation of Title IX, and courts will be very likely required to resolve this conflict.”