https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/books/review/goodnight-beautiful-women-by-anna-noyes.html
‘Goodnight, Beautiful Women,’ by Anna Noyes - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Noyes  Anna (Author),Goodnight  Beautiful Women: Stories (Book),Goodnight  Beautiful Women (Book)
June 10, 2016
4198
GOODNIGHT, BEAUTIFUL WOMENStoriesBy Anna Noyes216 pp. Grove Press. $24.In the eleven stories of Anna Noyes’s artful debut collection, “Goodnight, Beautiful Women,” women and girls, living in a coastal New England environment of some harshness, confront the bleak realities of their lives: the unreliability of those they love and depend on, the hurt and confusion of sexual molestation, the desperation of poverty, the sorrow of loss. A woman struggles to understand what happened to her husband, a sculptor gone mad, who has drowned himself in a nearby quarry. An unexpectedly pregnant young woman finds comfort and guidance in her boyfriend’s dying mother. Another young woman atones for a childhood lie — blaming a cousin with Down syndrome for sexual abuse committed by someone else — by spending every Sunday of her adult life with the cousin.The stories may sound grim, but they consistently sparkle with expressive detail. In the title story, a teenager home from boarding school joins her ill mother and her mother’s longtime boyfriend, a good-hearted but parochial man, on a road trip that leads to her mother’s sudden abandonment of him. The teenager’s last image of this man, a father figure who taught her how to wash dishes and tie her shoes, is of him standing outside the gas station store, holding the two cups of hot chocolate he just purchased for her and her mother, his hair “blowing like seeds from a kicked dandelion.”In “Safe as Houses,” the physical rawness of a young teenager’s wisdom teeth being pulled presages her first sexual encounter. The recent attempted attack on a local girl adds to the foreboding atmosphere. Early in the story, the protagonist’s father, a widower, accompanies the teenager to the dentist. In a rare shift to a male point of view, Noyes takes us into the father’s mind. Having endured the illness and death of his wife — “Her face grew old when she was still young, and her breath turned sour from too much sleep” — he knows to expect of the bloody dental procedure that “all of it, even the most vulgar details, would come home to his heart.” With sympathy and skill, ­Noyes captures the ordeal of his past as he recalls changing the sheets of his wife’s deathbed: “Only after she died did grace shake loose, the twisted sheet stripped from her bed, the fresh one filling like a sail before settling smooth.”Noyes’s knack for lucid prose includes providing her characters with simple language that nevertheless grasps an understanding of complex human dynamics. In “Treelaw,” a young woman sums up the difference between the relatively straightforward love of her boyfriend and that of her sexually abusive father: “Drill looked at me like he’d known me forever, and Dad looked at me like I was a stranger sneaking through the room.” An aged widow in “Drawing Blood” pinpoints her capacity to endure a long marriage to a man “who should have been sickening” to the moment when, still a newlywed, she turned “from hating him to needing him,” a surprising shift stirred by his ability “to quicken something inside” her “that could not be slowed.”While the characters in “Goodnight, Beautiful Women” suffer no shortage of hardship, and are often as much participants in their own downfall as they are victims of it, they are full of an honesty they can’t hide. As one woman remarks to another: “I see big news all over your face.”