http://www.nytimes.com/1996/08/27/world/death-sentence-for-ex-president-chun-a-landmark-for-korea.html
Death Sentence for Ex-President Chun a Landmark for Korea - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,ROH TAE WOO,CHUN DOO HWAN,SENTENCES (CRIMINAL),CAPITAL PUNISHMENT,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
Aug. 27, 1996
9592
Many South Koreans rejoiced and some fumed today after a court sentenced one former President to death and another to 22 years in prison in a landmark case that underscores how far this country has come from the era of military rule that the two men represented.Those who complained about the sentences said they were politically motivated or unfair. But no one denied the distance that South Korea has traveled since its transition to a civilian Government with a democratically elected President in 1993.Chun Doo Hwan, who seized power in a coup in 1979 and who was feted at the Reagan White House in 1981, was sentenced to death for his role in the coup and for the brutal repression of protests in the southern city of Kwangju in May 1980, when several hundred pro-democracy student demonstrators were machine-gunned or clubbed to death.''It is long overdue, but we Korean people have finally achieved justice today,'' said Lee Shin Bom, who was arrested and tortured under the Chun Government and is now a member of the governing party's delegation in Parliament. ''It is the opening of a new era. Korean people have begun to have a new belief in democracy, to see that democracy could finally take root in this country.''Mr. Chun, his face solemn and his hands tied behind his back as he stood rigidly in court today, seemed far removed from the general who had dominated Korean politics and society for most of the 1980's. He was found guilty on all main counts of mutiny, insurrection and bribery.Next to him stood his successor, Roh Tae Woo, 63, who led South Korea from 1988 to 1993. Mr. Roh was convicted on similar charges, but was given 22 years and six months in prison instead of the life sentence demanded by the prosecutors.Nine business leaders and nearly two dozen other defendants were given lesser penalties today in a mass sentencing on charges relating to mutiny and corruption. The judgments may close a chapter on a time of turbulence in South Korean history.''I feel sorry for Chun as a person, but this is a punishment from heaven,'' said Kang Min Jo, who became a leader in a victims' organization after his son was killed in demonstrations against Mr. Roh. ''It's a good thing Chun was sentenced to death. There's no room for leniency, because he killed so many people.''Many Koreans believe that President Kim Young Sam will pardon Mr. Chun. But the sentences have resonance around the world, wherever political and military leaders may someday be liable for official brutalities committed under their rule.Such leaders may be betting that military crackdowns will be forgiven and forgotten if they bring their people out of poverty. But Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh delivered economic growth and lost the gamble, in part because they also presided over South Korea's transition to democracy, under which they could be held to account for their earlier actions.For most of South Korea's history, if a civilian government had taken steps against former generals, the army would have seized power in a coup. But now, nearly everyone agrees that there is almost no chance of a military intervention, and some say that today's sentence against Mr. Chun will make a coup less likely.''It's a lesson that whoever takes power through force will be punished,'' Chang Dong Young, a spokesman for the main opposition party, led by Kim Dae Jung, said of today's sentence.But the country was still drawn to the drama of today's sentencings, a culmination of months of courtroom theater. In shopping malls, offices and train stations, South Koreans dropped what they were doing today to watch images of their former Presidents, Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh, standing side by side in their pale blue prison uniforms.But they also saw the heads of the country's largest conglomerates sentenced to prison terms after being found guilty of paying huge bribes to Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh.The business leaders were allowed to wear suits at the sentencing, and got off comparatively lightly. Five were given suspended sentences. Lee Kun Hee, the chairman of the Samsung Group, one of Asia's biggest companies, was sentenced to two years in prison, with a three-year reprieve. Experts said he might not serve any time.Four others were given sentences but were still allowed to walk free today. Among them, Kim Woo Choong, the chairman of the Daewoo Group, was convicted and given a two-year prison term, but the judges excused him from going to jail immediately.Huh Young, a law professor at Yonsei University, accused the judges of straying from the spirit of the law in sentencing the four to prison but allowing them to return home today.''In the future, this action will be a burden to the court,'' Mr. Huh said, ''because everyone should be equal before the law. The rule of law will be undermined if the court decides to use selective sentencing.''But for many South Koreans, the spotlight today was on Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh. Some people complained that their trial was politically motivated, an effort by President Kim to boost his own shaky public standing. For the same reason, they also think Mr. Kim will pardon Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh, or reduce their sentences, in a gesture of magnanimity.Others seemed to focus more on the role that Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh played in bringing wealth and prosperity to this society.''We should give recognition to the contributions Chun and Roh made to this country,'' said Park Kyang Sun, a 40-year-old salesman.Even some of Mr. Chun's most bitter critics said a pardon might be in order.''First of all, he should recant,'' said Mr. Lee, the lawmaker tortured under Mr. Chun, ''for Chun tried to justify the coup at court, and that's not what he should do. He should apologize and take responsiblity for the killing. In that case, I'd say we may consider a pardon. But now is not the time to talk about it.''