https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/18/us/baton-rouge-attack-deepens-anguish-for-police-weve-seen-nothing-like-this.html
Baton Rouge Attack Deepens Anguish for Police: ‘We’ve Seen Nothing Like This’ - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Attacks on Police,Baton Rouge (La),Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Police Department (Dallas  Tex),Dallas (Tex),Dallas  Tex  Shooting of Police Officers (2016),Police
July 17, 2016
2432
“Officer down!” an officer screamed frantically into his police radio Sunday morning in Baton Rouge, La. “Shots fired! Officer down!”One of the most dreaded calls in policing triggered a surge of officers to the city’s Airline Highway, not far from Police Headquarters, an agonizing replay of the distress calls 10 days earlier that prompted the Dallas police to scramble to the aid of their fallen colleagues.The twin attacks — three officers dead Sunday in Baton Rouge, five killed on July 7 in Dallas, along with at least 12 injured over all — have set off a period of fear, anguish and confusion among the nation’s 900,000 state and local law enforcement officers. Even the most hardened veterans call this one of the most charged moments of policing they have experienced.Officers from Seattle to New Orleans are pairing up in squad cars for added safety and keeping their eyes open for snipers while walking posts. It is an anxious time: Officers must handle not only vocal denunciations from peaceful protesters who criticize abusive policing, but also physical attacks by a tiny few on the periphery.Law enforcement officials said it had been generations since the nation endured two separate episodes in which so many police officers were killed.“We’ve seen nothing like this at all,” said Darrel W. Stephens, the executive director of the Major Cities Chiefs Association and an instructor at the Public Safety Leadership Program at Johns Hopkins University. “The average officer in America, who was tense anyway, their tension and vigilance is going to increase even more. Police officers have always been vulnerable, and they know it. But somewhere inside you, you didn’t think it would happen. But now we’re seeing it happen.”The attack in Baton Rouge resonated in Cleveland, where delegates were gathering for this week’s Republican National Convention. Stephen Loomis, the president of the Cleveland Police Patrolmen’s Association, called on Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio to temporarily suspend the state’s open-carry laws in light of the recent tragedies.Mr. Kasich rejected the request, saying through a spokeswoman that he had no authority to unilaterally suspend state firearms laws, which permit legal owners to carry a gun in plain sight.In Baton Rouge, a city in another open-carry state, the sheriff disagreed that gun laws were the issue. “To me, this is not so much about gun control as it is about what’s in men’s hearts,” said Sheriff Sid J. Gautreaux III of the East Baton Rouge Parish Sheriff’s Office.The violence against officers is also causing angst among community leaders pushing for better policing.“What happened today will make our task harder,” said Joe D. Connelly, the pastor of Wesley United Methodist Church, who has been active in rallies and protests in Baton Rouge since Alton B. Sterling was killed by the police on July 5 in a shooting caught on video. “The challenge is that what we face has been heightened because of both the killing of Alton Sterling and the officers.”While the total number of officers killed by gunshots while on duty is lower than in recent decades, the nature of the attacks this month in Dallas and Baton Rouge, along with continuing protests around the nation spurred by videos showing fatal shootings of African-American men by the police, have led to considerable tensions.Police officers including David O. Brown, the Dallas chief, say they are being threatened on social media, and other officers complain that protesters sometimes chant for them to be killed. “We’re all on edge,” Chief Brown said last week, “and we’re being very careful.”Twenty-eight officers have died from gunshots this year, compared with 18 at the same point last year, a 56 percent increase, according to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund, which tracks law enforcement deaths.What officers say concerns them most: 14 of the deaths this year have come in ambushes, six more than in all of 2015 and only one fewer than in 2014. The officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge were ambushed by gunmen, officials said.“I think commanders all over the country, me included, are worried about our officers as they manage different events,” said Chief Jon Belmar of St. Louis County, Mo. “Dallas and Baton Rouge have probably showed us that we’re going to have to err on the side of protecting our officers so we can protect the community.”He said the turmoil in the country would have to ease before officers and their bosses would feel more comfortable.“I think there will have to be some changes,” said Chief Belmar, whose department was criticized for its aggressive response to protests in Ferguson, Mo., almost two years ago. “Some of the rhetoric, some of the tone, some of the actual violence is going to have to slow down before I think officers feel like they have the confidence to move back into the arena of relaxation.”Other police officials say they are grappling for ways to balance accessibility with protection.“We tell them to keep their guard up, not in a way to make them standoffish from the community but in a way to make them safe so they’re able to go home at night,” said Steven D. Anderson, the police chief in Tuscaloosa, Ala., a college town of about 98,000 people.Jim Bueermann, the president of the Police Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to helping the police be more effective in doing their jobs, said the very nature of policing put officers at constant risk. “In this age of community policing,” he said, “we want police officers to be walking around, to be seen, and this puts them in a position where they can be assaulted like this.”Chuck Canterbury, the president of the Fraternal Order of Police, said the intense criticism from some members of the public, particularly on social media, had deeply harmed police morale.“Cops are hurt,” he said. “They don’t understand what’s going on. Every cop in America is on their guard.”On Sunday, Chris Southwood, the president of the Illinois Fraternal Order of Police, suggested that protesters had spurred violence against police officers.“How many police funerals must occur before the American public finally says ‘enough is enough?’” he said in a statement. “Those involved in recent protests against the police should look at what happened today in Louisiana and immediately and vehemently condemn these coldblooded murders. A badge should not be a bull’s-eye.”But Kareem Henton, a Black Lives Matter activist in Cleveland, said it was unfair to blame protesters focused on police reforms for the deaths of the police officers.“They are just trying to tarnish our credibility, and I don’t think most people are going to go for it,” he said. “Black Lives Matter isn’t responsible for the deaths of anyone. Yet we can attribute scores and scores of deaths of black people to the hands of law enforcement, and I think that is where the attention should be.”Still, the annual number of police deaths has decreased dramatically since the 1970s. In that decade, during one of the country’s worst surges of violent crime, an average of 127 officers were fatally shot each year. During the past 10 years, the average number of officers fatally shot was 52, according to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund.“We’re living in a period of antigovernment sentiment, and the most vulnerable symbol of government is the police officer on the street,” said Craig W. Floyd, the president and chief executive of the memorial fund.