https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/us/politics/state-department-diplomats-tillerson.html
Tillerson in No Rush to Fill Nearly 200 State Department Posts - The New York Times
Tillerson  Rex W,State Department,United States Politics and Government,Trump  Donald J,United States International Relations
April 27, 2017
1202
WASHINGTON — The stampede of diners who once rushed through the State Department’s vast cafeteria has ebbed, with diplomats who previously grabbed quick bites between meetings now lingering over Korean barbecue and checking their phones for some kind of news.Many have little to do until the Trump administration starts filling the nearly 200 jobs at the department that require Senate confirmation, and their agendas look increasingly as though they will remain empty. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson has done almost nothing to select leaders for the White House’s consideration, and nominations for assistant secretaries and others who largely run the State Department are unlikely to be made for months.In an unusual interview, R. C. Hammond, Mr. Tillerson’s spokesman, said the secretary intended to embark within days on a listening tour of the building and then a restructuring of the department’s operations. Only after those are underway will he begin to name his wider leadership team.With a Senate confirmation process that takes months, that means the department will remain largely leaderless until well into 2018. And no other department in the federal government is as dependent on political appointees, or as paralyzed when the appointment process freezes.State Department veterans reacted to Mr. Tillerson’s timetable with incredulity.“There is a crisis with North Korea now, at a time neither State nor Defense have the bench of senior leaders needed, and with State facing a massive budget cut,” said Wendy R. Sherman, a top diplomat in the Obama administration. “How do you execute a policy with the quality you need in that circumstance?”Fill-in leaders, like those who are conducting diplomacy in the absence of political appointees, do not always instill confidence in foreign governments, said Siddharth Mohandas, another Obama administration diplomat.“People abroad are looking to see that the president’s own people are in place and can speak to the president’s agenda,” Mr. Mohandas said.But Mr. Hammond said there was no sense nominating people for jobs that might be eliminated in a restructuring. The Trump administration has proposed cutting the department’s budget by 31 percent, and while the Senate is unlikely to approve such a drastic cut, some reduction is likely.“The first step was to find out where the Titanic was, and then it was to map out where everything else is,” Mr. Hammond said, likening the department’s organizational structure to a sunken ocean liner and its seabed surroundings. “I think we’re still in the process of mapping out the entire ocean floor so that we understand the full picture.”The listening tour will enable Mr. Tillerson to hear from diplomats on how to reorganize and refocus, Mr. Hammond said.“What you’ll see us do over the next several months is start to ask the question, ask people to contribute their vision of what they think the big mission is,” he said. “Not until that part is accomplished can we even begin to think about how to restructure anything.”In the meantime, career Foreign Service officers “are operating very much at the varsity level” in posts usually reserved for political appointees, Mr. Hammond said.Besides, he added, Mr. Tillerson, a former chief executive of Exxon Mobil with no prior diplomatic or political experience, wants capable managers, not political cronies.“It’s the distinction between politics and management, and between political motivation and motivating people,” Mr. Hammond said.Whether Mr. Tillerson will be able to stick to his timeline is unclear. Nominations have begun to trickle in for other departments, and even Republicans sympathetic to him have begun to express alarm at his delays.“I don’t think they can sit around too long,” said James J. Carafano, a fellow at the Heritage Foundation and a member of the Trump transition team. “The clock is ticking.”While an unusually difficult White House vetting process has slowed appointees elsewhere in the administration, that is not the problem at the State Department. Mr. Tillerson has done little beyond proposing a lone deputy and acceding to a handful of ambassadorial nominations by the White House.Whatever the future — even if it involves drastic reductions — there is a near-universal wish among State Department employees for Mr. Tillerson to lead them to it, and soon. The wait is taking a toll.“With very little guidance coming from the secretary’s office, rumors of draconian cuts abound, and many dedicated and extremely knowledgeable civil servants are electing to leave,” said Robert G. Berschinski, a top Obama administration diplomat.Elliott Abrams, a neoconservative whom President Trump rejected as Mr. Tillerson’s pick for a deputy, said delays in appointing new leaders meant that career diplomats — most of whom lean ideologically toward the Democratic Party, he said — might remain in charge for nearly a quarter of the president’s term.“The Republican Party won the election, and Republicans should be in charge,” he said.Mr. Tillerson’s principal challenge, of course, is serving a mercurial president whose ideas on foreign policy are short on substance. The first months of the Trump administration have featured such breathtaking strategic reversals that paralysis at the State Department was arguably better than having diplomats charge off in one direction only to reverse course weeks later.But Mr. Tillerson has also been plagued by a series of embarrassing missteps and hour-by-hour tactical turnarounds that a trusted team might have prevented. He declared President Bashar al-Assad of Syria an enduring presence only to contradict himself within days, publicly disagreed with South Korea over whether he had been invited to dinner, and noted cryptically that Iran was complying with a landmark nuclear accord only to declare hours later that the deal had failed.Most secretaries of state spend their transition periods plotting structural changes, but the Trump transition was bare-bones, and Mr. Tillerson was unusually cloistered — never meeting with his predecessor, John Kerry, for instance.After his chief duty of “helping the president develop his foreign policy positions,” Mr. Tillerson’s next steps, Mr. Hammond said, were “touching gloves with our allies and partners around the world” — including in Europe, Japan, South Korea and Mexico — and hosting a meeting of foreign ministers from countries fighting the Islamic State.Third, Mr. Tillerson has been helping to carry out new administration positions on the crucial issues of the day, including North Korea, the NATO alliance, the Iran nuclear deal and China, Mr. Hammond said. And finally, he has begun to focus on the department’s budget, which Congress is expected to approve by September, Mr. Hammond noted.But Mr. Hammond’s explanation suggested that Mr. Tillerson was moving through issues one by one, without delegating, which could hamstring the department in an environment where multiple events often unfold simultaneously and develop quickly.Leaders in Congress said they were eager to hear Mr. Tillerson’s restructuring plans. “We look forward to what it is he brings forth relative to streamlining,” said Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.Mr. Abrams said that several models were possible for the department, but that speed was preferable to perfection.“The quicker they do it, the better,” he said.