https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/02/nyregion/bill-de-blasio-climate-cars.html
What’s Keeping the Mayor From Going Green? His Gym Routine - The New York Times
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,de Blasio  Bill,Automobiles,Subways,Plastic Bags,Global Warming,Trump  Donald J,New York City,WNYC,Komanoff  Charles
June 2, 2017
4905
Mayor Bill de Blasio has a message for New Yorkers looking for a productive way to respond to President Trump’s decision to remove the United States from the Paris accord on climate change: Do your part, and stop using plastic grocery bags.But when it comes to his roughly 11-mile trips in a police caravan from Gracie Mansion to a favored gym in Park Slope, Brooklyn, the mayor — after one such trip on Friday — appeared to break with that philosophy during his weekly radio appearance, essentially telling listeners, do as I say, not as I do.The seeming contradiction arose after a man identified as Charles in Manhattan called in to the Brian Lehrer show on WNYC, where Mr. de Blasio appears on most Fridays by phone after going to the gym.“How about you stepping up your game, leading by example, getting out of your S.U.V. armada, and if you need to go to the Park Slope Y five days a week rather than a gym near you, why don’t you take mass transit or even once in a while ride a bike like the vast majority of your fellow New Yorkers, so you will know how we are suffering under a transit system?” Charles asked.“Charles, I understand the emotional appeal of what you’re saying, but I’m just not going to take the bait, my friend,” the mayor responded. “I’m going to keep going to the gym, I’m proud to say we have a hybrid and it’s a good car, it’s very fuel efficient.”In the past, the mayor has occasionally presented his and his family’s personal environmental habits as a model for New Yorkers, for example, with their composting of household food.But on the radio show, Mr. de Blasio said he should be judged not on his personal behavior but on the policies of his administration, including efforts to retrofit buildings and move toward more electric vehicles in the city’s fleet.“The issue is not cheap symbolism here,” the mayor said. “The issue is, are we going to take action, are we actually going to change the way things are done?”The caller was someone familiar with that argument: Charles Komanoff, an advocate for the environment and cycling, and an energy analyst, who for years has railed against the automobile. Mr. Komanoff travels around the city by bicycle, never drives and rarely takes a taxi alone, he said.Mr. Komanoff said in an interview that he had long been galled by Mr. de Blasio’s car trips to the gym, but finally decided to call the show because of a combination of President Trump’s decision on the climate accord and the current subway woes.He called the rampant delays and subway problems “the fundamental climate issue and the fundamental sustainability issue for the city and state.”He said the mayor’s contention that riding the subway would be little more than “cheap symbolism” would strike many New Yorkers who ride it everyday as hollow.“I think if you ask a thousand people on the street, 990 of them would say he’s missing the point,” Mr. Komanoff said. “He has to really feel the agony and frustration of millions of New Yorkers because they can’t travel reliably.” The last time the mayor took the subway was April 19 — over six weeks ago — said Ben Sarle, a City Hall spokesman.Mr. Komanoff also criticized Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo for being “M.I.A.” as troubles mounted for the state-controlled Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subway system.As for the gym trips, the mayor will not be moved. Mr. de Blasio, who is not facing a strong challenger in the Democratic primary, has long defended his gym routine — a part of his mayoralty since before he moved to Gracie Mansion from his Park Slope home — even as it has become a talking point for challengers in the 2017 campaign, and as his gym has become a destination for some protesters.In recent weeks, he has appeared more confident in positions that could antagonize some New Yorkers, such as his refusal to attend a New York Yankees game, even when working out of the nearby Bronx courthouse. (Mr. de Blasio is a Red Sox fan.)The gym trips sometimes occur daily during the workweek, including on days when the mayor has events north of his home, necessitating a long round trip to Lower Manhattan, across the river to Park Slope, then back, past Gracie Mansion to destinations in the Bronx. Mr. de Blasio made that trek three times during his weeklong sojourn in the Bronx last month, Mr. Sarle said.Mr. de Blasio’s exchange with Charles occurred minutes after the mayor, in the interview, castigated President Trump for pulling the United States out of the Paris accord on climate change and urged listeners to stop using plastic shopping bags.“Why don’t we go straight to a ban?” Mr. de Blasio said, going further than the City Council did when it imposed a fee on bags. (That law was blocked by legislators in Albany and Mr. Cuomo.)“Some of this is culture change and personal change,” the mayor said. “Everyone in their own life has to change their own habits to start protecting the earth.”