https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/television/emmy-awards-2017-evan-rachel-wood-westworld-anthony-hopkins.html
Emmy Awards 2017: Evan Rachel Wood on ‘Westworld’ and Channeling Anthony Hopkins - The New York Times
Emmy Awards,Westworld (TV Program),Wood  Evan Rachel,Television,Actors and Actresses,Home Box Office
July 13, 2017
1078
Actors often offer some version of the “I didn’t even realize the nominations were today...” story in awards interviews, but Evan Rachel Wood was open about the fact that she’s been looking forward to Thursday’s Emmy announcement.“The anticipation is usually the worst part so yes, I’m really happy for the show to be recognized,” she said. “This is my favorite job I’ve ever had.”Ms. Wood was shortlisted for best actress in a drama for HBO’s “Westworld,” which led all scripted series with 22 nominations. Her humanoid “host,” Dolores, was arguably the heart of the twisty sci-fi western, moving from a mostly oblivious plaything for the rich to, by the end of the season, a creature taking control of her own destiny. (Probably — you can never be totally sure with this show.)Ms. Wood, previously nominated for the HBO mini-series “Mildred Pierce” in 2011, called to discuss “Westworld,” which just began shooting Season 2, and her own pet plot theories. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.[ Emmy Interviews: Samantha Bee | Millie Bobby Brown | Claire Foy | Samira Wiley | Evan Rachel Wood ]Why has “Westworld” been your favorite job?It’s a big show — the scale of it is very large. But it also has so much soul and brains behind it. And it’s also kind of a never-ending surprise. The actors are kept in the dark most of the time, and I’m constantly blown away every time I get a script.Was it tough to inhabit a character and a show, in general, without knowing where the story was going?Just signing on to play an artificial being is complicated enough. The biggest challenge was making a character that read as artificial but really seemed natural, because you’re not supposed to be able to differentiate between the hosts and the humans. But all of us found a good flow, which was weird because we were never all in scenes together. That we were all able to slip into the right tone was great.I was surprised how emotionally deep the character goes. It was all a wonderful metaphor — I guess I didn’t realize how symbolic it was going to be.A metaphor for what?For a lot of different things. She’s a survivor, first and foremost, and after years of trauma and finally having access to memories, she chooses to walk through it and come back stronger and wiser and take control of her own life. I think so much about the show is a metaphor for life and the world and our “programming.” These existential crises we all have when we start to question the world around us and ourselves, and how we really are.The show inspired plenty of theorizing. What was the oddest one you heard?We had plenty of our own, actually. We were the first ones to start spouting theories about this show. I was one step away from having a theory cloud on a bulletin board in my trailer.Any you remember?We had a lot of weird ones. One running joke was that at some point, we were all going to end up being Anthony Hopkins. He was going to take over one of us or get in our brains somehow.There are worse people to be.Absolutely! But I’d just think, “Who is this poor actor who’s going to have to channel Anthony Hopkins?”How will you approach Season 2 differently, now that you know more?I have to be really careful with my words here because we’ve started filming. It’s exciting because when we left, Dolores had, as far as I can tell, really woken up and realized who she is, and embraced who she is. I’m excited to step out of the damsel role and step into whatever comes next — I don’t really know if she’s going to be the hero or the villain. Season 1 was about control and the hosts being confused and trapped. I think this season is going be the opposite.The show is going to Comic-Con next week. Are you prepared for that?I haven’t been to Comic-Con or been on anything mainstream enough to go before. So it will be an experience, but I’m excited. If I wasn’t on this show I’d probably be in the crowd, dressed as one of the characters and geeking out. So I weirdly relate to these people.