https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/magazine/how-colin-kaepernicks-protest-is-connecting-playing-fields-to-the-streets.html
How Colin Kaepernick’s Protest Is Connecting Playing Fields to the Streets - The New York Times
Kaepernick  Colin,James  LeBron,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks,Football,Race and Ethnicity,Athletics and Sports
Oct. 11, 2016
3625
A few days after the first presidential debate, LeBron James took a stand: He endorsed Hillary Clinton for president. The reasons he cited ranged from a belief that Clinton would “build on the legacy” of his “good friend” Barack Obama to her good works on behalf of children. James concluded with a passage about the “violence, of every kind, the African-American community is experiencing in our streets and seeing on our TVs.” He went on to say we need to be “unified” and “stand together — no matter where we are from or the color of our skin.” The measured tone was an echo of his appearance at the ESPY Awards in July, where he and his fellow N.B.A. stars Dwyane Wade, Carmelo Anthony and Chris Paul spoke out in a joint speech for “uniting communities” and ending violence.The means of expression that James chose to make his endorsement, an op-ed written for The Akron Beacon Journal and Business Insider, was as significant as its content. Over the past two years, James has been partial to tightly controlled political displays, whether as the written word or on the dramatically lit stage of a prime-time performance. Soon after his op-ed came out, James told reporters, “Well, anytime I do something, I always say I like to put it in writing form so it’s not — it can never be interpreted the wrong way.” He does not put out controversial tweets or post Instagram photos with lengthy captions or even communicate through The Players’ Tribune, Derek Jeter’s online publication, which has made a cottage industry of producing glossy news releases for players who want or need to make announcements. Instead, and perhaps a bit anachronistically — at a time when high-school and college athletes across the country have been kneeling in solidarity with the 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick — he seems to prefer the established outlets, and to judge by his endorsing a candidate for public office, traditional politics.James has a history of political involvement, but he wasn’t always so formal or inclined to institutional means of speaking out. In 2012, after the fatal shooting of Trayvon Martin, James, Wade and 11 of their Miami Heat teammates put on hoodies and took a team photo. Two years later, when New York City was roiling over the death of Eric Garner in police custody, James and his Cleveland Cavaliers teammate Kyrie Irving warmed up for a game against the Nets in the same “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirts that some activists wore outside the Barclays Center, where the Nets play in Brooklyn. The attendees at the game included Jay Z, Beyoncé, Prince William and Kate Middleton. That star power helped make sure that the black shirts on millionaire athletes preparing for their game inside the arena would get as much notice as the black shirts on the protesters behind the police barricades outside, serving as a reminder that few places in New York could hold at a remove what was happening in the streets.I was at that game and watched James go through his warm-ups. He has never been a particularly expressive player; he mostly sets his face in a look of mild annoyance. That night in Brooklyn, he walked from spot to spot on the court, hoisting jump shots and corralling rebounds, moving with his odd mix of fidgety energy and grace, so that everything related to game play seems to unfold slowly while anything extraneous — slapping fives with teammates, drumming his feet on the floor as he sits on the bench — moves fitfully. The juxtaposition of an athlete going about his work and the confrontational clarity of “I Can’t Breathe” disproved the popular lie that a superstar can’t play ball and have an opinion at the same time. A movement’s slogan and a famous body had merged into a singular emblem, and when James put on a show after halftime by scoring nine points (just before the royal couple finally took their seats), there was no way to separate his athletic spectacle from his politics. He had, in effect, remade his own brand.In the nearly two months that have passed since Colin Kaepernick started kneeling for the national anthem, the method and impact of athletes’ protests have evolved. Gestures, however solemn and sincere, now require an antagonistic directness that translates easily to television or social media. To hold the public’s attention, it’s no longer enough for the Seattle Seahawks to link arms and make a video about “unity” or for Cam Newton to wear a T-shirt printed with a quote from Martin Luther King Jr. (“Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere”) and mutter his way through a speech about the need for everyone to be accountable for themselves, regardless of race, gender or age. (Newton, who in the past rarely acknowledged the antipathy his touchdown celebrations provoked among many stodgy fans, might have finally accepted the counsel of Frank Luntz, the right-wing consultant reportedly hired by the Panthers to work with him.)The sorts of statements that capture the popular imagination now aren’t echoes from the past but images that show defiance or expressions rooted in the personal — as in Serena Williams’s Facebook post last month that candidly described the fear she felt driving with her 18-year-old nephew and worrying about what might happen if they were pulled over by a police officer. The viral amplification of Kaepernick’s individual action has inspired many athletes to reveal what they might have always felt but feared to say out loud.Last month, after the killing by the police of Keith Lamont Scott in Charlotte, N.C., protests formed on the city’s streets. This time small groups of marchers had something new to do, an action anchored in the present, not in the language of the revolutionary ’70s. They knelt.You could show a photo of Kaepernick’s protest to someone who has never seen a football game or heard the national anthem or has no concept of race relations in this country, and the viewer would immediately understand the dynamics at work. The person kneeling had chosen to set himself apart from the group and had done so peacefully. The pose and its meaning are easy to replicate. And now every week another football team, whether college players at the University of Nebraska, high schoolers in San Francisco, even Pee Wees in Beaumont, Tex., kneel or raise a fist during the national anthem. Over the course of two months, Kaepernick has gone from a forgotten and failing quarterback to mass-produced icon. Hundreds of Kaepernicks kneel everywhere.The images of past protests that have captivated the world — the unnamed man standing in front of the tanks in Tiananmen Square; a serene Gandhi, gaunt and hunched over during a hunger strike; Rosa Parks staring out the window of a bus in Montgomery — tend to exhibit calm, near-beatific and often solitary determination in the face of chaos and hardship. The spell Kaepernick’s protest has cast over the country for the past couple of months comes in part from its fidelity to these rules of visual composition. In nearly every ceremony, whether religious or chivalrous, kneeling implies a willingness to sacrifice the body.That spirit of sacrifice might not announce itself clearly amid the overblown pageantry of a professional football field, but others who kneel with Kaepernick carry it. In late September, during a night of protests in El Cajon, Calif., following yet another police shooting of an unarmed man, two men wearing Kaepernick jerseys knelt before law-enforcement officers wearing helmets and face guards. Those earlier moments at the Barclays Center, when star athletes dressed in the clothes of protesters, became inverted, as they had in Charlotte too — the protesters now wore the athlete’s shirt and copied his gesture, taking it from the playing field back onto the streets that inspired its birth.To help guide Kaepernick through his budding activism, the 49ers have turned to Harry Edwards, a team consultant and the famed activist-sociologist whose calls for a boycott of the 1968 Olympic Games were an inspiration behind John Carlos and Tommie Smith’s black-power salute at the event. Edwards was among those who recommended that Kaepernick stop wearing socks depicting pigs in police hats to practice. When a reporter recently asked Kaepernick what he thought of the presidential debate and he replied, “Both are proven liars, and it almost seems like they’re trying to debate who’s less racist,” Edwards went into damage-control mode and told USA Today that Kaepernick’s “abilities to articulate his analyses have not yet caught up to his abilities to formulate those analyses.”These attempts to wrangle Kaepernick back into something controlled, whose actions are considered tactically, feel ill conceived and, in the end, irrelevant. The icon of Colin Kaepernick, which now shows up on iPhone cases and T-shirts, in stadiums and protests throughout the country, has taken on its own life, one that makes the famous declaration attributed to Michael Jordan that “Republicans buy shoes, too” and even LeBron James’s carefully crafted entry into presidential politics feel like relics from a bygone era.