https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/health/iowa-healthcare-wellmark-blue-cross-blue-shield-obamacare.html
Iowa’s Largest Insurer Says It Will Withdraw From Obamacare Exchanges - The New York Times
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Health Insurance and Managed Care,Blue Cross and Blue Shield Assn,Iowa
April 3, 2017
8543
In the latest move by insurers worried about the viability of the markets created under the federal health care law, Iowa’s major carrier said Monday that it would stop selling individual policies in the state next year.In a statement, the insurer, Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which is based in Des Moines, blamed its decision to withdraw in 2018 on what it said was the high cost of covering people under the Affordable Care Act.Like some other insurers, Wellmark says it has had difficulty making money because many of those enrolling in its plans have expensive medical conditions. The company said it had lost $90 million over the past three years of providing coverage on the exchanges and individually, despite aggressively raising its rates.While Wellmark’s chief executive, John Forsyth, emphasized the importance of stabilizing the markets, he said the current uncertainty over their future was one reason the company decided to exit. “While there are many potential solutions, the timing and relative impact of those solutions is currently unclear,” he said. “This makes it difficult to establish plans for 2018.”Republicans have repeatedly vowed to repeal the law enacted during the Obama administration, but the House Republican bill that would have replaced it failed last month. Some insurers had praised the plan as providing much-needed support over the next year or two, and have voiced concerns about what steps, if any, President Trump and Congress would take to stabilize the markets.Mr. Trump and Republican leaders have frequently argued that the insurance market is collapsing, blaming the Democrats who created the markets. The law’s proponents contend the administration and Congress are undermining the law by failing to make critical decisions about funding the plans for low-income individuals.Wellmark said its departure, first reported by The Des Moines Register, would affect 21,400 Iowa residents. The insurer, which covers another 1.64 million in the state, said it would continue to sell individual policies that were not offered under the law. The bulk of Wellmark’s business is employer-based.The company, which announced in September its decision to leave the individual market in South Dakota for 2017, has been viewed as a somewhat reluctant participant in the state marketplaces. The company sat out the first year in Iowa, and it struggled to make money in both states.But the decision, like the announced exits by national insurers like Humana in other states, creates increasing anxiety over whether there will even be insurers in some areas. Anthem, a large for-profit insurer that offers Blue Cross in several states, has already indicated it will leave if the market appears unstable, and other companies have withdrawn.While two other insurers currently offer coverage on the exchanges in Iowa, neither would commit to continuing next year. Aetna, a large for-profit insurer, has largely exited the market and declined to comment on its plans. The second, Medica, a nonprofit company based in Minnetonka, Minn., has “not yet made final decisions,” a spokesman said in an email. “In light of information about insurers pulling their products from the individual market in Iowa, Medica needs to carefully consider its options.”Iowa’s insurance commissioner, Doug Ommen, said that regulators “are very concerned about this development,” but that many states are facing narrowing options for consumers.“It’s concerning given that Iowa has now had two carriers leave the A.C.A.’s individual health insurance market. We will continue looking for ways to protect Iowa consumers,” he said.