https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/08/business/media/sinclair-tribune-media-sale.html
Sinclair Unveils Tribune Deal, Raising Worries It Will Be Too Powerful - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Television,Sinclair Broadcast Group Inc,Tribune Media Company,News and News Media
May 8, 2017
870
In an era of information saturation, when cable news seems ubiquitous and Twitter posts stream forth uninterrupted, local television still holds a powerful grip on the American consciousness. And the Sinclair Broadcast Group just tightened its grasp.Already the largest owner of local television stations in the United States, Sinclair said Monday that it had agreed to buy Tribune Media for $3.9 billion, beating out other suitors including Nexstar and 21st Century Fox. With the deal, Sinclair would reach more than 70 percent of American households, with stations in many major markets, including Chicago, Los Angeles and New York, giving it significant heft at a time of increasing consolidation in the industry.The acquisition would also provide Sinclair with a far-reaching platform for its news programming. A Pew Research study last year showed that almost 60 percent of adults get their news from television, and of those, almost 50 percent rely on local stations.That has stoked concern about the pitfalls of consolidation, with some pointing out that Sinclair has shown a willingness to use its 173 stations to advance a conservative-leaning agenda.Opponents of the deal have cited examples like Sinclair’s hiring of Boris Epshteyn, a former spokesman for President Trump, as its chief political analyst and the on-air commentary of Mark Hyman, a former Sinclair executive who provides reliably conservative arguments on dozens of Sinclair stations.“It’s an incredible amount of power in one company’s hands,” said Craig Aaron, president of Free Press, a consumer advocacy group that has opposed the deal. He added that Sinclair, based in the Baltimore area, had a tendency to “centralize things as much as they can,” saying it produced stories from its headquarters with a clear conservative slant.Michael J. Copps, a Democratic commissioner on the Federal Communications Commission from 2001 to 2011 who is now a special adviser to the nonpartisan consumer group Common Cause, called the planned merger “another blow to the diversity of journalism that we should have.”“It’s symptomatic of what is happening in this market,” he said, “which is fewer and fewer organizations controlling more and more of the information on which our democracy rests.”Sinclair is set to acquire Tribune Media’s 42 stations and its prize asset, WGN America, a network based in Chicago that broadcasts nationwide. Some analysts and executives have speculated about whether Sinclair would repurpose the network to become a rival to Fox News, or possibly become a landing spot for conservative commentators like Bill O’Reilly. When Fox News ousted Mr. O’Reilly amid allegations of sexual harassment, he did not have a noncompete clause in his separation agreement.People with knowledge of the bidding said Sinclair had not expressed any plans to compete directly with Fox.Some analysts and media specialists discounted the idea that political ideology shaped Sinclair’s approach, saying the expansion was more likely motivated by business considerations.“This is about a play to get bigger because the world requires scale,” said Michael Nathanson, a media analyst with MoffettNathanson.In the last several years, cable and telecommunications companies have consolidated, and analysts predict that the deal could set off another wave of combinations, with jostling by groups like Nexstar, Tegna (which was formed when Gannett split into a newspaper division and a television company), Cox, Hearst and Meredith Corporation.“This combination creates the largest TV broadcast company in the country,” said Christopher S. Ripley, the chief executive of Sinclair. “And as you all know, scale matters in this industry and the media in general.”Tribune would be the latest acquisition for Sinclair, which has often turned to mergers to build its empire. The company has spent more than $7 billion on takeovers since 1996, excluding the Tribune deal, according to data from Standard & Poor’s Global Market Intelligence.As part of the deal, Sinclair would also acquire Tribune’s minority stake in the Food Network.Under the agreement, Sinclair will pay $35 a share in cash and 0.23 of one of its class A shares. The final bid was valued at about $43.50 a share, up about 26 percent over Tribune’s stock price before reports of merger talks.The deal is expected to close by the end of the year, pending approval by Tribune shareholders, the Federal Communications Commission and antitrust regulators at the Justice Department.For Tribune Media, a deal with Sinclair could be the coda for a company that was the television arm of the Tribune behemoth that published newspapers including The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune.“I think it’s probably the first of a variety of combinations that will take place in local broadcasting that will better allow local broadcasters to compete,” Peter M. Kern, Tribune’s chief executive, said in an interview.The company began to explore selling itself last year, recognizing that it could become an attractive target if consolidation increased, two people with knowledge of the process said. The presidential election and the expectation that a Republican-led F.C.C. would loosen regulations increased the possibility of a deal frenzy.Several weeks ago, Tribune formally put itself up for sale, drawing interest primarily from Sinclair and Nexstar. But late in the process, 21st Century Fox, in partnership with the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm, jolted the proceedings by joining the talks.Interest in Tribune was heightened late last month when the F.C.C. eased rules on how many stations an owner may have.But Fox and Blackstone, whose potential bid involved a complicated joint venture, could not work out a suitable financial arrangement and did not make a bid, the people with knowledge of the process said. They insisted on anonymity to discuss private talks.One of the people said that the competition was always between Sinclair and Nexstar and that Fox’s late entry did not ultimately drive up the price. Nexstar appeared to have the upper hand, the person said, until Sinclair proposed $43.50 a share on Saturday, sealing the deal.Whether Sinclair uses its expanded reach to push its conservative-leaning views remains to be seen. Any ambitions to do so would face significant hurdles.For one, television, where ratings beget advertising revenue, is not a forgiving medium for dissatisfaction, several media analysts and specialists said. Because overnight ratings are readily available, Sinclair will know almost instantaneously if its programming is attractive to viewers or driving them — and advertising dollars — away.“If you are not serving the community’s needs, you will know it, and you will know it fast,” said Al Tompkins, a senior faculty member at the Poynter Institute. “In television, if you fail to serve, you will pay the price.”There is also the question of how much Sinclair can shape local programming. It would seem unwise, for instance, for Sinclair to replace scheduled shows on network affiliates with partisan content. Sinclair, however, could tilt the coverage at local stations, as some say it did at WJLA, an ABC affiliate in Washington, D.C., that it bought as part of a 2014 deal with Allbritton Communications.Still, the onus is now on Sinclair to show that it is committed to serving the myriad local communities whose homes it has entered.“They’re moving into the big leagues,” Mr. Tompkins said. “And that will bring substantially more scrutiny into what they do and how they do it.”