https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/13/realestate/commercial/delaware-sees-new-life-for-a-historic-base-on-the-river.html
Delaware Sees New Life for a Historic Base - The New York Times
Delaware,Real Estate (Commercial),Historic Buildings and Sites,Restoration and Renovation,Military Bases and Installations,Delaware River
Aug. 12, 2014
225
FORT DUPONT, Del. —  Wanted: developers for a historic military base who are willing to revive neglected buildings in return for cheap land.Delaware is looking for private investors to revamp and preserve the 325-acre Fort DuPont Complex, the military site dating back to the American Revolution that abuts the Delaware River on the state’s northern coast.The State of Delaware, which has owned the complex since 1947, wants to turn it into a “live-work-play” community where people would live in buildings that once housed army officers, or in newly constructed single- or multifamily homes that match existing designs and materials, and would be situated among the complex’s extensive lawns and tree-lined avenues.Among the many dreams for residential dwellers would be bike-riding on traffic-free streets, sports on the many ball fields, or community events in a renovated War Department Theater, a 1933 building where servicemen and their families once watched movies for 20 cents a show. The theater, like many other buildings on the campus, is now boarded up.If developed, the complex would also allow the expansion of Delaware City, an adjacent community of some 1,800 people that wants room to grow, but is blocked by the river on one side and a refinery on another. The city’s population could increase by up to 30 percent if the project’s residential component is realized, said Richard C. Cathcart, Delaware City’s manager.The project, first proposed about a decade ago, took a step forward in late July when Gov. Jack Markell signed legislation setting up a Redevelopment and Preservation Corporation to oversee the development.The corporation, which will have an 11-member board consisting of state officials, representatives of Delaware City, and a chairman or chairwoman to be appointed by the governor, is charged with putting into action a master plan drawn up by consultants in 2013.“It’s very much an underutilized asset,” Governor Markell said. “The question is, can we turn it into something that’s a lot better?”The state, which spends $80,000 a year on maintaining the buildings and grounds used by several departments at the complex, would require private sector capital to initiate the project.But the state will approve or deny individual plans, said Matthew P. Chesser, an administrator in Delaware’s Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control.“Before a state entity can cut land loose for a certain purpose, it has to reach a higher standard than maybe what’s permissible by law — what’s morally and ethically right,” Mr. Chesser said.Any plans for “lewd and lascivious” establishments like rowdy bars or strip clubs would be rejected, he said. He plans to issue requests for proposals by early spring 2015.If executed, the project would follow other examples of adaptive reuse of former military bases such as the Presidio, a much bigger development in San Francisco, and Fort Bragg, N.C., where an army base operates alongside a water-treatment plant and ball fields.In Philadelphia, the redevelopment of both the Navy Yard and Penn’s Landing on the Delaware River show that former military bases can become successful commercial or recreational centers, said David M. Scolnic, a real estate lawyer at Hangley Aronchick Segal Pudlin & Schiller in Philadelphia.The Navy Yard in particular has become a magnet for major corporations like the pharmaceutical firm GlaxoSmithKline and the retailer Urban Outfitters, because of state tax incentives and its proximity to major highways, Mr. Scolnic said.Fort DuPont’s position, some 10 miles from Interstate 95, would most likely make it less attractive to business or educational entities than the Philadelphia locations, he said.But the marina and new houses nearby are likely to be the most attractive features for new residents, Mr. Scolnic said. “That really has some sizzle to it,” he said.The residential component, however, is expected to add housing for only 500 to 600 people, reflecting the state’s desire to preserve the environmental and historic nature of the site.“It can’t be super built-up,” Governor Markell said. “You can’t pave over everything.”“If you combine the green space with the water access and the water view, it’s pretty unique, not to mention the historic component,” he said. “It’s probably not for everybody, but for the right developer, it could be attractive.”Mr. Cathcart of Delaware City said it would cost $900,000 just to stabilize historic buildings by repairing roofs and boarding up windows and doors, indicating the state’s limited ability to back the project financially.“It’s going to be hard to get the General Assembly to get an appropriation for a lot of these infrastructure repairs and upgrades,” Mr. Cathcart said during a visit to the complex. “Let’s leverage the private sector: land at a very reasonable price, or flat out give it to you, in return for the upgrades for the infrastructure.”Mr. Cathcart hopes the first projects will break ground next year.The complex, which is designated as a National Historic District, contains 63 structures that contributed to the federal designation, or about half of the number that stood when the site was assessed in 1943.Twenty-nine of the surviving buildings were built from 1898 to 1922, when Fort DuPont was one of three coastal defense installations in Delaware and New Jersey, while 24 date from World War II. The latter category consists of one remaining building of a group that was used to house around 3,000 German prisoners of war from 1943 to 1945. Their barracks were overseen by a lookout tower, which would be preserved under the redevelopment plan.Fifteen of the existing buildings are classified as “threatened” and need emergency stabilization, while two are ruins and will be demolished, according to the master plan.The plan also calls for a marina to be built at the mouth of the canal that divides Fort DuPont from Delaware City; a pedestrian bridge that would link the two; demolition of some historic buildings that are derelict or incompatible with the planned development; and expanded trails and sports fields.With its access to the water and access to Delaware’s Bayshore region, some of which is federally protected, Fort DuPont is also being positioned as an ecotourism destination.Attracting more birders, kayakers and other outdoor enthusiasts would build on Delaware City’s recent success in becoming the new national headquarters for the American Birding Association.For now, officials declined to identify potential developers or describe their level of interest in the project.“We will see what the market can actually bear and we will see what kind of investment has to be made in infrastructure in the first place,” the governor said. “Our goal has been to put a plan together that the market can respond to.”