https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/nyregion/bodies-found-central-islip-park-long-island.html
Four Bodies Found on Long Island Appear Linked to Gang Violence - The New York Times
Gangs,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13),Police Department (Suffolk County  NY),Long Island (NY),Suffolk County (NY)
April 13, 2017
7732
CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y. — The phone call came Wednesday night, delivering ominous words in an area of Long Island torn apart by gang violence.William Tigre said the caller, a young man named Alex, told him, “I see your brother, he was getting killed.”On Thursday, the police said they had found the bodies of four young men who had been brutally killed near a park in this Suffolk County hamlet. Mr. Tigre said he feared that his brother, Jorge Tigre, 18, was among the victims.Timothy Sini, the Suffolk County police commissioner, said at a news conference that the four had been killed in a manner “consistent with the modus operandi of MS-13,” the transnational gang with roots in Los Angeles and El Salvador that was responsible for 11 deaths in Suffolk County in 2016.“They all suffered from significant trauma throughout their body,” Mr. Sini said. “It appears that they were killed with a sharp or edged instrument.”Mr. Sini did not identify the victims but said they ranged in age from 16 to 20.Justin Llivicura, 16, was later identified by his uncle Marcelo Llivicura as one of the victims. Mr. Llivicura, a native of Ecuador, said that Justin, who was born in the United States, had been missing a few days. The family had reported him missing on Wednesday, according to the police.“He was a good boy,” Mr. Llivicura said in a telephone interview. “He did nothing, no drugs; he was a good student and was working on Saturdays and Sundays.”Mr. Llivicura said that the last time the two had spoken, on Tuesday, Justin had said he planned to go to a party. Justin and Jorge Tigre were friends from Bellport High School, which was closed for spring vacation this week.“He did not have bad friends or anything, and now he died,” Mr. Llivicura said.Jorge Tigre’s family had also reported him missing on Wednesday, according to the police.The bodies were found at 8 p.m. on Wednesday, and Mr. Sini said the killings had “occurred within the past few days.”“There’s no question that MS-13 still exists in Suffolk County,” he said. “They’re still engaging in acts of violence, and if this is MS-13, this clearly is an example of that.”In September, Kayla Cuevas, 16, and Nisa Mickens, 15, were found dead in Brentwood, a neighboring town. The teenagers had been beaten with machetes and baseball bats, the authorities said.The murders prompted an aggressive investigation that led to the skeletal remains of three teenage boys and, eventually, the arrests of more than 125 gang members. In March, the federal authorities charged 13 adult members of MS-13 with a variety of crimes, including racketeering and murder; 10 were undocumented immigrants, prosecutors said.Four MS-13 members were charged in the June killing of José Peña-Hernandez, 18, whose remains were found in October in the woods near a state hospital. Prosecutors said he had been stabbed.On Monday, four adult MS-13 members charged in the killing of Ms. Cuevas and Ms. Nickens were in court in Central Islip for a hearing on whether they should face the death penalty. The four have pleaded not guilty.“No doubt, we’ve made tremendous progress, we solved several murders, including Nisa and Kayla, we’ve made hundreds of arrests, but this is a long-term war,” Mr. Sini said. “And make no mistake about it, it’s a war.”He added that the Suffolk County police were working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Gang Task Force. “It’s all hands on deck until we solve these murders,” he said.In a statement, Steve Bellone, the Suffolk County executive, said, “These heinous acts will not go unpunished, and our communities will not be intimidated by such cowardly violence.”William Tigre, 21, an auto mechanic who is originally from Ecuador, said that Jorge had not returned to their Bellport home since 3 p.m. on Tuesday.Mr. Tigre said that as far as he knew, his brother was not involved in gang activity. He said there had been a time when Jorge was “doing some drugs.”On what appeared to be Jorge Tigre’s Facebook page, he identified himself as being from Gualaquiza, Ecuador. On March 28, he posted a “feeling positive” emoji and an accompanying message: “I have learned this: It is not what one does that is wrong, but what one becomes as a consequence of it.“