https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/06/nyregion/nypd-body-cameras.html
Contract for N.Y.P.D. Body Cameras Is Under Investigation, Sources Say - The New York Times
Cameras,Crime and Criminals,Police Department (NYC),TASER International Inc,Vievu LLC,Department of Investigation (NYC),New York City
Feb. 6, 2017
1405
The city’s Investigation Department is looking into the New York Police Department’s awarding of a $6.4 million contract for body-worn cameras, two people with knowledge of the investigation said Monday.The existence of the inquiry, which was opened last year, was shared with the city comptroller’s office late Friday, leading Scott M. Stringer, the comptroller, to decide against signing off on the contract, an official in the comptroller’s office said. The contract was awarded last year to Vievu of Seattle.Mr. Stringer’s office sent the contract back to the Police Department and requested more information about the investigation, said the official, who requested anonymity to discuss a pending investigation.The Police Department is under federal court order, stemming from a 2013 decision against the city over its stop-and-frisk practices, to conduct a pilot program using 1,000 body cameras. Mayor Bill de Blasio promised last week that every New York City officer on patrol would be outfitted with a body camera by 2019. No city officers wear body cameras now.Asked Monday about the comptroller’s decision not to approve the contract, Mr. de Blasio said it would have no effect on his goal. “He’s not blocking this contract,” the mayor said of Mr. Stringer. “This contract is going forward.”Mr. de Blasio, speaking at a news conference on monthly crime statistics, suggested that negative attention to the contract process had been driven by Taser International, the industry leader, which lost out to Vievu, a smaller company. Taser sent a protest letter to the city last fall.“A lot of information has been put out to denigrate the company involved,” Mr. de Blasio said. “That information has been put out largely by one of its competitor companies. I don’t think it’s the first time in the history of the free enterprise system that we’ve seen one company try to smear another.”Taser company officials did not respond to a request for comment.Details of the investigation were not available. A spokeswoman for the Investigation Department declined to comment.A Vievu spokesman said the company had not been contacted by the Investigation Department and referred questions to the city.One city official briefed on the investigation said it had yet to produce any information that would warrant the rejection or cancellation of the contract. The official, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a pending investigation, said that top City Hall officials first learned of it on Monday.The decision by Mr. Stringer’s office to not sign off on the contract was made on the last day before the deadline, when the office learned from the Police Department about the investigation, the official in the comptroller’s office said.“We want to be fully confident of the contract’s integrity,” Tyrone Stevens, a spokesman for the comptroller’s office, said in a statement, “and we want to be certain there are no investigations, legal questions, or otherwise on the matter.”City contracts normally contain a provision allowing the city to get out of a contract should the Investigation Department uncover new information after the contract has been registered. Under the City Charter, the comptroller’s office can reject contracts for only certain reasons, including corruption in the procurement process. The comptroller must approve or reject pending contracts within 30 days of receiving them.The Law Department, in a statement on Monday, said the comptroller did not have a lawful reason to object to the contract and therefore “the contract is deemed registered upon the expiration of the 30-day deadline.”