https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/17/realestate/landlord-bill-tenants-for-city-fines.html
Billing Tenants for Trash Violations - The New York Times
Landlords,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Renting and Leasing (Real Estate),Rent Control and Stabilization
June 17, 2017
2860
Q. I live in a small, rent-stabilized building in the East Village, with garbage and recycling cans unlocked and on the street. Neighbors and passers-by frequently use our bins, causing trash and recycling to overflow and commingle, so the city often tickets our building. Our landlord blames the tenants and now says that whenever the building gets ticketed, he will divide the fine among us. Is that legal? A. Your landlord owns the property, not you. So he is responsible for maintaining it and making sure no one else uses his bins. “If third parties are causing the problem, that’s his problem, not the tenants’,” said Samuel J. Himmelstein, a lawyer who represents tenants.So he cannot make you pay the fines. “The landlord absolutely cannot do what he’s threatening to do with the tickets,” Mr. Himmelstein said. “A landlord is not allowed to pass on any costs to tenants that are not explicitly authorized by the rent-stabilization code.”If you receive a bill, write the landlord a letter refusing to pay it. Explain that the charge is illegal, as it constitutes a rent overcharge. “If we bring this to court, we would fight it and we would win,” Mr. Himmelstein said. “This is pretty clearly the law.”Your landlord is also required to provide tenants with safe and habitable living conditions. The overflowing trash may violate the warranty of habitability, a state statute. Tenants could call 311 and report the situation, potentially delivering your landlord still more tickets (that he, not you, would have to pay). You could also file a complaint for a reduction of services with the Division of Housing and Community Renewal, which oversees rent-regulated apartments. But take pictures now, because if an inspector shows up after the trash has been collected, there won’t be any evidence.