https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/us/politics/border-taxs-apparent-demise-jeopardizes-gop-overhaul-plan.html
Border Tax’s Apparent Demise Jeopardizes G.O.P. Overhaul Plan - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Corporate Taxes,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Federal Taxes (US)
May 23, 2017
1131
WASHINGTON — After months on life support, the border adjustment tax looks as if it’s finally dead.The sharp divisions that make overhauling the tax code a monumental task were on full display on Tuesday as Republicans in Congress and the Trump administration publicly panned the provision at the heart of House Speaker Paul D. Ryan’s tax plan. Its apparent demise sends Republican tax writers back to the drawing board to come up with alternatives as they race to pass legislation before the end of the year.The rifts raise the likelihood that Republicans will struggle to meet their goal of enacting a sweeping rewrite of the tax code in 2017. It’s just as likely that Mr. Ryan and Representative Kevin Brady, the Republican chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, will need to find alternatives to their proposed border adjustment tax on imports. The idea is the linchpin of a plan produced by House Republicans last year, but it has drawn fierce resistance from retailers, energy companies and small businesses.At a standing-room-only House Ways and Means Committee hearing Tuesday about the tax proposal, it was not only Democrats who were uneasy about the path that Republicans have been charting on taxes. “I know we have to pay for these tax cuts, but I don’t want it to be on the backs of everyday hardworking American taxpayers,” said Representative Mike Kelly, a Republican from Pennsylvania.Representative Erik Paulsen, a Minnesota Republican, was more explicit in his opposition. “I cannot support the border adjustability provisions as introduced last year in the blueprint,” he said.Other Republicans echoed Mr. Kelly’s fears, expressing concern that importers would face higher tax bills and that consumers, in turn, would be harmed by higher prices. Without their support, a bill that includes the tax could die in the committee.As proposed, the border adjustment tax would impose a 20 percent tax on imports and exempt taxation of exports. It would raise more than $1 trillion in revenue over a decade, helping Republicans cut tax rates permanently without adding to the deficit. In theory, it would level the playing field between American manufacturers and their competitors around the world.The proposal has ignited a frenzy of lobbying activity, with retail executives scrambling around Washington to “educate” lawmakers on the evils of an import tax. At the same time, companies that are heavy exporters are working to push the concept forward in hopes that their income tax bills will shrink. The retail lobby and advocacy groups financed by the billionaire Koch brothers are spending millions in an effort to kill the tax.On Tuesday, lawmakers heard these arguments in the public glare. “The people who shop at Target are middle-class working families whose budgets are already stretched,” Brian Cornell, chief executive of Target, told lawmakers. “For them, this new tax would be a budget breaker.”“This whole thing needs to be thought out,” said Tee Miller, owner of Black Mingo Outfitters in South Carolina. “It’s one thing to make a model on a spreadsheet, but this whole thing is pretty complex.”Witnesses at the hearing debated the effects that a border adjustment tax would have on currency markets and the economy. While some cautioned that it could create upheaval, others, such as the chief executive of the food processing company Archer Daniels Midland, said that the change to the tax system would make companies like his more competitive globally.Others discussed the possibility of phasing in a border tax to give sectors that are worried about sudden disruptions time to adapt. Lawrence B. Lindsey, a former director of President George W. Bush’s National Economic Council, proposed starting with a smaller import tax to essentially let companies get their feet wet.“Let’s try something minor,” Mr. Lindsey said.But the appetite for making such a drastic change to America’s tax system does not appear to be there.Democrats are primarily interested in middle-class tax cuts and are opposed to any changes to the tax code that could raise prices for working-class families.Senate Republicans are currently crafting their own plan, and none in that chamber have publicly embraced the one pitched by Mr. Ryan and Mr. Brady.The Trump administration has also been cool to the border tax idea. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin threw more cold water on it during a conference hosted by the Peter G. Peterson Foundation on Tuesday.“One of the problems with the border adjustment tax is that it doesn’t create a level playing field,” Mr. Mnuchin said. “It has the potential to pass on significant costs to the consumer.”Although Mr. Mnuchin and other administration officials have been meeting regularly with members of Congress to develop a unified tax overhaul plan, the White House budget released on Tuesday revealed no progress beyond the one-page tax outline that it unveiled last month. The administration was still not prepared to say if its tax plan would add to the deficit or reduce it, so it made it neutral as a placeholder in the budget.“The tax plan, as you know, is in its very early stages,” Mick Mulvaney, the White House budget director, said during a budget briefing on Monday afternoon.Despite all of the resistance, Mr. Brady does not appear to be giving up on the border adjustment tax. Speaking at the Peterson forum after the hearing, he insisted that it was the best way to give the economy a boost and help American businesses.“If someone has a better solution,” he said, “bring it.”