http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/02/us/politics/grahams-immigration-bid-starts-in-south-carolina.html
Graham’s Immigration Bid Starts in South Carolina - The New York Times
Graham  Lindsey,South Carolina,Immigration and Emigration,Illegal Immigrants,Law and Legislation,Republican Party,Senate
April 1, 2013
2633
COLUMBIA, S.C. — A five-minute lunch break at Chick-fil-A was Senator Lindsey Graham’s only unscheduled stop of the day.But he had barely stepped inside the fast food restaurant here last week before a constituent was upon him, urging Mr. Graham, a South Carolina Republican, to relay a message to his colleagues in Washington: “Make ’em understand the word ‘illegal,’ ” said Stephen Lewis, 72, a retired Marine. “If you’re not here legal, be punished or thrown out of this country for it.”The problem is that Mr. Graham is part of an influential bipartisan group in the Senate that would do just the opposite: take the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country and, after what he calls a “long” and “challenging” path, make them legal.Nonetheless, Mr. Graham shook Mr. Lewis’s hand and launched into his well-rehearsed pitch: Those immigrants are here illegally, Mr. Graham agreed, and they are going to have to get right with the law, pay a fine and back taxes, learn English, and head to the back of the line before they can become citizens. Does that seem fair?“Exactly,” said Mr. Lewis, seemingly convinced, if wary.Mr. Graham, 57, a two-term senator immersed in multiple issues on Capitol Hill, will have to continue to win over voters like Mr. Lewis if he hopes to overhaul the nation’s immigration laws — and fend off a possible primary challenge himself.“I think we’re at a point now where 2013 is the best chance to have a comprehensive immigration bill that I’ve seen,” Mr. Graham told a reporter trailing him for two days, over a rib-eye at a local restaurant last week. “I am confident.”He has reason to be. The mood — both nationally and in his home state — has changed significantly since Mr. Graham first tried an immigration overhaul, in 2007. At the time, the effort was derisively dubbed Grahamnesty and Mr. Graham found himself further marginalized by the rise of the Tea Party in 2010, even censured by several county Republican organizations in South Carolina.“Politics went bad for me after the 2006 and 2007 efforts failed, sort of the wilderness years for immigration,” Mr. Graham said.Now, helped by the 2012 election, in which Mitt Romney received a drubbing from Hispanic voters, Republicans seem willing at least to consider an immigration overhaul.Even in Mr. Graham’s home state, the topic has become less of a hot-button issue.At an hour-and-a-half Chamber of Commerce question-and-answer session last week with much of the South Carolina Congressional delegation, the topic of immigration came up only once — when Mr. Graham mentioned it in his opening remarks.“Are you ready for immigration reform?” he asked the crowd. “I am!”The applause was scattered — but there were no boos, a change, aides and fellow Republicans said, from just a few years ago.“I certainly think that the level of rhetoric and the environment for having the discussion has changed,” said Representative Mick Mulvaney, Republican of South Carolina. “I don’t think people are any less passionate about their view on immigration, but I do think people are willing to talk about immigration more freely and more holistically now.”Mr. Graham, too, has made something of a comeback. He led the charge against the Obama administration on Benghazi — “President Obama’s leading from behind is a debacle in Libya; what he’s doing in Syria is unconscionable,” he said — and was a vocal critic of Chuck Hagel’s nomination as secretary of defense. His outspokenness on national security has endeared him to his grass-roots conservative base, though skeptics wonder if it is for show, to give him cover to move toward Democrats on immigration or a budget compromise, a charge Mr. Graham rejects.“It would be a disservice to write our concerns about Libya off as a partisan deal motivated by politics,” he said, “given the national security implications of what’s happened in Libya and Syria.”“Anytime you challenge the president, Obama, it’s good politics,” he added, but pointed out that he was equally critical of President George W. Bush on foreign policy.“He is a lightning rod, but is he doing it for cover?” asked Hogan Gidley, a Republican strategist based in South Carolina and a former executive director of the state’s Republican Party. “Looking at his record would suggest otherwise. He is a defense hawk, he is an Israel ally, he was always going to be against Hagel. It just so happens that it also falls politically perfectly for him in the state.”Mr. Graham is up for re-election in 2014, and though there have been rumblings about a primary challenge from the right, Democrats and Republicans both privately and publicly say Mr. Graham is unlikely to get a credible opponent.“There’s 67 million reasons not to run against Lindsey Graham,” said Chad Connelly, the chairman of the South Carolina Republican Party, using an arbitrarily large number for emphasis. “You’re going to have a heck of a run.”Richard Quinn, a longtime consultant to Mr. Graham and a Republican pollster based in South Carolina, said that in a recent poll he conducted, the South Carolinian view of immigration seemed largely in line with that of the nation; only 21 percent of likely Republican primary voters said that the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country should be deported, while 73 percent said they should be offered a path to citizenship provided they pay a fine, go to the back of the line, and learn English.“Lindsey does not run from controversy,” Mr. Quinn said. “Difficult problems don’t intimidate him, and he’s a guy who’s willing to take chances when others are trying to hide in the tall grass, and that makes him a target from time to time.”By Mr. Graham’s own admission, South Carolina has become “ground zero for the immigration debate,” and ads tied to the issue have already hit the airwaves here. Speaking at an event last week with two faith leaders, who have also gotten behind immigration reform, Mr. Graham sounded a defiant note.“If you want to run ads, spend all the money you want to spend,” he said. “I’m not backing off.”A bit later, he added, “When people come up to me and say, ‘You’ve got to send them all back,’ I say, ‘Thank you very much, that ain’t gonna work.’”Mr. Graham can seem simultaneously boyish and weary. He still has pale, almost baby blue eyes, but thick lines at the corner of his mouth pull downward, making his chin appear like that of a marionette. At one point at his final event last Tuesday — the last of four before he had to head to Atlanta for a fund-raiser — Mr. Graham rubbed his eyes with both hands. It had been a long day; he had been swigging Cherry Coke Zero to stay awake, peering periodically at his old-fashioned flip phone, talking about getting himself to a gym, and trying (and largely failing) to stay on a low-carb diet.He has learned from his earlier immigration battle. Now he leads with securing the borders and the idea that immigrants should not be rewarded for breaking the law, and only then moves on to citizenship.Mr. Graham talked about immigration reform and South Carolina politics for 45 minutes over dinner while cheating on his low-carb diet — “Since I didn’t ask for them, they don’t count,” he said, pointing to some onion strings adorning his steak — and he hopped into a reporter’s car after the Chick-fil-A stop to chat some more, again violating his diet with a chicken sandwich.That evening, he was still eager to talk immigration.“I thought those guys at the Chick-fil-A were probably representative of how it’s changed,” Mr. Graham mused. “They wish the problem didn’t exist, they don’t think it’s right, but they understand at a level that they’ve got to be practical.”