http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/world/americas/colombia-farc-juan-manuel-santos.html
Colombia’s Leader Says Peace Deal Rests on People’s Ability to Forgive - The New York Times
Colombia,Santos  Juan Manuel,Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,Referendums
Sept. 19, 2016
6292
A half-century of civil war has deeply injured the psyche of Colombians, the country’s president said on Monday, weeks before a nationwide referendum on a peace deal that would end Latin America’s last major guerrilla conflict.“Making peace is much more difficult than making war because you need to change sentiments of people, people who have suffered, to try to persuade them to forgive,” the president, Juan Manuel Santos, said in an interview.“Three generations of war have taken away from us our capacity to feel and suffer for other people,” he added.Colombians are scheduled to vote next month on an agreement between Mr. Santos’s government and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, that would bring the 52-year war to an end. That up-or-down vote is also seen as a referendum on the president’s political reputation.The agreement, reached last month after four years of negotiations, calls for the FARC guerrillas to lay down their arms under the supervision of United Nations observers, and allows the guerrillas to return to civilian life. The deal offers a path to amnesty for rank-and-file fighters, Mr. Santos said, and establishes a special tribunal to try commanders. How that will work remains to be seen, along with the question of whether government soldiers will be prosecuted for serious crimes.The war in Colombia, the longest in the Americas, killed about 220,000 people and was marked by kidnappings, massacres and rapes that prompted five million Colombians to flee their homes. Critics of the agreement have said that the government’s deal with the FARC would allow perpetrators of atrocities, among the rebels and on the government side, to be dealt minimal punishment or no punishment at all.Mr. Santos said that all but low-level fighters would be held accountable.“We need to achieve the maximum justice possible but that would allow us peace,” he said. “I think we struck that equilibrium.”Mr. Santos said that the ideas the guerrillas  fought for did not resonate with most Colombians, and that he doubted that the FARC would be able to reinvent itself as a political organization.“Unless they modernize their speech and modernize their mission, I don’t see much success in their political ideas,” he said. “But the whole purpose of this process is to allow them to try.”