https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/realestate/new-condo-complaints-heat-up.html
New Condo Complaints Heat Up - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Building (Construction),Condominiums,Suits and Litigation (Civil)
June 30, 2017
8849
Look back to the end of the last housing cycle, and the downturn was marked by a flurry of complaints from condo owners and their boards against developers, claiming defects in new or renovated buildings. Roofs and pipes leaked, balconies crumbled and facades cracked. The ensuing lawsuits dragged on for years, as homeowners struggled to recoup their losses.Now, as another round of homeowners settles into new apartments, the complaints are rolling in again. Lawyers say they are fielding as many calls from anxious owners and condo associations as they did in the early 2000s. The problems, they say, are similar to those that plagued properties when the housing market crashed in 2008.“As the market softens and developers rush to get projects done, corners are invariably cut,” said Steven D. Sladkus, a real estate litigator and founding partner of Schwartz Sladkus Reich Greenberg Atlas.So far, few condos built since late 2011, around the time the housing market began to recover, have filed lawsuits. This is partly because owners are just now beginning to assume control of the properties — the developers typically control condo boards for a number of years after the building opens. But lawyers expect the lawsuits to pick up again soon.“There is going to be a spike in the next couple of years,” as more buyers settle into their homes and begin noticing problems, said Robert J. Braverman, a real estate lawyer and the managing partner of Braverman/Greenspun.A May 24 New York State appellate court decision, however, may make it more difficult for some owners to go after the developers. For years, homeowners in Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island and other parts of the state have been able to sue a developer personally for breach of contract, simply because he or she signed what is known as a certification in the offering plan that is filed with the state attorney general.But the appellate court upended that practice, ruling that an individual principal of a corporation could not be held personally liable just because a certification was signed. The decision puts the three boroughs in line with Manhattan and the Bronx, where you already could not sue on these grounds.The recent ruling shines a light on the challenges that homeowners face when trying to recoup money spent on repairs. Developers invariably register projects as limited liability companies, an arrangement that shields individuals from liability. The principals of the L.L.C. may have millions of dollars of personal wealth, but the assets homeowners can go after are limited to whatever money is in the L.L.C. Once the shell company sells the apartments and depletes its funds, the pot may be empty.Lawyers are divided over the significance of the ruling.There are other, albeit more difficult ways to hold a developer personally accountable for problems with a building. A condo could sue him or her for violating the contract by arguing that the L.L.C. was a sham or a cover-up, or try to prove that he or she engaged in fraud or breached his or her fiduciary duty, said Jared E. Paioff, a real estate litigator and partner at Schwartz Sladkus Reich Greenberg Atlas.“There are other ways to skin a cat,” Mr. Sladkus said. The ruling “took away one of our tricks, but certainly didn’t ruin the game.”Others, however, see it as a game changer. “You’d have to be able to show that there was intentional fraud,” Mr. Braverman said. “That’s an incredible burden of proof.”And as Adam Leitman Bailey, a Manhattan real estate lawyer, noted, “It’s really hard to pierce the corporate veil. It takes a lot of money.”Problems are not unique to ground-up construction. Conversions can spell trouble, too, even among the city’s highest-end properties. Consider 150 East 72nd Street, a 24-unit condo converted in 2013 from a rental by Macklowe Properties, a developer of 432 Park Avenue, the super-skinny, super-tall tower where a penthouse sold last year for north of $87 million.At 150 East 72nd Street, a penthouse sold in 2015 for $15.27 million. Last December, the condo association sued the L.L.C. and its principal, Harry Macklowe, alleging failure to properly fund the reserve fund, fraud and “breach of contract and negligence resulting from the numerous construction defects,” according to the suit. The owners sued Mr. Macklowe personally, arguing that the L.L.C. was “an alter ego” expressly intended to shield him from liability.According to the lawsuit, “the building was defective, and not constructed in a skillful manner.” The board hired an architect who found insufficient fire-stopping measures, lack of insulation and major facade problems. According to the suit, the architect also found: The H.V.A.C. tower froze in cold weather, so the apartments did not heat properly; odors passed between apartments; and old pipes caused “extreme damage” to some apartments.Mr. Bailey, who represents the condo association in the litigation, declined to comment on the case. Macklowe Properties also declined to comment.The cost of solving construction problems like these can be staggering, hitting particularly hard in a middle-class building. To pay for lawyers and repairs, a condo association may have to impose hefty assessments on homeowners who have lived in their apartments for only a few months or years.In 2015, Nina Lubin, 34, bought a two-bedroom duplex with her husband in a new condo in Riverdale, the Bronx, paying around $500,000. The building has had problems with its plumbing, its roof, its facade and its heating and cooling system. Common charges have gone up by 7 percent. This August, each owner will have to pay a one-time assessment of $500 to $1,000 for repairs, and another assessment is coming next year.“We had hoped moving into a newer building that we wouldn’t have these problems,” said Ms. Lubin, who requested that the building address be withheld since the condo has not sued the developer. “It is frustrating to have so many issues going on that we were not made aware of when we were purchasing the property.”The board is considering its legal options, but litigation is a long and expensive road to travel. “The last resort anyone wants to pursue is litigation,” said Mr. Sladkus, who, with Mr. Paioff, represents Ms. Lubin’s condo association. “The hope is that it resolves quickly.”Once, water leaked into one of Ms. Lubin’s closets, narrowly missing her leather handbags. Another time, water leaking from the ceiling damaged a bathroom. Last March, water spontaneously burst from the light fixture above the kitchen island during a birthday party, drenching the food and the cake. “The whole birthday spread was a waterfall,” she said.Her reaction? “It was just another thing.”