https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/quentin-tarantino-bret-easton-ellis-interview.html
The Gonzo Vision of Quentin Tarantino - The New York Times
Movies,Tarantino  Quentin,Hateful Eight  The (Movie)
Oct. 12, 2015
1101
“I READ, IN A BOOK about Bette Davis, that anybody who does an interview while drinking alcohol is a damned fool. When I saw that, I thought, ‘Oh my god, she’s right! What have I been doing my whole career?’ ’’ Quentin Tarantino offers me a glass of red wine from a recently opened bottle that’s about half-full when I arrive at his house way up in the Hollywood Hills, overlooking the green-ridged canyons on a hot August evening. ‘‘I hope you’re a damned fool, too!’’Seated at a table by the pool behind the large and rambling home he bought in 1996 when he was making ‘‘Jackie Brown,’’ Tarantino is in baggy jeans and a brown hoodie, and because he is the ultimate auteur movie geek — I’ve never met anyone with such an encyclopedic knowledge of film — we are soon talking about our mutual affection for the critic Pauline Kael. A huge influence on Tarantino, Kael championed a kind of high-low trash-art aesthetic that was inclusive of both old-school foreign auteurs (Max Ophüls and Satyajit Ray) and new mavericks (Sam Peckinpah and Brian De Palma), while disdaining the polite, better-behaved American cinema of that era; we agree that she was so much more vital and interesting in the 1970s than in the 1980s. ‘‘The movies just weren’t up to snuff — she was better than the movies,’’ says Tarantino, a believer that the latter decade was among the worst for American film. But, he adds, ‘‘one of the weird things looking back at the ’70s reviews is that you can’t believe how mean she was to magnificent movies. She’s so rough on Don Siegel for making ‘Charley Varrick.’ ’’Now, you might not think “Charley Varrick” is ‘‘magnificent’’ (if you think about it at all) but Tarantino’s adolescent passion moves you closer to wondering: Did I miss something? Tarantino has been too busy working on his new opus, ‘‘The Hateful Eight,’’ to watch many new movies in the last year, but he offers, along with more wine, snapshot opinions about a few of his filmmaker contemporaries. David Fincher? ‘‘Even when I don’t like his movies I walk around thinking about them for a week or so.’’ Wes Anderson? ‘‘ ‘The Grand Budapest Hotel’ is not really my thing, but I kind of loved it. The fact that I wasn’t a die-hard fan before made me even more happy that I could finally embrace him.’’ Judd Apatow? ‘‘His audience is getting smaller and smaller but I think he’s getting better and better.’’‘‘The Hateful Eight’’ will screen on Christmas Day in a few select cities — in 70 millimeter as a roadshow presentation complete with an intermission — before opening wide in digital theaters in January. Tarantino is obsessed with the creamy grain of 70-millimeter film, so much so that he has arranged for 100 theaters worldwide to be retrofitted with Ultra Panavision lenses so the movie can be displayed as he intended. ‘‘I’ve been very on-edge the last three weeks,’’ he says, looking relaxed as the canyons around us recede into blackness.The film, which stars Bruce Dern, Samuel L. Jackson, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Michael Madsen, Tim Roth and Kurt Russell, was born of two genres: the parlor-room mystery and the wide-screen, large-scale western. The idea came to him from watching classic TV shows such as ‘‘The Virginian,’’ ‘‘Bonanza’’ and ‘‘The Big Valley,’’ in which, he says, ‘‘There was always, each season, at least one episode where bandits take over the Ponderosa or Shiloh Ranch, and they’d all be played by guest stars. It couldn’t help but lend itself to a situation like ‘Reservoir Dogs’: Trap them all in a room and let me get rid of all the hero characters so there’s no moral center.’’ Which is precisely what happens in ‘‘The Hateful Eight,’’ during a terrible blizzard.We talk about the differences between TV and movies, and how TV relies on a kind of relentless storytelling whose main job is to constantly dispense information, while movies depend much more on mood and atmosphere — TV is a writers’ medium and movies are a directors’ medium. Even in the Golden Age of Television, the notion of TV as art is now considered something of a media-made joke that is finally being publicly deconstructed by critics, journalists and showrunners alike. The best TV shows still have sets that look a little ragged and threadbare because of the reality of TV economics — and to Tarantino this matters. The bigness of his recent movies — ‘‘Inglourious Basterds,’’ ‘‘Django Unchained’’ and now ‘‘The Hateful Eight’’ — feels like a rebuke to the smallness of TV and its increasing relevance to audiences, a fight against watching a series of medium shots and close-ups on your computer, your iPad and your iPhone. The belief in visual spectacle is part of Tarantino’s message in the era of Amazon, Hulu and Netflix.‘‘I think we spent 60-something million on ‘Hateful Eight,’ which is actually more than I wanted to spend but we had weather problems. And,’’ he shrugs, laughing, ‘‘I wanted to make it good.’’ Unlike many filmmakers who get worn down by dwindling resources and drift over to television, Tarantino hasn’t because, well, he doesn’t have to. His last two movies were global blockbusters that were heavily nominated for Academy Awards. His first two movies were small-scale, L.A.-set crime dramas and, to this day, they are among the purest expressions of an ironic Gen-X sensibility that exist in American movie culture. When it opened in 1992, ‘‘Reservoir Dogs’’ was much-talked-about but little seen, yet it paved the way for a new kind of movie, exploding two years later into the malevolent delight of ‘‘Pulp Fiction’’ — at which point the audience was ready for it. In all of Tarantino’s movies, the dialogue is theatrical and profane and the criminal is the guiding moral authority. The humor is pitch-black, the nihilism gleeful. There are endless pop-culture references — and, yes, extreme and nasty violence.As hugely influential as his earlier movies were (there seemed to be thousands of terrible rip-offs throughout the ’90s and into the 2000s), it’s impossible now to imagine an earnest 20-something millennial dreaming up a film as perverse and lurid as ‘‘Pulp Fiction’’ or ‘‘Reservoir Dogs’’ or anything else he’s made. In an era obsessed with ‘‘triggering’’ and ‘‘microaggressions’’ and the policing of language, the Tarantino oeuvre is relentlessly un-PC: His movies are impolite, rude, irresponsible and somewhat cold. And the further Tarantino goes, the larger his audience gets, as seen with his racially explosive comedy-western ‘‘Django Unchained.’’ ‘‘The Hateful Eight,’’ which takes place eight or nine years after the Civil War, also ended up addressing issues of race, even if this wasn’t his original intention: ‘‘It was just this cool, neat, genre scenario.’’Tarantino’s dialogue-driven scenes, rambling and digressive, are often played out in real time, embedded within the strange, leisurely and byzantine plots he constructs, which are nothing like what a screenwriter who was taught by gurus such as Syd Field or Robert McKee might construct; the idea of the well-structured, three-act picture with the ‘‘inciting incident’’ on page 15 seems idiotic and fake in Tarantino’s world.He shattered and then rearranged such rules in ‘‘Inglourious Basterds,’’ a rollicking, harrowing World War II comic pastiche. It’s one of the great films of the past decade: Playful, erudite, funny, talky, suspenseful and madcap, it both loves and laughs at the conventions of genre movies while reimagining and updating them. To my mind, it’s much more sweeping, outrageous and formally inventive than Kathryn Bigelow’s ‘‘The Hurt Locker,’’ the other war movie that came out in the summer of 2009, which is a serious, straightforward, humanist-realist character study that makes earnest liberal audiences feel both guilty and self-congratulatory. It was because of this that ‘‘Inglourious Basterds’’ lost to ‘‘The Hurt Locker’’ at the 2010 Oscars for Best Picture, Director and Original Screenplay. ‘‘It bugged me that Mark Boal won Best Screenplay for that movie,’’ Tarantino now admits. ‘‘The Kathryn Bigelow thing — I got it. Look, it was exciting that a woman had made such a good war film, and it was the first movie about the Iraq War that said something. And it wasn’t like I lost to something dreadful. It’s not like ‘E.T.’ losing to ‘Gandhi.’ ’’We touch on this year’s Oscars and the supposed Oscar snubbing of Ava DuVernay’s Martin Luther King movie ‘‘Selma,’’ which caused a kind of national sentimental-narrative outrage, compounded by the events in Ferguson, and which branded the Academy voters as old and out-of-it racists — despite the fact that ‘‘12 Years a Slave’’ had won Best Picture the year before. Tarantino shrugs diplomatically: ‘‘She did a really good job on ‘Selma’ but ‘Selma’ deserved an Emmy.’’ ‘‘Django Unchained,’’ with its depictions of antebellum-era institutionalized racism and Mandingo fights and black self-hatred, is a much more shocking and forward-thinking movie than ‘‘Selma,’’ and audiences turned it into the biggest hit of Tarantino’s career. But it was also attacked for, among other things, being written and directed by a white man.Such controversy is not new to Tarantino. ‘‘If you’ve made money being a critic in black culture in the last 20 years you have to deal with me,’’ he says. ‘‘You must have an opinion of me. You must deal with what I’m saying and deal with the consequences.’’ He pauses, considers. ‘‘If you sift through the criticism,’’ he says, ‘‘you’ll see it’s pretty evenly divided between pros and cons. But when the black critics came out with savage think pieces about ‘Django,’ I couldn’t have cared less. If people don’t like my movies, they don’t like my movies, and if they don’t get it, it doesn’t matter. The bad taste that was left in my mouth had to do with this: It’s been a long time since the subject of a writer’s skin was mentioned as often as mine. You wouldn’t think the color of a writer’s skin should have any effect on the words themselves. In a lot of the more ugly pieces my motives were really brought to bear in the most negative way. It’s like I’m some supervillain coming up with this stuff.’’ But Tarantino is an optimist: ‘‘This is the best time to push buttons,’’ he says a few minutes later. ‘‘This is the best time to get out there because there actually is a genuine platform. Now it’s being talked about.’’An assistant interrupts and reminds Tarantino that it’s after 9 and that the movie he wants to see starts in 20 minutes, so we get into Tarantino’s yellow 2006 Mustang GT. Listening to a selection of his mixtapes, we head down the winding empty canyons, through the flatlands of Hollywood to the New Beverly Cinema, a revival theater that he bought in 2007. Last fall, he became the programming director there, often screening prints from his private collection. He parks in a space out back and we walk around the corner to a darkened and deserted stretch of Beverly Boulevard. Outside the theater there are clusters of hipster kids under the marquee, smoking, looking at their phones, some of them glancing up as Tarantino approaches.Tonight’s double feature is ‘‘Modern Times’’ and an obscure Chaplin movie called ‘‘The Circus.’’ Tarantino bounds through the lobby, down one aisle and then up another to the four seats that have been reserved for him in the fifth row of the house, which holds about 250 and is more than half-full tonight — a surprisingly good turnout for a Monday, he notes, settling into the aisle seat.As someone who hasn’t been to the New Beverly since I haunted it throughout my adolescence and into my 20s, I’m surprised both by how refurbished it is (new seats and a new screen) and isn’t (the men’s bathroom is still the closet it always was and the lobby is so tiny that the line for the concession stand can snake into the theater itself). Tonight there are previews of two Wertmüller and Giancarlo Giannini collaborations from the ’70s, and then ‘‘The Circus,’’ which turns out to be a delight, even though — or maybe because — the print is scratchy and roughed-up and missing frames. The young audience laughs loudly throughout the movie, and there are cheers when it ends.Afterward, Tarantino and I are standing outside, when kids milling about start gathering up the nerve to approach him. After one does, a line forms. Tarantino talks to everyone, his grin never faltering, as fans profess their thanks and gratitude — for his movies, for the theater, for just talking to them. It seems as if he could keep this up all night, but he is hungry and his favorite nearby restaurant will stop serving soon.Before he heads off, I mention how remarkable the communal experience of watching a movie on a screen with a large and willing audience is — and with an actual print — after seeing so much television alone or renting movies online. Tarantino nods, and uses our last few moments together to rally one more time against the digitizing of the moviegoing experience. ‘‘If Buzzy, the kid who pops the popcorn, simply hits play on the menu then we’re just there watching HBO in public,’’ he says. ‘‘And I don’t know about you, but I don’t need to watch HBO with a bunch of strangers.’’