https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/14/world/asia/singapore-lee-hsien-loong-siblings.html
In Singapore, Prime Minister’s Siblings Are Taking Private Feud Public - The New York Times
Singapore,Politics and Government,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Lee Hsien Loong,Lee Kuan Yew
June 14, 2017
9924
SINGAPORE — In an unusually public escalation of a feud within Singapore’s first family, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong’s siblings have accused him of misusing his position to advance his personal agenda and of betraying the legacy of their father, Singapore’s first prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew.“We feel big brother omnipresent,” the prime minister’s sister, Lee Wei Ling, and brother, Lee Hsien Yang, wrote in a statement posted on Facebook on Wednesday. Lee Hsien Yang added that he planned to leave Singapore “for the foreseeable future” because of his brother.The prime minister, who is on an overseas trip with his family, issued his own statement, rejecting the allegations.“I am very disappointed that my siblings have chosen to issue a statement publicizing private family matters,” he wrote on his Facebook page. “Since my father’s passing in March 2015, as the eldest son I have tried my best to resolve the issues among us within the family, out of respect for our parents.”Their father served as Singapore’s prime minister from 1959 until 1990, but remained until late into his life the dominant personality and driving force in what he called “a first-world oasis in a third-world region.” Although his leadership was accused of suppressing freedoms, it was credited with transforming resource-poor Singapore into a wealthy international business and financial center.Public criticism of leaders is rare in Singapore, and the open rift within the Lee family has shocked many. The differences between the siblings first broke into the open last year, on the anniversary of Mr. Lee’s death, when Lee Wei Ling published excerpts from emails in which she accused her brother of exploiting the commemoration ceremonies to abuse his power and “establish a dynasty.”At the center of the dispute is a house that belonged to their father. In their statement on Wednesday, the two younger Lees said their older brother had taken steps to hinder their father’s will, which called for the house to be demolished. The prime minister’s siblings accused him of wanting to preserve it as a monument for his political advantage.Lee Hsien Loong’s “popularity is inextricably linked to Lee Kuan Yew’s legacy,” they wrote. “His political power is drawn from his being Lee Kuan Yew’s son. We have observed that Hsien Loong and Ho Ching” — the prime minister’s wife — “want to milk Lee Kuan Yew’s legacy for their own political purposes.”They added that Lee Hsien Loong and his wife, who is chief executive of Temasek Holdings, Singapore’s sovereign wealth fund, were harboring political ambitions for their son. The prime minister also denied this assertion.Lee Hsien Yang, who is chairman of the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore, and Lee Wei Ling, a surgeon and a senior adviser at the National Neuroscience Institute, said they had nothing to gain from the demolition of the house except to honor their father’s wishes.“We do not trust Hsien Loong as a brother or a leader,” they wrote in their statement. “We have lost confidence in him.”Chua Beng Huat, a sociology professor at the National University of Singapore, called the public feud “mind-boggling.” He doubted, however, that it would undercut the political standing of Lee Hsien Loong, who has been prime minister since 2004.The prime minister, Mr. Chua said, “is not likely to sue his own brother or sister.”“In some sense,” he added, “it is his family spat. It’s embarrassingly nobody’s business.”But Catherine Lim, a political commentator, wrote in an email that the Lee Kuan Yew era was “effectively over,” with the governing People’s Action Party “openly preparing Singaporeans for the new leadership, a prominent lineup of young, already tested leaders.”Ms. Lim said that she was startled last year when the prime minister’s sister “actually called him ‘dishonorable’ and accused him of ‘dynastic’ ambitions, as the Lees have generally been a very private family.”“This new, very acrimonious development of the feud,” she said, “is likely to unfold further, and probably in unexpected ways, over the coming months.”In Singapore’s last general election, in 2015, a few months after Lee Kuan Yew’s death, the People’s Action Party won 83 of 89 contested seats in Parliament and captured nearly 70 percent of the vote. It was the best performance since 1991 for the party, which has governed continuously since the island state became independent in 1965.