https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/health/moonshot-to-cure-cancer-to-be-led-by-biden-relies-on-outmoded-view-of-disease.html
‘Moonshot’ to Cure Cancer, to Be Led by Biden, Relies on Outmoded View of Disease  - The New York Times
Cancer,Biden  Joseph R Jr,Research,State of the Union Message (US),American Assn for Cancer Research,Food and Drug Administration,Obama  Barack
Jan. 13, 2016
4722
Last Friday a group of 15 cancer researchers cut short a meeting at the Food and Drug Administration. The reason: They had been invited to Vice President Joseph R. Biden’s office to discuss his “moonshot” to cure cancer.“We had no idea what was coming,” said Dr. George D. Demetri, director of the Ludwig Center at Harvard and a professor of medicine at Harvard’s Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.It turned out the vice president was out of town that day, but his staff wanted to know: What could Mr. Biden do in his remaining year in office, and over the long term, to advance cancer research and ultimately cure the disease?The idea that a concerted government push can lead to a “cure” for cancer is nearly a half century old, stretching back to President Nixon’s failed “War on Cancer.” The latest, which President Obama formalized in his State of the Union address on Tuesday, has a deeply emotional tinge. Mr. Biden’s son Beau died of brain cancer in May, and the vice president’s very public mourning and  call for a “national commitment to end cancer as we know it” as he announced his decision not to run for president has moved and captivated Washington.While Mr. Biden’s focus has already made some meaningful difference — he negotiated with Republican congressional leaders a $264 million increase in funding for the National Cancer Institute, the largest in a decade for an agency that has been squeezed by static budgets in recent years — the chances of reaching a moment of victory as the analogy “moonshot” suggests seem entirely unrealistic.“This is not about getting to one point in a certain period of time,” said Dr. Harold Varmus, a Nobel laureate and former director of the National Cancer Institute.Unlike in 1971, when President Nixon launched his cancer war, researchers now understand that cancer is not one disease but essentially hundreds. The very notion of a single cure — or as Mr. Obama put it, making “America the country that cures cancer once and for all” — is misleading and outdated.“Cancer is way more complex than anyone had imagined in 1970,” said Dr. Jose Baselga, the president of the American Association for Cancer Research and physician in chief and chief medical officer at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.Although cancer death rates are dropping, cancer remains a leading killer of Americans — there were an estimated 589,430 cancer deaths in 2015. But cancer specialists are optimistic, saying they have entered a new era with the ability to rapidly determine the sequences of genes in tumor cells, searching for mutations that may be driving the cancer’s growth.That has led to new — and expensive — drugs that can attack specific mutations and prolong the lives of some patients. There also is a new class of therapies that unleash the immune system, spurring it to attack cancers. Still, most patients have tumors that will not respond to treatments. Researchers are developing more and more targeted drugs and immune therapies and say that in the future they expect to hit cancers with several such treatments at once, much the way AIDS was tamed when researchers developed drugs to strike the virus at its vulnerable points.“We are in a situation now where we can really make an impact,” Dr. Baselga said. “But at this point, funding matters. When you know what you want to do, when you have a road map ahead of you, funding lets you get there faster,” he said.Much of what Mr. Biden is doing for now is listening. On Friday, he is expected to visit Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine to talk to physicians and researchers. Next week, he plans to discuss cancer research with international experts at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Later this month, he will convene the first of several meetings with cabinet secretaries and agency heads to improve federal investment and support of cancer research and treatment.A top White House aide said that the vice president had been particularly intrigued by the idea that a crucial stumbling block to advances in cancer research may be poor collaboration among researchers who so jealously guard their data that advances the same studies and work is repeated in multiple locations, wasting resources.Data sharing was one of the topics discussed at the meeting last Friday between researchers from the American Association for Cancer Research and Mr. Biden’s staff. The researchers offered a number of ideas on how Mr. Biden could be helpful, not simply for new research but for making sure what is being discovered at such a rapid pace today is not squandered, that patients who could benefit were actually helped.The researchers pointed out that although genome sequencing seems to be rapidly transforming cancer research, a tiny fraction of cancer patients are having their tumors sequenced because most insurers, including Medicare, will not pay for the procedure.For a start, the group told Mr. Biden’s staff, Medicare could start paying for sequencing and, as a condition for paying, collect data on patient outcomes to see if they were noticeably better.Some major medical centers, like Dana Farber, Memorial Sloan Kettering and Vanderbilt, use their own funds and funds from philanthropists to pay for genome sequencing. But then another issue arises, the group told Mr. Biden’s staff. Each medical center keeps its own records of what mutations were found, what drugs were tried and how the patients fared.The cancer research association has started a pilot project with seven medical centers to share such information. It includes 17,000 patient samples, said Dr. Mary M. Zutter, professor of cancer biology and director of the tumor-host interaction program at the Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center.But different centers use different formats to store genetic sequencing data and have very different ways of describing patient outcomes.“You’d think it would be easy, but there are so many challenges,” Dr. Demetri said. “Patient privacy and everybody collecting data in their own way. Clinical outcomes are often in free text fields — ‘the patient feels better today.’ ”Mr. Biden’s staff did not make any promises, but the group of cancer specialists left encouraged.Commitments by powerful Washington figures to cure cancer seem to come along about every decade.Dr. Andrew von Eschenbach, the director of the National Cancer Institute, announced in 2003 that his organization’s goal was to “eliminate suffering and death” caused by cancer by 2015.During an appropriations hearing, Dr. von Eschenbach got into a public bargaining session with Senator Arlen Specter, then a Republican from Pennsylvania, about how much money Dr. von Eschenbach would need to advance the date of the cure.“I asked you what it would take to move that date up to 2010,” Mr. Specter asked.“We have proposed a budget that would support those initiatives that would amount to approximately $600 million a year,” Dr. von Eschenbach answered.“Six-hundred million a year?” Mr. Specter asked. “And you can move the date from 2015 to 2010?”“Yes, sir,” Mr. von Eschenbach said.Mr. Specter died of cancer in 2012.