https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/us/politics/emails-raise-new-questions-about-clinton-foundation-ties-to-state-dept.html
Emails Raise New Questions About Clinton Foundation Ties to State Dept. - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,E-Mail,Clinton Foundation,Judicial Watch,State Department,Abedin  Huma,Band  Douglas J,Clinton  Bill,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Liveris  Andrew N,North Korea
Sept. 1, 2016
8701
WASHINGTON — A top aide to Hillary Clinton at the State Department agreed to try to obtain a special diplomatic passport for an adviser to former President Bill Clinton in 2009, according to emails released Thursday, raising new questions about whether people tied to the Clinton Foundation received special access at the department.The request by the adviser, Douglas J. Band, who started one arm of the Clintons’ charitable foundation, was unusual, and the State Department never issued the passport. Only department employees and others with diplomatic status are eligible for the special passports, which help envoys facilitate travel, officials said.Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign said that there was nothing untoward about the request and that it related to an emergency trip that Mr. Clinton took to North Korea in 2009 to negotiate the release of two American journalists. Mrs. Clinton has long denied that donors had any special influence at the State Department.The exchange about the passport, between Mr. Band and Huma Abedin, who was then a top State Department aide to Mrs. Clinton, was included in a set of more than 500 pages of emails made public by Judicial Watch, a conservative legal group that sued for their release.“Need get me/justy and jd dip passports,” Mr. Band wrote to Ms. Abedin on July 27, 2009, referring to passports for himself and two other aides to Mr. Clinton, Justin Cooper and John Davidson.“We had them years ago but they lapsed and we didn’t bother getting them,” Mr. Band wrote.Ms. Abedin emailed back six minutes later to say, “OK will figure it out.”Mr. Band did not explain in the email exchange why he and the others needed the diplomatic passports, and Ms. Abedin did not ask.But a person with knowledge of the issue, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that the three men were arranging to travel with Mr. Clinton to Pyongyang less than a week later for the former president’s secret negotiations. Mr. Clinton already had a diplomatic passport as a former president.Mrs. Clinton’s campaign accused Judicial Watch of misrepresenting the episode.“Judicial Watch is now attacking State Department officials and the 42nd president of the United States for rescuing two American journalists from North Korea,” the campaign said. “This is a new low even for this right-wing organization that has been going after the Clintons since the 1990s.”Traveling with a former president does not convey any special diplomatic status, the State Department indicated in a statement regarding the emails.“Diplomatic passports are issued to Foreign Service officers or a person having diplomatic or comparable status,” the statement said.“Any individuals who do not have this status are not issued diplomatic passports,” it said, adding that “the staff of former presidents are not included among those eligible to be issued a diplomatic passport.”The emails released by Judicial Watch also include discussions about meetings between Mrs. Clinton and a number of people involved in major donations to the Clinton Foundation.In one exchange in July 2009, Ms. Abedin told Mrs. Clinton’s scheduler that Mr. Clinton “wants to be sure” that Mrs. Clinton would be able to see Andrew Liveris, the chief executive of Dow Chemical, at an event the next night. Dow Chemical has been one of the biggest donors to the Clinton Foundation, giving $1 million to $5 million, records show.Ms. Abedin arranged what she called “a pull-aside” for Mr. Liveris to speak with Mrs. Clinton in a private room after she arrived to give a speech, according to the emails, which did not explain the reason for the meeting.The person with knowledge of the issue said that this email chain also related to Mr. Clinton’s North Korea trip because Mr. Liveris had offered to let Mr. Clinton use his private plane.A separate batch of State Department documents released by Judicial Watch last month also revealed contacts between the State Department and Clinton Foundation donors. In one such exchange, Mr. Band sought to put a billionaire donor in touch with the department’s former ambassador to Lebanon.Donald J. Trump, Mrs. Clinton’s Republican opponent, has seized on the documents, saying they revealed a “pay to play” operation.