https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/realestate/a-palladian-villa-in-italy-listed-for-45-million.html
A Palladian Villa in Italy, Listed for $45 Million - The New York Times
Historic Buildings and Sites,Architecture,Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Palladio  Andrea,Italy,Veneto (Italy)
July 14, 2017
2868
In 1989, Carl and Sally Gable, a couple from Atlanta, paid $2 million for a 16th-century villa in the Veneto region of northeastern Italy. The building, which they used as a second home, wasn’t just any Renaissance jewel box, but one of 18 surviving houses by the master interpreter of classical architecture, Andrea Palladio. Nor was it any mere Palladian villa, but Villa Cornaro, considered one of the most influential buildings in the world.The Gables are the sixth family to have occupied Villa Cornaro in four and a half centuries. But now that they are both in their late 70s, with children who have busy, independent lives, they are ready to part with it. They have listed the house with Venice Sotheby’s International Realty for 35 million British pounds sterling (about $45 million). Ann-Marie Doyle, the company’s director, is the broker.Designed in 1551 for Giorgio Cornaro, the younger son of a powerful Venetian family, Villa Cornaro was built imposingly high, possibly to compensate for what was once a narrow building site. It is especially notable for its pillared double front porch, or portico, which juts out from the north facade like a puffed-up chest.Thomas Jefferson borrowed the portico for his first version of Monticello. The design also influenced Drayton Hall, an 18th-century plantation house in Charleston, S.C.Thirty years ago, the Gables were thinking about buying in New Hampshire, when Ms. Gable, a church music director, spotted an ad for Villa Cornaro in the Sunday New York Times Magazine. In their 2005 memoir, “Palladian Days: Finding a New Life in a Venetian Country House,” she described how she and her husband marinated in suspense while the Italian government decided whether to act on its right of first refusal for the historic property. (The previous owners were also an American couple, Richard and Julia Rush. Mr. Gable, a corporate lawyer and design historian, said he was subsequently advised that the government rarely exercises the option.)“Life is opera, as every Italian knows,” Ms. Gable wrote about being ushered to the monumental entrance after taking possession. “And if ordinary routine does not provide the requisite drama, then drama must be contrived.”Ordinary routine rarely failed them. They soon found themselves slaying scorpions and groping for the Italian for roof tiles (“tegole”). Eventually they eradicated the pests, mastered the language and befriended their neighbors in Piombino Dese, a town of 9,000 about 19 miles northwest of Venice. They also replaced the roof, reconstructed a portion of the southern portico that threatened to collapse and connected the house to the regional water and sewer systems.In Villa Cornaro they acquired a magnificent piece of architecture, with not only rigorously proportioned rooms topped by 24-foot ceilings, but also a trove of important artworks. One hundred and four frescoes decorate the walls of 13 of the 14 principal rooms. (Old Testament subjects are on the lower floor; New Testament upstairs.) The exception is the lower-floor grand salon, which is ornamented with six eight-foot-tall statues of Cornaro family members, created around 1590 by the sculptor Camillo Mariani.The sculptures, or at least the niches Palladio provided for them, were part of the original design. The frescoes, however, were later additions commissioned by a Cornaro descendant in 1717 from the painter Mattia Bortoloni. A stucco artist named Bortolo Cabianca embellished the panels with frames and cherubs, many of which lost their penises when the villa was sold to the parish church in the 1950s and used as a kindergarten.Mr. Gable believes that the frescoes and other 18th-century modifications were inspired by Freemasonry just as the organization was being introduced into Italy from northern Europe. In the lower-floor reception room, panels illustrate Solomon’s Temple in Jerusalem (an important Masonic edifice). The original terrazzo floor was replaced at the time with wood in a checkered pattern typical of Masonic meeting rooms.But as Ms. Gable recently wrote in an email, “We always insisted that Villa Cornaro is our home, not a museum. So we haven’t been afraid to bring comfortable chairs and modern lighting into a building that is now more than 460 years old.” The upper-floor living room is furnished with Art Deco carpets, contemporary sofas and a Murano chandelier. Mr. Gable’s upper-floor study has an early-20th-century office suite by Carlo Zen, a Milanese cabinetmaker, and a Chinese Art Deco rug.Like the original owners, who occupied the villa from sowing to harvesting season, the Gables have been spring and fall people. A favorite relaxation place is on the south side, near a fishpond they restored, overlooking fields that were tilled by first-century Romans. “Surrounded by our own plum, pear, cherry and fig trees, I can watch herons, cormorants, egrets and ducks scout the pond for their evening meal,” Ms. Gable wrote in an email.Asked about her wishes for the next owners, she said she hoped they would be people who realized they had “the opportunity to enjoy as a private residence one of the great historic houses and art treasures of the world.”