https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/us/body-cameras-police-shooting-video.html
After Minneapolis Police Shooting, Many Ask: Why Wasn’t Body Camera On? - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Cameras,Minneapolis (Minn),Australia,Justine Damond
July 19, 2017
16
It has happened in high-profile, fatal police shootings in Chicago, Los Angeles and now in Minneapolis: An officer fired a gun, but his body camera was turned off.Body cameras have been rapidly adopted in police departments across the country in recent years, as scrutiny of police conduct has mounted. But officers often fail to turn cameras on at crucial moments, depriving investigators and the public of video evidence that could be revealing.The issue emerged again this week after the death of Justine Damond, 40, an Australian immigrant and meditation teacher who was fatally shot by a police officer, Mohamed Noor, outside her home in Minneapolis on Saturday.State and city officials have given spare details about what happened that night, and they say they know of no video footage or audio recording of the shooting. Ms. Damond had called 911 to report a possible assault near her home and went outside to the alley, where Officer Matthew Harrity and Officer Noor had arrived and were investigating. Officer Harrity, who was driving the squad car, told state investigators that he was startled by a loud noise near the car; immediately afterward, Ms. Damond approached his window. His partner, Officer Noor, then fired through the open window, fatally shooting Ms. Damond in the abdomen.The authorities say that neither Officer Noor nor his partner had their video cameras activated during the shooting. Officer Noor, who declined to be interviewed by investigators, may have violated department policy by not turning his body camera on before firing his weapon. According to the Minneapolis Police Department’s policy and procedure manual, body cameras should be activated if the officer is using force. If the camera is not activated during the use of force, the manual says, the officer should turn it on “as soon as it is safe to do so.”State investigators have said that a camera on the squad car was also not turned on, and that the officers’ body cameras were not activated until after the shooting. A lawyer for Officer Noor did not return an email seeking comment.“Why don’t we have footage from body cameras?” Betsy Hodges, the mayor of Minneapolis, said at a news conference Tuesday evening, visibly frustrated. “Why were they not activated? We all want answers to those questions.”Around the country, police officers have no standard practice that dictates when a body camera should be turned on, said Jim Bueermann, president of the Police Foundation, a Washington-based nonprofit focused on improving policing. Recording constantly would spare officers from deciding when to turn on their cameras, but it would result in an unwieldy amount of data to be stored, an expensive undertaking for police departments, experts say. Instead, a patchwork of rules governing individual police departments has developed, with some officers required to turn on their cameras during every interaction with a civilian, and others required to activate cameras on a more limited basis.“Part of what’s happening in policing around body camera video policy is, there’s no national coherence,” Mr. Bueermann said. “The policy has to be clear. And you have to have an auditing system that helps you determine if the policy is working.”In Minneapolis, the use of body cameras has been fiercely debated. Critics say that the Police Department was slow to adopt cameras, and that it still does not require officers to use them frequently enough.Last week, days before Ms. Damond’s shooting, a Minneapolis television station, using a snapshot of data from March, reported that body camera usage in the Minneapolis Police Department appeared to be minimal. Records showed that on average, officers each uploaded five or six hours of video footage for the entire month.In Ms. Damond’s case, the lack of body camera footage is concerning, said Teresa Nelson, the interim executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Minnesota.“Body cameras aren’t perfect, and they’re only going to capture from the officer’s perspective,” she said. “But we would know, certainly, perhaps any commands that were given prior to the use of force. We would know, perhaps, the reason why force happened. We would know if this was an accident. The officer who shot might have commented, ‘I can’t believe I just did that.’ We would know so much more about why this happened.”The shooting in Minneapolis was unusual in several ways. It took place in a neighborhood in the southwest part of the city that has little violent crime. Ms. Damond had moved to Minnesota from Sydney, Australia, a few years ago, and she was fatally wounded by a police officer of Somali descent, one of only a small number of officers with similar backgrounds in the Minneapolis department.After the shooting, three days went by without an explanation from officials. Ms. Damond’s grieving family and friends demanded an answer: What reason could Officer Noor have had for shooting her?“It sounds like a really tragic situation right on the surface,” said Darrel W. Stephens, executive director of the Major Cities Chiefs Association and an instructor for the Public Safety Leadership program of the School of Education at Johns Hopkins University. “But we know virtually nothing from the officer’s perspective on what they encountered. Body camera footage would help.”The Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, a state agency, is investigating the shooting. It is likely to take weeks or months before the county prosecutor decides whether to file criminal charges against Officer Noor, 31, who joined the police force in 2015.Last year, the Minneapolis Police Department equipped its officers with close to 600 body cameras across all five districts, excluding detectives and undercover officers.A citizens group, the Police Conduct Oversight Commission, has pushed the department for more oversight of how officers are using the cameras. The group has urged monthly audits to determine how often officers are turning on the cameras. So far, said Jenny Singleton, the vice chairwoman of the group, the recommendations have been ignored.“I had no evidence about how they were using the body cameras, but I know that there weren’t specific structures in place to make sure they were using the cameras in accordance with policy,” Ms. Singleton said.Medaria Arradondo, assistant chief of the Minneapolis Police Department, said on Tuesday that department officials will soon release an updated policy. Among the updates expected: changes to when officers are required to turn their body cameras on.