https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/13/science/juno-sends-first-image-back-while-orbiting-jupiter.html
Juno Sends First Image Back While Orbiting Jupiter - The New York Times
Jupiter (Planet),Juno (Spacecraft),National Aeronautics and Space Administration,Hansen-Koharcheck  Candice
July 12, 2016
4970
So it did happen.The Juno spacecraft really did reach Jupiter.JunoCam, the electronic photographer affixed to the NASA spacecraft that locked into Jupiter’s orbit on July 4, has now met the bar set in the Instagram age. (Pics or it didn’t happen.)The images transmitted back to Earth after Juno began orbiting Jupiter now confirm the beginning of the space probe’s 20-month mission around the solar system’s largest planet.Until now, Juno’s nascent path around Jupiter had been tracked by signals it was sending back. But NASA on Tuesday released an image taken by the satellite on Sunday from a distance of 2.7 million miles; it even shows the Great Red Spot, though the famous storm has been shrinking in recent decades and may not be as great as it once was.“We’re quite pleased that we survived going through Jupiter orbit insertion,” said Candice Hansen-Koharcheck, a scientist at Planetary Science Institute in Tucson who is responsible for the operation of the camera. “The fact it’s a beautiful image is already a good thing.”The spacecraft’s camera had been turned off as it approached Jupiter, and was only switched back on, along with other instruments, once the solar-powered probe survived its passage through the planet’s massive radiation barrages.As Juno moves outward on a 53-day orbit, it will be taking about four images an hour even as the size of Jupiter diminishes with the growing distance.The mission has been relying on amateur astronomers on Earth to keep watch on what is going on in Jupiter’s clouds, but the planet will soon be out of sight from Earth for a couple of months, behind the sun. With Juno’s pictures, the scientists will be able to note any big changes in Jupiter’s appearance. “Stuff we’ll able to resolve, we’ll be able to keep an eye on while they’re essentially blinded,” Dr. Hansen-Koharcheck said.At the end of the month, Juno will reach the farthest point of its orbit and then swing back around, passing within 2,600 miles of Jupiter’s cloudtops on Aug. 27 for its first close approach with all of the instruments turned on. Juno will provide the first good views of Jupiter’s north and south poles, and planetary scientists are curious to know whether turbulent vortices swirl in the polar regions as they do on Saturn.On later orbits, Juno will continue photographing the poles, but where else the camera will focus will be open to a popular vote by the public.The Mission Juno website already invites discussion on points of interest, similar to discussions mission scientists would hold. Beginning with the fourth pass in November, anyone can vote among several choices.“We may finesse things a tiny bit,” Dr. Hansen-Koharcheck said, to combine nearby targets or to take into account memory constraints on the spacecraft. “But for the most part, we are going to have the priority determined by the voting.”She said that if other members of the science team had something they wanted photographed, they would have to propose them on the website like anyone else and win the popular vote. “They’re going to have to lobby for it, and they might have to get all their friends and neighbors to vote on it,” Dr. Hansen-Koharcheck said. “Other than the north and south pole, there’s not going to be any set-asides.”The specifications for the JunoCam called for it to last just eight of Juno’s 37 orbits, but Dr. Hansen-Koharcheck said it is shielded so heavily that she thought it would make it through the entire mission.