http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/04/nyregion/04metjournal.html
Scobee Diner, a Queens Institution, Closes - The New York Times
Diners (Eating Places),Queens (NYC)
Dec. 3, 2010
8869
Its purpose on this planet is bluntly advertised on the outdoor sign: “Breakfast-Lunch-Dinner.”But Scobee, a venerable diner in Little Neck, Queens, that closed last Sunday, was always much more than a place to have three squares, its mourners say. Like many a diner, it was its neighborhood’s social hub, the place where parents brought their uniformed children after Little League games, where teenagers took their first dates and where the end of another school year was celebrated, whatever the report card said.During its seven decades, it developed something of a pedigree. Under an earlier name, the diner was owned by the parents of George J. Tenet, the future director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and as teenagers George and his twin brother, William, worked as busboys at Scobee for five years, with George earning enough to buy his first car. George was known as “the mouthpiece” for his engaging volubility, and William, now a cardiologist, said the owners didn’t mind because he was “keeping the customers amused.”Two famous talkers, the comedian Alan King and Telly Savalas of “Kojak” fame, were regulars, as was the operatic tenor Richard Tucker, who would march in and greet a then-young owner, Sol Winder, with a Yiddish nickname, “Boyale,” and add, “Start me off with a glass of orange juice.”Less celebrated folks appreciated the homey feel inside the glass-and-stone building, an ambience cultivated by owners and managers.Diners are an evolving species in suburbanized areas like Queens, industry officials say. The Greek immigrants who owned so many diners toiled grueling hours to send their children to universities, and those children don’t want to take over the business. The aging owners are selling either to restaurateurs from other ethnic groups, who often turn the diners into ethnic restaurants, or to national chains that covet the diner’s parking spaces. Two diners near Scobee have closed in recent years.Harry Pallas, one of four current partners and the son of immigrants from the Greek island of Lemnos, has seen three daughters who worked as hostesses and cashiers move on to professions. Crystal became a registered nurse, Heather an analyst for Goldman Sachs and Faith a vice president of a credit card company.Scobee, though, was not entirely a Greek diner and “never had the Greek look,” said Sandee Winder, the manager, who worked at the diner for 33 of her 46 years. Her father, Sol, 79, one of the four partners, is a World War II Jewish refugee from Poland.The trigger for the closing was the expiration of a 30-year-lease. The owners of the underlying property decided to put it on the market. According to both sides, Mr. Winder and Mr. Pallas offered $2.5 million, not enough to match a $3.75 million bid.Word about the closing filtered out among diner alumni around the New York region. On Sunday, former customers streamed in to have a last meal or show their grandchildren where they ate as children. The lines were out the door, Mr. Pallas said.“It’s a tragedy — we’re all crying about it,” said Carolyn Palzer, who has eaten there for more than 40 years.Though many of its 60 workers were snapped up by other restaurants, Scobee constituted a big chunk of their lives. On Tuesday, with the booths hauntingly empty and the building plastered with signs like “Lost Our Lease,” workers wiped away tears as they watched the diner’s contents be reassembled in preparation for an auction.The hoard gave a sense of what goes into running a diner — 20 voluminous pots, 150 salt shakers, 143 coffee cups and a signboard announcing Sunday’s specials in chalk: a Captain’s Platter featuring broiled shrimp or broiled scallops.“They took me apart,” Mr. Winder said afterward. “I’m sick to my stomach. I can’t sleep. Fifty years! Fifty years!”His daughter Sandee fled before the auction began. “It was like vultures on a carcass,” she said.Mrs. Palzer recalled that several years after the birth of her sons, Keith, now 46, and Gregg, 43, she would drop them off at Public School 94 “and then go to Scobee for conversation.”“We solved many of the neighborhood’s problems there,” she said.In recent years, she took her grandchildren whenever they visited, and they concluded that Scobee “has the best hamburgers in America.”The spot on Northern Boulevard at Little Neck Parkway where Scobee sits has been a diner going back at least to World War II, though when the Tenets were owners it was just a narrow railroad car called Twentieth Century Diner. It became Scobee around 1960 when it was bought by Mr. Winder and several other investors. Mr. Pallas joined as a partner a few years later. One financial backer insisted that the restaurant be named for his village in Poland, Mr. Winder recalled, though no such village could be found in gazetteers.The partners kept John Tenet on as chef. His son George — C.I.A. director under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush — stopped by a month ago for a wistful cup of coffee and remembered the place where, as he said in an interview, “you’d go out on a date on Saturday night, and everybody would go to Scobee for a hamburger.”“It’s sad because it’s a little piece of Dad gone away,” he said.When they started out in diners, Mr. Winder and Mr. Pallas were young and had the drive to keep it open 24 hours and orchestrate the preparation of a dizzying menu — 300 items. “It was a lot of heartbreak and blood and sweat,” said Mr. Pallas, now 77.This Thanksgiving, the Winder family gathered at the diner, just as they had for so many Thanksgivings — the not-surprising fate of a diner family. One daughter, Marlene, 42, who worked at the diner years before and now produces television commercials, said that “this is the only place I knew for Thanksgiving.” She added, only half laughing: “I didn’t know you sat around a table.”