http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/14/opinion/sunday/echoes-of-jim-crow-for-sparta-voters.html
Echoes of Jim Crow for Sparta Voters - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Voting Rights Act (1965),Voter Registration and Requirements,Blacks,Sparta (Ga),Segregation and Desegregation,Discrimination,Editorials,Georgia
Aug. 13, 2016
8717
The disastrous Supreme Court ruling that crippled the Voting Rights Act three years ago has emboldened aggressive new attempts at voter suppression by local officials in jurisdictions that have been freed from federal oversight.In Sparta, Ga., last year, white election officials decided to systematically question the registrations of more than 180 voters, mostly African-Americans, by dispatching sheriff’s deputies to flag them down. These voters were served with “courtesy” summonses ordering them to appear in person to prove their residence to officials or lose their voting rights.In an echo of the Jim Crow South, the black voters described how they were suddenly approached by a uniformed police officer challenging their right to vote. “I was kind of nervous,” one of the voters told Michael Wines of The Times. “I didn’t know what to do.” Local officials said the goal was to guard against voter fraud. This false excuse has been used to impose numerous voter suppression rules this election year — a threat that research has repeatedly shown is not a problem in American elections.With the Supreme Court having gutted the Voting Rights Act provision that required all voting changes in Georgia to be pre-cleared by federal monitors, black Sparta residents had no option but to file a lawsuit last year challenging the purging of 53 registered voters from the rolls. They accused election officials of scheming to give an edge in municipal elections to a white mayoral candidate, who eventually won by a narrow vote in the 2015 election.The Sparta case is only one of a number of voter suppression attempts underway in jurisdictions with histories of racial discrimination. A June survey by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund found that governments in six former pre-clearance states have introduced a range of restrictions, including limiting registration days and polling places and strict voter identification requirements that disproportionately affect minority voters.The Sparta litigation has so far allowed 27 people to get their voting rights back. Other voters, obviously intimidated by the police tactic, have declined to vote. Lawyers for the black community plan to ask the Department of Justice to reimpose pre-clearance on local officials, but such a response is far from a certainty. It’s become obvious to black residents in Sparta that racial bias is far from a thing of the past.