http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/19/sports/tennis/djokovic-hires-boris-becker-as-coach.html
Djokovic and Becker Form Star Tandem - The New York Times
Tennis,Djokovic  Novak,Becker  Boris
Dec. 18, 2013
9412
In tennis these days, old stars do not fade away. They go on to coach new stars.Novak Djokovic, becoming the latest to hope that Grand Slam magic of old rubs off, hired Boris Becker as his coach. Djokovic announced the decision Wednesday on his website.Djokovic, who fell to No. 2 in the world this year, is following the lead of Andy Murray, who turned to Ivan Lendl as his coach in 2012 and promptly won a Grand Slam event for the first time, an Olympic gold medal and then another Grand Slam event (Wimbledon) this year.The former No. 1 Roger Federer has recently been working with another blast-from-the-past champion, Stefan Edberg, and the American champion Michael Chang has a new role, coaching Kei Nishikori of Japan.Players are hoping the genius of another era remains alive and well, although not all such partnerships have fared well. Maria Sharapova hired Jimmy Connors, then fired him after one tournament last summer.Djokovic is banking on a better run with Becker.“I am really excited to have the opportunity to work with Boris,” Djokovic said on his website. “He is a true legend, someone who has great tennis knowledge, and his experience will help me win new trophies from the Grand Slams and other tournaments. Becker is a great person, too, and I am sure he will fit in our team in the best possible way.”Becker, 46, won six Grand Slam titles and was the youngest player to win Wimbledon, at 17 in 1985.Coaching, however, is an interesting twist in the career of the mercurial Becker, who has been living in London and appearing occasionally as a television commentator.“I will do my best to help him reach his goals, and I am sure we can achieve great things together,” Becker said.The move effectively demotes Djokovic’s longtime coach, Marian Vajda, who has led Djokovic’s team since 2006. But Vajda was quoted in Djokovic’s announcement as a key decision-maker in the move.“I realized that Novak needed a new head coach in order for him to continue improving certain parts of the game,” Vajda said. “In the same time, I will have more time for my family. Becker’s assignment will not affect much my position in the team, since I will do all I can for Novak, just like I did before. On the other hand, choosing Boris as a head coach is a good solution. I am sure we will get along very well, and that Novak will continue to progress.”The shake-up comes after a season that was hardly terrible. Djokovic started the year by winning his fourth Australian Open title and reached the final at Wimbledon and the United States Open. He finished the year No. 2, behind Rafael Nadal.