https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/sports/2018-winter-olympics-pyeongchang-north-south-korea.html
With the 2018 Olympics in South Korea, Will the North Be Participant or Provocateur? - The New York Times
Olympic Games (2018),Politics and Government,International Relations,North Korea,Pyeongchang (South Korea),South Korea,International Olympic Committee
May 23, 2017
7355
As preparations accelerate for the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea, sporting relations on the divided Korean Peninsula in recent years have seldom appeared more amicable, despite the building nuclear tensions and escalating talk of war.Last month, North Korea sent its women’s national hockey team to play a match in South Korea and the squads posed together for a photograph. For the first time, South Korea’s women’s soccer team also played in North Korea.Olympic organizers want to sustain the relatively cordial relations and to curb any threat to the Games, with hopes that North Korea will participate.The Winter Olympics will take place in February in Pyeongchang, South Korea, about 40 miles from the demilitarized zone separating North and South Korea. If any North Korean athletes qualify for the Winter Games — none have so far — plans call for them to travel through the heavily fortified DMZ, in what South Korean officials describe as a gesture of peace.Less than nine months from the opening ceremony, North Korea continues to develop and test ballistic missiles that could strike South Korea and Japan, and Washington has been most worried about its developing a nuclear-tipped missile that could reach the continental United States.It is impossible to know whether such threats will intensify to the point of disrupting the Winter Games. Or whether, as with security and health concerns at recent Olympics, warnings will ease and one of the world’s largest sporting events will not be directly affected.“It’s scary, but I have to believe that cooler heads will prevail,” said Ted Ligety, 32, a two-time Olympic gold medalist in Alpine skiing for the United States who plans to compete in South Korea.Nervousness, however, has led some athletes, and the governing body of one sport not in the Winter Games, to take precautions. The International Judo Federation has relocated its world junior championships this year to Zagreb, Croatia, from Pyongyang, North Korea, citing an “alarming” political situation and concerns over the safety of the participants.Tyler Brickler, a Chicagoan whose mother was born in South Korea and who hopes to play for that country’s Olympic hockey team, said he saw something in late April that he had not witnessed in his two years of living north of Seoul, the capital — a tank on a bridge and South Korean soldiers carrying rifles while performing a military drill.Worried about talk of a potential war, his parents urged him to return home. In early May, Mr. Brickler, 26, flew to British Columbia to be with his fiancée.“You get the feeling that something could happen,” Mr. Brickler said in a phone interview before he left Goyang, South Korea, which he said was about 20 minutes by car from the demilitarized zone.Later, he said in an email from Canada that he and his fiancée “feel a lot safer being back on North American soil.”If the tension ebbs sufficiently, Mr. Brickler said, he plans to return to South Korea in late July or early August to resume his Olympic quest and play for his professional hockey team in the Asia League. Otherwise, he said, he may seek to continue his professional career in Europe.“I just want to make sure this is a safe place to come back to,” he said.At the same time, many athletes who grew up in South Korea have responded with a shrug to the latest military muscle-flexing.“This subject is not really brought up by our team members,” Lee Min-ji, 25 and a member of the South Korean women’s national hockey team, said in an email. “People in South Korea do not care too much about all this nuclear tension because we have lived with this for so long.”Marissa Brandt, 24, a member of the South Korean women’s hockey team who was born there and adopted by American parents from Minnesota, said: “It’s like the girls didn’t bat an eyelash; no one seemed panicked. If they weren’t concerned, I’m not going to be concerned.”The International Olympic Committee said it was following the situation on the Korean Peninsula “very closely” and receiving firsthand information.As is the custom, the Olympic Committee and the United Nations General Assembly are expected to request an international truce for a period before, during and after the Games.“We are not considering the worst-case scenario right now,” the I.O.C. said in a statement. “It is our goal and our responsibility to do everything to ensure a safe running of these Olympic Winter Games in Pyeongchang.”Scott Blackmun, the chief executive of the United States Olympic Committee, said he was not aware of any change in training plans by American winter sports teams as a result of Korean tensions. He added that the U.S.O.C. would work closely with the State Department as it always does when American teams travel abroad.It appears too late to move the Winter Games to another country, current and former Olympic officials said, given the years of preparation needed for security, ticketing and housing, and the building, upgrading and testing required for ski courses, luge tracks and speedskating ovals.It also seems unlikely at this late date that South Korea would try to reduce tensions and promote good will by offering North Korea a chance to host some Olympic events, officials said. Shortly after South Korea was awarded the 2018 Games in 2011, North Korea offered to share skiing events. The offer was declined.The Pyeongchang Olympics “will promote the spirit of peace by considering the relationship with North Korea through other means,” said Nancy Park, a spokeswoman.Negotiations between the two countries over sharing the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul fell apart and North Korea boycotted those Games.North Korea is a medal-winning power in such sports as weight lifting, gymnastics and judo at the Summer Olympics but has a much lower profile at the Winter Games.It did not participate in the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, and sent only two athletes to the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, British Columbia.Unlike the Summer Olympics, the Winter Olympics do not permit each country to enter two athletes even if they do not meet qualifying standards.But some Olympic experts said they would not be surprised if the rules were relaxed for the 2018 Games to encourage North Korean participation. Its best winter sports are figure skating and short-track speedskating.“We would not object to that,” said Richard Pound, an influential I.O.C. delegate from Montreal and the author of a book on the negotiations for the 1988 Seoul Games.If North Korea does participate, it is possible that it could march with South Korea in the opening ceremony, as the countries did at the Summer Olympics in 2000 in Sydney, Australia, and in 2004 in Athens.North Korea also competed in the Asian Games in South Korea in 2002 and 2014. Chang Ung, the I.O.C. delegate from North Korea, told Japan’s Kyodo News in February, “There is no reason why we won’t come” to Pyeongchang “and no reason why we can’t.”But North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is unpredictable and could just as easily boycott the 2018 Winter Games, said David Wallechinsky, the president of the International Society of Olympic Historians.“They can go into the Summer Olympics and win gold medals,” Mr. Wallechinsky said. “They’re not going to win any gold medals in the Winter Olympics. So what do they gain by having two people go and finish in 32nd place in women’s figure skating and be eliminated in the first round of short track?”Choi Moon-soon, the governor of the South Korean province where the Olympics will be held, has suggested that North Korea’s presence would serve as an insurance policy against a provocative act by Mr. Kim.During the last major international sporting event held in South Korea, the 2002 soccer World Cup, a naval skirmish with North Korea in disputed waters left six South Korean sailors dead on the day that South Korea played in the third-place match.Ten months before the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, North Korean agents placed a bomb on Korean Air Flight 858 that detonated in midair and killed all 115 people aboard. The attack was viewed by some political scientists as an attempt in part to scare tourists and athletes from attending the Seoul Olympics.Worries of confrontation with North Korea are “understandable,” Mr. Choi recently told the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. “But if they participate in the event, that threat disappears.”Sergey Radchenko, a professor of international relations at Cardiff University in Wales, who has written about the Olympics and politics on the Korean Peninsula, said that disrupting the Games did not appear to be on Mr. Kim’s agenda and would be risky.During the Cold War, Professor Radchenko said in an email, North Korea could expect some support from its allies China and the Soviet Union.“Today, North Korea’s sole supporter, China, is increasingly losing patience with Pyongyang,” Professor Radchenko said. “If Kim does something ‘stupid,’ he may well push the Chinese over the edge and lose all support. And he would not want that.”