https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/26/sports/ncaafootball/chip-kelly-espn-analyst.html
Chip Kelly to Join ESPN as Football Analyst - The New York Times
Football (College),ESPN,Kelly  Chip (1963- )
May 26, 2017
9371
Chip Kelly is getting back into the college football business, this time without a headset.Kelly, a former Oregon coach, is joining ESPN as a studio analyst this season. ESPN announced Friday it had signed him to a multiyear deal.Kelly will primarily be part of Saturday pregame, halftime and wrap-up shows on ESPN2. He will also provide N.F.L. analysis on Sundays during “SportsCenter.”The 53-year-old Kelly spent the past four seasons in the N.F.L., coaching the Philadelphia Eagles for three years and the San Francisco 49ers for one. Kelly was fired by the 49ers after going 2-14 last season. He was 26-21, with a playoff appearance, for the Eagles.Before jumping to the N.F.L., Kelly spent four seasons as Oregon’s head coach, compiling a 46-7 record. In 2010, Kelly led the Ducks to the Bowl Championship Series title game and was named coach of the year by The Associated Press. He left Oregon as the football program was under investigation by the N.C.A.A. for recruiting violations that led to three years of probation and scholarship reductions.“I spoke with a lot of people this off-season about different situations for me — in coaching and TV,” Kelly said in a statement. “I had various opportunities in both. In the end, I have had a relationship with ESPN for many years from when I was coaching, and after speaking with them, I decided it was the best step for me to take.”Kelly will probably be in demand when college head-coaching jobs begin opening after the season. Spending a season or two doing television has been a common path for coaches who are between jobs. Urban Meyer spent a season at ESPN between resigning from Florida and landing at Ohio State. So did Rich Rodriguez after being fired by Michigan and before being hired by Arizona.“I have been a coach for nearly the last 30 years,” Kelly said. “Working in television will allow me to see the game from a different perspective, but I didn’t take the job with the intention it will lead to something specific. I love the game of football and working with good, smart people. ESPN presents an opportunity to combine those two things.”Kelly will fill an opening left by Butch Davis, who became the head coach at Florida International.Kelly was considered one of the most innovative coaches in college football. His up-tempo spread offenses dominated defenses and were mimicked by teams across the country.“As a coach, he saw the game from a unique perspective, never afraid to take an unconventional approach,” said Lee Fitting, a senior coordinating producer at ESPN. “We want him to bring that mentality to our college football coverage each week, offering fans a varying viewpoint outside of the conventional thought process.”