http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/us/politics/republicans-brownback-and-roberts-fend-off-challengers-in-kansas.html
Sam Brownback and Pat Roberts, Both Republicans, Undefeated in Kansas - The New York Times
Kansas,Brownback  Sam,Roberts  Pat,Midterm Elections (2014),Elections  Senate,Democratic Party
Nov. 5, 2014
7769
TOPEKA, Kan. —  The Democratic surge that was supposed to end Republican control of Kansas never happened.Gov. Sam Brownback and Senator Pat Roberts survived unusually close races to keep their seats on Tuesday, fortifying their party’s political grip on this plains state.Mr. Roberts, 78, who has served in Washington for more than three decades, fought back a chorus of anti-incumbent and anti-Washington sentiment. Mr. Brownback, a former United States senator who easily rode into office four years ago, prevailed despite a philosophical split in his party and a harsh race focused on deep tax cuts that his critics said had put the state in a precarious financial position.Just a year ago it would have seemed all but certain that Mr. Brownback, who won his first term with more than 60 percent of the vote, would win re-election. Republicans far outnumber Democrats among registered voters here, and most of the state’s lawmakers are cut from the same conservative cloth as Mr. Brownback.But Mr. Brownback had been steadily lagging in recent polls as his Democratic opponent, Paul Davis, sought to turn the race into a referendum on the governor’s conservative economic policy. Mr. Brownback had proudly said that he was embarking on a fiscal turnaround in Kansas when he took office nearly four years ago, and enacted the largest tax cuts in state history. The governor eliminated income taxes on nonwage earnings for nearly 200,000 small businesses and, over the course of two legislative sessions, worked with the Republican-controlled State Legislature to deeply slash individual income tax rates, arguing that the policies would attract new businesses and residents, thus stimulating the economy.The results so far have hardly been promising. The most recent fiscal year ended with revenue falling more than $300 million short of expectations. Job growth in Kansas has trailed that of the rest of the nation, education funding has remained mostly flat and both Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s have downgraded the state’s credit rating.The latest round of bad fiscal news for the Brownback campaign came less than a week before the election when the state’s Revenue Department announced that October revenue had fallen $23 million below estimates. Still Mr. Brownback insisted the fiscal situation would turn around. “We’ve gotten the state in a good position to grow,” he said. “I think we can move forward solidly in working with the people of Kansas,”Mr. Davis argued that it was time for the state to change course.Mr. Brownback’s agenda extended beyond tax policy to loosening gun restrictions, making it harder for women to get abortions and slashing public assistance rolls and it deepened a longstanding divide between moderate and conservative factions within the state party.Mr. Roberts, the incumbent senator, faced a formidable challenge from Greg Orman, a businessman running as an independent candidate. Mr. Roberts entered the general election bruised from a strong challenge by a candidate with Tea Party support.While Mr. Orman tried to convince the electorate that Mr. Roberts had been in Washington for too long and was out of touch with Kansas voters, Mr. Roberts linked his challenger to President Obama and Harry Reid, the Democrat who serves as Senate majority leader. “Tonight, Kansas stood up and said enough,” Mr. Roberts said as he declared victory. “Enough of the gridlock, enough of the failed leadership under President Obama and, yes, Harry Reid. I will be bold, I will be conservative and I will be constructive.” Mr. Roberts said. “And I promise you this: We will get things done.”