https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/arts/television/review-jennifer-lopez-as-a-conflicted-cop-in-shades-of-blue.html
Review: Jennifer Lopez as a Conflicted Cop in ‘Shades of Blue’ - The New York Times
Television,Lopez  Jennifer,Liotta  Ray,Shades of Blue (TV Program)
Jan. 5, 2016
8801
On “Law & Order,” the show that anchored NBC for years, things were generally pretty straightforward: crime, investigation, arrest, prosecution. Nothing is straightforward on “Shades of Blue,” the network’s newest police show, which begins on Thursday. Jennifer Lopez plays a dirty Brooklyn detective on a crew full of them, and the choices that confront her and others aren’t between right and wrong, but between damage-control options.Though Ms. Lopez doesn’t initially dominate the proceedings the way that, say, Michael Chiklis did in the landmark bad-cop series “The Shield,” her character, Harlee Santos, gains complexity over time.Harlee is a single mother whose talented daughter (Sarah Jeffery), a cellist, is also her main vulnerability. Yes, the because-of-my-child plot device is a lazy way to lead someone into morally shaky territory; the list of characters who have justified questionable decisions by citing their kid’s medical condition, emotional needs or (as here) music-school tuition bills is rather long.But the mother-daughter relationship isn’t the core of this series; the relationship between Harlee and her fellow officers is. Chief among those is Matt Wozniak, a lieutenant played by Ray Liotta, working his growly voice to perfection. Matt leads a group of officers, including Harlee, whose members work a shakedown racket, convincing themselves that they’re serving the public good by keeping criminals in check, drugs away from schools and so on.Harlee has been on Wozniak’s team for 10 years, and he’s a friend and mentor, so when she is snared in an F.B.I. corruption sting and asked to become an informant against him, her decision isn’t an easy one. It’s not made any easier by the fact that her F.B.I. handler (Warren Kole) is an unlikable fellow with a stalkerlike aura.“Shades of Blue,” created by Adi Hasak, isn’t as cerebral as, say, “Public Morals,” Ed Burns’s look at compromised New York cops in the 1960s (recently canceled by TNT). It has the occasional police chase, shooting and so on, because even dirty cops have to enforce the law now and again. But it’s about gray-area choices, not about catching perps. Ms. Lopez and Mr. Liotta pair well, and the early episodes certainly have a pulse. The key will be how long the conceit holds up; in real life, the F.B.I.’s traps have to be sprung eventually.