https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/15/world/americas/venezuela-nicolas-maduro.html
Nicolás Maduro Flexes New Budgetary Muscles in Venezuela - The New York Times
Venezuela,Maduro  Nicolas,Budgets and Budgeting,Legislatures and Parliaments
Oct. 14, 2016
4011
CARACAS, Venezuela — Venezuela’s new annual budget resembled those of past years. Millions of dollars were promised for social programs like housing and education. Money would be earmarked for local governments to police the streets and repair potholes.But there was one big difference: President Nicolás Maduro never showed a word of it to lawmakers for approval and simply signed his budget before a cheering crowd on Friday.“Everything that our country needs, we must give it to ourselves,” Mr. Maduro said, referring to his leftist government. “Only we know how to do it.”Critics say the president’s move — made possible by a Supreme Court decision that stripped the legislature of its budget oversight powers — is the strongest evidence yet that Mr. Maduro is consolidating power and sidelining lawmakers.“This budget is openly unconstitutional,” said José Vicente Haro, a constitutional law expert, who said no president had tried to bypass the country’s congress, the National Assembly, in such a way since the 19th century.The budget also reflected the need for belt-tightening in Venezuela, where the economy is expected to contract by 10 percent this year. The 2017 budget was 22 percent smaller than the last one when adjusted for inflation, said Ángel García Banchs, an economist at the consulting firm Econométrica.Venezuela’s National Assembly was once considered a rubber stamp, quickly approving the plans of the previous president, Hugo Chávez, and his handpicked successor, Mr. Maduro. But that changed last year when the collapsing economy led voters to elect rivals of Mr. Maduro’s leftist allies to lead the legislature for the first time in more than a decade.While legislators have passed a flurry of new laws, the courts have overturned them, including bills to free political prisoners and stabilize the economy. Now lawmakers have been stripped of the power to approve the budget.“It’s the National Assembly that must always see the budget and must make its observations,” said Oneida Guaipe, an opposition legislator. She said the moves by Mr. Maduro and the court now “put this regime on the margins of democratic principles.”In his speech, Mr. Maduro hinted at some openness to speaking with his opponents. “If one day in the years to come they want to sit with me to talk, I am ready to talk,” he said.But he scoffed at efforts to oust him through a recall referendum that his rivals hope to organize. “No one can knock down Maduro, especially those oligarchs,” he said, referring to his opponents.