https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/15/nyregion/nanny-expressed-regret-over-2-killings-papers-show.html
Nanny Expressed Regret Over 2 Killings, Papers Show  - The New York Times
Ortega  Yoselyn,Krim  Lucia,Krim  Leo,Murders and Attempted Murders,Carro  Gregory,Upper West Side (Manhattan  NY)
Nov. 14, 2014
7675
The nanny accused of killing two children in the bathtub of their Upper West Side home two years ago said she was sorry for what she had done, according to court papers released on Friday.The nanny, Yoselyn Ortega, 52, has pleaded not guilty to killing Lucia Krim, 6, and Leo Krim, 2, on Oct. 25, 2012, in a bathroom while their mother was away from the family’s apartment picking up her third child from a swimming lesson. After stabbing the children, Ms. Ortega cut her throat in a failed suicide attempt.The court papers say she told the authorities that Lucia tried to fight back before she stabbed her and then killed her brother. She used at least two knives.“Oh my God, I’m sorry,” she said, according to the court papers. “I’m sorry for what I’ve done. Relieve me of my misery.”The documents were included as exhibits in lengthy motions filed by Valerie Van Leer-Greenberg, a lawyer for Ms. Ortega. Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg had asked in the motions that the prosecutor assigned to the case be removed and that the judge overseeing it bar news media from an upcoming court hearing.The judge, Justice Gregory Carro of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, denied both requests on Friday.Ms. Van Leer-Greenberg has said Ms. Ortega cannot understand the charges against her because of her injuries and because she has delusions. Justice Carro found her fit for trial.Ms. Ortega’s statements included details from interviews with the authorities after she regained consciousness. She said she had hurt the children because she was having financial problems and was angry at the parents. She said her schedule constantly shifted, she had to act as a cleaning lady though she did not want to, and she missed an appointment with “the psych,” the papers say.“I had to do everything and take care of the kids,” she said. “God forgive me, so many things they made me do. Pray for me.”Just before the killings, the children were out getting ice cream and going to a park because Lulu, as Lucia was called, did not want to go to dance class, according to the court papers.The parents, Kevin and Marina Krim, have not spoken publicly about the killings. Last year at a fund-raiser for a nonprofit they created, they said they would miss their children forever. “We are just heartbroken,” Kevin Krim said. “But they inspire us every day as well.”