http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/03/us/politics/tim-huelskamp-roger-marshall-kansas-primary.html
Tim Huelskamp, Anti-Establishment House Republican, Loses Primary in Kansas - The New York Times
Primaries and Caucuses,Elections  House of Representatives,Huelskamp  Tim,Marshall  Roger W (1960- ),Kansas,Republican Party
Aug. 3, 2016
8437
Representative Tim Huelskamp, a member of the hard-line conservative Freedom Caucus, lost to a political newcomer on Tuesday in the Republican primary for his Kansas district.Mr. Huelskamp, who was  elected to Congress in 2010 and quickly earned a reputation for frustrating Republican leaders, was defeated by Roger Marshall, an obstetrician from Great Bend, in the primary for the First Congressional District, which covers western Kansas and much of the state’s center.Mr. Marshall won with the support of business groups and the agriculture lobby, which had turned its back on Mr. Huelskamp after Speaker John A. Boehner had him removed from the Agriculture Committee in 2012, a crucial position for a legislator from a farm state. Mr. Huelskamp was a frequent critic of Mr. Boehner, who resigned last year amid strife with the Republican Party’s right wing.“Getting kicked off the Agriculture Committee is a crime that can’t be forgiven,” Brian Scheideman, a 52-year-old driver’s education instructor, said after voting for Mr. Marshall in Wamego, The Associated Press reported. “I don’t mind the independent voice, but you’ve got to figure out how to work with people.”Mr. Marshall had the support of the Kansas Farm Bureau, the Kansas Livestock Association, the National Association of Wheat Growers and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, according to The A.P. Mr. Huelskamp had the backing of the billionaire Koch brothers’ political network, the Club for Growth and conservative colleagues who visited the state to campaign for him.Mr. Huelskamp, who is also a Tea Party Caucus leader, quickly earned a national reputation after his election for frustrating Republican leaders.Born and raised on his family farm in Fowler, Kan., Mr. Huelskamp went on to attend a seminary in Santa Fe, N.M., where he earned his bachelor’s degree, according to his official biography. He then attended American University in Washington, where he received a Ph.D. in political science with a specialty in agriculture policy. He returned home and became a state legislator.While the campaigns of both men raised more than $700,000, interest groups spent over $2.7 million on the race, much of that benefiting Mr. Marshall, according to The A.P. There is no Democratic challenger for the seat, though Alan LaPolice, a farmer and educator who challenged Mr. Huelskamp for the 2014 Republican nomination, is poised to run as an independent.