http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/01/t-magazine/noma-charity-dinner-wall-street-rene-redzepi.html
Noma, Imported — for Art’s Sake - The New York Times
Redzepi  Rene,Cooking and Cookbooks,Philanthropy
Oct. 1, 2015
3700
“I hope you don’t mind, I put a couple of my paintings up on the walls,” said Simon Birch, an English-born, Hong Kong-based artist, to a round of friendly laughter. The crowd — which included luminaries like Tommy Hilfiger, Alan Cumming and Jeffrey Deitch — was gathered on Tuesday night in a cavernous, bare-bones space inside 23 Wall Street. For years, the 102-year-old building, right across the street from the New York Stock Exchange, served as the headquarters of J.P. Morgan & Co., but for the last decade or so it has sat abandoned — except when it occasionally serves as an event venue, as it did for Edible Schoolyard NYC’s spring benefit earlier this year.Why the laughter? In part, Birch was being facetious: Over the next six months or so, he can do more or less what he wants with the space since his nonprofit foundation, 14th Factory, will be taking it over starting in April for a six-week, free and open-to-the-public pop-up installation. But he was also referencing just how vast a space he plans to fill: almost 150,000 square feet, over seven floors, including two basement vaults. He plans to bring in all manner of contemporary art, in large part based around anticapitalist themes — “of empires expanding and contracting,” he explained. “An exhibition that taps into the past, talks about the present and hints at the future — and maybe a collapse.” In keeping with those themes, after the installation runs its course, all items will be auctioned off, with 100 percent of the money raised going to charity.The past, present and future were evident in another way: The elaborate 10-course meal that drew this well-heeled crowd was created by Noma, the wildly acclaimed Copenhagen restaurant whose chef, René Redzepi, recently announced that it will close at the end of 2016 and reopen in 2017, in a new urban farm setting. Though Redzepi was not in attendance, the restaurant had flown in much of its staff, led by Lars Williams and Thomas Frebel, two of Noma’s top deputies.Why Noma? According to Birch, the team includes friends of friends, who share his general philosophy. “Noma is very much about risk, creativity and collaboration. What they saw in us, they saw in themselves.” He also drew parallels between the project, which will include 15 interlinked installations over those seven floors, and the evening’s meal: “The dinner is like the exhibit,” he said. “It’s a procession.”Peter Kreiner, the managing director of Noma, suggested that though the restaurant gets approached for many events (in January, it will head to Australia for a 10-week pop-up there), the team was attracted to Birch’s for “the sense of Simon wanting to do something out of the ordinary. Honestly, it’s quite bold.” And yet, the natural partnership was not without its challenges. “We’re not normally a catering company,” Kreiner acknowledged. Some ingredients had been flown in from Copenhagen, while others were sourced through New York friends.After Birch spoke about his life and the project, and after a few words from Kreiner, the meal — for which attendees had paid a suggested (and almost entirely tax-deductible) $5,000 a plate — began. Guests swooned over dishes like a roasted langoustine, accompanied by a paste made from oyster, parsley and oil; dehydrated scallop chips atop barley and a watercress sauce; and “black garlic flower,” a paste made from aged and fermented garlic that had been folded, origami-like, into gorgeous little leaves. The texture was like fruit leather, but the flavor had mellowed into a deeply funky, slightly sweet state. Courses were paired with appropriately idiosyncratic wines from the New York-based importer and distributor Jenny & François Selections.After more supportive words from Hilfiger, who is on the board of the foundation, it was announced that the evening had raised over $1 million for the foundation and project. Guests then enjoyed a final course, aptly called, in the Noma way, “Things in Chocolate” — those things being mushrooms and deep-fried moss. It felt like a perfect analogy for the evening: inventive, decadent, but oddly comforting and friendly.