https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/us/politics/after-michigan-loss-hillary-clinton-retools-message-on-jobs-and-trade.html
After Michigan Loss, Hillary Clinton Sharpens Message on Jobs and Trade - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Sanders  Bernard,International Trade and World Market,Labor and Jobs,Trans-Pacific Partnership,Layoffs and Job Reductions,North American Free Trade Agreement,Factories and Manufacturing
March 9, 2016
5521
DETROIT —  From the start of her presidential campaign 11 months ago, Hillary Clinton has presented an upbeat assessment of an improving economy, saying Wall Street and corporations would be held accountable, but must be part of the solution for all Americans to benefit from the country’s prosperity.“I want to be the president for the struggling, the striving and the successful,” she often said.Her message has at times collided with an angry electorate drawn to the populist pitch of Senator Bernie Sanders. In Michigan on Tuesday, it crashed.The state’s voters, scarred by the free trade deals associated with Mrs. Clinton and her husband that have been widely blamed for the loss of American manufacturing jobs, delivered a surprise victory to Mr. Sanders, who railed here against “disastrous trade agreements written by corporate America.”While his victory did little to bridge the delegate gap with Mrs. Clinton, the loss in Michigan left the Clinton camp confronting an urgent quandary as the Democratic contest moves to other Midwestern states like Ohio, Illinois and Missouri, which will vote on Tuesday: Will Mrs. Clinton’s we’re-all-in-this-together approach work in what has been called an off-with-their-heads election year?Stung by the bad showing, Mrs. Clinton was already recalibrating her message, even altering her standard line before the Michigan race had been called. “I don’t want to be the president for those who are already successful — they don’t need me,” she said at a rally Tuesday night in Cleveland. “I want to be the president for the struggling and the striving.”The surprising Michigan defeat forced her campaign Wednesday to emphasize to donors and supporters that its central strategy remained intact: to capture the 2,383 delegates needed to clinch the nomination, which they expect to come closer to doing with victories Tuesday in Florida and North Carolina and close contests or victories in the Midwestern states.But the campaign manager, Robby Mook, acknowledged that it needed to better amplify Mrs. Clinton’s tough stance on trade deals and her plans to actually create and bring back manufacturing jobs, while contrasting her specific policies with what her aides say are empty catchphrases and trade bashing from Mr. Sanders.As Mrs. Clinton prepares for those battles on Tuesday, she will face a barrage of Sanders ads in Ohio, including one that his campaign believed turned the tide in Michigan by making the argument that Mr. Sanders was the only candidate who had opposed free trade agreements that led to job losses in America. Mr. Sanders expanded on his critique in an interview Wednesday.“Hillary Clinton has supported virtually every one of these trade agreements,” Mr. Sanders said in the interview, conducted Wednesday at a hotel in Miami. “Our message is resonating increasingly with the American people and especially working people and young people who understand — and we saw this in Michigan yesterday.”Kristina Schake, a spokeswoman for Mrs. Clinton, told MSNBC that the Sanders campaign had “really mischaracterized” her record on trade “in the lead-up to Michigan, and she is ready to get in there and set the record straight.”But the revolt over trade has energized voters on both sides of the aisle, with Donald J. Trump, who won  the Republican contest in Michigan, vowing to be a tough negotiator with China and other nations. And in Michigan, Mr. Sanders repeatedly reminded voters that Mrs. Clinton had at one time supported “disastrous” trade deals like the North American Free Trade Agreement, which President Bill Clinton signed into law in 1993, and President Obama’s 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact.The Clinton campaign says that going forward, it will continue to run its own advertisements highlighting how Mrs. Clinton has called out specific bad corporate actors by name, an effort to combat Mr. Sanders’s line of attack. Trade deals alone could be more difficult to disavow.“Nafta was her husband’s achievement, and it is hard to claim implied credit for his economic successes and claim opposition to one of the cornerstones of his policy,” said David Axelrod, the former senior strategist for Mr. Obama. “She can claim the TPP was an Obama initiative, but walking away from him too overtly runs counter to her strategy.”Or, as Mr. Obama put it during their 2008 primary battle, “The fact is, she was saying great things about Nafta until she was running for president.”And the new headwinds she faces in Midwestern states could have implications beyond the nominating contests. A primary loss in Michigan and potentially Ohio, where polls show Mrs. Clinton leading and where Mr. Trump has drawn widespread support among the white working class, could be a troubling sign in a general election, Democratic strategists say.Mr. Sanders’s victory in Michigan is sure to energize his donors and ensure that he can remain in the race and continue to challenge Mrs. Clinton on her ties to Wall Street and trade — even as he lags in the delegate count.In the early contests, Mrs. Clinton did not have to contend as directly with her record on global trade deals, but when the race reached the Midwest, the issue became acute, with her past positioning coming back to haunt her. In a 2012 speech in Australia, Mrs. Clinton said the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal “sets the gold standard in trade agreements,” but in October said she could not support the deal.And for years, she has called to renegotiate Nafta to make it more favorable to workers in the United States. Former aides to Mr. Clinton said she opposed the pact in 1993, but could not speak out against it as first lady.“I won’t support any agreement unless it helps create good jobs and higher wages for American workers,” Mrs. Clinton said Friday.She also refused to adopt the crisper messaging of Mr. Sanders or Mr. Trump. “There are people in both parties who think we can somehow shut ourselves off from the world,” she said. “Even if the United States never signs another trade deal, globalization isn’t going away.”That type of balance will probably not appease non-college-educated voters, who have seen their job prospects drastically diminish and their wages stagnate.“Sanders had an opening because Hillary Clinton has been very responsible in how she raised questions about Nafta and TPP,” said Matt Bennett, a former Clinton administration aide and a senior vice president at the centrist Third Way think tank. “When you are responsible and battling an anecdote-driven campaign, you’re going to lose that battle.”Underscoring the potency of the trade issue in Michigan, almost three-fifths of voters there said that trade with other countries was more likely to take away jobs, and those voters favored Mr. Sanders by a margin of more than 10 percentage points, according to exit polls by Edison Research.And the Sanders campaign sees similar openings in other battleground states.“Trade will be front and center in Ohio, Illinois and elsewhere, and we will be expanding on the arguments against free trade deals that we made in Michigan,” said Tad Devine, a senior adviser to Mr. Sanders. “We’ll be making the explicit connection between trade and being beholden to special interests that want trade deals. Bernie’s argument is that the people who are rigging the economy are also rigging the trade deals.”Mr. Mook acknowledged that the campaign needed to better communicate Mrs. Clinton’s plan to bring jobs back to the United States and to create new ones in clean energy, infrastructure and other areas.“She is the only candidate who has rolled out a specific plan to create more good-paying manufacturing jobs,” Mr. Mook said. “So we are aligning this campaign to amplify that message as loudly and as clearly as we can nationally and in those states.”