http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/19/business/dealbook/starwood-says-rivals-counteroffer-tops-bid-from-marriott.html
Starwood Says Rival’s Counteroffer Tops Bid from Marriott - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Anbang Insurance Group Co,Marriott International Inc,Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide Inc,Hotels and Travel Lodgings
March 18, 2016
5935
Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide says a $13.2 billion takeover offer led by a Chinese insurer is superior to the one that was all but sealed by Marriott International — a deal that would have created the world’s largest hotel company.Starwood revealed on Friday that the consortium led by the Anbang Insurance Group had presented the board an all-cash bid worth $78 a share, in contrast to Marriott’s cash-and-stock proposal, worth about $68 a share based on Thursday’s closing price. Starwood, which operates hotel brands such as the W and Sheraton, said the new offer could require the company to terminate its agreement with Marriott.But Marriott is not ready to walk away quite yet. The lodging company, with more than 4,400 properties, is “reviewing the Anbang consortium’s proposal and is carefully considering its alternatives,” Marriott said in a statement.“Marriott continues to believe that a combination of Marriott and Starwood is the best course for both companies and offers the best value to Starwood shareholders,” Marriott said in the statement.The offer from Anbang, along with J. C. Flowers & Company and Primavera Capital, would represent the biggest Chinese takeover of an American entity, according to Dealogic. The Starwood board said in the statement that the binding and fully financed proposal “provides a high degree of closing certainty.”Until this week, the deal between Starwood and Marriott was nearly complete. The companies agreed in November to combine after a competitive process also said to involve Hyatt Hotels Corporation. Shareholders were disappointed when the deal was announced, sending Starwood’s stock lower — the opposite of what typically happens to a seller’s stock. Since then, Marriott’s offer was weakened by a decline in the acquirer’s shares.Cash represented an unusually small proportion of Marriott’s original offer. Marriott will need to increase the cash component as well as the overall value of the offer to prevail over Anbang, said Anthony Sabino, a professor of business law at St. John’s University.“If Starwood’s shareholders agree with their board, then they will be bought out completely,” Mr. Sabino said. “They won’t care about what is inarguably Marriott’s stellar record of hotel operations, because they will just be pocketing the cash and moving on to other things.”Anbang’s desire for Starwood appears to coincide with its interest in acquiring Strategic Hotels from the Blackstone Group for $6.5 billion. Strategic Hotels owns high-end hotels throughout the United States, such as the Four Seasons in Scottsdale, Ariz., and the JW Marriott Essex House hotel in Manhattan. Two years ago, Anbang agreed to acquire the Waldorf Astoria for $1.95 billion.Under either proposal, Starwood shareholders would also receive about $5.67 a share from the previously announced spinoff of its time-share business, Vistana Signature Experiences, which will merge with the Interval Leisure Group. Including the spinoff, the Anbang offer represented value of $83.67 for each Starwood share, compared with $73.67 a share from the Marriott bid.Terminating the agreement with Marriott would require Starwood to pay a $400 million breakup fee to Marriott. Marriott can revise its own offer with Starwood until 11:59 p.m. on March 28. That day was supposed to be Marriott’s special meeting of stockholders, which the company said it may reschedule.