https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/17/travel/17paris-shops.html
How to Shop in Paris - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Paris (France),Shopping and Retail,Fashion and Apparel
April 15, 2011
8994
THERE may be no city that takes shopping more seriously than Paris, the birthplace of haute couture and a place where mere browsers, while welcome, can still be made to feel snubbed in subtle ways. In fact, the French term for window shopping, faire du lèche-vitrine, translates directly as “to go window licking.” To shop more like a local, it helps to know the score at the coolest stores in town. Here are four of them.Colette213, rue St.-Honoré, First Arrondissement; colette.fr BACK STORY Opened in 1997 by Sarah Lerfel and her mother, Colette Roussaux, the store has thrived as an arbiter of Parisian cool with its eclectic mash-up of high-end fashion, designer collaborations, magazines, music and the silliest knickknacks imaginable.ENVIRONMENT Bright and brash, Colette can often feel like a souk. Indefatigable tourists squirm alongside hard-core fashion insiders on the narrow staircase that connects the main floor — packed with art books and a cage the size of a walk-in closet, stocked exclusively with T-shirts — to the serious clothes upstairs and a cafe in the cellar.THE GOODS The thrill of Colette comes from the unexpected, like finding quirky young labels (Mary Katrantzou, Rodarte, Christopher Kane) displayed right next to the French masters (Lanvin, Hermès, Chanel). There’s also a steady stream of exclusive, limited-edition items: Lacoste shirts reimagined with Snoopy and Woodstock substituting for the crocodile logos, Emissar pilot bags and Jeremy Scott’s take on the Swatch. Then there is the obscure reading material to browse or buy. (One title on display is called Kaiserin, subtitled “a magazine for boys with problems.”) For a funny souvenir, the store offers something called “Colette: Surprise.” It’s a small blue shopping bag that, for 20 euros, could contain just about anything. One purchased recently held a pocket flashlight, two lollipops, two novelty key chains, some Japanese gum, a Pez dispenser, birthday candles and a single, sad blue balloon.SAVOIR FAIRE Sometimes it is hard to distinguish the staff from the customers, since pretty much everyone fails to disprove the stylish and skinny stereotype of the French. To demonstrate you are  worthy of their attention, try dressing unconventionally, maybe by wearing a ratty old cardigan over an elegantly tailored dress with mismatched socks on your hands. The idea is to convey that you are in on the joke. By the way, never ask about prices, unless you enjoy caustic glaring. Besides, it’s more fun to admire a Rodarte wood-print dress when you don’t know it costs 5,410 euros (that’s $7,540 at $1.40 to the euro).Merci111, boulevard Beaumarchais, Third; merci-merci.comBACK STORY Merci is the newest contender among Paris concept shops, opened two years ago by Marie-France and Bernard Cohen after they sold their luxury children’s wear label, Bonpoint. Set on the eastern edge of the Marais, the shop includes a mix of contemporary and vintage fashions along with seasonal products created exclusively for Merci.ENVIRONMENT The main entrance to Merci is tucked away in the courtyard of an 18th-century building, behind a pair of storefronts housing a cafe and a bookstore, both of which are connected to the store. The peaceful, loftlike space covers two large floors, and includes a restaurant and a few crannies set around an atrium, stocked with displays of linen sheets, shabby-chic housewares and Annick Goutal perfumes.THE GOODS  Most of the fashions for men and women are displayed on the main floor, including a broad range of Isabel Marant and Comme des Garçons sportswear, Current/Elliott jeans, wooden clogs from Sweden and, in one recent collaboration, a group of recycled trench coats made by designers like Charles Anastase and Marni. Merci also stocks interesting discoveries from around the world, like lampshades made of recycled plastic by the South African artist Heath Nash (1,490 euros). Many customers shopping for gifts flock to the linen napkins and place mats (17.50 euros and up) made by MYdrap— they come on a roll, perforated and dispensable just like paper towels.SAVOIR FAIRE Attitudes and cellphones should be checked at the door. Merci is one of the most inviting stores in Paris, where customers, mostly of the boho-chic variety, prefer shopping at their leisure. Although the fact isn’t advertised anywhere in the store, it helps to know that the Cohens have pledged to give all of their profits to a charity that helps women and children in Madagascar.L’ÉclaireurMultiple locations, including two near the Marais — at 12, rue Mahler, in the Fourth, for men, and at 40, rue de Sévigné, in the Third, for women — and one closer to the Louvre, at 10, rue Hérold, First, for the adventurous; leclaireur.comBACK STORY L’Éclaireur is the destination for intellectual-minded customers who prefer their fashion directional and their designers underexposed. (The name translates as “The Scout.”) In 1980, Armand Hadida opened his first shop on the Champs-Élysées, which has since expanded to five locations, a restaurant and an event space, each addition more theatrical than the last. A sixth store is about to open in the Philippe Starck-redesigned Royal Monceau- Raffles hotel.ENVIRONMENT The style varies from store to store, but most of them are dark and mysterious, with raw wood fixtures, exotic taxidermy, curious art installations and, as a contradiction, a big welcoming bowl of walnuts. The suggestion is that the shopper is on a mission of discovery, an idea seen most visibly at the Rue Hérold location, which is unmarked except for the name on a buzzer of an 18th-century manor house. Press it, and the door swings open to a fabulous, dimly illuminated store constructed in what was once a stable.THE GOODS  Major luxury labels like Lanvin, Balenciaga and Bottega Veneta are represented, but only with a few choice pieces from each house. It’s more fun to gawk at fashion oddities from less obvious brands like Mihara Yasuhiro (a pair of his men’s sweat shorts with holes in them sells for 294 euros), or Maison Rabih Kayrouz, offering an evening dress (3,725 euros) that looks as if it were designed for Cinderella, post-midnight.SAVOIR FAIRE Most of the clothes sold here would challenge even a professional model. This is the place to wear whatever asymmetrical, voluminous, shredded or otherwise deconstructed clothes you have that might earn you pitying glances and the occasional handout anywhere else. Somehow, it all looks cool here.Le Bon Marché24, rue de Sèvres, Seventh; lebonmarche.comBACK STORY On a chart of hip boutiques, it might seem odd to include a store with its roots in the 1830s, but ask where the locals shop and the answer is often Le Bon Marché. Now owned by the luxury goods conglomerate LVMH, the department store includes a designer emporium, a gourmet market, a book store and modern furniture displays. It’s probably the only place in Paris where you can pick up a pair of men’s socks, a ball of yarn and some sushi to take home for dinner.ENVIRONMENT A central atrium is dominated by the vast offering of cosmetics, above which the women’s fashion and home departments are in breezy, well-kept arrangements organized by designer. On the second floor, a small space houses seasonal exhibitions (past shows have focused on Christian Dior, the photographer Ellen Von Unwerth and the jeweler Victoire de Castellane). The food market, on the ground floor of a neighboring building, is filled with glistening displays of sweets, fresh breads and, of course, several varieties of foie gras (about 60 euros).THE GOODS  A bit of everything: Fashion from names like Haider Ackermann, Dries Van Noten, Stella McCartney and Balenciaga, plus an enormous lingerie department. The store makes terrific, quality basics under its house label, including Sea Island cotton socks (26 euros) and dress shirts (about 100 euros) that are long-lasting enough to justify the prices. There are also delightful finds throughout the store, not the least of which are in the “notions” area, stocked with hundreds of varieties of buttons and walls lined with balls of knitting yarn (7 euros for baby cashmere, 11 for angora). Also amusing are candles from Cire Trudon in the shape of a bust of Marie-Antoinette (70 euros).SAVOIR FAIRE The expansive store requires several hours if you intend to browse everything, but it is best enjoyed in small doses, preferably concluding with a box of éclairs. There’s a multilingual concierge desk on the main floor that can help you plot your own course of attack.