https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/01/us/threat-to-tiny-golden-cheeked-warbler-is-disputed-in-texas.html
Threat to Tiny Golden-Cheeked Warbler Is Disputed in Texas - The New York Times
Birds,Endangered and Extinct Species,Texas,Fish and Wildlife Service,Warbler,Austin (Tex)
July 31, 2015
8910
AUSTIN, Tex. —  With a pair of 10-power binoculars, a zoom-lens camera and sensible hiking shoes, Shelia Hargis arrived at a thickly wooded bird sanctuary just a few miles from the rapidly growing Austin suburbs shortly after 7 on a weekday morning.Within minutes, a brilliantly colored golden-cheeked warbler soared through the foliage and alighted atop an oak, striking a photogenic pose in the early morning sunlight. “Now I can breathe,” exclaimed Ms. Hargis, 53, a crime analysis supervisor with the police in Austin who jokingly describes herself as “a crazy obsessed birder.”Each year, thousands of other avid bird-watchers, including many from other countries, come to Central Texas with the goal of catching a similar view. In the bird-watching world, the black, yellow and white warbler is a prized sighting. It nests in only about three dozen Central Texas counties — making the species a native Texan — before heading south to Mexico and Central America for the winter.These days, the diminutive songbird, which weighs less than an ounce, is at the center of a classic environment-versus-development confrontation over emerging efforts to end its 25-year status as an endangered species. Those who are calling for the delisting maintain that the protections are based on inaccurate data, impede development in the high-growth Austin and San Antonio metropolitan areas and restrict training at Fort Hood, one of the world’s largest military installations.The warbler showdown is also part of a continuing debate over the 1973 Endangered Species Act, which imposes federal protections on plants and animals deemed in danger of extinction. More than 1,500 United States species, including the warbler, are listed as threatened or endangered.A key leader in the warbler delisting effort is Susan Combs, a former state comptroller. Last year, she formed Texans for Positive Economic Policy, which has joined with two other groups to petition the Interior Department to remove the songbird from the endangered species list, contending that the warbler population is so robust that it does not need federal protection.“I truly believe that they did not have adequate science” in the original decision, Ms. Combs said in a telephone interview.Other prominent figures who have voiced support for the delisting include George P. Bush, the Texas land commissioner and a son of the presidential candidate Jeb Bush, and Lt. Gen. Sean B. MacFarland, the commanding general of Fort Hood, which covers nearly 218,000 acres and is a prime habitat for the warbler.In a statement, General MacFarland expressed support for “U.S. government efforts to protect the environment and wildlife species on our installation” but said delisting the warbler would “benefit Fort Hood both operationally and administratively.”Since 1993, the military installation has been required to impose training restrictions to minimize the impact on the warbler. Directives in force in 2008, according to Fort Hood documents, prevented the firing of artillery or use of chemical or smoke grenades within 328 feet of habitats during nesting periods. The restrictions also placed a two-hour limit on training in habitats while warblers were nesting.“We got some pretty stiff constraints on what we could and couldn’t do,” said Ron Perry, who, as director of mission support, is the senior civilian official at Fort Hood.The United States Fish and Wildlife Service, which administers the act, relaxed the restrictions in June, citing the “success of endangered species management” at the installation. Mr. Perry said Fort Hood nevertheless supported delisting because the installation pays hundreds of thousands of dollars to comply with the act, including funding a biological assessment every five years.Mr. Bush, whose office oversees state lands, also cited the impact on Fort Hood training in a statement endorsing the delisting petition and said the warbler “should never have been listed in the first place.”The petition ignited an impassioned response from Texas’ diverse environmental community almost immediately after it was submitted on June 29.“Save the Golden-Cheeked Warbler,” blares a message on the website of the Austin area’s Travis Audubon Society, next to a close-up of the songbird perched on a tree limb. As of Friday, more than 5,400 had signed the site’s online petition opposing the proposed delisting.Tom Smith, a longtime Austin environmentalist and the director of Texas’ Public Citizen office, said emails had been pouring into his inbox from environmental allies each day “talking about what we’re going to do to keep the listing in place.”Joan Marshall, the executive director of the Travis Audubon Society, said warbler defenders had consulted legal counsel and were mapping out their options to combat proponents of delisting, who she said wanted to “open large sections of Central Texas to more development.”“We’re taking the petition very seriously,” said Ms. Marshall, who accompanied Ms. Hargis on the recent bird-watching trip at Travis Audubon’s 715-acre Baker Sanctuary about 20 miles from Austin. “We’re dealing with a moneyed Goliath. They have a multitude of weapons.”Placement of the golden-cheeked warbler on the endangered species list in 1990 was a major victory for environmental groups. It helped lead to the creation of two areas in the hills and canyons surrounding Austin to provide sanctuary for the warbler and other endangered species, including another songbird, the black-capped vireo.The Balcones Canyonlands Preserve was established in 1996 to set aside 30,428 acres in western Travis County and is partly funded by federal grants and so-called mitigation fees charged to property owners who want to develop in golden-cheeked warbler habitat outside the preserve. To the northwest is the federal Balcones Canyonlands National Wildlife Refuge, encompassing about 24,500 acres in Travis, Williamson and Burnet Counties.Warblers descend on the Lone Star State every year in early or mid-March, drawn by a unique habitat requirement: They make their nests out of bark stripped from mature Ashe juniper trees in 33 to 39 counties that stretch from Central Texas north toward the Dallas-Fort Worth suburbs. Now that the nesting season is over, the warblers will soon head south.The loss of habitat caused by development and other factors was cited as a key element in the listing of the warbler a quarter-century ago. But the delisting petition said extensive research since 1990 showed that there is almost five times more habitat and roughly 19 times more warblers than was believed at the time the bird was designated as endangered.Scientific evidence that led to the listing “has since been made obsolete,” said the petitioners, asserting that the “time has come to remove the golden-cheeked warbler from the endangered species list.”But the Fish and Wildlife Service, in a five-year review of the warbler released in August 2014, recommended that the endangered classification remain in place. The bird “continues to be in danger of extinction throughout its range,” it said, because of “the ongoing widespread destruction of its habitat.”The Interior Department has 90 days to determine if there is “substantial information” to warrant further review. If there is, the department will conduct a 12-month review to determine whether the listing should be removed or stay in place.Fifty-nine species have been delisted since the act was created, according to the Fish and Wildlife Service. Ten were removed as a result of delisting petitions, three of them because of data errors and seven because the species had recovered.