http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/25/fashion/brad-shermans-office-interior-design-on-a-dorm-budget.html
Office Interior Design on a Dorm Budget - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Sherman  Brad,Workplace Environment,Food52,Cooking and Cookbooks,E-Commerce
June 24, 2015
9983
Step off the office elevator and you’re immediately hit with the smell: a cooking aroma, something warm and inviting (corn chowder? bread?) wafting from a spacious, open kitchen with a wall of Waterworks cabinets.The lights are set to rainy-Saturday-at-home. Stocked metal bar carts line the back of a plush sofa in a lounge area. One woman conducts a work call inside the “book nook,” a free-standing four-walled room built within the space, with library shelves and a chocolate brown swivel chair that came not from Staples but Chairish.com, a vintage furniture site.Indeed, the Chelsea headquarters of Food52, the online cooking community and e-commerce site, look less like an office than a cozy loft apartment. Which is the point.The work space was designed by Brad Sherman, a Manhattan-based commercial designer who has developed a trademark style that blurs the line between home and office.Mr. Sherman installs soft lighting, vintage midcentury furniture and fiddle-leaf fig trees. Or, as he did with the downtown office and showroom of Casper, the online mattress seller, he carves out discrete rooms, staging them with artwork and used books from the Strand to create the impression that someone lives there.If your workplace is as comfortable and welcoming as your home, the thinking goes, you never have to leave.“A lot of start-ups can’t afford the best young talent,” Mr. Sherman said. “So how do they attract it? With cool spaces.”Mr. Sherman, 30, has created cool homey spaces for several of the city’s tech start-ups, including Sakara Life, an organic-meal delivery service; Jack Erwin, a direct-to-consumer men’s shoe retailer; and Mobile Commons, a text-messaging platform for nonprofits to connect with donors.Clients who have hired Mr. Sherman describe him as a budget-stretching magician, able to transform Ikea sawhorses and plywood slabs into chic work stations, or fashion an arty chandelier from exposed mattress springs and string lights.“We needed it to look presentable because we had customers coming in,” said Philip Krim, the chief executive of Casper, referring to the apartment work space he hired Mr. Sherman to design. “Brad was able to get the job done in a scrappy way that allows us to live on a start-up budget but have an office we’re very proud of.”Ariel Nelson, a co-founder of Jack Erwin, turned to Mr. Sherman after his friend Mr. Krim hailed the designer. The company had a nothing budget of “20 grand, all in,” he said, for a 3,500-square-foot loft in SoHo. Mr. Sherman took control of the build-out, allowing Mr. Nelson to focus on building his company.“I was like, ‘If you have a creative idea and it saves me money, go for it,’ ” Mr. Nelson said. “It was mostly all him.”The office-as-home concept has been perfected with Mr. Sherman’s latest finished project, Food52. Giving a tour of the space one recent afternoon, Mr. Sherman — handsome, floppy-haired, Midwestern friendly — pointed out the chrome and rattan rocker he found at Amsterdam Modern, a vintage store in Los Angeles, and paired with an Ikea coffee table.“It’s about the mix,” he said. “I spent money where I thought it would improve the sophistication.”Merrill Stubbs, a co-founder of Food52, said she wanted a space that “evokes hunger but is also soothing, super-functional as an office and also feels like a home.” Because the staff members use their office for photo shoots, the test kitchen also had to feel warm and lived-in, in keeping with the brand’s focus on home cooks.It was a high bar that Mr. Sherman exceeded. “Everyone comments about how things are so pulled together and every inch is thought out,” Ms. Stubbs said.Isn’t Ms. Stubbs concerned her employees will feel too much at home?“We’re online and available all the time,” she said. “Giving people a place to relax or feel comfortable at the office is much needed for recharging.”Working with start-ups presents unique challenges, Mr. Sherman said, because often the clients lack both funds and office renovation experience but still have high expectations. And yet Mr. Sherman has delivered under those demands, again and again, becoming, as Ms. Stubbs put it, “the go-to office designer for tech start-ups looking to make a statement.”It was a chance conversation with Ms. Stubbs three years ago that began his role as the tech start-up maestro.At the time, Mr. Sherman was trying to start a design career in New York and working as a glorified receptionist at General Assembly, then a co-working space popular with start-ups, including Food52.One day, Ms. Stubbs cut her finger and asked Mr. Sherman for an adhesive bandage; the two began talking about how Food52 had just signed the lease on its first office.“He said: ‘Well, you know, I design office spaces in my real life. I’d love to talk to you guys about your plans,’ ” Ms. Stubbs said. “We had no plans.”They also had no real budget: about $15,000 for 3,500 square feet. Still, that seemed like a fortune to Mr. Sherman, a graduate of Philadelphia University College of Architecture, where he earned a master’s in sustainable design.His previous job was at TerraCycle, a New Jersey-based waste solutions company. He helped design TerraCycle’s 20,000-square-foot office, for what he called an “absolutely insane” budget of $1 per square foot.“We used every single thing we could,” Mr. Sherman said. “The desks I built out of old doors. Some of the bases were built out of old plastic buckets that I just stacked and screwed into the desk.”That resourcefulness has served him well in working for start-ups. He handles not only the design but also oversees the contractors, shops for the furniture and fixtures, custom designs items he can’t source (he made bed frames for Casper and recently started a furniture line) and has been known to screw in the electrical outlets on workstations himself.To cut down on overhead, Mr. Sherman and his design partner, Nina Etnier, along with another employee, work out of his studio apartment in Greenwich Village, or set up shop in the unfinished offices of their clients.Being the guy who can over-deliver on the cheap isn’t the most lucrative path for a designer. But as Mr. Sherman’s firm is growing and maturing, so are his clients. He’s designing a new, much larger office for Casper, which has already outgrown its downtown space and turned to Mr. Sherman because, as Mr. Krim said, “Brad knows our aesthetic and we know we’ll get something really great.”Mr. Sherman persuaded Mr. Krim and his partners to lease a space in a building along Broadway, north of Union Square. The office, currently occupied by a brokerage firm, is run-down and man-cave-ish.But as Mr. Sherman explained on a recent visit, he sees potential in the expansive northern and southern views, the skylight and the new HVAC system and other cost-saving elements already present.His eyes lit up, appraising the potential.“First thing I look at is, What can I reuse?” Mr. Sherman said, adding what may as well be his sales pitch. “We can accomplish a lot more for a lot less.”