http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/22/world/middleeast/yemen-votes-to-remove-ali-abdullah-saleh.html
Yemen Votes to Replace President Ali Abdullah Saleh - The New York Times
Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Elections,Saleh  Ali Abdullah,Yemen,Hadi  Abed Rabbo Mansour al-
Feb. 21, 2012
2750
SANA, Yemen — Yemenis voted Tuesday in an election that was predetermined, with one candidate on the ballot for president. But the lack of choice did little to dim the palpable joy on the streets here where the vote meant the formal end of an autocrat’s rule and the chance to move past a violent, yearlong political crisis.The electoral exercise on Tuesday means that Ali Abdullah Saleh will no longer be Yemen’s president after more than three decades in power. He is to be replaced by his loyal, longtime vice president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, in a peaceful transfer of power orchestrated under pressure from Yemen’s neighbors in the Persian Gulf region, and Western nations.Mr. Saleh, who has recently been receiving medical treatment in New York after a failed assassination attempt last year, agreed to step down only after having turned his security forces on unarmed demonstrators calling for democracy, killing dozens and prompting some in the military to side with the opposition. It was a bloody conflict that damaged the economy while giving Al Qaeda an opportunity to expand its influence. So the vote was seen as a step forward.At one polling place here in the capital, five women, veiled in black from head to toe, waited patiently for their turn to vote. The air was quiet in the musty stone room where one by one they stepped up to a table to register their thumbprints and check a box on the white ballot slip.“We all agree to Abdu Rabbu,” said one of the women, who identified herself as Umm Abdullah, displaying her ink-stained thumb after she finishing voting. “He is enough for us. We want to end this crisis.” Outside the polling place, a group of men burst into patriotic songs.Voter turnout appeared to be high here, as long lines wrapped outside polling places in schools and outside mosques. Sporadic gunfire was heard throughout the day in various neighborhoods of Aden, a southern port city, residents said. Seven people were killed by gunfire, including three government soldiers, according to local news reports.Supporters of the president voted because the election was endorsed by Mr. Saleh, while the opposition’s supporters voted to ensure Mr. Saleh’s ouster. Whatever the motivation, for the first time in more than a year, the popular spirit was optimistic in this conflict-stricken capital where the sound of shelling used to echo every night.The uprising here was not swift and triumphant like the revolutions of Tunisia or Egypt, or the all-out warfare of Libya and Syria. Rather, a slow-burning revolution of sit-ins, negotiations and international pressure has pushed out Mr. Saleh, making him the fourth Arab autocrat forced from power in the wave of popular uprisings that continue to roil the region.Yemen was not without violence, though, as powerful allies of Mr. Saleh decided to take up arms against him and supported the protest movement calling for his ouster, eventually fracturing the government and forcing Mr. Saleh to enter into negotiations over his exit strategy. An agreement that gave Mr. Saleh immunity from prosecution contributed to a resolution.“The change that has taken place was not a voluntary change, for sure,” said Abdel-Karim al-Iryani, a former prime minister under Mr. Saleh who still acts as an adviser to the president. “The spearhead of the change, despite what the situation might be now, was the youth protesters.”The end of Mr. Saleh’s rule does not yet put Yemen on the road to democracy, though. Mr. Saleh is most likely to return to Sana and will retain considerable influence, through the prominence of his family and tribe, which have dominated the Yemeni military for the past three decades. Mr. Saleh ruled Yemen as if he were a tribal sheik, pitting different players against one another and using the resources of the state — jobs and money — to win allies. Cronyism substituted for the rule of law, and little effort was put into building the infrastructure required for a stable state. All authority in the country had been consolidated in the Saleh presidency.But Mr. Saleh’s influence will be weakened when Mr. Hadi, a southerner, takes over.“The political stage is wide open to create a new political system,” Mr. Iryani said. “That new political system cannot be the same as it was before. There is a consensus that the dominance of the military and tribal sheiks that has controlled the stage is now no longer acceptable.”Mr. Hadi’s role as president is to lead a transition to a more democratic system. After he formally takes power, the ruling and opposition parties intend to begin a national dialogue to draw up a new constitution. Previous efforts to do so ground to a halt, and even with Mr. Saleh gone, all parties may not be willing to participate. That may be especially true of the Houthi rebels who control Saada Province in the north and the southern separatist leaders, many of whom are living in exile.Others are worried that Mr. Hadi will remain loyal to Mr. Saleh.“He will play according to Saleh’s rule,” said Abdel Kader al-Guneid, a well-connected opposition supporter in Taiz. “His pocket is full. He has no power base, but the ambassadors and the opposition stand behind him nicely.” But Mr. Guneid added that voter turnout in Taiz was very high because “people want to see the back of Ali Abdullah Saleh.”The United States ambassador to Yemen, Gerald M. Feierstein, said that Mr. Saleh’s political future was uncertain.“If he is running things from behind the scenes, it’s because the new government has not asserted itself,” the ambassador said. “What we want to see is see this government develop and take on their full role and responsibilities. That will eliminate the potential or people from outside the government to interfere.”As soon as the ballots are tallied, Mr. Hadi will be sworn in as president of the Republic of Yemen, probably next week. Yemeni officials say that Mr. Saleh will return to Yemen this week.The leader of Yemen’s Socialist Party, Yassin Saeed Noman, who played an active role in the negotiations between the ruling party and opposition over the past year, warned of the uphill battle for the new government.“Hadi will face a lot of problems, you see, not just because it’s Hadi, but any person would,” he said. “He has to face very complicated issues.”Yet despite his worries, Mr. Noman still sounded brighter than he had all year.“This is the first such experiment in the past 33 years, so let us be optimistic,” he said.