https://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/02/sports/basketball/02knicks.html
Knicks Tell Marbury to Stay Away From Team - The New York Times
Basketball,New York Knicks,New York Post,Marbury  Stephon,D'Antoni  Mike,Walsh  Donnie,Richardson  Quentin,Thomas  Isiah,Duhon  Chris,Brown  Larry,Gallinari  Danilo
Dec. 1, 2008
7470
GREENBURGH, N.Y. — Stephon Marbury strutted through the lobby, pushed through the glass double doors and stepped into the crisp December air Monday afternoon, his Knicks career all but over.Marbury still has a contract and a locker, but after the doors to the Knicks’ training center swung shut behind him at 2:45 p.m., it marked the figurative end to his turbulent five-year tenure with his hometown team. On Monday, team officials ordered Marbury to stay away indefinitely while they try to arrange a permanent separation.The decision followed a brief meeting between Marbury; a union representative; Donnie Walsh, the Knicks’ president; and Glen Grunwald, a senior vice president for the team.“After meeting with Stephon and his representative this afternoon, we have directed Stephon not to participate in practice or attend games until further notice,” Walsh said in a statement. “We want to continue to meet with him to discuss a long-term resolution.”The most likely resolution remains a buyout agreement, which could take some time. The Knicks have been pushing Marbury for weeks to accept a pay cut in exchange for his release. Marbury, who is being paid $21.9 million this season, has been reluctant to negotiate.The talks have been further handicapped because Marbury does not have an agent. Although he is being advised informally by Hal Biagas, a lawyer for the players union, Marbury is representing himself at the table.It is unclear whether any meaningful negotiations took place Monday. The meeting lasted just 35 minutes, with Marbury present for only 15 minutes. He left without commenting.Biagas said the matter was “not resolved,” but declined to offer any specifics.“We need to try to keep this in-house, and I have no comment at this time,” Biagas told a small group of reporters.Walsh was not available for comment but will probably address the news media before the Knicks play the Portland Trail Blazers on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.By effectively barring Marbury, Walsh removed the Knicks’ greatest source of strife. Since arriving in a January 2004 trade, Marbury has feuded with coaches, clashed with teammates and created numerous distractions with provocative and bombastic comments. Mindful of that history, Coach Mike D’Antoni dropped Marbury from the rotation on opening night of the regular season, then assigned him to the inactive list.Marbury initially held his emotions in check. But tensions flared 11 days ago, after trades and injuries depleted the roster. Over six days, D’Antoni twice offered Marbury a chance to play and he declined both times, according to D’Antoni.After the second refusal, last Wednesday at Detroit, Walsh suspended Marbury for one game and  docked him two game checks, totaling about $400,000. Marbury has acknowledged his reluctance to play for D’Antoni, but insists that he did not refuse to play outright. He is filing a grievance.The meeting Monday was scheduled for 2 p.m. Marbury’s Rolls-Royce pulled up to the building at 2:30 p.m. Although he still has access to the players’ private lot, Marbury had his driver park in front.Wearing blue jeans and a black T-shirt emblazoned with his personal logo, Marbury strode through the front doors and smiled for a small group of reporters and cameras. He left 15 minutes later, then waited in his car. Biagas came out 20 minutes later and left with Marbury.Before closing the door on his Knicks career, Marbury lighted one last firestorm for the franchise to douse. In an interview published Monday in The New York Post, Marbury called D’Antoni a liar and blasted teammates for not supporting him.“I sat there for three weeks and didn’t say one word,” he told The Post. “I didn’t hear one of my teammates say, ‘Why isn’t Stephon Marbury playing?’ ”About two dozen reporters surrounded D’Antoni and the players after practice, seeking reaction to Marbury’s comments. For the players who have been with the Knicks during Marbury’s tenure, the scene was sadly familiar.“The main thing we want to do is we want to play basketball and win games,” said Quentin Richardson, who recently criticized Marbury’s refusal to play. “These aren’t the things we want to come off the court and talk about.”But, Richardson added, “it’s a situation that we’ve kind of grown used to.”In his interview with The Post, Marbury also criticized Walsh, complaining that he issued the suspension without asking for his side of the story. According to Marbury, Walsh said he believed D’Antoni, saying, “My coach has no reason to lie to me; he hasn’t lied to me yet.”Marbury said he responded, “He’s lied to you now.” Marbury said that D’Antoni did not order him to play but merely gave him “the option to play.”“Mike had no intentions of me playing basketball here,” Marbury told The Post. “He gave me straight disrespect. It was beyond disrespect.”D’Antoni shrugged off the remarks, saying: “Obviously, he’s in a tough position, and I don’t think anybody’s thrilled with where anybody is. But that’s not really true. I’m sure he feels that way and I can understand.”“Obviously,” he added, “everybody’s looking for closure.”That includes the players, who long ago grew weary of Marbury’s behavior. Asked if he looked forward to the matter being resolved, Richardson said, “Yeah, I mean, we’re the people that see it the most on a day-to-day basis, so probably so.”Last week at Detroit, Richardson criticized Marbury for refusing to play and said that he no longer considered Marbury a teammate.“He didn’t care I was his teammate when I was banished,” Marbury told The Post. “They left me out for dead. It’s like we’re in a foxhole and I’m facing the other way. If I got shot in the head, at least you want to get shot by the enemy. I got shot in the head by my own guys in my foxhole. And they didn’t even give me an honorable death.”