http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/05/us/charleston-michael-slager-walter-scott-trial.html
Tense Jurors in Michael Slager Trial See Video of Killing of Walter Scott - The New York Times
Santana  Feidin,Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Slager  Michael T (1981- ),North Charleston (SC),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Blacks
Nov. 4, 2016
7345
CHARLESTON, S.C. — Before court began here on Friday, the county’s chief prosecutor stepped into the gallery and spoke quietly to the family of Walter L. Scott, a black man who was shot and killed by a white police officer last year.“The video’s coming up,” the prosecutor, Scarlett A. Wilson, said. “If you can’t take it, everybody understands that. It’s rough. It’s hard. It’s emotional.”Less than two hours later, with Mr. Scott’s mother out of the courtroom, rapt jurors fixed their attention on the video: a cellphone recording of some of the fatal encounter between Mr. Scott and Michael T. Slager, the North Charleston police officer now on trial for murder. The video shows Mr. Slager firing eight rounds toward the back of Mr. Scott, who had fled a traffic stop and become involved in a struggle with the officer.As the jury of 11 white people and a black man watched State’s Exhibit No. 237, a female juror held her right hand to her lower lip. A male juror repeatedly swallowed. Mr. Slager watched the video on a screen near the defense table as the sound of gunfire boomed, shot after shot, through the courtroom.“It was an injustice what I saw,” testified Feidin Santana, who recorded the video on his way to work on April 4, 2015.Mr. Santana, the only witness to the shooting besides Mr. Slager, said he had been first drawn by the sight of Mr. Scott running. Moments later, Mr. Slager came into view.Mr. Santana said he had heard the buzz of a Taser and watched Mr. Slager punch Mr. Scott’s side. Using his cellphone’s camera, Mr. Santana taped the men as they tussled.Then Mr. Slager opened fire, and Mr. Scott fell to the ground. Mr. Santana testified that the officer handcuffed Mr. Scott, who was not moving.“At any point, did you see Walter Scott coming at Officer Slager?” Ms. Wilson asked.“That never happened,” Mr. Santana replied.Mr. Santana acknowledged ignoring an officer’s request that he stay around, and he did not immediately supply the video, which became a stirring symbol of the national debate over race and policing, to city or state investigators. Instead, Mr. Santana said, he provided the video to Mr. Scott’s family and sat for multiple news media interviews before meeting with the authorities.Mr. Santana said he wanted to ensure his personal protection, and he testified that his lawyer had arranged the payments he received from licensing the video. But faced with the most damning evidence of the trial, Mr. Slager’s lawyer, Andrew J. Savage III, pointedly tried to undermine Mr. Santana’s credibility and fact-check his memory.Mr. Savage picked at details: Why, for instance, did Mr. Santana take a long, indirect route to work on a day he was running late? And with a stanza of a song that Mr. Santana wrote, the defense lawyer moved to portray the witness as a man with a distrust of law enforcement that predated the shooting.“It’s all war, trouble, police abuse and those who must defend us as the worst criminals,” Mr. Santana wrote about six months before the shooting. “Who can I trust? Tell me.”Mr. Santana said he did not oppose the police, generally.“I’m against police brutality,” he said, adding, “I write how I see things, you know, in the moment.”Mr. Slager, who was fired after the shooting, could be sentenced to life in prison if he is convicted of murder in state court, where his trial will resume on Monday. He has also been indicted on federal civil rights charges.The video could resurface in the state trial, in which Judge Clifton B. Newman on Friday denied a defense request to block the footage from being played in slow motion. The recording is also expected to be crucial evidence in the federal case.Yet Mr. Santana testified that he did recognize what was unfolding as he recorded the video on the morning before Easter. He first thought Mr. Slager’s handgun had been loaded with rubber projectiles.“I didn’t know it was real bullets,” he said.