https://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/19/business/19hedge.html
Suddenly, a Hesitation About Splurging - The New York Times
Hedge Funds,Executives and Management,House of Representatives,Schwarzman  Stephen A,Blankfein  Lloyd C,Wall Street (NYC),Manhattan (NYC)
Sept. 19, 2007
9210
On a sun-splashed day in Southampton this month, Harald Grant, a Sotheby’s real estate agent, showed his top listing for a hedge fund client.The client himself was not touring the jaw-dropping 11-acre Old Trees estate, with its 2 swimming pools, 21 bedrooms and sweeping view of Lake Agawam. Instead, he had sent a representative, a fast-talking young woman with jewels on her fingers and a cellphone pressed to her ear.“So, asking is 48 million,” she said. “Magnificent.”But unsold. There have been several low-ball offers over the past year, Mr. Grant said, mostly from hedge fund executives and other Wall Street barons.A few years ago, as markets boomed and the new hedge fund rich banked paydays that surpassed $1 billion, Old Trees, with its Gatsbyesque allure, might have been snapped up by a brash executive looking to crash the old money gates of Southampton.But a cautiousness has begun to creep in, brought on by recent turmoil in the markets, uproar over a lavish birthday party for the private equity executive Stephen A. Schwarzman, and calls from Capitol Hill to increase taxes on hedge funds and private equity billionaires.In August, leading hedge funds showed a loss of 2.5 percent, according to the HFRX index compiled by Hedge Fund Research. On the surface, it does not seem like a lot, given the billions of dollars that hedge funds have accumulated. Yet it was the largest monthly reversal since a 3.8 percent decline in April 2000. Taken together with larger downturns at several prominent funds, the number represents a stark reminder that the fast and easy returns of recent years are on the wane.“People just don’t feel euphoric, and they don’t want to be high profile any more,” said Dolly Lenz, a high-end real estate broker at Prudential Douglas Elliman, who said she began to see this reserve from her hedge fund clients in July. “They are no longer seeing new highs every month. They may have the same net worth, but it’s all about euphoria and confidence. These are trade-up purchases; no one really needs them.”It is not just Old Trees. Ms. Lenz cited a growing number of luxury properties that have not found a buyer, most prominently a $70 million penthouse at the Pierre Hotel.An early sign of this modesty came in the spring, when Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, rescinded an offer to buy Old Trees after a small news item about the deal appeared in The New York Post. After his $54 million bonus last year, such an outlay might have seemed ostentatious. Mr. Blankfein declined to comment.There certainly has not been a moratorium on big-ticket real estate purchases: Sanford I. Weill, the former chief executive of Citigroup, was recently reported to have paid $42 million for an apartment at 15 Central Park West. Mr. Blankfein himself bought an apartment there for a reported $27 million last year.All the same, some in the hedge fund industry describe a subtle psychological shift as the markets have softened. They say that the change will become more pronounced if funds show a loss for the year, eliminating the 20 percent cut of profits that executives receive when funds show a positive annual return. What’s more, having finished down one year, funds could find it difficult to recapture higher ground, especially in a choppy environment.So the pressure begins to build, and eventually, said Andy Kessler, a former hedge fund manager, “you stop spending.” Why? Fear, mostly.“You worry about redemptions,” Mr. Kessler said, “you worry about margin calls, and you worry about working for free. Down 7 percent may be no big deal, but when your investors say, ‘Get me out,’ you have to sell everything.”After years of eye-popping returns, sudden losses can be wrenching. Aware of the psychological impact that high-pressure trading can have, several funds have retained psychologists to counsel  stressed managers.“It has been a very challenging period for these people,” said Jonathan F. Katz, a psychologist who works with large hedge funds. “I have seen people shaken, their confidence eroded. They are upset and depressed.”Such anxieties become all the more acute when taken with the boundless spending habits developed at the height of the hedge fund bubble.As an example, Mr. Katz cites a client who, in the middle of the market turmoil in August, found himself closing on an expensive apartment in Manhattan.“All of a sudden, two or three of his major positions were down,” Mr. Katz said. “He was on an emotional roller coaster. He had put himself out there, and now he felt horrible because he had lost his firm tons of money.”Such distress can result in what some call a social contagion, as hedge fund executives let their woes at work affect their personal lives. Investors have said that their golf scores soar, that they lose their appetites and wake up in the middle of the night in a cold sweat.To be sure, many investors are cool headed enough to not let inevitable setbacks derail them. But others find it hard to keep their sense of self insulated from losses.“Some people are debilitated by it,” said Ari Kiev, a psychiatrist who works principally for SAC Capital, the hedge fund founded by Steven A. Cohen. “You can’t sleep; you can’t eat; you have catastrophic thoughts about losing your house.”A prominent hedge fund investor, who like the other executives who discussed their anxieties asked not to be identified, spoke of a crisis of confidence. “It’s an intellectual destabilization,” he said. “All of a sudden, your funds are down 5 percent and the S.& P. is down 1 percent. Once you were master of the universe, but the market makes you humble.”Like the most visceral fears, this apprehension is about the unknown. Liquidity is drying up, as is confidence, and many are bracing for the worst.The misgivings are at odds with the calm and the Old World charm of an estate like Old Trees. Mr. Grant, the real estate agent, highlighted details of the Georgian mansion, built in 1911 as a summer house for the architect Goodhue Livingston. The house has 12-foot ceilings, original detail and the aura of the Astors, the Phippses and other elegant families from New York society that were frequent guests.The hedge fund executive’s representative, who declined to give her name, took it all in and had a question. “Can you have a Jet Ski on the pond?” she asked, pointing to the serene Agawam.Alas, no, said Mr. Grant. Rowing is the preferred means of locomotion on the lake. Fifteen minutes later, she was gone.How many $100-million-a-year executives are willing to make such an extravagant purchase in these buttoned-down times?“I know he can afford it,” Mr. Grant said of his latest prospect, a hedge fund executive whom he would not identify. “It’s just a question of whether he decides to buy it.”