http://www.nytimes.com/1996/08/29/world/the-people-of-kwangju-recall-1980-massacre.html
The People of Kwangju Recall 1980 Massacre - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,ROH TAE WOO,CHUN DOO HWAN,COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT,SENTENCES (CRIMINAL),CAPITAL PUNISHMENT,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Aug. 29, 1996
5164
When paratroopers stormed City Hall here 16 years ago, committing a massacre that has haunted this country ever since, Kim Young Chul was deep inside the building, clutching his gun.Mr. Kim, who was one of the planners of the pro-democracy demonstrations, never got a chance to use his weapon. Instead, he was shot seven times and suffered head wounds. But he is still alive -- in a mental institution -- apparently still suffering from the trauma of the experience.He was in the institution when he heard the news this week that former President Chun Doo Hwan had been sentenced to death for staging a coup in 1979 and brutally suppressing the Kwangju uprising in May 1980. History suddenly turned on its head: Mr. Chun was for years revered as a national hero and the protesters here were portrayed as Communist rioters. Now the protesters have become martyrs for democracy and Mr. Chun is a convict sentenced to be hanged.''We should let him go after about a year, for he has already suffered,''  said Mr. Kim, 48, who has come to dislike all killing. ''There should be forgiveness and reconciliation.''Few people in this southern farming region are as magnanimous as Mr. Kim. His wife, who delivered milk, sold vegetables and tired herself out at scores of jobs to raise their three children and pay her husband's medical bills, is deeply embittered. She wants the sentence carried out, and she and others are dismayed that the prison sentence for Mr. Chun's successor, Roh Tae Woo, was 22 1/2 years and not longer.For people in Kwangju who have fought for 16 years to tell their version of the massacre and to see those responsible be punished, this is a moment to remember. The massacre was a pivotal event in modern Korean history, nurturing radicalism and anti-Americanism among a generation of youth.An opinion poll at Seoul National University once asked students to name the greatest tragedy in Korean history since 1945. The professor who planned the poll assumed that the students would answer the Korean War, but they overwhelmingly cited the Kwangju massacre.At Mangwol Dong Cemetery, where many of the victims are buried, visitors come from all over the country to pay tribute to those whose lives helped bring about greater democracy in this country.''My heart has been grieving so much and so long for these people,'' said Cho Han Young, a 40-year-old pastor who drove more than six hours to visit the grave of a childhood friend here on a hot summer day. ''I regret I was not there with them. I feel guilty for being alive now.''They also come to gain a greater understanding of the event that has been at the center of South Korean politics for the last 16 years. For years after the massacre, those who ordered it served in the top leadership, like Mr. Chun and his aides, while those who had protested for democracy were denounced as Communists or rioters.Park Soon Lae, 63, a mother whose son was killed by paratroopers as he rode in a minivan with his fellow students, helped start one of the first organizations to fight the Government on behalf of bereaved parents. But for years, every time Mr. Chun paid a visit to this city, more than a dozen police officers would be stationed outside her house to prevent her from staging protests.''I clapped when I heard it,'' Miss Park said of Mr. Chun's sentence. ''I said: This is one day I feel I am really alive.''But like other people here, Miss Park says that the punishment does not ease the pain and that talk of a pardon is disconcerting.''I expect the sentence to be implemented,'' she said, as she pulled some weeds from around her son's flowered grave. ''If not, I will fight to the end, until all my strength expires.''In the spring of 1980, protesters in Kwangju broke into armories and stole weapons, which briefly allowed them to gain control of the city. After 10 days of protests, the army invaded with tanks and machine guns.The Government says that the death toll was 193, but it eventually agreed to compensate the family members of 288 victims of the massacre. Beyond that figure, 23 soldiers were also killed, most apparently by other troops, although some were killed by protesters.Many relatives have dedicated their lives to fighting for their sons and brothers, daughters and sisters who died in the Kwangju massacre. Hong Soon Baek, a 37-year-old businessman, for instance, gave up his business after a car accident nearly killed him. During his recovery, he had a change in outlook and left his business to become the custodian of the Mangwol Cemetery where his brother, who was killed in the massacre, is buried.A broader legacy of the Kwangju massacre has been an even more ferocious regionalism in South Korea, and it is still unclear if the conviction of Mr. Chun will ease that. The province that includes Kwangju is economically backward and its people and those from the rest of the country rarely have nice things to say about each other.So while there is some relief and healing as a result of the sentencing of Mr. Chun, there is also deep skepticism about whether a rapprochment with the rest of the country is really at hand.''The people of Kwangju have to make more effort to breed more politicians,'' said Y. H. Chung, 22, a kindergarten teacher who dislikes all the demonstrating around her. ''When we have a President from our region, then we will benefit economically.''