https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/world/middleeast/early-results-show-reformists-and-moderates-drawing-votes-in-iran-elections.html
Early Results Show Reformists and Moderates Drawing Votes in Iran Elections - The New York Times
Iran,Elections,Assembly of Experts,Guardian Council (Iran)
Feb. 27, 2016
8320
TEHRAN —  Preliminary results released Saturday in Iran indicated that reformist and moderate candidates were set to expand their influence after two important elections, state news media quoted the Interior Ministry as saying.More than 30 million Iranians voted Friday in the two elections, one for a new Parliament and the other for an influential clerical council. The elections were the first since the completion of an international agreement to curb Iran’s nuclear program that included the lifting of economic sanctions against the country, a deal supported by the reformist camp and opposed by hard-liners. Voter turnout for the two contests exceeded 60 percent, according to the Interior Ministry.The reformist and moderate list of candidates for the 290-member Parliament appeared to be headed for victory in the Tehran area, according to preliminary results announced by election officials and reported by the state-run Islamic Republic of Iran News Network. Representatives from Tehran, the capital, control 30 seats in Parliament and generally determine the political direction of the body.According to the early tallies, only one hard-line candidate was among the top 30 vote-getters in Tehran, the state news media reported.There were no immediate results from constituencies outside Tehran in either of the two elections. But some political analysts said that they expected to see similar gains for reformist parliamentary candidates in other large cities.In the election for the Assembly of Experts, an 88-member clerical council that would, if necessary, pick the next supreme leader, the reformist and moderate list led by President Hassan Rouhani and former President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani was also making a strong showing in the Tehran area, according to reports of the preliminary results.But major hard-line figures in Tehran were still battling for seats on the clerical council, and political analysts said that the final results in both elections could leave Parliament and the council with an uneasy balance among reformists, moderates and hard-liners, in which no group has a majority.With millions of votes still to be counted, one prominent hard-liner, Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi, the spiritual leader of a group known as the Steadfastness Front, was running in 16th place in the council election in the Tehran area, barely holding on to the last open seat. Other hard-line figures were also failing to attract much support. A poor showing, if confirmed by the final results, would be a severe blow to their standing and influence.Hard-liners close to the current supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, have cautioned against allowing the nuclear deal and its expected economic benefits to weaken Iran’s resolve to resist Western influences. Thousands of reformist candidates were barred from participating by the Guardian Council, a 12-member vetting body that is dominated by hard-liners. As a result, the remaining reformists have joined forces with supporters of Mr. Rouhani’s moderate government.Updates on the counting were expected throughout Saturday, but officials warned that the release of unofficial, preliminary results could cause “tension and concerns” because of fluctuations in the figures, a ministry spokesman was quoted as saying by the state news media. Voter turnout seemed comparable with the last parliamentary elections, in 2012, when 64 percent of eligible voters came out. State news media reported that 33 million out of 54 million people had cast ballots, citing Interior Ministry officials, but the reports added that the final turnout figure was not yet available.Tehran is the constituency to watch, with 25 percent of the total population. The middle-class residents of the capital turned out in large numbers, overcrowding polling stations in their neighborhoods. Their vote is widely seen to represent a protest against the hard-liners and a desire to limit the hard-liners’ influence in the next Parliament and Assembly of Experts.The Guardian Council, which also supervises the elections, will now start the process of confirming the election results. The Interior Ministry said official results were expected on Tuesday.