https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/podcasts/the-daily/the-daily-the-view-from-kabul.html
‘The Daily’: The View From Kabul - The New York Times
The Daily,Afghanistan War (2001-14),Kabul (Afghanistan)
June 7, 2017
4484
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherAfghanistan was barely mentioned in last year’s election. But while U.S. attention has turned from the Taliban to the Islamic State, the Taliban are back, stronger than ever, and the government is on the brink of collapse.On today’s episode:A week after a bombing in Kabul that killed over 150 people, we bring you the view from the streets of Kabul and from the Pentagon.• Mujib Mashal, our senior correspondent in Afghanistan, talks about life in Kabul — the life his parents remember from their youth, the everyday anxiety he’s grown up with and how the city handles attacks.• Helene Cooper, who covers the Pentagon, describes U.S. military strategy on Afghanistan.Background reading:• The Kabul bombing in pictures.• Graphic: Taliban and ISIS control in Afghanistan.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’t enough, we can even text.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”