https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/science/echo-hunter-whale.html
An Ancient ‘Echo Hunter’ Provides Clues on Whale Evolution - The New York Times
Whales and Whaling,Ears and Hearing,Fossils,Dolphins and Porpoises,Evolution (Biology),Current Biology (Journal),Churchill  Morgan
Aug. 4, 2016
3208
In a newly-identified ancient species, scientists have found evidence that ultrasonic hearing — and use of the navigational technique of echolocation — goes back millions of years earlier in whales than previously known.A paper published Thursday in the journal Current Biology reports that a 27-million-year-old fossil from a species named Echovenator sandersi, nicknamed Echo Hunter, had features in its inner ear indicating that it could hear sounds too high-pitched for the human ear. The species is a relative of modern toothed whales like dolphins, porpoises and sperm whales.The fossilized skull of the Echo Hunter, discovered in South Carolina about 15 years ago, was unusually well-preserved, allowing researchers to analyze its facial features and the physiology of its inner ear in great detail.“We can tell a lot about how well this animal fit within whale evolution based on the cranial features, and we can also use that cranial anatomy to determine whether or not it could echolocate,” said Morgan Churchill, a postdoctoral researcher at the New York Institute of Technology and the paper’s lead author.He added that the fossil had “several features that we would see in a modern whale with echolocation.”Toothed whales, or odontocetes, use echolocation to hunt for prey, emitting a series of high-frequency chirps and navigating based on the echoes.Bats also use the technique — the fossil record suggests that they probably developed it before whales did. It has also been found, usually in less sophisticated forms, in other animals. Humans are even capable of using a crude version.By examining the Echo Hunter’s inner ear, the researchers found evidence of its ability to receive ultrasonic frequencies. A soft tissue structure called the basilar membrane, while not present in the fossil itself, was indicated by other parts of the ear to be of a size and thickness consistent with high-frequency hearing. Another part of the inner ear, a thin, bony structure within the cochlea, provided further evidence of the ability.Earlier research had shown that odontocetes had developed the ability to produce high-pitched sounds relatively early in their evolution as a group.“We had suspicions that they were echolocating but to really get down to a rough estimate of frequency, you really had to look in the inner ear in more detail and that’s where this project comes in,” said Jonathan Geisler, a professor at N.Y.I.T. and one of Dr. Churchill’s co-authors.Echo Hunter would have been about the size of a modern day harbor porpoise, and would have resembled a small dolphin, Dr. Churchill said. Its remains indicate that it lived in warm coastal waters and preyed upon small fish, using echolocation to help it forage in murky, sediment-filled waters.Mark D. Uhen, a professor at George Mason University who in 2008 named the whale family to which the new fossil belongs, said that previous research had suggested that the earliest toothed whales could echolocate, but that the new paper provided a clearer picture.“They’re sort of triangulating when and how the high-frequency part of echolocation in odontocetes first arose,” he said.Dr. Uhen, who was not involved in the study, said that the development of high-frequency hearing in whales was a nice illustration of natural selection.“I think the way evolution mostly works is that animals adopt a behavior, and then natural selection changes generation after generation so that they get better and better and better at that behavior,” he said. “Whales started feeding in the water so their feeding apparatus and their ears changed early.”