https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/04/us/michael-browns-stepfather-apologizes-for-ferguson-outburst.html
Michael Brown’s Stepfather Apologizes for Outburst in Ferguson - The New York Times
Brown  Michael (1996-2014),Head  Louis,Ferguson (Mo),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Apologies
Dec. 3, 2014
7270
The stepfather of Michael Brown apologized on Wednesday for emotional comments he made shortly after a grand jury did not indict the police officer in Ferguson, Mo., who killed his stepson.Louis Head, the stepfather, spoke one day after the St. Louis County police said they were investigating whether he had incited a riot, part of a broader look into the arson and looting that took place last week in Ferguson, a St. Louis suburb, after the decision not to indict Officer Darren Wilson in the fatal shooting.Mr. Head, who repeatedly shouted, “Burn this bitch down,” said Wednesday that he was sorry for the outburst, but that his remarks did not cause the arson and looting that ravaged Ferguson and the surrounding area.“I was so angry and full of raw emotions, as so many others were, and granted, I screamed out words that I shouldn’t have screamed in the heat of the moment,” Mr. Head said in a statement distributed by a family lawyer. “It was wrong, and I humbly apologize to all of those who read my pain and anger as a true desire for what I want for our community. It wasn’t.”Mr. Head’s angry outburst outside the Ferguson police station was captured on video and occurred shortly before protesters began to loot and then burn several businesses in and near Ferguson. Other members of the Brown family, including Mr. Brown’s mother and father, have repeatedly urged protesters to remain peaceful.St. Louis County police officials said they were investigating Mr. Head’s comments as part of a broader inquiry. “The investigation includes multiple arsons, robberies, destruction of properties and larcenies,” Officer Shawn McGuire, a department spokesman, said Tuesday. “The statements made by Louis Head are also under investigation. When the investigation is completed, our department will forward everything to the St. Louis County prosecuting attorney’s office.”Mr. Head said Wednesday that it was not fair to say he alone was the cause of the night’s destruction. “To place blame solely on me for the conditions of our community, and country, after the grand jury decision goes way too far and is as wrong as the decision itself,” the statement said.