http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/23/dining/wassail-review.html
At Wassail on the Lower East Side, in Praise of Smashed Apples - The New York Times
Restaurants,Lower East Side (Manhattan  NY),Wassail (Manhattan  NY  Bar),Wassail (NYC)
Dec. 22, 2015
5384
You can tell when restaurateurs’ choices are based on cold market calculus and when they’re driven by passion. If the passions are good ones, they can become contagious. Wassail is a Lower East Side restaurant that is deeply devoted to hard cider. After circling back again and again since it opened early this spring, I’ve fallen under cider’s spell, and Wassail’s, too.Sometimes I take over a table in the tavernlike back rooms to spend a couple of hours with food in which vegetables get to show off, and there’s always more going on than meets the eye. Sometimes I drop anchor at the long, busy bar and eat fried jalapeño-Gouda balls as if they were popcorn. Always, I drink cider.Hanging out at Wassail is like going to a planet populated by nitrogen-based life-forms; everything is at once recognizable and thoroughly different. The staff plays up the recognizable aspects. Conversations about cider at Wassail often begin with “What kinds of wines do you like?” then a suggestion for a cider with the clean rasp of a sauvignon blanc or the cow-patty funk of rustic natural wines.I could taste a different cider at Wassail every night starting now and not repeat myself until the end of March. This sounds like a wise use of the next three months when I think of how many discoveries I’ve already made: Among many others, I’ve had Hudson Valley ciders that were as round and fleshy as a Degas bather; Spanish ciders as taut and linear as a Giacometti; a spooky, briny cider introduced to seaweed; and a smoky, brooding cider aged in charred whiskey barrels.The roots of Wassail’s idiosyncratic obsessions go back to when one of the owners, Ben Sandler, went on a class trip to a zoo at age 14. He was on acid at the time, which did not prove to be a sound decision. When his mind stopped rippling, he swore off meat and illegal drugs for good.This helps explain why the menu at Wassail, which he opened early this spring with his wife, Jennifer Lim, is fully devoted to vegetables. (Ms. Lim converted after marriage and is now fully devoted to vegetables herself.) How they settled on fermented apple juice as the house intoxicant is a story that starts at the Queens Kickshaw, the couple’s first restaurant. Their original idea, back in 2011, was to sell excellent coffee and grilled cheese sandwiches to their neighbors in Astoria. Cider wasn’t even a gleam in their eyes. Apart from sugary, mass-produced stuff, neither had ever tried it.That year, though, they went to a tasting of French and American ciders. They had the kind of reaction that Mr. Sandler was probably hoping to get from LSD.“It was eye-opening, it was mind-blowing,” Ms. Lim said. “We were clued into something that was incredible and underrated and new and old at the same time.”Cider began to take over the Queens Kickshaw, but things really got going when the couple found a space for Wassail on Orchard Street. (It must have seemed like a sign that the street is named after the fruit-tree grove of an early New York family, the De Lanceys.)Wassail has a dozen ciders on tap and about 100 more in bottles. A number of those bottles are poured by the glass, thanks to trial-and-error adjustments to a carbon dioxide pump designed to keep the fizz inside uncorked Champagne. Apples, pressed and turned into brandy, pommeau and of course cider, are the foundation of most of the cocktails, including a potent and energizing wassail punch of mixed spirits and beet juice.Apples roll through Joseph Buenconsejo’s savory courses and Rebecca Eichenbaum’s desserts as well. Luckily, this is not always obvious. Little about their cooking is. What I noticed about a parsnip-apple soup wasn’t the thematic tie-in but the way caramelized onions and pecans broadened the sweet, creamy flavor of the soup.Grilled butternut squash was buried under smithereens of nuts and seeds, a kind of exploded granola that added a wonderfully sweet and crunchy dimension to the soft squash.I almost always order creamy little potatoes, their red and white skins blistered and blackened over charcoal. Mr. Buenconsejo sends them off in an Eastern European direction with a dill sauce and a lather of tangy goat butter, a treatment that’s both delicate and direct.To a salad of cucumber spears and pearls of dripping-ripe melon, Mr. Buenconsejo adds so many elements — macadamia milk, chopped macadamias, sorrel leaves, borage oil — that it almost spins out of control, but it doesn’t. One dish that got away from him paired hakurei turnips with wild rice in a dashi that was off-puttingly fishy, despite containing no actual fish.He and Ms. Eichenbaum think and cook alike; her desserts flow seamlessly out of his savory courses. She makes a pool of chocolate, softly melting like a candy bar you kept in your pocket, but then reminds you that this is a vegetable restaurant with screaming-pink buttons of beet-buttermilk sherbet and a spill of toasted amaranth grains that pop between your teeth. She can even find the sweetness in celery, churning it into a delicate granita that she scatters around a parsley-root mousse.With all due respect for her interest in the produce bin, though, my favorite Eichenbaum creation was a floral, romantic, early summer assemblage of strawberries, strawberry ice cream and a deeply enchanting rose-petal cream.The menu is supposed to progress from small plates to larger ones, but in practice there isn’t much difference. Mr. Buenconsejo’s compositions tend to stimulate your palate more than they satisfy your appetite. Hunks of lobster mushrooms given a luxurious bath in butter were served over a cauliflower-mushroom purée and a twirl of gingered noodles with a side of foamy curry sauce; I immediately wanted more. This is both a compliment and a minor complaint. The dish is listed as “ginger pasta,” but it isn’t filling the way you expect pasta to be.It’s even harder to feel as if you’ve had a whole meal on nights when the kitchen has trouble getting the food to the tables. One time the wait between courses grew so long that my companions and I were on the verge of playing a game of charades to pass the time. On other nights, service at the tables could be glancing and distracted.I tended to be happiest when I treated Wassail as a bar where the food is surprisingly interesting but cider, doing things I never expected it to do, carries the night. As a destination for exploring the nuances of the apple, Wassail is so exceptional that I don’t mind working around its occasional shortcomings as a restaurant.