http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/09/us/09sugar.html
Lives and a Georgia Community’s Anchor Are Lost - The New York Times
Explosions,Imperial Sugar Company,Sugar,Georgia
Feb. 9, 2008
8049
PORT WENTWORTH, Ga. — A day after an explosive fireball cratered the sprawling Dixie Crystal sugar refinery, the anchor of this small community for decades, families of missing workers waited in a Catholic church across the street on Friday as rescue workers tried to determine the human toll.By late afternoon, four bodies had been found and four more workers were missing, officials said. More than three dozen workers were injured, some with severe burns.Rescuers were facing ever-more-difficult conditions as they searched. Flooding in parts of the ruined, century-old plant was eight feet deep, the fire still burned and the building was no longer structurally sound. Search efforts had to stop until heavy equipment could be brought in to dismantle the wreckage, said Sgt. Michael Wilson of the Savannah-Chatham Metropolitan Police Department.At least 118 workers were inside the plant on Thursday night when the explosion, possibly caused by combustible sugar dust, shook the ground and shattered windows blocks away. Some workers dived beneath desks and tables as ceilings collapsed around them; others fled as walls vaporized.Gene Bryan, a supervisor, was crushed by a metal table, said his wife, Irene. He is now at the Joseph H. Still Burn Center at Doctors Hospital in Augusta, Ga., where 18 of the most severely burned patients were airlifted. At least 37 people were treated at hospitals.“I saw people come running out burnt, screaming, hollering, their skin hanging off them,” said Jason Perry, who hurried to the plant after the blast to search for an uncle who was working that night. “One lady hit the ground, and then the medical was on her so fast you couldn’t see what was going on.”“It was raining debris, iron, sheet metal,” he said. “Everything from the boiler to the river is gone.”Mr. Perry’s wife, Breanne Thompson, first notified the uncle’s wife of the explosion. “I said, ‘Is Ricky working?’ She said ‘Why?’ ” Ms. Thompson said, shaking her head and trailing off.The uncle turned out to be alive and helping with the rescue efforts, Mr. Perry said.“He had two or three extremely good friends that are missing in the silo,” Mr. Perry, 34, said. “He’s just really devastated. You know, your job, your life — like he said, them people are like his family.”An elderly couple nearby believed that they were under attack, as did Ashlie Myers, 21. “I thought somebody blew up the port,” Ms. Myers said. “Like a crash dummy, I was standing outside thinking I was going to die.”By Friday afternoon, the neighborhood’s usual caramel aroma had curdled into the burned smell of an unstirred saucepan.The chief executive of Imperial Sugar, which owns the plant, told employees at an afternoon meeting that the company would continue to pay employees and had not yet assessed the damage or decided the factory’s future, attendees at the meeting said.The chief executive, John C. Sheptor, said the probable cause of the explosion was sugar dust building up in storage areas, which could have been ignited by static electricity or a spark. But local fire officials said it was too early to make an official determination of the cause.Combustible dust was responsible for at least 281 explosions from 1980 to 2005 that killed a total of 119 people and injured 718 others, according to study conducted by the United States Chemical Safety Board after a rash of deadly dust incidents in 2003.According to the National Fire Protection Association, as little as  1/32 of an inch of dust over 5 percent of a room’s surface is enough to cause an explosion under the right conditions.The safety board also found that no comprehensive, federal standard exists to control the risk of dust explosions in general industry, only in grain-handling facilities.The explosion occurred in perhaps the most inaccessible part of the plant, the midsection, where silos, warehouses and sugar bagging rooms were clustered in a maze of conveyor belts and elevators. “We’re talking narrow corridors with six-  to eight-story buildings on each side,” said Greg Long, who as the Port Wentworth fire chief has 5 paid employees and 20 volunteers.Ms. Bryan, the wife of the injured supervisor, said the factory’s mechanical equipment was older than her husband’s tenure there — 28 years.Company officials did not respond to requests for comment about conditions at the plant.Firefighters from three counties aided efforts to contain the blaze, and on Friday refinery employees helped the recovery effort because they were more familiar with the plant layout than were the rescue workers.The refinery opened in 1917, and the construction materials of that era — wood tongue-and-groove ceilings and hot-burning creosote known as “fat lighter” — contributed to the ferocity of the blaze, Chief Long said.The property, which extends from the Coastal Highway to the Savannah River, resembles a Southern plantation, with a low white fence and the warehouses barely visible behind oak trees dripping with Spanish moss. The factory was aging, workers said, but was sustained by its advantageous location, with access to trains and ships.Though it is owned by Imperial Sugar, of Sugar Land, Tex., it is still referred to by its earlier name, Dixie Crystal, and Imperial still markets sugar under the Dixie Crystal brand.Virtually everyone in Port Wentworth and nearby Garden City, it seems, had friends and relatives who worked there, many for 20 years or more.“My mom and dad worked there in the ’50s,” said Herman Bryant, a neighbor of one of the victims. The victim’s name has not been released by the authorities and the family gathered at his home declined to speak with a reporter. “He knew me when I didn’t know myself,” Mr. Bryant said, holding his hand at toddler-height. “To make a long story short, he was a good, hard-working man.”