https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/06/world/middleeast/transcript-video-trump-airstrikes-syria.html
Transcript and Video: Trump Speaks About Strikes in Syria - The New York Times
Syria,Biological and Chemical Warfare,Assad  Bashar al-,Civilian Casualties,United States Defense and Military Forces,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government
April 6, 2017
2250
WASHINGTON — The following is a transcript of President Trump’s remarks on Thursday night from Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach, Fla., as transcribed by The New York Times.My fellow Americans, on Tuesday, Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad launched a horrible chemical weapons attack on innocent civilians. Using a deadly nerve agent, Assad choked out the life of innocent men, women and children. It was a slow and brutal death for so many, even beautiful babies were cruelly murdered in this very barbaric attack. No child of God should ever suffer such horror.Tonight I ordered a targeted military strike on the airfield in Syria from where the chemical attack was launched. It is in this vital, national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons. There can be no dispute that Syria used banned chemical weapons, violated its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention and ignored the urging of the U.N. Security Council.Years of previous attempts at changing Assad’s behavior have all failed and failed very dramatically. As a result, the refugee crisis continues to deepen, and the region continues to destabilize, threatening the United States and its allies.Tonight I call on all civilized nations to join us in seeking to end the slaughter and bloodshed in Syria. And also, to end terrorism of all kinds and all types.We ask for God’s wisdom as we face the challenge of our very troubled world. We pray for the lives of the wounded and for the souls of those who have passed. And we hope that as long as America stands for justice, that peace and harmony will in the end prevail.Good night, and God bless America and the entire world. Thank you.