https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/15/business/international/didi-dache-and-kuaidi-dache-chinas-top-taxi-hailing-apps-say-they-will-merge.html
China’s Top Taxi-Hailing Apps Say They Will Merge - The New York Times
China,Car Services and Livery Cabs,Didi Dache,Kuaidi Dache,Mobile Applications,Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Tencent Holdings Ltd,Alibaba Group Holding Ltd
Feb. 14, 2015
2453
HONG KONG — If you can’t beat them, join them.That seems to be the thinking behind a Saturday announcement that China’s two largest taxi-hailing mobile applications, Didi Dache and Kuaidi Dache, will complete a “strategic merger.”The unlikely tie-up comes after a year of cash-fueled competition between the two companies. With the gaming giant Tencent backing Didi Dache and the e-commerce powerhouse Alibaba supporting Kuaidi Dache, the two start-ups spent hundreds of millions on promotions in what was widely seen as a proxy war between China’s two largest Internet companies.Drawing on the massive support from Tencent and Alibaba, each app offered rebates to customers who used it, as well as large daily tips to drivers. The idea was that through the taxi apps, Tencent and Alibaba could lure users to other smartphone services.Kuaidi is connected to Alibaba’s mobile payment system, while Didi works through Tencent’s enormously popular messaging application WeChat.The merger, which is expected to be worth about $6 billion, was likely driven in part by a recognition from each side that the huge expenditures had failed to win the market. Despite investment and spending well over $1 billion in total, Didi and Kuaidi are at a stalemate, with each controlling about half of the market for taxi-hailing applications.In an unconventional move that indicated the tie-up might be more about eliminating competition than cooperating, the companies said that they would operate independently and retain their separate brands.Though Tencent and Alibaba dominate different sectors, competition between the two has grown heated over the past two years, as both have moved beyond their core competencies to woo China’s more than 600 million smartphone users to their services.Still, there is precedent for the two cooperating. Both companies are shareholders in an online insurance operation run in cooperation with Ping An Insurance.In the statement Saturday, Didi and Kuaidi said that they would release more information after the Chinese New Year holiday, which begins next week.Also likely after Chinese New Year, according to analysts, could be scrutiny of the deal by Chinese regulators. China’s antimonopoly regulator has mostly left alone the domestic players in the country’s booming Internet industry, many of which have dominant market share positions. But a major fine imposed this week on the U.S. chip maker Qualcomm may add pressure on regulators to consistently apply their scrutiny to domestic and foreign companies.The merger will create a company with a combined market share well above 90 percent. That could also be bad news for Uber, the U.S. ride-sharing app, which cooperates with the Chinese search giant Baidu in the country.But when Uber entered the Chinese market, Didi and Kuaidi were already dominant. More likely, Uber is positioning itself in China as more of a niche service, which could bring in handsome earnings even with a tiny share of the country’s enormous market.