https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/21/movies/new-directors-new-films-8-filmmakers-to-watch.html
From Brooklyn to South Africa, 8 Filmmakers to Watch - The New York Times
Movies,New Directors-New Films (Festival),Film Society of Lincoln Center,Museum of Modern Art,Diamond Island (Movie),Pendular (Movie),The Wound (Movie),Weinstein  Joshua Z,The Last of Us (Movie),Happiness University (Movie),Menashe (Movie),The Dreamed Path (Movie),Slim  Ala Eddine,Chou  Davy,Lady Macbeth (Movie),Trengove  John,Della Negra  Alain,Kinoshita  Kaori,Schanelec  Angela,Oldroyd  William,Murat  Julia
March 21, 2017
9534
New Directors/New Films continues this week with movies from around the world — ambitious and unusual selections from Cambodia, South Africa, Brazil and Brooklyn. The festival, an annual presentation of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art, is among other things a showcase of prevalent styles and influences, a series of case studies in the ways filmmakers at early stages of their careers grapple with the work of living masters and the conventions of genre. The eight highlights that follow, selected by The New York Times’s chief film critics, Manohla Dargis and A. O. Scott, generate sparks of originality and frissons of insight and surprise.MENASHE In a world apart, the recently widowed Menashe (a wonderful Menashe Lustig) is anxiously trying to get his only child back home to live with him. His family, friends and rabbi in his tight-knit Orthodox community want Menashe to remarry first, but that sits uneasily with this quietly stubborn, independent soul. As the story opens gracefully, Menashe’s struggle to balance his Orthodox religion and his own desire builds into a gentle human comedy.The director Joshua Z Weinstein, a cinematographer and documentarian making a seamless transition to fiction, shot “Menashe” entirely in Yiddish in Borough Park, Brooklyn. He has an eye for the fine-grained textures of everyday life that draw you into this cloistered world and close to Menashe, a character partly inspired by Mr. Lustig’s own life. (Manohla Dargis)THE DREAMED PATH In this oblique, deceptively quiet, beautifully constructed film by the German director Angela Schanelec, the past haunts the present and vice versa. The double-stranded story begins in Greece in 1984, with the prospect of European unification on the horizon and a couple — Theres and Kenneth — navigating what seems to be the end of their relationship. Three decades later, in Berlin, another couple, Ariane and David, are falling out of love. The two stories converge in ways that are both powerful and enigmatic.Ms. Schanelec, who is linked to the Berlin School of historically conscious, formally inventive filmmakers, is not afraid to challenge the audience. The performances in “The Dreamed Path” can seem stiff and opaque, and the narrative logic at times verges on the inscrutable. But your patience and attention are rewarded by the emotional resonance and intellectual rigor of this meditation on how the politics of division and unity are refracted in the intimate lives of ordinary people. (A. O. Scott)PENDULAR Try to imagine a movie that is at once identical to and the complete opposite of “La La Land.” The result might be something like Julia Murat’s exacting and poignant portrait of two artists in love and at work. The camera rarely leaves the cavernous industrial space where a sculptor (Rodrigo Bolzan) and a dancer-choreographer (Raquel Karro) have sex, hang out with friends and pursue their creative ambitions. The loft is divided by a masking-tape border on the floor, and the film is concerned above all with the negotiation of boundaries: between the intimacy of a couple and the autonomy of an individual; between art and eros; between labor and leisure.In some respects, “Pendular” is about the pursuit of that ever-elusive goal known as work-life balance. What makes it unusual — and, despite its slow pace, exciting — is the time and attention Ms. Murat devotes to showing her unnamed characters, in particular the female half of the couple, in the midst of actually working. While they aren’t dance numbers in the usual movie-musical sense, the scenes of a woman in concentrated motion at once transcend the story and provide its emotional core. (A. O. S.)HAPPINESS UNIVERSITY This teasing French whatsit starts out with a series of stationary, precisely framed sun-kissed images. In one shot, a man strikes a meditative pose alone in a green field. In another, a woman practices yoga, except that when she goes topsy-turvy, the camera goes upside down too. As “Happiness University” continues, this inverted point of view seems to assume meaning, particularly when an unnamed man mentions that “extraterrestrial beings came to our planet.”The directors Kaori Kinoshita and Alain Della Negra coyly avoid answering the questions they stir up: Who are these people? What’s up with E. T.? You have to do some online sleuthing to learn that the setting is a retreat for the Raëlian Movement, an actual group that believes aliens created humans. The New Directors website claims that the movie mixes fiction with documentary. (A few actors play roles.) Yet shooting in real locations with nonperformers doesn’t make this nonfiction, although here it does make for a glib amusement. (M. D.)LADY MACBETH The title evokes Shakespeare, and the source is a story by the 19th-century Russian writer Nikolai Leskov, but the more apt literary antecedents of William Oldroyd’s first feature seem, at least at first, to be Bovary, Chatterley and the Brontë sisters. Katherine (Florence Pugh) enters into a marriage that is a form of captivity, subjected to the nastiness of her husband and the rigid authority of her father-in-law, a prosperous coal-mine owner. She is stifled and stultified at every turn, but Ms. Pugh’s alert, intelligent performance signals that rebellion is imminent.It takes the form of an affair with a servant named Sebastian (Cosmo Jarvis), who becomes both Katherine’s liberator and her plaything. Mr. Oldroyd and the screenwriter, Alice Birch, weave Leskov’s tale into a barbed feminist fable of class, cruelty and sexual power that feels absolutely true to its period and uncannily attuned to the present moment. (A. O. S.)THE WOUND A traditional Xhosa initiation ritual — in which adolescent boys, after being circumcised, live in the countryside under the authority of slightly older caregivers — becomes the backdrop for a potent drama of sexual identity and divided loyalty in John Trengove’s powerful film. The protagonist is one of the caregivers, Xolani (Nakhane Touré), a factory worker in Queenstown, South Africa, for whom the ritual offers a chance to earn some extra money, to reconnect with ancestral ways and to rekindle a secret affair with an old friend.Sensitive to the nuances of culture and the blurred boundaries between homosocial masculinity and homosexual desire, “The Wound” is affecting and suspenseful even as it hits a few predictable beats. (A. O. S.)DIAMOND ISLAND Dreamily recalling the work of Wong Kar-wai (disaffected youth pursuing romance on motorbikes) and Apichatpong Weerasethakul (long shots of rural vegetation and urban architecture), Davy Chou’s first fictional feature takes place largely on a construction site in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. The city is changing rapidly. Bora (Sobon Nuon), a young man who has traveled from his rural village to work on the site, becomes the lens through which we observe the progress of modernity and its undertow of alienation and danger.There is a deep sorrow at the heart of “Diamond Island,” but it’s balanced by a sense of the buoyancy of youth and the perpetual optimism of popular culture. The world Bora and his friends inhabit may be a place of cruelty, inequality and shallow consumerism, but they are determined to find love, joy and meaning in spite of it all. (A. O. S.)THE LAST OF US At first, Ala Eddine Slim’s film seems like a grimly realistic, aggressively timely tale of migrant desperation about two men making their way across a desolate Middle Eastern landscape toward a vaguely happier prospect somewhere else. They travel on foot and in the back of a truck, and after an inevitable eruption of violence, one of them continues in a stolen boat.But then the movie swerves — guilelessly and effectively — into the realm of folklore and fable. Without a word of dialogue, and with a hypnotic, hallucinatory clarity, it leaves behind the sad details of modern life and zeros in on primordial questions of survival and human identity. It’s hard to say whether it’s about the end of the world or the recovery of Eden, but in either case, the final images are captivatingly strange in their simplicity. (A. O. S.)