https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/movies/norte-the-end-of-history-a-dostoyevskian-fable.html
‘Norte, the End of History,’ a Dostoyevskian Fable - The New York Times
Movies,Norte  the End of History (Movie),Diaz  Lav
June 19, 2014
9521
More than four hours long, filmed in expansive takes with almost no close-ups and very few camera movements, Lav Diaz’s “Norte, the End of History” is a tour de force of slow cinema. The movie, something of a sensation at Cannes last year, is not difficult or obscure — there is a clear, dramatic story involving characters who solicit both empathy and curiosity — but it does require an adjustment of the usual viewing metabolism.You can spend a lot more time binge-watching a television series, but that would mean cruising through scenes of snappy editing, on-the-nose dialogue and ready-made emotional payoffs. That approach can work on the big screen, too, but Mr. Diaz, a leading figure in the resurgent Philippine cinema, is interested in a different kind of immersion. “Norte” is based, loosely but recognizably, on Dostoyevsky’s “Crime and Punishment,” and its duration is analogous to the novel’s thickness. A simple act — the murder of a moneylender by a disaffected intellectual — becomes the center of a large and layered narrative, the focal point through which an entire world comes into view.The killing doesn’t take place right away. We need to be calmed — to absorb the rhythms of life in a coastal city in the northern Philippines — before we can be shocked. And so we spend the first few minutes in the company of the film’s Raskolnikov, a law-school dropout named Fabian (Sid Lucero). He and two of his former professors are in a cafe, slipping between English and Tagalog as they philosophize. Fabian’s ideas about good and evil are radical but also familiar, a stew of Nietzsche, existentialism, political yearning and personal frustration that he insists is not, as a teacher suggests, just another version of postmodernism.Nor is it just idle thoughts. In arguments with erstwhile classmates (including one whose girlfriend Fabian is sleeping with), he spins out wild revolutionary projects that express a deep generational malaise. His friends share his sense that their country has lost its way, but they would rather drink beer and pursue their studies than take meaningful action.The action that Fabian ends up taking is meaningless in the sense that it advances no cause or vision. But in another way, because of its consequences for Fabian and others, it is almost unbearably saturated with meaning. Even though he comes from a wealthy landowning family (something we discover much later), Fabian is in debt to Magda (Mae Paner), a bullying matriarch who dispenses small stacks of cash and holds his A.T.M. card as collateral. She also has her hooks in Eliza (Angeli Bayani) and Joaquin (Archie Alemania), a couple whose dreams of opening a modest restaurant are threatened by Joaquin’s leg injury and Magda’s heartlessness.“Norte” is partly a political fable, a smoldering, meticulous indictment of injustice and inequality. After Magda’s murder, Joaquin is sent to prison, leaving Eliza to support their children and her sister-in-law by selling vegetables from a cart. The dignity with which the two endure their fates is heartbreaking, but untouched by easy sentimentality. Mr. Diaz, patiently surveying the social and physical landscape with his beautiful, asymmetrical wide-screen compositions, makes inequality seem like an aspect of the local climate. The cruelty of laws and economic arrangements is obvious and intolerable, and yet there is no real sense that anything can be done.That conclusion would be a fatalistic reading of part of the film’s title. The end of history might mean the permanent eclipse of any notion of progress. But though it tells a harsh story to sometimes devastating effect, “Norte” is far from a document of despair. This is partly because, like any true work of art, its very existence is an exhilarating triumph over complacency, and also because Mr. Diaz’s images are too rich and lovely to create a lasting sense of gloom. But there is also, above all, an almost inexhaustible humanism at the heart of this remarkable film. It is the work of a director as fascinated by decency as by ugliness, and able to present the chaos of life in a series of pictures that are at once luminously clear and endlessly mysterious.