https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/world/asia/south-korea-reunions.html
South Korea Seeks Reunions for Families Split by Korean War - The New York Times
Arms Control and Limitation and Disarmament,International Relations,Moon Jae-in,South Korea,North Korea
July 6, 2017
58
SEOUL, South Korea — President Moon Jae-in of South Korea called on Thursday for family reunions for older Koreans separated by war six decades ago in a conciliatory move after the North’s first test of an intercontinental ballistic missile.Mr. Moon, a dogged advocate of dialogue with the North, made the proposal during an address in Germany, where he was scheduled to attend a Group of 20 summit meeting this week. In his first speech since North Korea’s missile test on Tuesday, Mr. Moon reaffirmed his policy of seeking to engage the North through negotiations even as his government vowed to join Washington in tightening sanctions against the North after its ICBM test.“What the North chose to do this time was reckless,” Mr. Moon said in a speech delivered at the Körber Foundation, a nonprofit research group based in Berlin. “It asked for punishment from the international community.”He added, “If the North doesn’t stop its nuclear pursuit, there is no other option but to enforce even stronger sanctions and pressure.”But Mr. Moon also reiterated that he was willing to meet Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, “at any time and any place” if the circumstances were right and if he saw an opportunity to reverse the military standoff on the Korean Peninsula.He said North Korea should return to the negotiating table to discuss a “complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.” If the North chooses that path, he said, great benefits wait for it: security guarantees like a peace treaty for Mr. Kim’s regime, as well as joint economic projects and other assistance that would help rebuild the North Korean economy.Mr. Moon said the need for dialogue with the North was stronger than ever, given a dangerous escalation of tensions on the peninsula in recent weeks.As one of the first steps toward easing tensions, Mr. Moon said the two Koreas should start Red Cross talks to arrange temporary reunions of relatives in the North and South who have not seen each other since they were separated during the chaos of the 1950-53 Korean War.He suggested that such reunions could be held in time for the Korean Thanksgiving holiday in October.The reunions of so-called separated families remain a highly emotional affair and are widely viewed as a barometer of relations. For more than six decades, the family members have been forbidden to exchange letters, phone calls or emails, much less meet.Only 18,800 Koreans have been allowed to participate in 19 rounds of face-to-face reunions since 1985, when the first gatherings were held. About 60,000 South Koreans are still waiting for a chance to meet their wives, siblings and parents across the border; more than half are in their 80s or older.The two Koreas last held such reunions in 2015, when fewer than 100 elderly people from each side were allowed to meet their relatives from the other side for three days.On Thursday, Mr. Moon also invited North Korea to send a delegation to the 2018 Winter Olympics, to be held in the South Korean town of Pyeongchang.There was no immediate response from North Korea.After the ICBM test, Mr. Kim said he would never put his nuclear weapons and missiles on the negotiating table unless Washington’s “hostile policy and nuclear threat” are “definitely terminated.”Since taking office in May, Mr. Moon has vowed a more active role for his government in international efforts to defuse the crisis surrounding North Korea’s pursuit of nuclear weapons. In their summit meeting in Washington last month, Mr. Moon and President Trump agreed to keep the door open for dialogue with the North while tightening sanctions and pressure.Mr. Moon’s approach met its first serious challenge when the North conducted its ICBM test. On Wednesday, South Korea and the United States conducted a rare joint missile exercise. In a continued show of force, South Korea’s warships and fighter jets fired more guide missiles in a drill on Thursday.In Warsaw on Thursday, Mr. Trump said he was weighing “some pretty severe things” to respond to the nuclear threat from North Korea, and he called on all nations to confront what he called the “global threat” from Pyongyang.“They are behaving in a very, very serious manner, and something will have to be done about it,” Mr. Trump said at a news conference.In the past, North Korea and the United States engaged in negotiations aimed at dismantling the North’s nuclear weapons program in return for economic and diplomatic benefits, including a peace treaty. Such talks produced agreements to freeze the North’s nuclear program, but those deals did not last long as both sides accused each other of breaking terms of their agreements.Some American officials doubt that North Korea will ever give up its nuclear weapons unless China, its only major trading partner, uses its economic leverage to rein in its neighbor. In South Korea, some policy makers and analysts say that the North’s nuclear program was driven by its sense of insecurity and that the country might still bargain it away for right incentives.“I will make it very clear now,” Mr. Moon said on Thursday, addressing the North Korean regime’s reported fear for survival. “We do not want North Korea to collapse, and we will not seek any form of reunification that would absorb the North into our system.”