http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/14/international/middleeast/14amman.html
Jordan Arrests Iraqi Woman in Hotel Blasts - The New York Times
IRAQ,AMMAN (JORDAN),JORDAN,AL QAEDA,AL QAEDA IN MESOPOTAMIA,RADISSON SAS HOTEL,RISHAWI  SAJIDA MUBARAK AL-,ZARQAWI  ABU MUSAB AL-,RECORDINGS (VIDEO),BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES,TERRORISM
Nov. 14, 2005
2838
AMMAN, Jordan, Nov. 13 - Jordanian security officials on Sunday announced the arrest of an Iraqi woman they said was closely linked to the terrorist leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi as a fourth bomber in the Amman hotel attacks. They also broadcast a taped confession showing her wearing a translucent explosive belt packed with ball bearings, in which she described how she had tried unsuccessfully to blow herself up.Looking tired and nervous in a head scarf and long black coat partly concealing the bomb belt, the woman, who identified herself as Sajida Mubarak al-Rishawi, 35, was shown recounting the moments when she and her Iraqi husband, whom she described as another member of the suicide squad and who killed himself in the bombing, entered a ballroom in the Radisson Hotel last Wednesday."He took one end and I took another," she said. "The hotel had a wedding in it and there were women and children. My husband executed the attack. I tried to detonate but it failed. People began to run, and I ran out with them."Fifty-seven people died at the Radisson, Days Inn and Grand Hyatt hotels in one of the worst terrorist attacks in Jordan.Marwan Muashar, Jordan's deputy prime minister, said Ms. Rishawi is the sister of Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi, a senior aide to Mr. Zarqawi who was killed last year by American forces in the restive Iraqi city of Falluja.Her confession included some details of how the plot was organized and was seen here as likely to yield significant intelligence into the methods and plans of Mr. Zarqawi's group, Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, which took responsibility for the Amman blasts.The case has raised the possibility that Mr. Zarqawi, a Jordanian fugitive who has become the most wanted terrorist leader in Iraq, is adjusting his tactics in Jordan, where he has tried -- and failed, according to Jordan security officials -- to orchestrate more than 150 attacks against government targets in the past few years.Now, these officials say, he appears out of frustration to be shifting to more vulnerable civilian targets here like hotels, where security has been less stringent.While the videotaped confession of Ms. Rishawi appeared to represent a breakthrough and was greeted enthusiastically by many Jordanians, much about the confession remained undisclosed.Jordanian officials would not say when or where she was arrested, when the tape was made, and whether she was told to wear the bomb belt by her interrogators.It is unclear how much of the tape, which runs less than five minutes, was edited. It is also unclear to what extent, or indeed whether, Ms. Rishawi had been coerced into making the confession.Jordanian officials would not say where they had detained Ms. Rishawi or explain the precise charges against her.News of the arrest and broadcast, which were clearly aimed at showing progress in the investigation, also appeared to reflect the Jordanian government's efforts to reinforce its image of security following the bombings. Up until now, Jordan had been considered one of the Middle East's most stable and safe countries.On Sunday, King Abdullah, speaking to CNN, stressed that he believed the ultimate targets of the bombers were Jordanians, even though the three hotel chains are Western and some of the victims were foreigners."Those that know Jordan, the hotels, especially the Days Inn, is a favorite place for Jordanians and Iraqis," Abdullah said. "These suicide bombers actually went and aimed at Jordanian targets. The Radisson Hotel was a Jordanian wedding with Jordanians and Palestinians, where innocent people were killed. So this was nothing to do with the West. This targeted Jordanian citizens, innocent men, women and children."The other two bombers, also Iraqis, were identified as Rawad Jassem Muhammad Abed, 23, and Safaa Muhammad Ali, 23. The three men set off their belts almost simultaneously at the Radisson Hotel, the Grand Hyatt Hotel and the Days Inn on Wednesday night.On the confession tape, Ms. Rishawi said she and her husband, Ali Hussein al-Shumari, 35, left Ramadi, Iraq, for Jordan on Nov. 5 with explosives belts specifically to bomb hotels in Amman. They rented an apartment in an Amman neighborhood earlier in the week, rented a car and set out for the Radisson last Wednesday evening.An official with Jordan's intelligence services, who spoke on condition that he not be identified by name because he was not authorized to do so, said Sunday that Ms. Rishawi had been spotted on a hotel security camera and police had been searching for her for several days.The presence of a female bomber was announced in an Internet posting claiming responsibility for the attacks by Mr. Zarqawi's group, but the posting said that she had died in the bombings.Security men reconstructed the bodies of the suicide bombers and said they had made positive identifications using DNA analysis.The arrest of Ms. Rishawi brought a sense of relief -- even car-honking celebrations -- on Amman streets, as demonstrations against the attacks continued for the fourth day. Security officials said Sunday that they were still on the lookout for 10 rental cars and several cars with Iraqi plates believed to be tied to the attacks.Jordanian security officials said Sunday that they had found no evidence that the bombers had been assisted by Jordanians here. The officials also said they had found no evidence of contact between the bombers and Mr. Zarqawi after they had crossed into Jordan.