https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/14/business/dealbook/supreme-court-ruling-draws-a-vague-line-in-bankruptcy-cases.html
Supreme Court Ruling Draws a Vague Line in Bankruptcy Cases - The New York Times
Decisions and Verdicts,Supreme Court (US),Breyer  Stephen G,Bankruptcies
April 14, 2017
4536
A few weeks back, the Supreme Court decided Czyzewski v. Jevic Holding Corporation. I had previously noted that the case had the potential to greatly disrupt modern Chapter 11 practice.Bankruptcy lawyers breathed a sigh of relief when Justice Stephen G. Breyer issued a relatively narrow opinion. But after a few weeks of reflection, I wonder if he didn’t lay the groundwork for years of future litigation.The Supreme Court held that when a bankruptcy court orders a Chapter 11 case dismissed, it can’t also order the distribution of the debtor’s assets in a way that contradicts the order of payment in a bankruptcy liquidation. This is the old “absolute priority rule,” of bankruptcy lore and legend.The court went out of its way to avoid saying anything definitive about all the other times priority is violated in a Chapter 11 case. That is how the court avoided doing any damage to current Chapter 11 practice — beyond the obvious point of prohibiting nonconforming dismissals.In reaching this conclusion, Justice Breyer distinguishes most of the other priority violations as interim distributions, which might plausibly make most creditors better off in the long run. He contrasts these with final distributions, like those at work in Jevic, that decide creditors’ recovery rights once and for all.Of course, this line is not always obvious. In the automotive cases, for example, the assets of General Motors and Chrysler were sold to newly formed buyers. The sale process itself was interim, in that the bankruptcy estates of both companies still had to formulate a plan to distribute the sale proceeds, but the outcome of that process was largely set once the sale closed. Nonetheless, Justice Breyer suggests these two sales were an example of permissible interim distributions.So it seems that the proponents of the “deal” in Jevic might have achieved something quite near the result they desired with a little creativity.What if the company had distributed the sale proceeds to the lenders, as happened in this case, without going any further? Presumably the other creditors would have spent some time considering their options, and converted the case to a Chapter 7 liquidation or dismissed it.Alternatively, the parties might have entered into a settlement, as they did here, but simply avoided the one provision that seemed to get everyone riled up: namely, so long as the settlement did not expressly pay junior creditors when senior ones were still unpaid, no problem.Perhaps the parties would not have agreed to these alternative arrangements— the creditors committee no doubt thought they had done pretty well by their constituents to get even a token payment to general unsecured creditors.In the end, however, it is the bankruptcy courts that are going to have to deal with all the creditors’ attempts to find out where exactly Justice Breyer’s interim-final distribution line really is.