http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/09/us/walter-scott-settlement-reached-in-south-carolina-police-shooting-case.html
Walter Scott Family Reaches a $6.5 Million Settlement for South Carolina Police Shooting Case - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,North Charleston (SC),Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Slager  Michael T (1981- ),Blacks,Suits and Litigation (Civil),South Carolina
Oct. 8, 2015
2348
The family of Walter L. Scott, the African-American man who was fatally shot by a white police officer in North Charleston, S.C., reached a $6.5 million settlement with the city Thursday that precludes Mr. Scott’s family from bringing civil claims over his death.The North Charleston City Council voted to authorize the settlement at its meeting Thursday night, according to lawyers for the Scott family and a statement issued by the city.A passer-by’s video of the April 4 killing appears to show the officer shooting Mr. Scott in the back while he was running away. The shooting sparked a national furor and became part of a broad and passionate conversation about American policing methods and the fate of African-Americans at the hands of some officers.The police officer, Michael T. Slager, was fired shortly after the shooting. He has been jailed since April 7. In June, he was indicted by a grand jury on a murder charge. Mr. Slager has not been arraigned, but Andy Savage, his lawyer, said that Mr. Slager denied any culpability for the killing.A judge denied Mr. Slager bond in September. The local prosecutor, Scarlett A. Wilson, has said she will not seek the death penalty.“I am glad the city and the family were able to reach a settlement without the necessity of a lawsuit,” Mayor Keith Summey said in the news release. “As mayor, I was directly in touch with the Scott family immediately after the tragedy occurred and offered our heartfelt condolences for their loss. We have supported the family and are extremely sorry for their loss.”Before the shooting, Mr. Slager pulled over Mr. Scott for driving with a broken taillight. Mr. Scott initially ran from the officer because, his family has said, he had outstanding child-support obligations and did not want to be arrested. Mr. Slager followed Mr. Scott and caught up with him, after which the two men apparently fought over the officer’s Taser.After the altercation, Mr. Scott ran again, and Mr. Slager fired eight shots in his direction.After Mr. Scott’s death, Mr. Slager was named in at least two lawsuits involving other episodes during his tenure as a North Charleston police officer. Those cases are pending.The North Charleston police chief, Eddie Driggers, said in April that the episode captured on video had “sickened” him, and he said the department’s procedures had not been followed.Anthony Scott, Mr. Scott’s brother, said that the settlement would help four children who lost their father.“They’ll be taken care of financially for the rest of their life,” he said. “And that’s very important.”