https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/05/opinion/sunday/t-m-luhrmann-the-appeal-of-christian-piety.html
The Appeal of Christian Piety - The New York Times
Evangelical Movement,Books and Literature,DeRogatis  Amy (1965- ),Sex,Women and Girls,Christians and Christianity,Abstinence (Sexual),Muslims and Islam,Saving Sex: Sexuality and Salvation in American Evangelicalism (Book),Saving Sex (Book)
July 4, 2015
8820
I FOLLOW a lovely blog called “There Is a River,” written by a young Christian evangelical named Christie Purifoy, whom I knew when we both lived in Chicago. She lives now in an old brick farmhouse in southeastern Pennsylvania. She writes about the changes in the seasons: the sudden spring flowering of her big magnolia, the last of the tomatoes. What I find moving about her words is how hard she works to adapt to the imperfections of the world, and the way she interprets disappointment as compost: “Some beginnings are brown. There is nothing fresh or new about them.” This insistent recasting of the negative as positive, of suffering as love, marks the writing, to my mind, as Christian.A recent book on evangelical sexuality gives this Christian insistence on the reinterpretation of experience a particular bite. “Saving Sex: Sexuality and Salvation in American Evangelicalism,” by Amy DeRogatis, an associate professor of religion and American culture at Michigan State University, describes the surprisingly rich and briskly selling literature of evangelical sex manuals.Some of these manuals call on women to stay pure until marriage. (A 2008 documentary, “Virgin Daughters,” claimed that one in six girls in America takes a purity pledge.) They describe a world in which young girls in evening gowns take their fathers as their date to purity balls, and publicly commit to remaining virgins until they find a “gallant and godly husband” of whom their fathers approve.The authors of what Ms. DeRogatis calls “the princess purity books” present as empowering a young woman’s decision to leave all decisions in the hands of others. One of the best known of these books is Sarah Mally’s “Before You Meet Prince Charming: A Guide to Radiant Purity.” In it, Ms. Mally remarks: “I don’t have to date, flirt or be searching for a husband. The Lord is more than able to arrange my marriage without my help.”What Ms. DeRogatis calls the “helpmeet” literature, by contrast, celebrates sex with one’s husband — but does not portray that husband as a fairy-tale prince. In fact, the books admit that sometimes he is loathsome. But they insist that God has given the husband the job of leading the family and that it is the wife’s role to accept this. “It is far better that the job be done poorly by your husband,” one book explains (in bold), “than it be done well by you.” When a wife accepts her man as he is, the books say, she feels God’s grace. She has become a warrior wife.This kind of language infuriates secular observers, who say these ideas are not only antiquated but can even be harmful.Over half of young people who made virginity pledges in 1995-96 had broken them by 2001, according to one study, which also found that pledgers were no more likely to delay sex than nonpledgers. Moreover, young people who make these pledges are sometimes at higher risk of sexually transmitted diseases because they have not planned for having sex. Add to that the fact that this literature portrays feminism as a menace to godly families, and you can see why secular observers see nothing here that empowers women.And yet there is an appeal in this kind of piety. The act of submission, when consciously chosen, can feel empowering, and even politically empowering. Anthropologists have seen these dynamics among Muslim women. In the 1990s, when young women in Java increasingly chose to wear veils, despite the harassment and mockery of others, the anthropologist Suzanne A. Brenner set out to understand why. She found that they saw themselves as activists: as people who were creating a new social order, free of the corruption of the West. They saw themselves as modern but godly. Choosing to submit to Islamic law made them feel powerful, independent and effective. It gave them a sense of control.The anthropologist Saba Mahmood made a similar argument about newly observant women in Cairo. Their decision to wear the veil and become more observant, in a religion in which some women appeared to be subordinate, made them feel that they were involved with creating a new society, transforming it from within.It may look to secular readers as if these women who think they are being empowered are merely deluded. But that’s not how they understand themselves.Just as some newly observant Muslims see themselves as political activists, the evangelical women who buy the Christian sex manuals are also led to see themselves as political activists. Ms. DeRogatis writes: “Young people are told that they are standing up for Christ and resisting America’s sexualized culture by claiming virginity as a countercultural, radical stance.” Their choice to submit is a choice to create a new social order from within.In May, the Pew Research Center released a study showing that the Christian share of the population has declined, and that the decline came from Protestant mainstream churches and Catholicism — not evangelicalism. Evangelical churches are gaining converts more rapidly than they are losing any who grew up in the tradition. I’ve always thought that the primary appeal of these churches was the vivid immediacy of their God. The sex manuals remind us that another factor is the sense of being a countercultural activist who sets out to remake the world.That’s heady stuff. The mainstream churches offer nothing like this edgy rebellion, this nose-thumbing at ordinary expectations. Paradoxically, it may be this invitation that makes what seems like passivity feel so effective.