https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/21/opinion/the-violent-legacy-of-chicagos-police.html
The Violent Legacy of Chicago’s Police  - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Editorials,Blacks,McDonald  Laquan (d 2014),Burge  Jon,Emanuel  Rahm,Chicago (Ill),Reparations
April 21, 2015
7309
Rahm Emanuel inherited a Police Department with a history of serious misconduct when he became mayor of Chicago four years ago. Mr. Emanuel tried to break with the past on Wednesday when he co-sponsored a proposal in City Council that would provide reparations to scores of people who were systematically tortured by the police during the 1970s and ’80s under the infamous police commander Jon Burge.On the same day, in a separate case that is still fresh in the public’s mind, the Council awarded $5 million to the family of Laquan McDonald, a black teenager who was shot 16 times by a police officer in October. The shooting spawned a federal investigation, rattled public trust and raised troubling accusations of a police cover-up. The Council’s decision to pay was made before a lawsuit was filed, but this cannot be the end of the case. The city needs to release a police dash-cam video of the shooting that it has withheld on grounds that releasing it might interfere with the federal investigation.The shooting of Mr. McDonald, who was 17, brought back bitter memories of the days when Mayor Richard J. Daley and the Police Department ruled Chicago with an iron hand. Between 1972 and 1991, lawyers say, about 120 mainly African-American men were picked up by Mr. Burge’s “midnight crew,” shocked with cattle prods, beaten with telephone books and suffocated with plastic bags until they confessed to crimes. Mr. Burge was ultimately fired in 1993 after he was linked to a torture case. Statutes of limitation protected him from charges of abuse, but, in 2010, he was sentenced to four and a half years in prison for perjury and obstruction of justice.The reparations plan will provide substance abuse treatment, counseling and other services to Burge victims and their immediate family members, as well as free tuition at city colleges. The plan also includes a formal City Council apology and a permanent memorial recognizing the victims. The case will be included in eighth and 10th grade history classes in city public schools. In addition, a $5.5 million fund will be created to provide financial reparations to individuals with a credible claim.Settlements like these are necessary and justified, but they are also a serious drain on Chicago’s precarious finances at a time when the city is closing schools and mental health clinics. According to a 2014 study by the city’s Better Government Association, the government has spent more than $500 million on claims related to police misconduct in the last decade alone.These losses underscore the failings of a Police Department that cannot seem to shake its lamentable past and, to this day, is poorly trained, poorly managed and ruled by an ingrained culture of hair-trigger violence. Over the last seven years, Chicago police have killed more than 120 people. Mr. Emanuel described the reparations plan as a way to bring a dark chapter of the city’s history to a close. But, even as he spoke, federal and state investigators were combing the city for information about the McDonald shooting.Last October, a spokesman for the police union said that officers shot the teenager because he refused drop a knife he was carrying. Witnesses have said that he was moving away from the officers and was shot while lying on the ground.A lawyer for the family who had viewed a police video taken at the scene told the Chicago Sun-Times columnist Mary Mitchell last week that Mr. McDonald was not menacing the officers or running when he was shot and that the officer continued to fire once the young man had fallen. He further asserted that 86 minutes of surveillance video taken by security cameras at a Burger King restaurant near the scene of the shooting had gone missing and that Chicago detectives had visited the restaurant.The city has declined to release the police video because of the continuing investigation. But that’s a flimsy excuse. The public deserves to see this evidence, and the longer the delay the greater the suspicion against a department that has a history of violating the public’s trust.