http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/05/world/asia/05prexy.html
In Australia, Bush Finds an Enthusiastic Supporter - The New York Times
Australia,United States International Relations,Iraq,United States Armament and Defense
Sept. 5, 2007
568
SYDNEY, Australia, Wednesday,  Sept. 5 — As lawmakers in Washington debate the future of his troop buildup in Iraq, President Bush flew halfway around the world and wound up with an endorsement from at least one leader who supports his policy: John Howard, the prime minister of Australia.“We believe that progress is being made in Iraq, difficult though it is,” Mr. Howard declared at a news conference with the president here, where the two are to attend an economic summit meeting of Asian nations later this week. “And we do not believe this is the time to be setting any proposals for a scaling down of Australian forces.”The meeting is supposed to focus on trade and climate change. But, with the president fresh off his surprise trip to Anbar Province, where he suggested he would draw down troops, he quickly turned the topic to Iraq, using his introductory remarks at the news conference to deliver what amounted to a lengthy soliloquy in defense of his policy.“Is it perfect?” he asked, referring to the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, whose efforts at national reconciliation have been deemed a failure by congressional Democrats. “Absolutely not. Is there more work to be done? You bet there is.”After saying the Iraqi Parliament had passed 60 laws, the president took a dig at the Democratic-controlled Congress, adding, “It’s more than our legislature passed.”Australia, which has more than 1,500 troops in Iraq,  is among the major members of what Mr. Bush once called “the coalition of the willing.” As he welcomed Mr. Bush on Wednesday, Mr. Howard declared, “The United States president is always welcome in our country.”But Mr. Bush may not have felt especially welcome as he arrived in Sydney, where protesters calling themselves the Stop Bush Coalition are planning a major protest for Saturday, and the city is buttoned down like a fortress. Many Sydneysiders, as the city’s residents call themselves, have fled town for the week, and the city’s major landmarks, like its famed opera house, are nearly impossible to get to.When an Australian journalist raised the issue of the heightened security with Mr. Bush, the president took the unusual step of apologizing.“Look, I don’t want to come to a community and have them say, what a pain it is to have the American president,” he said, adding, “I apologize to the Australian people if I’ve caused this inconvenience.”The reporter replied that he wasn’t blaming Mr. Bush personally. “I guess I must be feeling pretty guilty,” Mr. Bush said.When he meets with a foreign leader who has supported the war, Mr. Bush typically uses the occasion to deliver a public thank you. Rarely does a foreign leader so enthusiastically embrace the Iraq cause in return.Declaring that “our commitment to Iraq remains,” Mr. Howard used language almost identical to that of Mr. Bush when he said  troop withdrawals would be “not based on any calendar, but based on conditions on the ground.”But just as Tony Blair, the former British prime minister, paid a political price for supporting the war, so too has Mr. Howard, and his appearance with Mr. Bush will likely do him little political good as he fights a tough re-election challenge from Kevin Rudd, the Labor Party candidate and a staunch opponent of the war.Mr. Bush will meet with Mr. Rudd on Thursday, but he has made little secret of whom he favors in the Australian race. “John Howard has been behind in the polls before and he’s won,” the president told an Australian journalist, David Speers, in an interview in Washington last week. Of Mr. Rudd, he said, “He doesn’t know me, and I don’t know him, and so I look forward to sharing my views.”The economic summit meeting draws together leaders of 21 nations, including China, Japan, Russia and South Korea, a mix that last year put intense focus on the negotiations to pressure North Korea into abandoning its nuclear weapons program. With the North agreeing to shut down its main nuclear reactor, Mr. Bush said those efforts are “making good progress.”But the lead negotiator with North Korea, Christopher R. Hill, said here that North Korea had not been taken off the list of countries the United States considers state sponsors of terrorism, despite North Korean claims to the contrary.“No, they haven’t been taken off the terrorism list,” Mr. Hill said, speaking to reporters after he arrived here late Tuesday night, though he went on to say that if the North moves forward in good faith, the United States would consider a status change.