https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/10/opinion/the-vanishing-pangolin.html
The Vanishing Pangolin - The New York Times
Pangolins,Endangered and Extinct Species,Poaching (Wildlife)
April 9, 2015
9875
In the vast, lucrative and rapidly spreading menace of wildlife trafficking, it is usually the rhinoceros horn and the elephant ivory that get the most attention — properly so, given the cruel destruction of those magnificent animals to satisfy the vanity and medical illusions of humans. But the problem goes far beyond the fates of those two poster animals; huge numbers of wild creatures that most of the world has never even heard of are threatened with extinction by illegal trade as exotic pets or for their meat, shells, skins and purported medicinal properties.Consider the pangolin, whose sad plight was chronicled last month in The Times. This small denizen of the tropics hardly ranks among the royalty, or even nobility, of the wilderness. A solitary, nearsighted and largely nocturnal mammal with a taste for ants and termites, the pangolin is covered with large scales and rolls up into a giant artichoke-like ball when threatened. Alas, the flesh of the pangolin is regarded as a delicacy in parts of China, and its scales are used in folk medicine to treat most anything that ails you.As a result, it is among the most trafficked animals in the world — all eight varieties are included on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of Threatened Species. A single pangolin can fetch $1,000 on the Asian market. That kind of money is an irresistible temptation for poor people to poach or trap animals, especially in countries like Vietnam where enforcement of laws against wildlife trafficking is weak and penalties are paltry.The problem is not with lack of laws or education. There are plenty of international conventions, coalitions and nongovernmental organizations dedicated to combating wildlife trafficking. But enforcement is universally weak and the loopholes plentiful, so traffickers in China, the United States, Europe and Japan — the major culprits — have a 90 percent chance of not getting caught. A decade or so ago, saving the pangolin would have been a challenge of awareness and conservation. Today it is a battle against a rapidly expanding demand for wild animals — dead and alive — that is spawning a global criminal network and threatening innumerable species with annihilation.