https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/us/politics/mike-pence-tie-break-betsy-devos.html
Mike Pence’s Vote on a Cabinet Nominee Would Be Historic - The New York Times
Senate,DeVos  Elizabeth (1958- ),Pence  Mike,Vice Presidents and Vice Presidency (US)
Feb. 7, 2017
6796
WASHINGTON — On Tuesday, call him the tiebreaker.A vice president does not have much on his plate, as far as constitutional responsibilities go. He presides over the official count of electoral votes once, possibly twice, and, in the meantime, he waits in the wings in case the president becomes incapacitated.But Vice President Mike Pence is expected to demonstrate the position’s unique duty, and in historic fashion: In his capacity as president of the Senate, he is expected to cast the deciding vote to confirm Betsy DeVos as President Trump’s education secretary — the first time a vice president has had to resolve a tie on a cabinet nomination in the nation’s history.Allowed to vote only when the Senate is deadlocked, vice presidents have a long history of settling disputes. John Adams, for instance, cast votes that helped determine the location of the United States capital and averted war with Britain.Ahead of Mr. Pence’s potential vote, here is a look back at a few crucial moments in modern vice-presidential tiebreaking.Dick Cheney broke the last tie, according to the secretary of the Senate. On March 13, 2008, he broke a 50-50 split on an early procedural vote as Congress worked on a federal budget.Parachuting in from the campaign trail, three presidential contenders were on hand to cast their own votes that day: Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona; Hillary Clinton, Democrat of New York; and Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois.In his eight years as vice president during the Obama administration, Joseph R. Biden Jr. never settled a deadlocked vote, although there was speculation at one point that he would be called in to help confirm Loretta Lynch as attorney general when her nomination stalled in 2015. (She was ultimately confirmed 56 to 43.)Mr. Cheney cast eight tiebreaking votes in total — more than any other vice president since Richard M. Nixon’s stint as No. 2. Mr. Cheney’s first two opportunities came less than three months into George W. Bush’s presidency.On April 3, 2001, Mr. Cheney settled his first tie, beating back a Democratic plan to reduce the president’s proposed tax cuts to cover the cost of Medicare prescription drug coverage.It is perhaps more remarkable, though, that Mr. Cheney did not have more ties to break: When he was sworn in, the Senate was evenly split, with 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans, meaning any party-line vote could have necessitated a visit from the vice president.The Senate currently has 52 Republicans, 46 Democrats and two independents (who choose to caucus — and frequently vote — with the Democrats).While these votes are often seen as a dutiful nod to the president, there have been times when they could be seen as a boon to the vice president, too.In May 1999, Al Gore cast his last of four tiebreaking votes, helping pass an amendment to require background checks on all sales of firearms at gun shows.At the time, Mr. Gore was in the midst of his ill-fated run for president. In the final weeks of the race, he cited that vote in a 60-second campaign ad, part of a biographical spot intended to highlight his principled stances on issues important to working families.“As vice president, he defied the gun lobby and cast the tiebreaking vote to keep guns away from criminals,” the announcer intoned.It has been more than three decades since the last vice-presidential tiebreaker on a presidential nomination — settling a deadlock over a nominee who, like Ms. DeVos, had become the subject of a bitter political fight.In 1986, President Ronald Reagan appointed Daniel A. Manion, a lawyer and former Indiana legislator who had little experience in federal courts and whose father was a founder of the far-right John Birch Society, to a federal appellate court.The nomination quickly became a tense tug of war between Reagan and Senate Democrats, who argued Mr. Manion was deeply unqualified. On July 23, 1986, Vice President George Bush put the matter to rest, siding with Republicans.“We won by one vote,” Reagan said afterward. “A little lynch mob had organized resistance against his nomination.”