https://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/13/sports/13elk.html
Stalking the Majestic Tule Elk With an Eye on the Record Book - The New York Times
Hunting and Trapping,Elk,Archery,Pope and Young Club
Sept. 12, 2009
8835
Releasing across a marshland expanse of man-high bulrush three-quarters the length of a football field, an elite hunter has felled a trophy elk worthy of consideration for the archery record books, according to an outfitter and wildlife officials.The beast, a male of the tule strain endemic to the Central Valley of California, was slain last month at the culmination of an eight-day expedition in the Grizzly Island Wildlife Area, a 15,300-acre preserve about 50 miles northeast of San Francisco. The breadth of his antler rack appeared to match the record.“It’s right there; it might make it, it might not,” said Cary Jellison, an outfitter based in Auburn, Calif., after taking a rough measurement on the bed of his pickup truck. “It’s a heck of a bull any way you look at it, y’know?”Once considered a vanishing subspecies of Roosevelt elk, the tule (pronounced TOO-lee) have been nurtured to revival, numbering about 4,000 in 22 herds. Also known as dwarf elk, smaller and with lighter fur than other variants of the species, they are creatures of great magnificence, caution and sense of smell. Last year, they became so plentiful as to merit a distinct category in the annals of the Pope and Young Club, a conservation outfit considered the arbiter of bow hunting records. To gain inclusion, archers must adhere to an ethical code known as Fair Chase, which bans the use of power vehicles, spotlights and other modern contrivances.The club’s records have proved sturdy. Some date to the mid-1960s. Aside from the self-imposed restrictions of sportsmanlike hunting, other obstacles include the costs of travel, gear and guides. The likes of Coues deer, polar bears and tule elk do not hang around the counter at Starbucks.The largest known tule, a specimen with compiled antler measurements of 312  5/8 inches, was slain by Audrey Goodnight in 1990. At the time, it was classified by the club as a Roosevelt elk.In 2006, a hunter from California submitted a challenger, but a panel of nine judges at the club’s biennial convention ruled his animal short of the record by about an inch.Last year, the first season since the establishment of the tule elk category, more than 500 hunters applied for a chance at the record book. California charges nonresidents $1,162.50 for the chance to take an elk, distributing tags through property owners and conservation groups. Of the 329 hunters who received tags, none brought home an animal to rival Goodnight’s. Hers became the mark to beat.As the 2009 season approached, Walter J. Palmer, a dentist in his late 40s from Eden Prairie, Minn., paid $45,000 for a tag at an auction to finance preservation of the elk habitat. Palmer, said to be capable of skewering a playing card from 100 yards with his compound bow, has cultivated a purist’s reputation for his disinclination to carry firearms as backup. Learning to shoot at age 5, he has slain all but one of the animals recognized by Pope and Young.“I don’t have a golf game,” Palmer said.As the season began, Palmer was completing a year of probation. In 2008, court records show, he pleaded guilty to making a false statement to federal wildlife officials concerning the exact location of the slaying of a black bear during a guided hunt in Wisconsin. In his sentencing order, prosecutors had specifically agreed that the “defendant shall be permitted to possess archery equipment for lawful sporting purposes.”On June 3, Jellison started scouting Suisun Marsh. About 100 tule elk, counting bulls and spikes, inhabit Grizzly Island, roaming at times across its sloughs and rivers to private property out of bounds for hunters. The bulls can weigh more than 800 pounds and run 45 miles per hour.Jellison identified a handsome prospect, underweight and in velvet. He lost sight of the animal until late July, when it reappeared fully grown, with distinctive points on its brow tines.“The devil bull,” Jellison said.On Aug. 1, Palmer began his hunt in the company of Jellison, a second guide, Brent Sinclair, and the coordinator of the state elk and pronghorn preservation program, Joe Hobbs. The first day, the men observed their target. The next two days passed without a sighting, by Jellison’s account.As the cows on the island neared their rut, other bulls arrived, none as large as the one called the devil. A mating ritual seemed imminent, a showdown bound to leave antlers broken and scarred.After a week of observation, the hunters put a stalk on the devil bull. Jellison carried his binoculars atop a rise, guiding the others by hand signal. Sinclair set a decoy and sounded a call. Palmer parted the towering saltgrass and pickleweed downwind of the elk. Disturbed, the cows charged and the bull followed. Palmer had no angle. Only an arrow launched broadside or quartered away can make a clean kill, and Palmer was facing the bull straight on.“I thought they were going to get run over,” Jellison said.Avoiding that fate, Palmer found his mark from 75 yards. The elk fell dead. Its antlers equaled the Goodnight elk to an eighth of an inch.“It’s a wonderful bull,” Palmer said. “I cannot tell you it’s a new world record. I can say it’s going to be close.”After a 60-day drying period, the horns of the great devil bull may well shrivel below record size. No official measurement can be taken until Oct. 8.“Of course, it is a personal achievement to harvest any big-game animal with a bow and arrow,” said Glen Hisey, the curator of the Pope and Young records program. “It is a way of honoring that animal for all time.”