https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/03/nyregion/trump-malcolm-turnbull-australia-new-york.html
Trump and Turnbull in New York: A Chance to Make U.S.-Australia Ties Shipshape - The New York Times
Australia,New York City,Turnbull  Malcolm (1954- ),Trump  Donald J,United States International Relations
May 3, 2017
8605
Among the many people President Trump has antagonized during his brief yet turbulent time in office, few were quite as surprised to receive his ire as the Australians. Though the United States and Australia have long been allied in war and trade, Mr. Trump abruptly ended a phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in late January after the Australian leader urged him to honor an agreement to accept 1,250 refugees from an Australian detention center.Things only soured further when Mr. Trump took to Twitter to excoriate the agreement. “I will study this dumb deal!” he declared in a post a few days later.On Thursday, the president will have a chance for reconciliation when he boards the hangar deck of the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum for a dinner commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which United States and Australian naval and air forces fought Japan during World War II. The conflict is often remembered as “the battle that saved Australia.”“There’s a deep and broad connection between the two countries that most people don’t know enough about,” said John Berry, a former United States ambassador to Australia and the president of the American Australian Association, which is hosting the event. “I’m glad we’re taking a moment to really celebrate that.”The American Australian Association, a little-known yet industrious nonprofit organization with offices in the Financial District of Manhattan, has been working for decades to strengthen relations between the countries. Founded in 1948 by the journalist Keith Murdoch, the association was intended to spark American governmental and business interests in Australia after World War II. Since then, the scope of its ambitions has expanded to include cultural, educational and philanthropic activity. Its Education Fund, for example, has financed the participation of more than 200 fellows in postgraduate study between Australia and the United States since 2002.The dinner on Thursday will raise money to start a new fund for veterans. It will also be the first time an American president has met with the association, Mr. Berry said, and the first in-person encounter between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull.Perhaps nowhere is that burgeoning cultural kinship more apparent than New York, which has experienced a surge of Australian immigration in recent years. The Australian Consulate now estimates that there are approximately 20,000 Australians in New York; a decade ago, a census survey estimated that there were fewer than 6,000.With those immigrants has come a swell of Australian culture in a city already rich with international life. New Yorkers have taken notice. In 2014, the website Gothamist posted an article asking, “What’s the Deal With All These Australians in NYC?” The upswing, as it noted, can be attributed in part to the E-3 program, a class of visa introduced under President George W. Bush in 2005 exclusively for Australians that is easier and less expensive to obtain than the conventional H-1B work visa. Every year, more than 10,000 E-3 visas are reserved for Australian nationals.“Australians focus not only on work but on vacation and quality of life, so when they come it’s for six weeks or six months, not just six days like most tourists,” Mr. Berry said. “And if you look around the city, you’re starting to see their impact.”A healthy collection of Australian bars, restaurants, and clothing stores have taken root in a stretch of NoLIta, around Mulberry Street, that some people call Little Australia. Now, alongside the typical Manhattan fare, Australians can find comfort in the familiar taste of flat whites and chants of “Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi!” As time has passed, more and more longtime New Yorkers have also begun to better understand their antipodal counterparts.“Back when we first got here, everyone used to think we were all Crocodile Dundee with kangaroos in our backyards,” said Tim Sykes, 32, a co-owner of Ruby’s Cafe, an Australian restaurant on Mulberry Street. “But now that we’re all over the place, Aussie life is kind of taking hold.”The transformation has been evident in at least one crucial way for Mr. Sykes. “Now you can actually find Vegemite in some restaurants,” he said.Still, that sense of comfort was upended by Mr. Trump’s clash with Mr. Turnbull. In late April, Vice President Mike Pence helped smooth over relations when during a visit to Australia, he confirmed the countries’ “strong and historic alliance.”Since Mr. Trump’s comments, Mr. Sykes said, he and many of his Australian friends have been calling their immigration lawyers, worried that their status might shift. For now, Mr. Sykes is counting on the meeting Thursday to help return a sense of normalcy.“That’d be ripper, mate,” he said.