http://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/31/world/party-with-islamic-roots-likely-to-win-turkish-vote.html
Party With Islamic Roots Likely to Win Turkish Vote - The New York Times
TURKEY,ERDOGAN  RECEP TAYYIP,ARMAMENT  DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES,PUBLIC OPINION,ELECTION ISSUES,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,ETHICS,ISLAM,ELECTIONS,ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS,CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Oct. 31, 2002
2648
Turkey looks set to give a victory in this Sunday's parliamentary elections to an untested party with Islamic roots, a prospect that scares many in this moderate Muslim nation but that others see as a crucial test of how well democracy here and a greater emphasis on Islam can co-exist.Polls give the party, Justice and Development, as much as 30 percent of the vote -- a lead it hopes to translate into a single-party government in a nation that has zealously defended its secularism since its founding as a republic in 1923.It is a measure of progress, in Turkey's long and fitful drive to full democracy, that there seems no chance that the military will step in as it has done whenever it felt the state was threatened. The party's leader, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is too popular, his message has been moderate and Turkey is eager to burnish its democratic credentials in the hope of joining the European Union.But Turkey's so-called establishment -- the politicians, soldiers and judges who see themselves as the guardians of the state's sanctified secularism -- has worked hard to prevent the party from winning. Last month, the election board banned Mr. Erdogan from running, though he still campaigns as the party's popular face. Last week, the chief prosecutor filed a suit to outlaw the party itself.With the election days away, Mr. Erdogan, 48, the former mayor of Istanbul, is in any case drawing huge crowds. But he and his party do not promise to Islamicize Turkey -- they have, to the contrary, vigorously played down the party's Islamic roots. Instead, the party's appeal lies in its determination to end corruption, to revive the economy and to listen to the plight of ordinary Turks.''They said they were going to keep down Tayyip Erdogan,'' he told 25,000 or more supporters, some with the beards and head scarves of pious Muslims but many others with shaved faces and uncovered heads, at a rally in Istanbul on Sunday. ''Look at this crowd.''A complicated dynamic is thus driving this election. At a time when much of the world is jittery about the role of Islam in politics and terror, and Turkey's place as a strategic bridge between West and East is especially vital, voters seem willing to gamble around the edges of secularism out of anger at the nation's current politicians.In fact, disgust with the country's politics is such that none of the parties in the ruling coalition led by Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit are polling above or near 10 percent -- the threshold for winning seats in Parliament.''There are certain basic qualities about Turkey that we have to change -- politics are dirty,'' said Sebahat Tolu, 31, a single woman and fashion stylist, who attended Mr. Erdogan's rally in trousers with an uncovered head. She said she worries about Mr. Erdogan's Islamic ''point of view.'' But she liked the job he did as Istanbul mayor in the 1990's, expanding electricity, water, and cleaning up the streets, and so is willing to take a risk. ''As long as he maintains a balance, as long as he doesn't step over the line, he is the leader,'' she said.If Justice and Development does win the election, the biggest unknown is what role Mr. Erdogan would play in any new government. Under present law, he cannot hold public office because of a past conviction for inciting religious hatred. He has left open the possibility of amending the Constitution to allow himself to be a minister of some stripe.''It means his intention is to lead the government from behind the scenes and to appoint a weak prime minister,'' said Ilter Turkmen, a former foreign minister. ''What we need is a strong prime minister, a modern prime minister.''But even a behind-the-scenes role for Mr. Erdogan makes some here nervous. Many refuse to dismiss his past. Elected mayor of Istanbul in 1994, he banned alcohol in municipal restaurants, opposed entry into the European Union and supported withdrawing from NATO. ''You cannot be secular and a Muslim at the same time,'' he said in a speech in 1995. ''The world's 1.5 billion Muslims are waiting for the Turkish people to rise up. We will rise up.''In 1997, he recited a poem that landed him in jail for four months, ending his tenure as mayor. That was the charge that the elections board used to ban him from these elections, though there is no doubt he remains the head of his party.''There is still a lot of worry that they are not sincere in their willingness to play by the rules and uphold the secular state,'' said Kemal Dervis, a former World Bank vice president and former economy minister, now a candidate with the Republican People's Party, which is running second in the polls.Mr. Dervis said he worries about how well the party would guide Turkey into the European Union. Others have raised concerns about how solid an ally Mr. Erdogan's party would be to the United States, a longtime friend, in the event of an attack on Iraq, a fellow Muslim nation.Throughout the campaign, Mr. Erdogan and other party leaders have projected a moderate, pro-Western, pro-European Union stance, even while promising observant Muslims greater freedom of expression, itself a contentious issue in Turkey. Yet they say their government would be defined not by religion but for being competent, honest and a beacon to democracy in other Muslim nations.''We want to prove that a Muslim country could be democratic, transparent and compatible with the modern world,'' Mr. Erdogan's deputy, Abdullah Gul, said earlier this month in a speech in Brussels, on one of several such trips party chiefs have made to soothe nervous Western political and business leaders.The moderate oratory has helped tamp down some immediate concern about Mr. Erdogan and other party leaders, who trace their roots to the Welfare Party, the first pro-Islamist party to govern Turkey, which Turkey's army eased out of power in 1997 after only a year in office. Few doubt that the military would act as fail-safe again if, like the Welfare Party, Justice and Development became too Islamist.''That party is made up of human beings, and human beings learn from their lessons,'' said Cem Duna, a financial consultant and former Turkish ambassador to the European Union. ''If they haven't learned, they are in serious trouble.''Mr. Duna said he is more concerned by the party's inexperience and what he said was a narrow view of the world. ''Their ignorance is their main threat,'' he said. ''The trouble is, the other parties are no less worrisome.''At a minimum, many experts say, Mr. Erdogan's candidacy has put before Turkey a critical test of its unripened democracy. The test is especially immediate as the country hopes to set a date for talks about joining the European Union at its summit meeting in December.Jonathan Sugden, a Human Rights Watch researcher who follows Turkey, speculated that the powers that be in Turkey faced a dilemma in this election. They feared a victory by Mr. Erdogan could discourage the Europeans from setting an immediate date for talks. But then, he said, banning Mr. Erdogan from running did not prove Turkey's commitment to democracy either. ''They must know this sort of manipulation of elections doesn't enhance their chances,'' he said. ''This has clearly presented problems for them.''The perception of Turkey's commitment to democracy would grow dimmer, experts say, if the military ever stepped in against Mr. Erdogan once he was in power -- or if the lawsuit seeking to ban the party, not expected to be decided for several months, prevented it from taking office.While it seems likely that Justice and Development will win the most votes, many questions remain: whether it will win outright; whether it will need to form a coalition; whether other parties will win enough votes to band together to force Justice and Development into the opposition.The prospects for any coalition are murky. Both Justice and Development and the People's Republican Party, a center-left party created by Turkey's founder, Kemal Ataturk, have questioned their ability to govern together, though some experts say that Mr. Erdogan would be eager to join with such a mainstream party to reassure foreign investors as well as the military.Despite regular prodding from the press, Mr. Erdogan has refused to say who in his own party he might support as prime minister.But Mr. Turkmen said the election shows that Turkey is still ''grappling with how to make democracy work.'' Mr. Erdogan's possible leadership may strip away some bans on religious expression, such as women wearing head scarves in schools, just as Turkish leaders have granted more political freedom to Kurds.''We have a political life where taboos are disappearing,'' Mr. Turkmen said. ''And they should be disappearing.''