https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/us/officer-seeks-bond-in-shooting-death-of-walter-scott.html
Ex-Officer Seeks Bond in Shooting Death of Walter Scott - The New York Times
Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Slager  Michael T (1981- ),North Charleston (SC),Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings
Sept. 11, 2015
7339
CHARLESTON, S.C. — Saying that he hoped to spend time with his young son, a former police officer asked a judge on Friday to release him on bond while he awaits trial in the shooting death of an unarmed black man after a traffic stop in April.The former North Charleston officer, Michael T. Slager, 33, told Judge Clifton Newman that he “was not a flight risk” and would follow any bail requirements set by the court.Bound in chains and wearing a purple-gray jumpsuit, Mr. Slager appeared haggard as he spoke in court for the first time since he was arrested in April in the death of Walter L. Scott, 50. Mr. Slager shuffled to the stand and said he hoped to see his family — particularly his son, who is to be baptized soon.Judge Newman said he would rule “as expeditiously as possible” on the bond request. The trial is expected sometime next year. Mr. Slager’s bond hearing had been put off, his lawyers said, because of delays in collecting information needed to make the defense’s arguments.A video of the shooting taken by a bystander appeared to show Mr. Slager firing at Mr. Scott as he tried to run away in what started as a traffic stop over a broken taillight. The episode strained racial tensions in this port city and came at a time of intense scrutiny of the treatment of African-Americans by law enforcement officials.During an earlier hearing on Thursday, Scarlett A. Wilson, the South Carolina prosecutor overseeing the case, squared off against Andy Savage, a Charleston lawyer known for representing clients in prominent cases, including the families of victims of the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church slayings in June.Mr. Savage argued that Mr. Slager’s bond request was warranted because he was a supportive husband and father who had no criminal record and had earned exemplary performance reviews from his superiors.The hearing produced the defense’s first attempt to lay some of the blame for the killing on Mr. Scott. Mr. Savage argued that Mr. Scott had traces of cocaine in his bloodstream and that he and Mr. Slager had been involved in “a violent physical confrontation” moments before the shooting, fighting over Mr. Slager’s Taser. He said Mr. Slager, who had already fired the Taser at Mr. Scott, feared for his life.Mr. Savage argued that the traffic stop occurred because Mr. Slager was trying to fill a quota system that mandated North Charleston officers pull over a minimum of three drivers a day for minor offenses such as noisy mufflers, loud radios or faulty brake lights. “That’s the policy that Michael Slager was following as he drove west on Remount Road and saw a Mercedes without a tiny little brake light in the rear,” Mr. Savage said.Ms. Wilson vigorously disputed the defense’s characterization of Mr. Scott, saying only a trace amount of cocaine was found in his system. In addition, she said, Mr. Slager’s lightly skinned knees, lightly bloodied middle finger and clean uniform gave no indication of a perilous struggle.The prosecutor noted inconsistencies in Mr. Slager’s testimony and asserted that the blurry footage at the start of the video showed not a violent attack but Mr. Slager grabbing Mr. Scott’s arm, the Taser falling to the ground and Mr. Scott turning to flee before being gunned down.“Should he have fled from Officer Slager?” Ms. Wilson asked. “No, he shouldn’t have. But that doesn’t mean that Mr. Slager should have then become a firing squad and executed Mr. Scott.”Mr. Scott’s mother, Judy, fought back tears as she described his devotion to family that included caring for a father who is blind and on dialysis.“I’m truly hurt, and I pray for Slager and his family,” Ms. Scott said, “because of the love of Christ on the inside cannot hate. I don’t know what you would call that. To gun down a human being like you did. Nothing that’s done will ever bring him back.”Outside the county courthouse, James Johnson, the Charleston president of the National Action Network, the civil rights organization started by the Rev. Al Sharpton, said that none of Mr. Savage’s arguments overshadowed the fact that Mr. Slager fired on Mr. Scott as he ran away.“If Charleston County Court allows him to be out on bond, then every murder suspect whose bond was denied should be granted a new hearing,” Mr. Johnson said, adding that his and other civil rights organizations will call for nonviolent rallies should bail be granted.