https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/26/business/dealbook/blackstone-considers-a-lower-return-longer-term-approach-to-private-equity.html
Blackstone Considers a Lower-Return, Longer-Term Approach to Private Equity - The New York Times
Private Equity,Berkshire Hathaway Inc,Carlyle Group LP,The Blackstone Group,SuperReturn International,Baratta  Joseph (1971- )
Feb. 25, 2015
6599
Private equity firms have always offered a high-octane investing experience, attempting to multiply investors’ capital over a period as long as a decade.But some of the largest firms are now considering taking a more sedate approach with some of their biggest clients in the latest sign that the industry is moving away from its former free-wheeling spirit.Joseph Baratta, the head of private equity at the Blackstone Group, the biggest alternative investment firm, said at a conference in Berlin on Tuesday that the firm was speaking with large investors about a new investment structure that would aim for lower returns over a longer period of time.Mr. Baratta, whose remarks were reported by The Wall Street Journal, said the investments would be made outside of Blackstone’s traditional funds, which impose time limits on the investing cycle. Invoking Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, Mr. Baratta said he wanted to own companies for more than 10 years.”I don’t know why Warren Buffett should be the only person who can have a 15-year, 14 percent sort of return horizon,” Mr. Baratta said, according to The Journal.His remarks, at the SuperReturn International conference, were only the latest example of chatter about this sort of structure in private equity circles.News reports last fall said that Blackstone and the Carlyle Group, the private equity giant based in Washington, were both considering making investments outside their existing funds. Such moves would let the firms buy companies they might otherwise pass on — big, established corporations that don’t need significant restructuring but could benefit from private ownership.Another private equity giant, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, has increasingly been making investments from its own balance sheet in addition to its funds. While this differs from the approach Mr. Baratta discussed, it similarly allows for new types of investments and provides a more stable source of capital. K.K.R., for example, has used its balance sheet to make minority investments in fast-growing companies like Arago, a German software maker, and Magic Leap, an augmented-reality start-up.The holy grail that these private equity firms are chasing is what they call “permanent capital,” exemplified by Berkshire.Blackstone, which has not yet deployed such a strategy, might gather a “coalition of the willing” investors to buy individual companies, Mr. Baratta said. This approach could be attractive to some of the world’s biggest investors, including sovereign wealth funds and big pension funds, which, though they want market-beating returns, also want to avoid taking too much risk.Mr. Baratta said Blackstone and the coalition of investors could buy consumer goods companies like H.J. Heinz, which Berkshire Hathaway bought with the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital, or infrastructure assets, according to The Journal.”It opens up a whole universe of opportunities that we’re not currently accessing,” he said.