https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/19/world/asia/sydney-siege-muslims.html
For Australia’s Muslims, Relief Is Shadowed by Fear - The New York Times
Australia,Muslims and Islam,Monis  Man Haron,Sydney (Australia),Terrorism
Dec. 18, 2014
3589
SYDNEY, Australia —  When television networks this week showed hostages being forced by a gunman to hold a flag with Arabic script against the window of a Sydney cafe, it was the first sign that their captor wanted to link his cause to Islam.While watching coverage of the siege at the Lindt Chocolate Cafe from his office, Rashid Ben Zerouk, a computer specialist in Sydney who is Muslim, said he felt a piercing glare from a colleague.“He looked at me like I had to explain myself,” Mr. Zerouk said. “I walked back to my desk with my head down. I felt like I wanted to hide.”In the aftermath of the siege, which left the gunman and two captives dead, Australian Muslims say they are relieved that there has been no major backlash against them. But they say they are also fearful that the country is one attack away from reversing its integration efforts, as well as a growing but tenuous acceptance of Muslims.The gunman, Man Haron Monis, an eccentric and troubled man with a history of crime, appears to have acted alone. Prime Minister Tony Abbott described him as a “sick and disturbed individual.”Muslim leaders in recent days nonetheless followed what has become a familiar script after terrorist attacks: They issued a statement denouncing any connection between the violent acts and the teachings of Islam, took part in interfaith meetings and candlelight vigils, and gave countless interviews to speak about Islam as a religion of peace.Muslim office workers, students and homemakers in Australia have said that many of their non-Muslim compatriots expected them to have answers about what happened.Hisham Bouab, who manages a chain of restaurants and attends a mosque in the Sydney suburbs, began receiving calls from non-Muslim friends and colleagues while the siege was unfolding.“I thought, ‘Here we go again,’ ” he said. “Another thing I’ll have to explain.”Nancy Mourad, 24, a cancer researcher at a government medical institute, said she felt “guilty by association.”“I felt the need to apologize to everyone who looked at me — ‘sorry, sorry, sorry’ — for something I had no connection to,” she said.Ms. Mourad, who wears a head scarf, said that as the siege continued into the night, she was jeered while playing in an indoor soccer tournament. “I heard people on the sidelines saying, ‘Kick her! Tackle her, take her down!’ ” she said.The next day, she continued, while she was on the way to her office Christmas party, an older man shouted at her on the train, “Bloody Muslims, go back to your country.”But Ms. Mourad also said her non-Muslim colleagues had been supportive.Mariam Veiszadeh, a lawyer and the founder of an organization that monitors anti-Islamic sentiment, said she was encouraged by the signs of solidarity, compassion and unified mourning after the hostage drama ended.“The worst in that deranged madman has brought out the very best in us as a nation,” she said.Ms. Veiszadeh pointed to a social media campaign, under the hashtag  #illridewithyou, which reportedly began after a Muslim woman on a train at the time of the siege removed her head scarf. “I ran after her at the train station,” Rachael Jacobs, a non-Muslim, explained on social media. “I said: ‘Put it back on. I’ll walk with you.’ ”A Twitter post by Michael James, a radio producer and reporter in Brisbane, repeated the story, which was shared online thousands of times.Muslims in Australia number about 500,000, slightly more than 2 percent of the population. They are ethnically diverse, with many having arrived from Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, Turkey and elsewhere. Their numbers have also risen quickly, by 69 percent since 2001.Muslims say the terrorist attacks in the United States in 2001, as well as the bombing in Bali, Indonesia, in 2002 that killed 202 people, including 88 Australians, had contributed to higher levels of mistrust in Australia toward Muslims.Efforts by Muslims to better integrate into Australian society were also marred by the 2002 gang rape of young girls by a group of men from Lebanese families, one of whom was sentenced to 55 years in jail. Three years later, riots between Muslims of Lebanese descent and non-Muslims broke out on a beach in the Sydney suburb of Cronulla.More recently, several controversies involving government policies have had Muslim integration as a subtext.Australia’s official policy toward asylum seekers has been closely intertwined with debates about Muslim integration, as many of those seeking asylum are from Muslim countries. Mr. Monis, the gunman in the hostage siege, was a political refugee from Iran.This year, officials banned the burqa and face-covering scarves from the open galleries of Parliament, citing security. The decision was quickly reversed.And in a move that some Muslims said singled them out, the government in March sought to soften racial-vilification laws. The attorney general, George Brandis, said that Australians had the right to be bigots, but later backed down.Some Muslims say they believe that there is a “with us or against us” ethos that is aimed at them.“There has been a whole process to make us feel separate,” said Keysar Trad, the head of the Islamic Friendship Association, a civic group. “We were meant to feel like a fifth column bent on destruction.”Others say they believe that most Australians accept the notion of diversity, and that intolerance is on the fringes of society.“There is 2 percent of ratbags doing the wrong thing in the Muslim community,” said Fatin Mourad, 65, a retired pathologist who is Muslim and the father of Nancy Mourad, the cancer researcher. “And there are 1 percent of rednecks also out there to make noise.”Mr. Mourad said he cried as he watched the events in Sydney on television. “But why do I have to hang my head in shame?” he asked. “We get tarnished, we get blamed.”