https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/13/business/energy-environment/oil-prices-fall-again-and-stocks-follow-suit.html
Oil Prices Fall Again, and Stocks Follow Suit - The New York Times
Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),Production
Dec. 12, 2014
1688
Oil prices continued their collapse on Friday as evidence mounted that the frenzy of American oil production would continue well into 2015 even while growth in global demand was declining.The swoon in oil prices led to a steep decline in equities, with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index closing lower by 1.6 percent, to 2,002.33, as investors feared that the declining energy demand meant that the global economy was slowing.“People are scared that the drop in oil demand is the first leg down for the global economy that had been led by the growth in the emerging markets,” said Nancy T. Schmitt, president of Taum Sauk Investments. “That growth has evaporated. The demand has gone away, and we are seeing it first with oil prices.”The global benchmark for crude approached $60 a barrel — down more than 3 percent on the day and roughly 45 percent since the summer. And the American benchmark continued its free fall as well, to below $58 a barrel, down around 4 percent. A day earlier, it sagged below $60 a barrel in the United States for the first time since 2009.The new rout began Friday morning after the International Energy Agency, the organization based in Paris that advises industrial countries, cut its forecast for global demand for crude oil in 2015 by 230,000 barrels a day. The agency cited less oil consumption in countries that produce it like Russia and a weaker-than-expected global economy.A trim of 230,000 barrels a day is minimal in a global market of about 93 million barrels a day. But the lower forecast, the fourth by the agency in the last five months, reinforced the sentiment that supply will most likely exceed demand substantially next year.The Energy Department also issued a report later in the day predicting that American oil production would average 9.3 million barrels a day in 2015, 700,000 barrels more than this year. That is a small downward revision of production previously predicted by the department, but its report emphasized that “all the decrease in forecast production growth comes in the second half of 2015.”The department said that drilling activity in North Dakota, a main driver of the surging domestic oil production of recent years, has “not slowed, despite the significant decline in domestic crude oil prices since July 2014,” according to the most recent data released by North Dakota regulators.The result was a near capitulation in the market for oil.“In the very short term prices can go lower; the market is weighted to very bearish sentiment,” said Richard Mallinson, an analyst at Energy Aspects, a research firm based in London.But even with the recent plunge, oil prices still have not approached the lows of recent decades. For example, oil briefly broke below $10 a barrel in 1986, which equates to about $21 today after adjusting for inflation.At least in the short term, the declines are good news for American drivers about to take vacations or visit their families and friends for the holidays.“Gas prices will continue to be in a free fall as long as crude oil is searching for a bottom,” the AAA motor club reported on Friday.Nationally, the average price for a gallon of regular gasoline fell 2 cents on Friday to $2.60, 11 cents below its price a week ago, according to AAA. Drivers on average are paying $1.10 a gallon less than they paid on April 28, the high point for the year in gas prices.“Many drivers are spending $15 to $30 less per trip to the gas station compared to what they paid during this year’s highs,” the motor club said.New York is the only state in the continental United States with an average above $3 a gallon, the motor club said, but at $3.02, “the average should drop below that mark within a few days.”Analysts say a major cut in global production would be needed next year to avoid an inventory buildup and to stabilize falling prices. But the prospect of a supply cut was dashed last month when the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries  declined to change its output ceilings at a meeting in Vienna.A test of strength appears to be occurring among the Saudis and their equally prosperous Gulf allies, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and other producers like Venezuela and Iran, which can much less easily afford a long bout of low prices. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the U.A.E. have about $1.5 trillion in financial assets among them, which is “plenty to meet their spending needs for the next few years,” said Rachel Ziemba, an analyst at Roubini Global Economics in London.At the same time, Venezuela, Nigeria and other producers are “going to have to cut back on spending,” Ms. Ziemba said. Already, Venezuelan officials have said it may be necessary to call an emergency OPEC meeting if the price rout continues.The Saudis and their allies argue that to cut production now to raise prices would be to subsidize competitors like the companies extracting oil from shale in the United States, which are responsible for recent big additions to world oil supplies.