http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/world/asia/south-korea-park-geun-hye-prime-minister.html
Weakened by Scandal, South Korea’s President Picks New Premier - The New York Times
South Korea,Park Geun-hye,Kim Byong-joon,Hwang Kyo-ahn (1957- ),Appointments and Executive Changes,Choi Soon-sil
Nov. 2, 2016
5177
SEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea replaced the country’s prime minister, the No. 2 official in her government, on Wednesday as she struggled to regain some of the authority lost to a growing political scandal.Ms. Park’s new appointee, Kim Byong-joon, was once a chief policy coordinator for President Roh Moo-hyun. Mr. Roh, in office from 2003 to 2008, was a progressive leader often hated by Ms. Park’s conservative followers.Mr. Kim’s appointment as Ms. Park’s deputy is seen as an overture to the progressive opposition parties as the president nears her last year in office.Ms. Park’s advisers in and outside her governing party have asked her to reform her cabinet to signal a new beginning for her embattled government. Mr. Kim’s appointment required parliamentary approval. He replaces Prime Minister Hwang Kyo-ahn.Mr. Hwang has not been accused of any wrongdoing, but Ms. Park replaced him to project the image of a fresh start, analysts said.On Sunday, Ms. Park fired eight presidential aides, including her chief of staff, in an effort to regain public trust. That was a day after thousands of South Koreans took to the streets to call for her removal from office.On Wednesday, she also replaced her chief economic minister and domestic safety minister. Yim Jong-yong, the minister for the Financial Services Commission, became minister of strategy and finance, the top economic policy maker. But the reshuffling did not affect the national security and foreign affairs posts in the cabinet.As the leadership changes unfolded, prosecutors summoned former presidential aides accused of helping Choi Soon-sil, the woman at the center of Ms. Park’s leadership crisis, manipulate important government affairs from the shadows.Ms. Choi, 60, a friend of Ms. Park’s for 40 years, is widely seen here as the president’s secret adviser, though she has no official government title. She was also accused of using her influence to extort $69 million from big businesses in the form of donations to two foundations she controlled.On Monday, after weeks of avoiding the news media and public scrutiny, Ms. Choi presented herself to prosecutors. She tearfully apologized before a phalanx of television cameras, while angry citizens demanded her arrest. One person was detained while trying to hurl a tub of excrement at her and the prosecutors’ office, claiming that the investigation was rigged to protect Ms. Park.Prosecutors are seeking an arrest warrant for Ms. Choi.The scandal has been particularly upsetting to South Koreans because of Ms. Choi’s background. Her father, a religious leader named Choi Tae-min, is said to have befriended Ms. Park in the mid-1970s by claiming that he could help her contact her dead mother, who was assassinated in 1974. Ms. Park’s father, Park Chung-hee, led a military dictatorship in South Korea from 1961 until 1979, when he, too, was assassinated.Many South Koreans believed that Mr. Choi, who died in 1994, exercised a Rasputin-like power over Ms. Park and used it to collect bribes.After Ms. Park became president in early 2013, rumors persisted that Ms. Choi was meddling in government affairs, installing her associates in political posts and helping them win large government contracts. Ms. Park acknowledged last week that she had let Ms. Choi edit some of her most important speeches, seeming to vindicate those suspicions. Her approval ratings have plummeted to record lows in the past couple of weeks.