http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/23/style/eluding-family-ties-as-he-hunts-for-stars.html
Eluding Family Ties As He Hunts For Stars - The New York Times
BUSH  BILLY,BUSH  GEORGE W,ST JOHN  WARREN,TELEVISION,ACCESS HOLLYWOOD (TV PROGRAM)
June 23, 2002
7193
BILLY BUSH, the relentlessly gregarious first cousin of President Bush and currently the East Coast correspondent for the entertainment news program ''Access Hollywood,'' is looking over a fax from his producer in Los Angeles. It's the script for an introduction to Mr. Bush's interview with the singer of Korn, a band known for a raucous power-chord-crammed brand of depresso-rock. The segment's angle is that with its new album, Korn has gone soft. Mr. Bush is reading the script aloud when all of a sudden he seizes up. Korn's latest, the producer has written, is ''kinder, gentler.'' The script might as well have begun ''Read my lips.''For Mr. Bush, though, this brush with family lore isn't a tough one. He has been sidestepping the issue of family ties since his first job in radio, a $6-an-hour gig at a station in New Hampshire. Avoiding the issue is made easier these days by a provision in his contract with ''Access Hollywood'' that prohibits the program from even mentioning his connection to the president.But mostly Mr. Bush has to do the dodging on his own. A few minutes after reading that fax, on a sidewalk at Rockefeller Center, with the camera rolling and a big furry boom microphone hovering overhead, Mr. Bush tells his viewers that Korn's album ''demonstrates a gentler touch.'' The original phrase was a bit redundant anyway.Like his cousin, the model Lauren Bush, Billy Bush has ventured into a profession with a notable absence of gravitas compared with the worldly doings of the president. While the high-profile pursuits of past presidential relatives sometimes have translated into political headaches for the White House, Mr. Bush seems more worried about how his cousin's performance in the Oval Office will affect his career than the other way around.''I don't talk about him,'' Mr. Bush said of the president when the cameras were not rolling. ''His approval ratings are up in the 70's, but that's going down. It has to. So if you ride it, and his ratings go to 30 percent, you go with him.'' He shrugged. ''Roger Clinton tried to use his brother to promote himself and his career,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'd never do that.''So far anyway, Mr. Bush hasn't needed to. In just eight months at ''Access Hollywood,'' he has distinguished himself as a cocksure but affable on-air presence, someone capable of conjuring instant bonhomie and a few seconds of usable tape with reluctant celebrities as they blow by on the red carpet at movie premieres. The job requires nothing if not a steely ego. When he was starting out, Mr. Bush was snubbed by Hugh Grant, whom he calls ''very disengaged,'' and given the brushoff by Conan O'Brien.''It was like, 'Chill, brother,' Mr. Bush said.His profile at NBC, which produces ''Access Hollywood,'' is on the rise. He has become a regular on ''Today,'' but Matt Lauer has nothing to fear. Mr. Bush specializes in quirky stories and in placing himself, or at least his ego, in harm's way. For a future ''Today'' segment, for example, he spends two days as a member of the boy-band impresario Lou Pearlman's latest group, and performs a song-and-dance number before 5,000 people at Disney World.''I'm not slick. I'm not polished,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think my strength is in reacting.''Mr. Bush grew up on East 86th Street, the son of the financier and State Republican Party organizer Jonathan Bush, and though his résumé is solidly preppie -- he went to grade school at St. Bernard's on the Upper East Side, boarding school at St. George's in Rhode Island and college at Colby in Maine -- his personality and at times his accent seem incongruously multiborough.''Everybody thinks the Bushes are from Texas,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I've been there twice.''JAY IRELAND, the president of NBC Television Stations, who hired Mr. Bush, said, ''His sensibility is a little New York, and also a little out in left field.'' He added, ''He makes people comfortable; he gets a different type of interview.''Disguising his family ties is not so easy for Mr. Bush. Besides the obvious giveaway -- his name -- Mr. Bush has the president's nose and the Bush brows, which shade the eyes like little canvas awnings. Like his uncle, the first President Bush, he is an obsessive writer of thank-you notes. Like the second President Bush, he is an inventor of nicknames. (He refers to the president as ''G. Dubs,'' as in ''I love G. Dubs because we have the same sense of humor.'') And he has what some consider the Bush air of patrician entitlement, which comes in handy when interviewing big-shot movie stars.Mr. Bush, who is 30 and married with two daughters, ages 4 and 1, lives in Chatham, N.J.. He takes the train to work and spends his days chasing celebrities.On Monday of last week, he interviewed Katie Couric for a segment about Matt Lauer's new buzz cut; he did a story about a Tom Brokaw special on the long-term effects on victims of a drunken-driving accident; he attended the premiere of the Tom Cruise movie ''Minority Report'' at the Ziegfeld Theater. On Tuesday, he did a 20-minute interview with the actor Colin Farrell, then attended the premiere of the Adam Sandler movie ''Mr. Deeds.'' On Wednesday, it was an interview with Brooke Burns, a former ''Baywatch'' actress now on the reality game show ''Dog Eat Dog.''''She's gorgeous,'' Mr. Bush said. ''She's wearing these pants that lace up the sides. Incredible.''On Thursday, Mr. Bush drove to Seaside Heights, N.J., where MTV was filming its show ''Total Request Live.'' His reward was a one-minute interview with the actor Will Smith.While some might find all that celebrity schmoozing a bit taxing, Mr. Bush says he is in his element. ''I bang around,'' he said. ''Hanging around with people, that's my thing.''Mr. Bush is not new to entertainment. For four years, he was the co-host, with Janet Elliot, of a morning radio show called ''The Bush League'' on Z-104, a top-40 station in Washington. The show took its energy from the rapport between its dissimilar hosts: Mr. Bush was then a bachelor in his 20's, Ms. Elliot was a considerably older mother of three.''I was literally out till 3:30 a.m., coming in to do the show at 4:30 a.m.,'' Mr. Bush said.The show became known for its gags, many of which Mr. Bush engineered. When several covers were blown off manholes in Georgetown, Mr. Bush sent an intern, dressed in a hockey uniform for protection, to stand on one for the duration of the show. (The intern was uninjured.) When Mr. Bush learned that a friend had dated Gwyneth Paltrow, he called at 6 a.m. and grilled him on the air about the details. And when Ms. Elliot gave birth to her third child, Mr. Bush covered the event live from the delivery room.The show was popular, but the early morning hours took their toll. Mr. Bush showed up weary one morning, he said, and inadvertently cursed on the air, a gaffe exacerbated by the fact that the station's parent company was affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Over time, Mr. Bush lost interest in the show, and so did his listeners. Mr. Bush was fired the week his cousin took office as president.''It was the greatest relief ever,'' Mr. Bush said. ''My heart wasn't in it. I'd gained 20 pounds. I was bloated, and I could feel myself becoming curmudgeonly and depressed.''Mr. Bush moved to New York and got a freelance position with ''Today in New York,'' Channel 4's morning show. He was spotted by Mr. Ireland.Though a fan, Mr. Ireland didn't offer Mr. Bush a contract, so Mr. Bush tried out for a job on ''American Morning With Paula Zahn'' on CNN. When Mr. Ireland saw Mr. Bush on CNN, he took action and offered him a full-time job.''It's all about leverage,'' Mr. Bush said.Though Mr. Bush had a contract, he was hardly out of the professional woods. His early interviews were halting, sometimes awkward affairs.''I was star-struck,'' he said. ''If you're nervous, the person in front of you will be nervous.''He hired a coach, and settled on a strategy of more or less being himself. Indeed, Mr. Bush's charm is in seeming like an old chum of celebrities, many of whom he has just met. He has a blinding smile, which seems to disarm the most withdrawn stars. (A recent duel with a fellow hyper-smiler, Tom Cruise, at the ''Minority Report'' premiere required welding goggles to watch.) The format of ''Access Hollywood'' helps. The program fancies itself more news-driven than its tabloidy competition, ''Entertainment Tonight'' on CBS and NBC's ''Extra.'''' 'E.T.' and 'Extra,' they are too salacious,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They go, Oooh, Katie Couric just broke up with X. 'Access Hollywood' is really good entertainment news. It's not dirty, and we don't get cheap.''THE format may limit Mr. Bush's potential as a political liability to his cousin in the Oval Office. And for now it seems to be working for ''Access Hollywood,'' which is beating its more established competition, ''Entertainment Tonight,'' in big markets like Los Angeles and New York.Mr. Bush is working hard to parlay his success on the show into something bigger. He is taking acting lessons and has a screen test coming up for a bit part on an NBC sitcom. But there is one place Mr. Bush says you won't see him: behind a lectern on the campaign trail.''I don't do politics,'' he said. ''I just like to laugh.''