http://www.nytimes.com/2003/08/03/nyregion/jessica-grace-wing-31-a-force-in-new-york-downtown-theater.html
Jessica Grace Wing, 31, a Force In New York Downtown Theater - The New York Times
WING  JESSICA GRACE,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,DEATHS (OBITUARIES)
Aug. 3, 2003
3146
Correction AppendedJessica Grace Wing, a composer for the theater and a filmmaker whose new musical, ''Lost,'' is scheduled to open next week at the New York International Fringe Festival, died at her home in Brooklyn on July 19. She was 31.The cause was colon cancer, said her mother, Jennifer Schneider.A fan of punk music and poetry, Ms. Wing was an active force in the city's downtown theater scene and was a founder of the Inverse Theater, a troupe devoted to performing work written -- as the title implies -- in verse.After graduating from Stanford University, Ms. Wing lived in San Francisco, where she played in a pair of punk and electronica rock bands. She later studied film at the graduate film department of Columbia University.Shortly after moving to New York, Ms. Wing met and began working with Kirk Wood Bromley, who is now the artistic director and principal writer of the Inverse troupe. Ms. Wing composed the music for several productions for the company. In a 1998 production of ''Othello'' Ms. Wing mixed classical chamber music with operatic arias, while in ''Midnight Brainwash Revival,'' a surreal comedy produced by the company earlier this year, Ms. Wing composed in a country style.Her last work was a full-length musical titled ''Lost,'' based on the children's story ''Hansel and Gretel.'' She finished writing the final songs for the musical -- with a book and lyrics by Mr. Bromley -- 36 hours before she died. It is to open on Friday at the Linhart Theater on Lafayette Street in the East Village.In addition to her mother, Ms. Wing is survived by her father, William H. Wing; her brother, Ben Wing of Tucson; and three stepsisters, Lara Young of Pickerington, Ohio; Andrea Matheson of Tucson, and Jennifer Ochoa of Fort Worth.Correction: August 7, 2003, Thursday  An obituary on Sunday about Jessica Grace Wing, a composer and filmmaker, omitted two survivors. They are her companion, Damian Volpe, and her father's companion, Prof. Jacqueline Sharke.                                             Correction: August 9, 2003, Saturday  An obituary on Sunday about Jessica Grace Wing, a composer and filmmaker, omitted two survivors, and a correction in this space on Thursday misspelled the surname of one of them. The survivors are Ms. Wing's companion, Damian Volpe, and her father's companion, Prof. Jacqueline Sharkey, not Sharke.