http://www.nytimes.com/2000/12/03/nyregion/03TROO.html
An Inside Story Of Racial Bias And Denial; New Jersey Files Reveal Drama Behind Profiling - The New York Times
NEW JERSEY,NEW JERSEY TURNPIKE,BLACKS,ROADS AND TRAFFIC,DISCRIMINATION,POLICE,HISPANIC-AMERICANS,DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC
Dec. 3, 2000
7427
The 91,000 pages of state documents released last week about racial profiling by the New Jersey State Police offer a rare look at one of the most contentious battlefields in the nation's war on drugs.Taken as a whole, the reams of memos, internal investigations, complaint letters and confidential reports show how the institutions of state government denied accusations of selective enforcement for nearly a decade before grudgingly admitting it and making changes.But the words written by the thousands of people involved -- troopers, civilians, attorneys general and state officials -- also tell an intensely emotional story: one of gung-ho troopers who saw themselves as unappreciated as they risked their lives to protect New Jersey's minority members from drug violence, and who sought promotions based on high-visibility drug arrests; the anger and defensiveness of police commanders who believed their tactics were unjustly branded as racist; the outrage of minority troopers ordered to view their own neighbors as drug suspects; the bewilderment of black and Hispanic drivers who could not understand why they were detained by the police simply because of the color of their skin.The story begins in the mid-1980's, when the federal Drug Enforcement Administration responded to the street violence of the crack epidemic by enlisting local police forces to catch smugglers who were importing drugs from Latin America, often to Florida, and moving them to major American cities by car.By 1989, the New Jersey State Police had become such a successful part of ''Operation Pipeline'' that D.E.A. officials hailed the troopers as exemplary models for most other states.But on New Jersey roadways, black and Hispanic drivers were subjected to such frequent, unjustified traffic stops and searches  that they complained of a new, unwritten violation in the state's traffic code: ''driving while black.'' In state police barracks, some black and Hispanic troopers bitterly acknowledged that even though the state officially prohibited racial profiling, senior troopers trained them to single out drivers on the basis of their ethnicity or race.The documents show that a few state law enforcement officials were troubled by evidence that minority drivers were being stopped and searched disproportionately.Those concerns grew in 1996, when a state judge in Gloucester County ruled that troopers had engaged in ''de facto racial profiling.'' But high-level officials of the state police and the attorney general's office defended their drug-interdiction strategy, even as they concealed  their own statistical analyses showing that minority drivers were being singled out. Privately, state police officials argued that it was only fitting that black and Hispanic drivers should face more scrutiny than whites because New Jersey's drug trade problem was primarily a minority issue.On April 22, 1998, troopers shot and wounded three unarmed black and Hispanic men during a traffic stop on the turnpike, propelling the controversy to the center of the state's political stage. State officials, including Gov. Christie Whitman, at first clung to their insistence that there was no pattern of profiling. But under unrelenting pressure from civil rights leaders and the federal Justice Department's Civil Rights Division, the Whitman administration ultimately acknowledged racial profiling, revamped its narcotics strategy and agreed to let a federal judge monitor the force.These are some of the documents released last week:Soon after the administration of former Gov. Thomas H. Kean ordered the war on drugs on the turnpike, lawyers in the state's Division of Criminal Justice studied federal and state court rulings on the legality of the so-called ''drug courier profile.'' In a memo to superiors on July 25, 1988, a deputy attorney general, Meredith A. Cote, wrote that the clear principle that ''emerges from pertinent case law is that the stop and/or seizure of an individual by law enforcement officers solely on the basis of drug-courier profile factors is unconstitutional. An officer must possess articulable, particularized facts, in addition to the profile characteristics, in order to justify such action.''But the memorandum did not rule out use of the profile.''The fact that a drug courier profile may not be used as a tool for selective prosecution does not, however, entirely preclude its use after a police officer has effectuated a valid stop for a legitimate motor vehicle violation. As indicated previously, profile characteristics may be used by law enforcement officers in conjunction with other articulable, particularized facts to justify subsequent'' searches.Some training documents for state troopers used in the late 1980's and early 1990's had a racial focus. One, titled ''Occupant Identifiers for a Possible Drug Courier,'' began by identifying these drivers and passengers as suspicious: Colombian men, Hispanic men, Hispanic men and black men together, and Hispanic men and women posing as couples. ''Any combination of sexes or races could be possible drug couriers,'' the document said. ''Only a few of the common ones were listed above.''The state police training bureau offered a course in the early 1990's called Sociology for the Police Officer. One of the topics was ''ethnic and racial minorities.'' An outline had these sub-headings:IV.Police Stereotypical View of MinoritiesA. Wary of minority people.B. Believe minorities are more likely to be involved in criminal activities1. Chinese Americans more likely to be involved in crimes of gambling.2. Italian Americans more likely to be involved in organized crime.3. Black Americans are more likely to be involved of crimes of violence.4. Spanish-speaking Americans are more likely to be involved in fights or taunting officers.C. Greater degree of hostility directed toward police.V. Minority stereotypical views of policeA. Are much more critical of police action.B. More willing to see racial slights in police actions.C. Feel more subject to mistreatment, harassment and brutality.D. Police are symbolic, stand for the power and authority of the majority, visible signs of majority dominated.E. Police perceived in the punishment business.F. Police are a 'blue minority.'VI. Ethnic and Racial Cultures. . . .C. Differing Cultures, attitudes and values.1. Black Americansa. Blacks value their families.b. Blacks value religion.c. Blacks value material goods as well.1. Blacks who are not able to purchase their own home put money into cars.a. Cars important -- show individual's style and personality, just as home would.In September 1989, the state police intelligence bureau prepared a document, apparently in response to a series on WWOR-TV that said troopers were stopping motorists on the turnpike on the basis of race, that  talked about ''Jamaican Posses'' in New York City and Philadelphia using the turnpike as a conduit to transport drugs. It also said that 76.3 percent of all drug and weapons arrests on the turnpike in 1988 involved blacks. But the document said that troopers were not taught to practice racial profiling and were not doing it. It said instruction for troopers ''does not include profiling or targeting techniques, but rather behavior-symptom analysis, conversational techniques, case law, and search and seizure procedure. Thus, the training focuses on events after the motor vehicle stop.''On the high percentage of blacks arrested on the turnpike in 1988, the report added: ''The fact that more blacks are arrested than whites is not a result of racial targeting but is due to: 1) nearly two-thirds of all I-95/ Turnpike corridor arrests are for drugs and weapon offenses, an area which intelligence suggests is heavily comprised of American blacks, Jamaican gangs, Colombian cartels, Cuban exiles and Dominican criminals.''The report said that ''intelligence'' indicated that ''black and Hispanic narcotics and weapon offenders'' were traveling from city to city in and around New Jersey. It added: ''Therefore, New Jersey's road troopers should necessarily be encountering and arresting a significant number of black and Hispanic criminals who utilize specific roadways in the furtherance of their criminal, particularly narcotics-related, endeavors.''In August 1993, Alexander P. Waugh, the executive assistant attorney general at the time, apparently began having misgivings about racial profiling. In a memo to Fred DeVesa, the acting attorney general at the time, Mr. Waugh, now a state Superior Court judge, said the profiling issue had come up in a recent meeting with state police troop commanders.''It occurs to me that it might be useful to have some further thought given to the issue of profiling, perhaps even leading up to the promulgation of some guidelines,'' Mr. Waugh wrote. ''I believe the SP would benefit from some further advice in this area.''Mr. Waugh's suggestion got an icy rejection. A handwritten note scrawled at the bottom of his memo said: ''Alex -- State Police SOP on road stops is pretty good. If it ain't broke don't fix it.''The initials of the person who wrote the rejection were indecipherable.During hearings on the Gloucester County case, Kenneth Wilson, who had been a trooper from 1987 to 1989, testified that he had been taught about profiling by his superiors and D.E.A. agents in seminars. In a document submitted to the court, he wrote: ''I was directed and urged to stop and search persons who fit the profile if I wanted to make 'good arrests.' We were given wide discretion and told to follow our hunches. If we wanted to stop and search someone or some persons, we would stop and search.  Any possible violations such as speeding, or improper equipment, were afterthoughts. ''Mr. Wilson added: ''As part of my general training, I was specifically taught how to write operation reports. We were specifically taught how to justify in our subsequent reports our stops and searches so that we would utter the right words, which would stand up in court. We were taught to write the right reports to justify our actions in court, whether or not that is what actually occurred on the roadway.''Mr. Wilson was suspended from the state police in 1989 after he and two other troopers were indicted on charges of stealing $500 from three people they had stopped on the turnpike. He eventually pleaded guilty to official misconduct and was placed on probation for five years.In the months after the profiling decision, state police commanders had generated so much evidence of profiling that even commanders of the Internal Affairs Bureau suggested that the department begin keeping a track of the racial breakdown of each trooper's stops, and including that data on the officers' evaluations. Col. Carl A. Williams, then the state police superintendent, vehemently objected, adding his handwritten comments to an Oct. 4, 1996, memo:''No! Station commander/Asst. commander will be responsible for this. If they see a problem it will be up to them to take the proper action.''Soon after the ruling in the profiling case in 1996, the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division started investigating the state police. Officials in the state police and the attorney general's office seemed to chafe at the inquiry.In December 1996, the Civil Rights Division sent the attorney general's office a  request for data on traffic stops and documents on patrol, management and training.  A month later, in a reply, Peter G. Verniero, then the attorney general, referred to ''our mutual commitment to the goal of ensuring that the civil rights of all persons are protected.''But internal documents suggest Mr. Verniero and his staff wanted to narrow the number of state police documents they would send to the Justice Department.On a memo dated Jan. 9, 1997, Colonel Williams said he had spoken with Mr. Verniero and his top aides about the data sought from the Justice Department. The notes added, ''At this time, same will be restricted  to the Turnpike Stations of Cranbury and Moorestown,'' the barracks involved in the profiling case.By early 1997, state police officials had found their most incriminating data yet: a study that found that more than 80 percent of the searches carried out by troopers in two stations involved black motorists. Rather than surrender the data to the Justice Department, Sgt. T. Gilbert recommended to Colonel Williams that the department consider strategies to pre-empt any attempt by federal government to force New Jersey into a consent decree for monitoring of the state police. ''At this point we are in a bad spot,'' the recommendation said. ''Through the Gloucester County case, the Illinois State Police investigation and the Maryland State Police Study/Settlement, the Justice Department has a very good understanding of how we operate and what kind of numbers they can get their hands on to prove their position.''He went on to write, ''The preliminary analysis makes it clear that the more historical search data we give them, the worse off we will be in regards to having any control over what we are forced into.''On May 20, 1997, Mr. Verniero scheduled a meeting with his chief deputies involved in the Justice Department's inquiry and with Colonel Williams. An unsigned, handwritten note on the bottom of a memo about the meeting suggests that Mr. Verniero strongly opposed relenting to a consent decree with the federal government. It says, ''AG advised he would not consent to signing a consent decree, 'they'd have to tie me to a train and drag me along the track before I'd sign a decree.' ''Over the years, even after the ruling in the profiling case, letters from angry black and Hispanic drivers poured into state offices, including Mrs. Whitman's, saying that profiling had not stopped.On June 6, 1998, a black Korean War veteran wrote the governor that he had been traveling on the turnpike for 30 years, and had been ''stopped by the state police on the average of twice a year for really no good reason, except that I was driving a late model BMW or Lincoln.''The man said that during all the stops over three decades troopers found grounds to give him only one summons -- for a broken taillight.