https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/style/marijuana-weed-stock-colorado.html
Welcome to Weedstock  - The New York Times
Marijuana,Denver (Colo),O'Neill  Robert J,Law and Legislation,Entrepreneurship,National Cannabis Summit
Oct. 30, 2015
9836
At the after-party for the National Cannabis Summit — an annual conference thick with entrepreneurs and business people, held in the bowels of the Sheraton in downtown Denver — eight of us attendees boogied alongside one of the more engaging speakers, the medical researcher Dr. Suzanne Sisley, who wore throughout the party a towering, purple velvet Mad Hatter’s hat. Remembering that in her speech she had said, “I’ve never tried marijuana in any form,” I wanted to whisper in her ear, “But your millinery tells a different story.”Outside in a cordoned-off area of a parking lot at the marijuana growers’ supply warehouse where the party was held, hundreds of attendees were smoking and vaping. The conference’s essential leitmotifs — self-promotion and schmoozing — reasserted themselves.A man who had spent a good part of the conference selling his outhouse-size turbine (to help marijuana growers “get off the grid”) was pitching it to anyone within earshot; another guest’s party banter ran, “The five reasons to consider a pen vape are high quality, safety, consistency, discretion, and … I can’t remember the fifth reason.” Then he picked up a glossy promotional card listing these five reasons and told me: “Oh, and purity. Purity’s important.” Dude.At the conference, you didn’t so much have a conversation as a series of concurrent elevator pitches. During breakfast, I sat next to a financial planner in her 40s, who described the purchase she was trying to get on the legalized marijuana industry.“I can really help with long-term planning,” she said, “so that these folks in the industry who are generating lots and lots of revenue very quickly don’t just …”“… go out and buy one enormous bag of chocolate chip cookies?” I said.“Yes.”Another attendee would try to excite me in his marijuana-infused pancake-crepe batter. (I told the gentleman, “Not to be prudish, but do you really want to promote weed as a breakfast food?” He said, “That’s what I want to call it: Wake and Bake!”)But perhaps most vivid was the slick brochure that the financial planner handed me, its title misspelled: “Finacial Solutions for the Cannabis Industry.” In the mad scramble known as the Green Rush, there is no time for proofreading.Thar’s weed in them hills! Gather around ye C.P.A.s and ye water filtration specialists, ye providers of insurance for growers and of free medical marijuana for vets, ye designers of greenhouses and tiny plastic containers.If the $97 million in tax revenue that Andrew Freedman, Colorado’s director of marijuana coordination, expects the state to earn this fiscal year cannot be described as a game-changer to a state whose all-funds budget for the fiscal year ending in June was $27 billion, you wouldn’t know it from the resultant swirl of activity.If you have a layover at the Denver airport, you can, for about $300, hire a car to take you to a dispensary and then smoke in the vehicle (as one website puts it: “no driving sweeeeeeet”); there are also meals with cannabis pairings, and cannabis-infused bubble baths.This thing could be bigger than cellphones and cupcakes.The two-day summit ($639, four meals; lodging not included) was rich with cultural dissonance. At a session called “Keep Your Customers High and Your Tax Low,” an accountant fielded a question from a patrician gentleman who wore a pale blue cashmere sweater and carried a Metropolitan Opera tote. Using industry shorthand for a grow house, a place where marijuana is grown, this audience member — a potential investor in the industry — asked the C.P.A. a question that began, “Say you have two companies — one is your property management company and the other is your grow … ”After another session, a woman in a navy blazer and skirt expressed excitement about the $11 million in sales that Oregon recorded in October during its first week of legalized recreational marijuana: “I love that number. That’s such a nice first quarter.”The conference’s four speeches and 31 breakout sessions covered a wide swath of the industry. While most sessions bore names like “Data Capturing and Your Business,” five were devoted to Native Americans, who can grow and sell on their sovereign land, and three to medical marijuana.Two common themes emerged. First, until marijuana’s classification is changed — the Drug Enforcement Administration lists pot as a Schedule I drug, which means the government has deemed it to have no medical benefit — the industry will continue to receive a cold shoulder from the banking industry, and medical research will continue to be underfunded.Second, the strides made in legalization were repeatedly likened to the gay rights movement. One speaker, the marijuana entrepreneur Christian Hageseth, imagined a day in the near future when we’ll hear a proud parent brag “My son and his partner? They grow weed.” (Applause.)The conference’s most glaring example of cultural dissonance came from the selection of its keynote speaker: Robert O’Neill, the leader of SEAL team 6 who has claimed to have shot and killed Osama bin Laden.The intense Mr. O’Neill started his speech by saying he wasn’t at the summit to talk about Bin Laden or the use of cannabis to treat veterans’ post-traumatic stress disorder. He proceeded to give harrowing accounts of several of his more dangerous missions, including the rescue of Capt. Richard Phillips from Somali pirates; he then drew management and team-building lessons therefrom (“Stress is a choice,” Trust your people,” etc.).I saw several people in the audience break into sobs. Others walked out — an Iraq vet later told me he didn’t want to relive a ghastly experience.Andrew Passen, the chief executive of MJ Conferences, the marijuana-specific events management company that organized the conference, later told me: “We really wanted to be different. A lot of cannabis shows don’t even have a keynote speaker. We wanted someone to stir emotion, good, bad or indifferent.”Eager to know whether the gonzo entrepreneurial zeal exhibited by the summit’s attendees was an accurate reflection of the pot industry as it already exists, I took it upon myself, during my five days in Denver, to go to dispensaries and express my very, very specific needs.At the Medicine Man dispensary on my first day, I told a “budtender” that I wanted to feel like “Tiny wings have emerged from my nape and ankles.” Without missing a beat, he directed me to a sativa-indica hybrid with the strangely governmental-sounding name G6.Two days later, I told a Euflora dispensary budtender — a Rebel Wilson type with lots of tattoos — “I am in a Peter Jackson movie, and my tunic is made of beast.” She unblinkingly recommended the sativa-dominant hybrid Outer Space, saying, “It’ll match all that creativity you’ve already got going on, and take you even further, my dear.” On my last day, I told a Green Cannabis budtender, “Cobblestones, elf dander: Sausalito.” He sold me a powerful indica called Leeroy.Back at the summit, I found myself in a predicament not uncommon to the pot tourist: There are lots of places to buy weed, but virtually no place to smoke it. Smoking is illegal in all public areas in Colorado. Outside of the parties held at the end of each day’s sessions, the summit was a “non-consumable” event. So I savored the irony of potentially being arrested for smoking pot in a state where pot is legal.When an attendee told me that the nearby hotel had “a patio” where guests could smoke, I confidently breezed into that property. There, in a dark open-air parking lot, I saw a sight that made me burst out laughing: Two grubby benches had been placed in a far, dank corner of the lot; each had its own slightly battered, circa 1958, canister-style ashtray. Patio livin’.Back at the conference, I was on fire. “There should be an app,” I started telling other attendees, “that tourists call to hire a car that will pick you up and get you high.” Each car would be themed: In the Nurse car, the driver would be dressed in a nurse’s uniform, and she would “medicine” you and feed you lots of Jell-O. In the Kitten car, the back seat has been ripped out and replaced with kittens.Reactions ranged from “Awesome! Stoner’s paradise!” to “Wouldn’t the kittens fall out?” to “I can see you’re being humorous there, Henry.”But I was delivered my strongest dose of reality when I shared the idea with JJ Walker, the chief executive of My 420 Tours, a company offering vape-friendly hotel rooms and party-bus tours of dispensaries, who told me: “I love that. But we’re already working on something sort of like that.” I was late to the proverbial party — the party that I couldn’t legally party at.On my last day in Denver, I went to Lo-Do Massage in the groovy RiNo arts district and got a THC-infused lotion massage. Earlier, I had seen the expensive lotion ($32 for two ounces) at a dispensary. I asked, “You mean I can get just my kneecaps high?” But the budtender explained that it yields Bengay-ish or arnica creamlike pain relief, not actual intoxication.A wonderfully cheerful and lovely Lo-Do masseuse named Megan gave me a massage; when, at hour’s end, she asked me how I was, I said, “I feel like a weightless, low-calorie iced dessert.” She asked, “Not like Jell-O?” I said, “No. More like Tofutti or fro-yo.” Megan said, “Awesome.”We shared a slightly awkward pause. I had already paid for the massage, and tipped Megan, so I wasn’t sure what other aspect of this commercial transaction seemed to be hanging in the balance.Finally, Megan spoke: “I don’t want to make you talk too much more because I can see you’re in a really good place and I don’t want to ruin it.”Now that’s good business.