https://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/05/world/asia/interview-with-tsai-ing-wen.html
Interview With Tsai Ing-wen - The New York Times
Taiwan,Elections
Jan. 5, 2012
2549
Tsai Ing-wen, chair of the Democratic Progressive Party, is running for president of Taiwan against President Ma Ying-jeou in the Jan. 14 elections. The following is a partial transcript of the interview conducted last month with Times reporter Andrew Jacobs at the Taipei headquarters of her party. Ms. Tsai spoke in English. Click here to read a transcript of an interview with her opponent in the race, President Ma Ying-jeou.Q: As an outsider looking in, life in Taiwan looks pretty good: you have double-digit economic growth, low inflation and relations with China have never been more stable. Why are you running for president and what would you do differently from the incumbent if elected?A: Tsai Ing-wen: Well 10 percent GDP growth last year doesn’t mean much because that was 2010 figure. But in 2009, the growth rate was actually minus -2 percent, so it‘s a rebound. So it doesn’t mean we did very well in 2010. And this year the growth rate is 4.5 percent, and they continue to lower the figure. And secondly, the growth rate doesn’t mean job opportunity here because when you are calculating the growth rate, there is a very important element in that, and that is our exports. And half of our exports are actually manufactured somewhere else, not here. So people are looking for jobs here. And thirdly, with this relationship with China and mismanagement of the economic policies, the housing prices are going up and up and normally people just can’t afford a place to stay in the city, especially here in Taipei. So despite your talking about the inflation rate, the real problem is housing that we’re facing. So the wealth gap, housing prices and lack of jobs are the problems facing Taiwan and the government and the people here.Q: How would you close the wealth gap?Tsai Ing-wen: Well, the first thing you have to do is find jobs for people, and you have to change your economic policies. You need to change the strategy from a pattern of competition based on cost to a pattern of competition based on technology and innovation. And we have not invested enough in the areas of research and development, especially in the companies here.Q: From the U.S. standpoint, Taiwan’s relationship with China is extremely important and Washington has been relatively pleased with the way President Ma has handled cross-strait relations. If elected, how would you do things differently?Tsai Ing-wen: The cross-strait issue has been managed for the last few decades in a way that is not transparent and decisions have been made by the leaders themselves without the full participation of people here. But nowadays we have a very different situation here that is we are a democracy and people want to participate in the decision-making process, especially when we are talking about issues related to cross-straits, an issue that affects the future of Taiwan. So I would deal with it in a way that is more consistent with the democratic development here. I guess many people think that one of important issues that we have to deal is the “one China” principle that the Chinese government has been insisting is a precondition for any cross-strait exchanges. So the K.M.T. came up with idea of the “92 Consensus,” which to many people who participated in the 1992 process is something that does not exist. Because there wasn’t such a term as “1992 consensus” in the 1990s, this was a term only invented in early 2000.It’s messy and nobody has a clear idea or convincing argument as to what happed in 1990s. So what is more important in my view is that you have to get the position ready. And this is a position supported by the majority of the people here. And the way you form this majority opinion is something that is particularly important, that is you need to have democratic process. So you can’t just have a politician or a leader saying that this is the majority view. No, that is not enough. You need to have democratic process to form this majority view, or at least a position that is supported by the majority of people here. So that’s what I am aiming at, that we need a process. So I have this idea of a Taiwan Consensus, which means people in Taiwan have to get together and form a consensus of their own and that they turn around to talk to the Chinese to form a cross-strait consensus so we can build a relationship on that consensus. And in my view, that is the right order to do things. And with that we can build a long lasting relationship with China.Q: Putting the process aside, if you were looking back at what President Ma has accomplished the past few years -- direct fight, shipping, postal service, tourism – is there anything you find worthy of praise.Tsai Ing-wen: These direct fights, direct trade and tourism were all things that we did in the government in 2008. We changed the legal infrastructure here to make all these things possible. And then we conducted several rounds of negotiations.  In the Chinese view, they were unofficial negotiations but they were true negotiations. We conducted quite a number of negotiations with China to set up the basis for direct fights, in our case it was direct charter flights. Today, it’s still charter flights, it’s not scheduled fights. And tourism, we started that. So we have done a lot to pave the way for the cross-strait exchanges and what the Ma government did was a continuation of what we did.Q: When you look across the straits at China do you see a foe or a potential friend?Tsai Ing-wen: It’s a rising power, but it also a source of uncertainty for the region because it’s not a democracy or a full market economy yet. So there are a lot uncertainties associated with that economy and what is more, we don’t know to what extent they can maintain their social stability while they are trying to develop themselves economically. And if we get too close to them, we will be subject to these uncertainties as well. We don’t know when things go wrong in China, whether we will be able to insulate ourselves from problems China may be facing.Q: You’ve talked about the loss of sovereignty. Do you have some examples of how Taiwan has lost some of its sovereignty as a result of President Ma’s policies?Tsai Ing-wen: For many Taiwanese, almost all Taiwanese, we’d like to we say we are a country, and we have a sovereignty of our own. We just fail to understand why the president had to say our relationship with China is an area-to-area relationship. When Chinese visitors come, we have to put away our flags. And then more and more people in international community think we have accepted the One China principle. Therefore they tend to think we probably don’t have sovereignty of our own. I’m sure you are aware of the example of Philippine government sending Taiwanese citizens to China [for prosecution on fraud charges]. And so, let me put it this way: the distinction between China and Taiwan to many foreign countries and foreigners is less and less clear. And this is damages our sovereignty.One more thing: this government accepted the 1992 Consensus and the 1992 Consensus, according to the Chinese definition, is “One China” principle so essentially this government accepted the “One China” principle. That’s not intangible. That’s pretty tangible.Q: So if elected, what’s the first thing you would do vis a vis relations with China?Tsai Ing-wen: I would have a democratic process for people to get together and talk about the way they want the government to conduct business with China.Q: In the past decade or so, it seems as if Taiwan has lost some of its diplomatic stature among American officials and there has been some extreme talk in academic circles about abandoning Taiwan Relations Act, which obligates the U.S. to sell defensive weapons to Taiwan, in order to improve relations with China. How does such talk make you feel?Tsai Ing-wen: I think the U.S. calculation of U.S. interests is getting more and more complex. So Taiwan is one of the elements in their calculation. But Taiwan is actually not alone. We are part of Asia so if the U.S. wants to come back to this part of the world and increase its presence and influence here, then the confidence of countries in Asia is very important. If the U.S. wants to reduce its support for Taiwan, other counties would be alarmed and very worried. The U.S. has the kind of determination to defend democracy in this part of the world.Q: Do you worry that Taiwan is being abandoned by the U.S.?Tsai Ing-wen: No, I think it’s still okay in the sense that it’s not Taiwan alone facing China; the neighboring countries are facing China together. Whatever problems we have, they have as well.Q: If you were elected, would you push strongly for the purchase of the latest generation of F-16s which until now have not been forthcoming from the United States?Tsai Ing-wen: We of course would continue to ask for the sale of this military equipment, and we would get our budget ready for that purchase. But it’s just so disappointing that this current government is not that enthusiastic about these purchases. For us, the purchase of adequate military equipment for our defense is essential.Q: Why do you think the current government is not enthusiastic?Tsai Ing-wen: Because they are afraid of offending China.Q: But President Ma has been critical of China when it comes to certain issues, like human rights or speaking out on the anniversary of the crackdown on the protests at Tiananmen Square.Tsai Ing-wen: You really think so? We didn’t hear much after he took office. When he was under a lot of domestic pressure, he would say something. But he wouldn’t say things under his own initiative.Q: If you were elected and 51 percent of the voters voted for reunification with China, how would you respond?Tsai Ing-wen: If that is the choice of the people here, than that is their choice. That is what democracy is about.Q: Another hypothetical. If you were elected and the next day you received a call from President Hu Jintao, and he said “Can I come to Taiwan and meet you?” what would you do?Tsai Ing-wen: Why not, if they don’t place any preconditions, like we have to accept one China principle before he comes.Q: Would you go there as well?Tsai Ing-wen: Yes, without any preconditions, sure.Q: Looking back on the cross-strait policies of Chen Shui-bian [Taiwan’s president from 2000 until 2008 and also from the Democratic Progressive Party] do you think they were too provocative?  Tsai Ing-wen: I was minister of the Mainland Affairs Council from 2000 to 2004 and during that time, I did a lot of things and so the market was able to establish these links with greater intensity after they [the Nationalists] took over. This whole thing is a continuation of the past.Q: But do think his provocative stance toward China was beneficial or harmful to Taiwan?Tsai Ing-wen: Ma Ying-jeou tends to use cross-strait policy as an election tool and a political tool too and my position is that we don’t use that as a political tool because that is an issue that is critical and essential to the interests of the Taiwanese people.Q: Would you say that your policy vis a vis China has evolved over the years?Tsai Ing-wen: No, I’m pretty consistent. When I was chair of the MAC [Mainland Affairs Council], I talked about democracy and I said that Yes, let’s leave the options open but the important decisions have to made by the people through a democratic process. The position remains the same. I do think we need to normalize our trade and economic relationship in the multilateral framework of the WTO. That continues to be my position.Q: This will be Taiwan’s fifth presidential election since it emerged from single-party rule. How would you describe the state of Taiwan’s democracy?  Tsai Ing-wen: It’s getting more and more mature, I mean the voters, the citizens. They are more informed, more sophisticated. But what is bad about democracy here is we have so much Chinese influence. Two thirds of our public companies have investment in China and I’m sure the Chinese will make sure [these companies] listen to what China has to say. Also, I’m not sure to what extent the press here is free from intervention from the government, because they need government advertising. The largest buyer in the market these days is the government. And then you have the K.M.T. and its party assets. It is almost the richest political party in the world. So that hurts fair competition between the political parties. They have a lot of money to spend. Last year their dividend income alone was about three billion NT dollars, which is $100 million US dollars. That’s a lot of money.Q: What about corruption in the current government?Tsai Ing-wen: Look, there are a number of problems like vote buying still going on. And in last few elections so many K.M.T. candidate got caught and prosecuted. So vote buying is still prevalent here even this time and mostly K.M.T. candidates. If you have vote buying, meaning people who spend money investing in their own political career, they then need reimbursement. Where are they going to get reimbursement to make their investment worthwhile? That’s the source of corruption.Q: Your party, the Democratic Progressive Party, also has a legacy of corruption in former President Chen Shui-bian, who is serving a 20-year sentence for bribery and embezzlement.Tsai Ing-wen: I tend to think of this is an individual case rather than systemic or group behavior.Q: You mean that corruption in the K.M.T. is systemic but not in the D.P.P?Tsai Ing-wen: Ours is not systemic but the K.M.T. is more systemic because vote buying is so prevalent.Q: But the president and former chairman of your own party was implicated in corruption.Tsai Ing-wen: Yes, it’s most unfortunate that it was the leader who made that mistake. But it doesn’t mean that there is a system there for D.P.P. politicians to be corrupt. For K.M.T. it is different because in each of the elections here the K.M.T. candidates have to spend a lot of money in order to get themselves elected. This is a saying which is rather popular in Chinese proverbs “不贿选，不会选”。If they don’t bribe, they don’t know how to run the campaign for K.M.T. politicians.Q: What have you learned from the scandal surrounding President Chen Shui-bian?Tsai Ing-wen: The most important thing we learned is about the issue of campaign expenses. Because we are a party with no party assets, and there is little help the party can offer individual candidates, they have to finance their campaigns and look for donors, especially big donors and in a way they got carried away by these donors. Because the big donors, when they give money, they would like them to adopt certain policies, one way or another. But after year 2008, we changed party finances to a small donation system. Today the main source of our finances is from the public.Q: President Ma’s family came from the mainland and you are ethnically Taiwanese. Your party, the D.P.P., traditionally draws a great deal of support among Taiwanese – whose voting strength is concentrated in the south -- and the K.M.T. has in the past done well among mainlanders. How big a role do you think ethnicity is playing this time around?Tsai Ing-wen: I’m popular in the south and other places as well and there are plenty of mainlanders in the south. It’s geographic in a certain sense. But the reason why it’s geographic is because the allocation of government resources. There is a tendency for the K.M.T. to invest more in the north and less in the south.Q: How did the years you spent studying in the United States influence you?Tsai Ing-wen: Essentially it’s a pretty decent democracy, despite its very complicated domestic politics. It’s much more complicated than ours. But it’s just that we don’t know to what extent the U.S. has the determination to be strong in this part of the world. Before these few weeks, we don’t know whether this would be sustainable, the kind determination they demonstrated recently.Q: After your recent trip to the U.S., at least one media outlet suggested that American officials, worried about your party’s traditional support for Taiwanese independence, were less than thrilled with the prospect of your election. Did you get that sort of feedback from the U.S. officials with whom you met?Tsai Ing-wen: We talked like normal business partners. I didn’t get any feeling that they … well let me put it this way, in each meeting we had with government officials, they assured us that they stand neutral in this election. Of course they asked question and we answered them. We didn’t see them expressing disappointment or frustrations of any sort.Q: I saw today in the local press an article about how Taiwanese business leaders in China are trying to sway their compatriots to vote for President Ma. You’ve mentioned several times that you believe China is trying to influence the outcome of the election. Can you give some examples of how that is playing out?Tsai Ing-wen: The story is not a single incident. It happens almost every day. We’ve heard a lot about that. They invite politicians and heads of villages to China and they even work on local opinions leaders. They invite them to China and pay their expenses. You hear this sort of story almost every day. But if you want me to provide you with the evidence, that will be difficult because we don’t have judicial means to investigate people, especially the behavior of people in China. This is the kind of story here every day. They also sent their purchase procurement people to the south to buy agricultural products. (An aide chimes in: “and they are accompanied by KMT people when they make those purchases.”)Q:  President Ma has halted what had become something of a ritual in Taiwan: applying for membership with the United Nations. How would you handle that if elected?Tsai Ing-wen: We have to have a good study and careful thought as to how we will manage our international efforts in that regard. With application for U.N. membership, the purpose is to let people know we have the intention to become a regular member of international society. So that is a way of doing it. There may be a lot of other ways to do the same thing. We will try to come up with alternatives to see what would be most effective.Q: Do you have any concerns about the recent policy change that allows mainland students to study at Taiwanese universities?Tsai Ing-wen: If you keep the balance right, it’s not a bad policy. When I was the Mainland Affairs Council chair, I did certain things in the same direction, but not to the extent they are doing now. You have to get the balance right. They may be taking away resources that the local students might want to keep for themselves.So far I don’t think the Taiwanese students are outnumbered. We are still okay in trying to change the attitudes and thoughts of the Chinese students toward Taiwan. So it’s not a matter of whether these Chinese students coming here is good or bad per se, it’s how you manage that. But in many of the policy areas related to China, it’s how you manage.Q: Have you been to mainland China?Tsai Ing-wen: Yes, once as part of a delegation, in 1998. In 2000, I became the M.A.C. chair and I wasn’t in a position to go.Q: Another hypothetical. If China next year turned toward democracy, would you pursue reunification if the resulting government was one you felt you could trust?Tsai Ing-wen: It’s not a time for me to offer you my personal opinions. I am running for public office. Such a decision needs to be made by the people through a democratic process.Q: Do you like this process of campaigning?Tsai Ing-wen: It’s not a matter of enjoying it or not, it’s a matter of whether you get used to it or not. It’s a matter of your life. I’m getting used to it. It’s like asking a student whether you like going to school. Being on a stage is quite a challenge for someone who used to be a teacher and who is more used to working in an office. But I’m getting used to it so it’s okay for me to go on stage and talk to the public, to tens of thousands of people, as long as the microphone is good.Q: Growing up, did you want to go into politics?Tsai Ing-wen: When I was growing up, I tried to survive by getting myself graduated from school. I wasn’t a very good student so it was always a matter of survival for me. I had some problems in learning new things. I wanted to do it in my own way. If I was tested in the teacher’s way, I failed the exam. But I managed to graduate from Tai Da [National Taiwan University]. And I like the way the Americans and British educate their students. So I did better when I was in the states and the U.K. The teachers gave me a lot of space and freedom. I essentially organized my own study plan when I was in the states and the U.K.Q: Then how did it happen that you’re running for president of Taiwan?Tsai Ing-wen: Well, it just happened. People like me. People want to vote for me. Don’t you know I’m very popular? (Laughs.) I’m surprised too.I just hope the other one [President Ma] can manage to run a decent campaign. Sometimes a campaign can get very dirty. The K.M.T. has good control over the press here so it’s still not a fair competition but we’ll manage.Q: It sounds like you’re worried what might happen in the next month?Tsai Ing-wen: Maybe a gunshot. I hope not. The 2004 [assassination attempt on President Chen Shui-bian] really changed the results and we don’t want to see that happen again.