http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/13/business/mutfund/the-bond-market-is-shifting-so-steady-yourself.html
The Bond Market Is Shifting, So Steady Yourself - The New York Times
Stocks and Bonds,Government Bonds,Credit and Debt,Interest Rates
Jan. 13, 2017
4864
The forces that rejuvenated the stock market late last year have changed the profile of the fixed-income market.Heading into the fourth quarter, for example, funds that invest in long-term government debt had been up more than 13 percent for the year as investors favored relatively safe bets on a sluggish economy. But as market interest rates shot up on hopes of accelerating growth and fiscal stimulus from the incoming administration of Donald J. Trump — hopes that contributed to the big rally in stocks — long-term government bond funds fell by double digits in the final three months of the year and finished 2016 up just 1 percent. The Vanguard Long-Term Government Bond E.T.F., for instance, fell nearly 12 percent in the final three months of 2016 and finished the year up only 1.2 percent for the year.At the same time, investor appetite for lower-quality bonds has been on the rise, with high-yield bonds up nearly 2 percent in the fourth quarter. The SPDR Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond E.T.F. has gained nearly 2 percent since Dec. 1 and returned 14.4 percent in 2016.“In one fell swoop, the market was recalibrated,” said Carl P. Kaufman, managing director for fixed-income strategy at Osterweis Capital Management. “The question is: Does it continue?”Mr. Kaufman said that investors aren’t likely to find that out until at least the first few months of the Trump presidency. But he said he thought “the markets are going to take a breather and see what happens until then.”In the meantime, market strategists warn investors not to dramatically overhaul their core fixed-income strategy.To be sure, many investors believe that the smartest strategy in 2017 is not to fight the Federal Reserve or fiscal stimulus.With the Fed indicating that there could be three modest rate increases in 2017, after the central bank’s quarter-point rise in December, investors are generally being advised to “shorten up” their bond portfolios by putting new money to work in short-term debt that will lose less value than long-dated bonds when market rates rise.Even if the Fed is overestimating the number of rate increases to come — as policy makers did in 2016, when they entered the year forecasting four rate increases but only delivered one — “you’re not being paid a lot to extend out” in terms of maturities, said Jeff Klingelhofer, a portfolio manager and managing director at Thornburg Investment Management.At the same time, the Trump administration’s calls to lower household and corporate tax rates and to increase spending on infrastructure projects are expected to energize growth — or at the least breathe some new life into an aging economic recovery that’s been unfolding for nearly eight years. And these stimulative policies are generally viewed as a sign that it’s safe to bet on institutions with less-than-pristine credit.But within this framework, fixed-income strategists advise investors to err on the side of caution.“The markets have mostly overreacted at this point,” Mr. Klingelhofer said. “Most investors would agree that we’re in the later stages of this recovery — maybe we’re in the seventh inning, maybe the eighth, but we’re not in the second inning when it comes to growth.”Therefore, he said, even if investors want to add to their high-yield exposure, the prudent move may be to focus on the higher-quality end of the junk bond spectrum — for instance with a bond rated BB or B.Andrew C. McCormick, head of T. Rowe Price’s United States taxable bond team, said that with the Fed poised to continue lifting short-term rates, there may be a more attractive way to gain exposure to the noninvestment grade market: bank loan securities with interest rates that float with market rates.Bank loan funds post gains when rates are on the rise, but this is particularly true now that the Fed’s December increase has pushed the three-month London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor, up to 1 percent. While rates on bank loan securities generally float with the market, in many cases that only happens if Libor is at or above 1 percent.With Libor at that threshold, this form of noninvestment grade debt should have more appeal.Moreover, the typical bank loan fund has about one-tenth the exposure to the energy sector as high-yield bond funds do. While energy prices have recently stabilized, plummeting prices in 2015 led to a jump in the default rate for high-yield debt early last year.Bank loans also sport ultrashort maturities. The average bank loan fund has a duration of less than 0.4 year, implying that if market rates were to rise by 1 percentage point, these funds would fall less than 0.4 percent in value. By contrast, the average duration of a junk bond fund is 3.6 years.“You’re taking virtually no duration risk in bank loans,” says Kathy A. Jones, chief fixed-income strategist for the Schwab Center for Financial Research. Meanwhile, she adds, bank loan debt hasn’t had the run-up that high-yield bonds have enjoyed.Kate Warne, an investment strategist with the brokerage Edward Jones, said investors shouldn’t assume too much when it comes to the bond market.For example, while it may seem certain that rates are poised to rise, “the Fed has overestimated the number of rate hikes they expect pretty consistently,” she said. Moreover, with bond yields generally higher in the United States than overseas, foreign money will continue to pour into domestic bonds, which should keep a lid on how high rates can rise.This is an argument for sticking with a traditional strategy like a bond ladder, she said, in which investors divide their fixed-income stake into bonds maturing in routine intervals to mitigate interest rate risks.Rather than abandoning the laddered approach by selling longer-dated bonds, investors may choose to add to their cash stake to take advantage of rising rates sooner. “But don’t ignore intermediate- and long-term bonds,” she said.Ms. Jones of Charles Schwab said that investors may think they know what’s to come in the economy or from the Trump administration in 2017, “but in reality, we are operating under a cloud of uncertainty. Everyone may be expecting taxes to be cut or counting on infrastructure spending, but we simply don’t know what the specific policy prescriptions will be,” she said.