https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/15/sports/cycling/obituary-hein-verbruggen-dead-international-cycling-union.html
Hein Verbruggen, Who Raised Cycling’s Profile, Dies at 75 - The New York Times
Verbruggen  Hein,Bicycles and Bicycling,Tour de France (Bicycle Race),Doping (Sports),International Cycling Union,Deaths (Obituaries)
June 15, 2017
3737
Hein Verbruggen, who brought the sport of cycling to new audiences and new countries as president of the International Cycling Union in the 1990s but was accused of failing to confront the pervasive use of performance-enhancing drugs in the sport, died on Wednesday. He was 75.The International Cycling Union, which reported his death on its website, did not say where he died or state the cause of death. He had recently been treated for leukemia.Mr. Verbruggen became president of the International Cycling Union in 1991. At the time, the organization had only a small number of employees, and the sport’s popularity was limited, with most of its major races confined to three countries: France, Belgium and Italy.A former food executive, Mr. Verbruggen dreamed of turning cycling into a world sport, like soccer or Formula 1 auto racing, and enhancing its presence in the Olympic Games, which did not allow professional cyclists to compete. He immediately merged the sport’s two other associations, the International Professional Cycling Federation and the International Amateur Cycling Federation, with the I.C.U., a move that smoothed the way for professionals to compete in the Olympics in 1996.In 2002 he created a center near the I.C.U.’s headquarters in Aigle, Switzerland, to train international cyclists and promote the sport in smaller countries. In 2005, the last year of his presidency, he started the I.C.U. Pro Tour, a series of competitions that included all the major one-day races as well as the biggest stage races. At the same time, he established regional tours on five continents.Doping cast a long shadow over his career. The issue was a sore point well before he joined the I.C.U.“I want to get rid of doping because it prevents me from selling the sport,” he told The Associated Press in the 1980s, when he was an official with the International Professional Cycling Association.That did not happen. To the contrary, Mr. Verbruggen’s reign at the I.C.U. was plagued by a series of doping scandals, none more damaging than the revelation that Lance Armstrong, winner of seven straight Tour de France titles, owed his victories in part to performance-enhancing drugs. A host of critics accused the organization, and Mr. Verbruggen in particular, of aiding and abetting Armstrong, the sport’s greatest international star.Mr. Verbruggen strenuously denied the criticisms, but the Cycling Independent Reform Commission, an independent investigating body commissioned by the I.C.U., delivered a damning report in March 2015. By then, Mr. Verbruggen was serving as honorary president of the I.C.U., a post he held until his death.The report accused him and his handpicked successor, Patrick McQuaid of Ireland, of fostering a doping culture, running the organization autocratically and secretively, violating the organization’s own guidelines and engaging in highly questionable ethics. It also stated that Mr. Verbruggen had foiled efforts to put an antidoping strategy in place.“I vehemently disagree with most of its contents, as well as its conclusions,” he told The A.P. “The report is outrageously biased, misleading, and frequently wrong.”To defend his reputation, Mr. Verbruggen created a website offering his version of events, with supporting documentation. And he denounced his critics — Armstrong among them — loudly and often.“I took a federation from virtual bankruptcy, with four people working in three offices in three countries, hopelessly divided, to a flourishing federation with an excellent reputation as a structure,” he told The Daily Telegraph in 2013. “So I haven’t lost one friend, nobody who is important in my life. I’ve lost nothing.”Henricus Verbruggen was born on June 21, 1941, in Helmond, near Eindhoven, in the southern Netherlands. After graduating in 1964 from the Nyenrode Business University in Breukelen, he became the Belgian sales manager for the food company Carnation.He became involved in cycling as a sales manager for Mars, the candymaker, which was preparing to introduce the Mars Bar in Belgium in 1970. Belgium did not permit television advertising, so Mr. Verbruggen decided to promote the brand by having Mars co-sponsor the hugely popular Flandria racing team, named for its primary sponsor, the Flandria bicycle and motorcycle company.In 1975, the year he started an independent business consultancy, Mr. Verbruggen was invited to join the professional cycling committee of the Royal Dutch Cycling Union. Three years later he became its representative to the I.C.U. He joined the board of the International Professional Cycling Federation in 1979, becoming vice president in 1982 and president in 1984.He became a member of the International Olympic Committee in 1996 and played a major role in its preparations for the 2008 Games in Beijing.