https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/13/world/europe/migrant-children-alone-in-condemned-jungle-look-hopefully-to-britain.html
Migrant Children, Alone and Desperate in Calais, Look to Britain With Hope - The New York Times
Calais (France),Children and Childhood,Great Britain,The Jungle,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,France,Refugees and Displaced Persons
Oct. 12, 2016
5585
PARIS — About 1,000 unaccompanied children live in the filth of the Jungle, as the sprawling migrant camp outside Calais, France, is known. Alone, with no parents, they sleep in the same crowded, muddy tents as adults. Some are as young as 9. Many traveled on their own, often in the wake of family or friends.Their only diversions are a makeshift school run by volunteers, and regular fights among the adults. “Only animals live in the Jungle,” a 14-year-old Afghan migrant told the British Red Cross recently.Now, after months of foot-dragging, and with the French government’s planned dismantling of the camp looming on Monday, relief officials say Britain may finally be accelerating steps to admit dozens of children who have the legal right to be reunited with relatives across the English Channel.Amber Rudd, Britain’s home secretary, told Parliament this week that the British would “transfer from the camp as many minors as possible” under European Union rules before the demolition begins.France is scrambling to find places for as many as 10,000 African and Afghan migrants at the Jungle, with plans to disperse them in communities around the country. It is proving to be a steep challenge.To protest the state’s plan, the far-right mayor of the southern town of Béziers put up posters this week depicting a crowd of migrants and text reading, “That’s it, they’re coming.” There have been demonstrations in other towns.But the issue of the children who have reached the squalid camp without relatives is particularly thorny. If the destruction of the camp goes ahead as expected, it would leave more than a thousand unaccompanied minors in a deeply uncertain position.“When we told the boy, he started crying and ran away,” the British Red Cross noted in a report this week, citing the case of a young migrant in the camp who was told recently that British officials had requested that his application be resubmitted, because of faulty paperwork.“We know he’s still trying to cross the Eurotunnel every night,” the report said. The process of admission can take up to 11 months, the report said — an often unbearable strain for already traumatized children.This week, France’s interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, criticized his British counterparts for their handling of the issue, saying they “need to live up to their responsibilities” and quickly take the children in.Mr. Cazeneuve said on French radio that Britain had a “moral duty” to do so. Just 72 children from the camp have been reunited with a family member in Britain since March, according to the British Red Cross report.Britain’s reluctance to accept more migrants has emerged as a theme in France’s coming presidential election, with several candidates saying that an earlier treaty making France the principal migrant gatekeeper for Britain should be revisited in light of Britons’ vote to leave the European Union.“Unaccompanied children who have relatives in the U.K. should be coming,” said Olivia Field, an advocacy officer for the British Red Cross. “That hasn’t been working well.”She added that the children had been living in “unimaginable conditions” near Calais.Mr. Cazeneuve is “waiting for the English to do their bit on the reception” of the children, said Laurent Giovannoni of the church organization Secours Catholique, who met with the interior minister on Tuesday alongside other officials from charity organizations. “He spoke of negotiations, always difficult.”In London, a Conservative member of Parliament, David Burrowes, suggested that inaction on the issue of the children was mostly on the French side. But the British Red Cross’s toughly worded report said that the process was “failing” and that both sides were to blame.Efforts to place the children have been frustrated by long waits at government offices in France, an absence of interpreters and volunteer official intermediaries, and Home Office inertia and insistence on DNA testing.Officials have identified 178 minors at the camp who have relatives in Britain. There are about 200 others who could be admitted under British law for humanitarian reasons.Red Cross officials said this week that after months of pressure from relief groups and the French government, Britain appeared to be stepping up its efforts.“There have been some systems put in place so that the U.K. could take responsibility for some of the children,” Ms. Field said. “We’re pleased with the steps the government has taken in the last few days. We’re confident that all those with relatives will be in the U.K. before the camp is demolished. Everything is happening quite quickly.”Human rights groups in France have denounced the government’s plan to dismantle the Jungle, even as one of France’s highest courts on Wednesday approved the demolition of the numerous shops and cafes that have sprouted in the camp.“A rapid dismantlement will give rise to tensions,” Mr. Giovannoni said. “There is a risk that this operation could turn into something very heavy-handed.”He added, “The migrants will continue to come to Calais.”