http://www.nytimes.com/2001/07/03/sports/tennis-sampras-king-of-wimbledon-is-dethroned.html
TENNIS; Sampras, King of Wimbledon, Is Dethroned - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 3, 2001
1410
There was the solitary figure of Pete Sampras, with a bag slung over his shoulder and flip-flops on his feet, cutting through a courtyard outside the locker room, where several players milled about.Not one of them approached Sampras. He simply slipped out the door, climbed into the empty back seat of a white courtesy van and disappeared around an ivy-covered wall. Almost a year ago, he was surrounded like a bonfire, circled by adoring fans, his shy parents and his future wife before departing with his 13th major championship and seventh Wimbledon title as added company.But 3 hours 41 minutes into his Round of 16 match today, Sampras's aura met its expiration date. With a forehand return punched down the line by an unabashed Roger Federer, in a match-point moment that startled the crowd, Sampras was in the unfamiliar position of watching his opponent fall to his knees in celebration.Soon, the 19-year-old Federer was wiping tears from his cheeks after displaying such detached emotion during his 7-6 (7), 5-7, 6-4, 6-7 (2), 7-5 test of nerve. With unflinching returns against Sampras's mythic serve, with the cool to ward off two break points midway through the fifth set, Federer became the first player to defeat the grass-court god of Wimbledon in 5 years and 32 matches.''You know, something great isn't going to last forever,'' said a visibly shaken Sampras, speaking in soft tones after the match. ''Today, I came up a little short.''The end was jarring but not completely unforeseen. This Wimbledon loss has been in the works for an entire season. For months, Sampras displayed the sluggish responses and languid reflexes of someone operating under water, and he has not won a tournament since Wimbledon last year. Once he stepped on the grass, he believed the magic would commence.But after Sampras barely bypassed Barry Cowan, the 265th-ranked player in the world, in the second round, there were warnings to the contrary. Sampras shrugged off his five-set escape. But more than ever, Sampras was vulnerable. Everyone said so.''A lot of friends and players told me, 'This year, I think you can really beat him,' '' the 15th-seeded Federer said. ''I'd played a great year so far, better than he had.''Over the first seven months of this season, the Swiss player with the all-court instincts has won 43 of 57, watched his ranking soar to 15 from 29 and has developed the kind of poise that Sampras usually possesses. He was not always so composed though. As a 14-year-old on the road, Federer would cry when he had to leave home. At 16, he was kicked out of practice sessions for smashing his rackets.Finally, he found his passion for tennis but realized that turning rackets into scrap metal wasn't helping his game. With fortune-cookie optimism, Federer stepped on Center Court today, the home of Pete Sampras, and turned it into his quiet think tank.''To play on Center Court in front of a packed crowd, to play Pete Sampras, I don't know,'' Federer said. ''It doesn't make you want to scream or throw rackets.''Federer was at peace. The pressure was on Sampras, not on a teenager playing in his ninth major. Federer's fearlessness was rewarded on several critical points, including the match-turning ninth game of the fifth set. The same Sampras who had blown two leaping, vintage overheads in the match, who had won just 47 percent of his net points on approach and who had dropped in just 50 percent of his service returns was experiencing a spiritual awakening.With an adrenaline kick from taking the fourth-set tie breaker, Sampras had unearthed a ''Best of Pistol Pete'' collection. After two deft half-volleys for winners, and one rip at a soft second serve for a return winner, Sampras conjured up a break point, ahead, 40-30. But with Sampras 6 feet from his peach-fuzzed face, swiping at short balls aimed at his chest, Federer came up with a reflex volley to erase one break point.There was one more chance though. After another wicked return winner by Sampras, Federer replied by pummeling a forehand into the corner. Two points later, Federer took a 5-4 lead when a mentally fatigued Sampras dropped a ground stroke into the net during a rare baseline rally.''He came up with some good stuff when he had to,'' said Sampras, who like Federer served 25 aces. ''If I could have possibly broken him there, I think I could have gone on to win this match. It wasn't to be.''Today, youth caught the 29-year-old Sampras. But that was not the case everywhere on the grounds. In a 7-6, 6-4, 6-4 victory against Greg Rusedski, Goran Ivanisevic, 29, advanced to the quarterfinals. He was joined by 28-year-old Patrick Rafter and 31-year-old Andre Agassi. On a day when Lleyton Hewitt, 18, had his 13-match winning streak ended by 24th-seeded Nicolas Escudé, the enigmatic Marat Safin, 20, felt happy to join Federer as a fresh face in the quarterfinals.Few were more pleased at his good fortune than Ivanisevic, a three-time Wimbledon finalist who had spent more than a week validating the wild card he received to get into the draw.''I don't know where I'm walking, but I'm walking,'' Ivanisevic said. ''Maybe it's not on the ground. Maybe I'm flying at the moment. Hopefully, I can continue like that.''He isn't under any illusion though. As a superstar on the decline, Ivanisevic has discussed how this Wimbledon could be his last. With talent that is still formidable, Sampras doesn't share the same mind-set.''He is still one of the best in the world in my mind,'' said Sampras's coach, Paul Annacone. ''With what he has accomplished, no one has the right to tell him what to feel about his future but him.''Twenty minutes after his loss, Sampras still had a positive outlook. Although he hadn't lost before the quarterfinals at Wimbledon since 1991, although his season has been forgettable, Sampras wasn't ready to ponder the end of his career.''Let's not get carried away,'' Sampras said. ''I mean, I just lost. I plan on being back for many years. I mean, this is why I play, for these tournaments. There's no reason to panic and think I can't come back here and win here again. I feel like I can always win here.''There is an element of denial in Sampras's reasoning. As his talents show signs of wear, the young stars are only getting better. There are more players like Federer in the making. If Sampras is to revive his chances, will have to do what other aging superstars have done: work harder just to keep up. In a way, will have to be more Agassi-like in his approach to fitness.''All I can do is try to rebound from kind of a disappointing year and get ready for the summer,'' Sampras said. ''It's going to take me awhile to get over this one.''It was an usual position for Sampras. Almost a year ago, everyone wanted a piece of the champion as he left the grounds. As early evening crept in today, no one wanted to approach Sampras, leaving him alone with his thoughts.