http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/08/us/man-shot-dead-by-police-after-scuffle-in-wisconsin.html
Unarmed Man Is Shot Dead by Police After Scuffle in Wisconsin - The New York Times
Robinson  Anthony Terrell Jr (1995-2015),Attacks on Police,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Madison (Wis),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks
March 7, 2015
7275
A 19-year-old Wisconsin man was shot and killed Friday by a police officer during a scuffle inside an apartment in Madison, police officials said. The shooting prompted protests that continued on Saturday and led officials to call for restraint while the shooting is investigated.The shooting occurred Friday evening after the police received calls for a man who had committed battery and was jumping in and out of traffic, said Michael C. Koval, the Madison chief of police. A police officer followed the man to an apartment on Williamson Street and forced his way in after hearing a disturbance inside, the chief said. The man then assaulted the officer, who shot him, Chief Koval said at a news conference on Friday evening.The officer immediately rendered first aid, but the man died at a hospital, Chief Koval said. Officials did not immediately release the man’s name, but friends and relatives identified him as Anthony Robinson, an African-American who graduated from high school last year.“My son has never been a violent person,” Andrea Irwin, who identified herself as Mr. Robinson’s mother, told WKOW, a Madison TV station. “And to die in such a violent, violent way, it baffles me.”On Friday, Chief Koval described the scuffle between the officer and the man as “mutual combat,” and said the officer had been treated at a hospital for injuries sustained in the altercation, during which he was struck in the head and knocked down. At a news conference on Saturday, the chief said that the slain man had been unarmed.The police chief identified the officer as Matthew Kenny, 45, a 12-year veteran. He was placed on paid administrative leave until the state’s Division of Criminal Investigation completes an inquiry and a decision is reached by the Dane County district attorney on whether to press charges.Officer Kenny was involved in a fatal shooting in 2007 that Chief Koval described as “suicide by cop.” In that incident, Officer Kenny shot and killed Ronald Brandon, 48, after Mr. Brandon pointed what turned out to be a pellet gun at police officers, the chief said. The Dane County district attorney ruled the shooting as justified, and the Madison Police Department awarded Officer Kenny its medal of valor.Chief Koval said the officer had fired more than once, but he did not say how many times the man had been wounded.The altercation was the third fatal shooting involving a Madison police officer since an April law requiring police shootings to be investigated by an outside agency, according to The Wisconsin State Journal.It happened amid a public debate over how the police use lethal force in encounters with unarmed civilians, especially African-Americans, and the subsequent absence of charges or convictions for officers involved. The refrain “Black lives matter” became the rallying cry of protests over the deaths of Eric Garner in Staten Island and Michael Brown of Ferguson, Mo., and others who died at the hands of police officers who were later cleared of criminal wrongdoing.On Friday night, protesters gathered at the scene around a police blockade, drumming and chanting, “Black lives matter.” On Saturday, people gathered for a rally at a downtown building that houses the Madison Police Department’s Central District and marched to the street where the shooting happened.Their protests coincided with the 50th anniversary commemoration of the civil rights march from Selma, Ala., to Montgomery, the state capital. Representative John Lewis of Georgia, who was in the 1965 march and introduced President Obama there on Saturday, urged others to “get out there and push and pull until we redeem the soul of America.”The police said that the protests in Madison had been peaceful and that there were no arrests connected to the demonstrations.Mayor Paul Soglin of Madison said that he met with the man’s relatives on Friday and that the shooting had caused a great deal of sadness and anger for the family and the larger community.“The parents have encountered the worst imaginable outcome of anything in life, which is to lose a child,” he said. “They’re angry. They want answers.”Mr. Soglin said that as far as he could tell, the man was “a nonviolent kid,” but he would not confirm his name. “He was a teenager,” he said. “He was congenial, had a lot of friends. He certainly wasn’t a kid that one would worry about as we do with some kids with gang affiliations. There is none of that, as far as I know.”A memorial service was planned for Sunday evening.Some people vented about the shooting on Twitter, using the hashtags #Justice4Tony and #WillyStreet to refer to Williamson Street.“Praying for Madison tonight,” wrote Shane Claiborne, a founder of the Simple Way, a faith community based in Philadelphia. “Stand up, sit in, walk out — until u get answers. And until there are no more hashtag eulogies.”Zellie Imani, who writes about the politics, education, race and social change at Black-Culture.com, compared the shooting to the death in 2010 of 7-year-old Aiyana Stanley-Jones, killed in a late-night police raid in Detroit. The officer who shot her was charged with involuntary manslaughter and reckless endangerment with a gun. After two mistrials, the final charge against him was dismissed in January.“You should’ve learned from the killing” of Aiyana, he wrote on Twitter, “that even being Black in Your House isn’t safe.”Chief Koval said it was “absolutely appropriate” for the protesters to express their feelings, but called for restraint.