https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/insider/charting-literary-greatness-with-jane-austen.html
Charting Literary Greatness With Jane Austen - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Data-Mining and Database Marketing,Statistics,Austen  Jane,Writing and Writers
July 15, 2017
1750
In my work life, I edit articles for The Upshot, which takes a data-driven approach to the news. But my secret life, for several years now, has been devoted to researching and writing a novel about Jane Austen and time travel. So when the Books desk wondered if The Upshot might want to contribute to the Book Review’s special issue timed to the 200th anniversary of Austen’s death, I raised my hand.The conclusion we reached — that her novels are unusual in their focus on the ordinary — was not obvious at the outset. In thinking about Austen and data, my greatest strength was also my greatest weakness: I knew too much to know where to begin. In between more pressing tasks, my book-loving colleague Josh Katz and I would send each other links and articles and charts we would come across, scratch our heads and sigh. Jane Austen. Data-driven. Fun. We learned that many scholars were tackling the analytics of Austen. A team at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln had, among other feats, cataloged the use of free indirect discourse in the entire corpus of her work. And txtLAB, at McGill University, had mapped her novels along with those of other female 19th-century novelists “on a sliding scale of sociability vs. interiority.”Franco Moretti and his colleagues at the Stanford Literary Lab were engaged in an effort to apply “computational criticism, in all its forms, to the study of literature.” Ben Blatt, in “Nabokov’s Favorite Word Is Mauve,” observed that Austen’s “use of words like very is off the charts.”All fascinating — but what did it add up to? What could data tell us about this incomparable genius that just reading her work did not? May I ask to what these questions tend? I wondered testily, echoing Mr. Darcy.The Upshot’s mission is to make journalism more rigorous and statistics-based, and to make the sometimes dense and wonky products of scholarly research accessible to a general reader — to bridge the gap of words and numbers. Being unable to figure out how to do this with Austen, a subject close to my heart, felt like a failure of imagination.Then one day, Josh sent me something he’d been working on. It was like that moment in a novel when a truth is revealed, when the plot thickens, when Lydia runs off with Wickham. A bunch of old novels, arranged on a scatter plot: “Pride and Prejudice” and “Sense and Sensibility” were off by themselves at one edge.Josh had used principal component analysis, a statistical technique used to emphasize variation and bring out strong patterns in a data set. In this case, that set was all the words in a sample of 127 British novels from 1710 to 1920, divided into three 70-year periods. Josh created a sort of multidimensional vocabulary profile that grouped together novels that had more words in common.Intrigued, I returned to things I’d been reading, among them essays by Mr. Moretti; a 2013 academic paper that focused on this issue of language use; observations critics over the decades had made. This time, I saw a pattern that had eluded me, a connecting thread: how the peculiar brilliance of Austen lies partly in what she focuses on, and what she ignores.Scarce or absent were big, dramatic things: war, elopement, murder, highwaymen, kidnapping, ghosts, gambling, shipwrecks, pirates. Instead we have families, letters, visiting, gossip, carriages, tea, dances, conversations, thoughts, emotions. We are left with daily, ordinary life, a focus on states of mind, thoughts and feelings — and efforts to understand others’.And word choice can show this.To reduce words to data points is not to diminish the power of choosing the right ones and putting them in the right order; there’s magic in fiction’s ability to explore universal human truths. But a discipline like statistics can offer a new and amusing — even instructive — look at something as intuitive and artistic as a novel, and that’s exciting, too. A new source of enjoyment, as Henry Tilney might have put it, and we must agree that it is well to have as many holds upon happiness as possible.