https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/22/science/do-wild-dogs-sleep-as-much-as-your-pets.html
Do Wild Dogs Sleep as Much as Your Pets? - The New York Times
Sleep,Wolves,Dogs
Sept. 19, 2015
832
Q. Do dogs in the wild sleep as much as domesticated animals?A. Wild canines that rely on strenuous hunting to survive may sleep or rest as much as, or even more than, indolent human-created breeds that rely on a can or a bag of kibble.Domestic dogs, with their great range of body types and personalities, show a tremendous variety of sleep patterns, often including relatively brief periods of deep sleep spread out over several hours.A half-century-long study of wolves and their interaction with their prey on Isle Royale, a wilderness island in Lake Superior, found that in winter the wolves would feed for hours on a fresh kill, then sprawl out or curl up in the snow and rest or sleep about 30 percent of the time.“Wolves have plenty of reason to rest,” the study’s researchers wrote. “When wolves are active, they are really active. On a daily basis, wolves burn about 70 percent more calories compared to typical animals of similar size.” The researchers note that while hunting, wolves may burn calories at 10 to 20 times the rate they do while resting.“When food is plentiful, wolves spend a substantial amount of time simply resting, because they can,” the study said. “When food is scarce, wolves spend much time resting because they need to.”Wolves may eat only once every five to 10 days, the researchers said, losing as much as 8 to 10 percent of body weight, but regaining all the lost weight in just two days of eating and resting.Similarly, African wild dogs typically spend the whole daytime sleeping with their pack, usually in the shade or near water, with bursts of activity in darker hours.Sleeping habits vary with age as well as with species and feeding habits. A 1982 study of wolves and dogs raised in similar conditions found that dogs slept more at the beginning of their lives, while wolf cubs were far more active.