https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/15/world/europe/london-grenfell-fire-syrian-refugee.html
Syrian Refugee Is Among Victims of London Fire - The New York Times
Refugees and Displaced Persons,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Grenfell Tower Fire (June  2017),London (England)
June 15, 2017
4678
The civil war in Syria turned Mohammed Alhajali into a refugee. After making a dangerous crossing to Europe by sea, a friend said, he eventually found refuge in Britain.On Thursday, a charity said that Mr. Alhajali, 23, had died in the huge fire that ravaged the Grenfell Tower apartment building a day earlier.He was among the first victims to be identified. At least 17 people were known to have died in the blaze, though the authorities warned Thursday that the death toll was likely to rise.The Syria Solidarity Campaign, a London-based advocacy group, confirmed Mr. Alhajali’s death.“Mohammed’s older brother Omar, who was with him in the flat, survived but lost Mohammed on the way out,” said group said on Facebook. “Omar was rescued by the fire services while Mohammed went back upstairs,” the group said. “Mohammed was on the phone for two hours with a friend in Syria, waiting to be rescued.”“When the fire reached his flat on the 14th floor,” the statement added, “Mohammed bid his friend goodbye, saying that the fire had reached him. He asked his friend to pass on the message to his family.”Friends say Mr. Alhajali had planned to return to Syria when the war was over, and was studying civil engineering at the University of West London.Abdulaziz Almashi, who said he met Mr. Alhajali at a Syria Solidarity Campaign event, described him as “so lovely” and recalled how they became fast friends.“He escaped, he crossed the sea to Greece,” Mr. Almashi said, describing the perilous journey in a small boat. After reaching Europe, Mr. Alhajali sought asylum in Britain.“He wanted to go back when the war was over to rebuild the country,” Mr. Almashi said. “It’s a big loss for me, for our friends and for Syria.”Another of Mr. Alhajali’s brothers was also living in Britain, but he had not seen most of his family for several years, as they are still in Syria.“The hardest thing for me to think last night was, who is going to tell his mum, who is going to tell his father?” Mr. Almashi said.A day after the fire, little was known about most of the victims, and many residents remained unaccounted for. By Thursday afternoon, the police had confirmed 17 fatalities, but had only recovered six bodies from the building’s charred remains.