http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/08/movies/zero-days-review.html
Review: ‘Zero Days’ Examines Cyberwarfare’s Potential Online Apocalypse - The New York Times
Documentary Films and Programs,Cyberattacks and Hackers,Zero Days (Movie),Gibney  Alex,Movies
July 7, 2016
6931
Technology: With every seemingly miraculous advance comes the potential for its catastrophic misuse. If you’re inclined toward paranoia, Alex Gibney’s sobering documentary “Zero Days,” about the spread of malware, exposes a whole arena of potential terror and calamitous destruction surrounded in secrecy.We all know that our digital connectedness has a dark side. But online bullying and pornography, for example, are the least of it. The nightmare of push-button nuclear annihilation that has haunted us since the invention of the atomic bomb now has a parallel in the looming specter of large-scale cyberwarfare.The agent of doomsday explored in the film isn’t an exploding object but the manipulation of computer code to destroy the infrastructure of nation-states by gaining control of nuclear plants, disabling power grids and wreaking chaos by, in effect, shutting down the world.To make a documentary on such a complicated, far-reaching subject and maintain a common-sense perspective requires formidable organizational skills and a steady narrative hand to keep the movie from straying into any number of theoretical byways. It takes the imagination of a science-fiction writer to make it coherent and entertaining enough to hold your attention.Mr. Gibney has demonstrated all of these qualities in other documentaries, most pertinently in his takes on WikiLeaks, Steve Jobs, and American torture and interrogation practices in Afghanistan. “Zero Days” has a similarly balanced outlook along with a critical political viewpoint that avoids hysteria and demagogy. Its strongest protest is against what Mr. Gibney sees as the dangers of excessive American secrecy.At the same time, the film is an often intimidating slog through jargon and computer code. The most articulate voices helping to bridge the gap between technological vocabulary and everyday speech are two cybersecurity specialists, Eric Chien and Liam O’Murchu from Symantec Research Labs.“Zero Days” begins with the true story of a cyberattack against a nuclear power plant in Iran in which uranium-processing centrifuges were programmed to explode. But the sophisticated worm wreaking the havoc spread to computers around the world. This malicious computer virus, the film reveals, was jointly built by the United States and Israel although neither will publicly confirm it. Numerous officials in Washington officials are questioned about its existence, but none acknowledge it, and a sequence of high-level stonewalling makes for dark comedy. The film contends that the secret program, Stuxnet, also known as Olympic Games, has since been identified as part of a broader plan, code-named Nitro Zeus, that could disable Iran’s infrastructure.One presence on camera is David E. Sanger, a reporter for The New York Times who calmly puts the development of cyberwarfare into a broad perspective. He is not alone in suggesting that this is now the frontier of modern warfare and that nations are competing fiercely to stay ahead. The United States has portrayed itself as a leader in cyberwarfare defense strategies, but “Zero Days” depicts America as an aggressor, and Israel even more so. An argument is made that Stuxnet’s secrecy was blown by an Israeli software variant that may have misfired. In any case, after relating the history of Stuxnet, the movie dismisses it as yesterday’s news.In documentary filmmaking, as in news writing, there is a fine line between irresponsible alarmism and dispassionate reportage. And Mr. Gibney has a proven record of tiptoeing to the edge without going too far. The movie makes use of an actress, Joanne Tucker, to repeat testimony by several officials that was deemed too sensitive for these sources to appear on camera. Filmed through a digital filter, she resembles the former C.I.A. officer Valerie Plame, which gives her scenes the look and tone of a creepy spy thriller.“Zero Days” conveys two messages. The broader one, though hardly new, bears repeating and applies as much to advances in medical science as to war. In a hypercompetitive world, it asks, when do we decide not to pursue innovation and hold back for the greater good? Has technology outrun our capacity to control it?Mr. Gibney’s biggest immediate worry is that a global lack of transparency has prevented society from negotiating necessary treaties and safeguards. Without them, humanity risks sealing its doom, should countries like the United States be guided by fear and suspicion.“Zero Days” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for some strong language. Running time: 1 hour 56 minutes.