http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/11/us/north-charleston-prepares-for-weekend-of-mourning-and-protest-in-walter-scott-shooting.html
North Charleston Prepares for Mourning and Protest in Walter Scott Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Slager  Michael T (1981- ),Blacks,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,North Charleston (SC)
April 10, 2015
7424
NORTH CHARLESTON, S.C. —  In a ritual that has been repeated around the country after racially charged police killings, this working-class city was preparing Friday for a weekend of public mourning and angry protest over the death of an unarmed black man who was shot in the back by a white police officer.The man, Walter L. Scott, 50, a forklift operator, was pulled over last Saturday for a broken brake light. He was shown on a bystander’s video being shot and killed as he ran away from the officer, Michael T. Slager, 33, who has been charged with murder and fired by city officials. Both state and federal officials are investigating the shooting.On Friday, the National Bar Association, a predominantly African-American legal group, called for the firing and the indictment of a black police officer, Clarence Habersham, who arrived on the scene shortly after the shooting. The group alleges that he filed a false police report and that any other officers who filed false reports should face similar punishment.“In an attempt to escape prosecution and deceive the public, Officer Slager made false statements to numerous North Charleston police officers regarding the incident,” the group said, adding that Officer Habersham “deliberately left material facts out of his report.” The association is the nation’s oldest and largest legal organization of predominantly black lawyers, judges, educators and law students.The bar association cited police reports issued hours after the shooting that described the episode as a “traffic stop gone wrong.” And it noted discrepancies between the Police Department’s initial version of events and what was seen on the video.“The video shows Officer Habersham standing next to Mr. Scott’s body and at times touching and/or examining it,” the association said. “Moments later, Officer Slager drops an object which appears to be a Taser near Mr. Scott’s body. In his report, Officer Habersham does not describe Officer Slager’s actions, but said that he gave aid to Mr. Scott and tried to give directions to the scene.” But the association said there was no evidence on the video that shows that Officer Habersham, or anyone else, administered CPR to Mr. Scott.In the brief police report he filed after the shooting, Officer Habersham stated that he “attempted to render aid to the victim by applying pressure to the gunshot wounds” and that he directed “the best route for E.M.S. and Fire to take to get to the victim faster.” Other officers wrote in their reports that both first aid and CPR were performed on Mr. Scott before medics arrived.Passions and tension over the shooting have grown not only among the various groups — police officers, city officials, protesters, civil rights leaders, the victim’s relatives and other African-American residents — but within the groups as well, as city leaders distanced themselves from comments of a white City Council member, Bobby Jameson, that were critical of black protesters.Relatives, friends and strangers gathered at a viewing service for Mr. Scott at a Charleston funeral chapel on Friday. On Saturday at 11 a.m., a larger crowd is expected to attend Mr. Scott’s funeral at W.O.R.D. Ministries Christian Center, in nearby Summerville. The funeral is open to the public, according to a representative of the funeral home, Fielding Home for Funerals.On Sunday, the Rev. Al Sharpton will preach about Mr. Scott’s death at Charity Missionary Baptist Church in North Charleston, at a service that both Mayor R. Keith Summey and the police chief, Eddie Driggers, are expected to attend. After the service, Mr. Sharpton will meet privately with Mr. Scott’s family and attend a vigil, a spokeswoman for Mr. Sharpton said.In a statement Friday morning, Mr. Sharpton, who spoke last year at the funeral for Michael Brown, the black teenager shot and killed by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo., said there had been no discussion about Mr. Sharpton’s attending the funeral. He disputed a report in The Daily News in New York that quoted an unidentified person close to Mr. Scott’s family saying that the family did not want Mr. Sharpton at the funeral.North Charleston’s police union, the Fraternal Order of Police, issued a statement on Thursday that, while describing the shooting of Mr. Scott as “beyond comprehension,” criticized protest leaders like Mr. Sharpton, who have focused national attention on police harassment and excessive force in black communities, though the statement did not mention him by name.“Do not allow the professional race agitators to seize this moment to advance their often self-serving opinions of what is wrong in South Carolina,” read the statement from John C. Blackmon, the president of the union, which represents nearly 700 local, state and federal officers in a three-county area.On Friday morning, there were isolated protests near the scene of the shooting, where a few men wore T-shirts reading “Black Lives Matter” and “Stop Killing Us” — two slogans that gained popularity among demonstrators and activists after police killings in Ferguson and on Staten Island.“I think folks are probably at a heightened state of just disbelief,” said Dot Scott, who lives in North Charleston, serves as the president of the Charleston branch of the N.A.A.C.P., and is one of several black leaders who have accused the police of harassing and racially profiling African-Americans. “People are angry. They’ve finally got the eyes of the nation on a situation we’ve been dealing with for years.”