https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/18/nyregion/second-cyclist-killed-bus-chelsea.html
For the 2nd Time in a Week, a Cyclist Is Killed by a Bus in Chelsea - The New York Times
Mamoukakis  Michael,Traffic Accidents and Safety,Bicycles and Bicycling,Buses,Deaths (Fatalities),Chelsea (Manhattan  NY)
June 18, 2017
3735
An 80-year-old man on a bicycle was struck and killed on Saturday by a charter bus in the Chelsea section of Manhattan — the second time in a week that a cyclist has died in a bus accident in the neighborhood.The latest victim, Michael Mamoukakis, was hit by the bus shortly after 1:30 p.m. while riding near the intersection of West 29th Street and Seventh Avenue. According to the police, both Mr. Mamoukakis and the bus, which was registered to Buckeye Limousine and Charters Corporation of Ohio, were traveling south on Seventh Avenue; the bus struck him as it tried to make a right turn onto West 29th Street.Mr. Mamoukakis was the sixth person killed on a bicycle in New York this year, according to city statistics.Last Monday, Dan Hanegby, a 36-year-old investment banker, was riding a Citi Bike east along 26th Street — his usual commute to work — when, after passing Eighth Avenue, he was struck and killed by a charter bus, becoming the first fatality in the four years of New York’s Citi Bike program. The bus that killed Mr. Hanegby was registered to Hudson Transit Lines in Chester, N.Y.Neither of the bus companies responded to phone calls on Sunday seeking comment.Mr. Mamoukakis, who was born on Crete, was a lifelong cobbler, learning his craft at age 14 and later opening Mike’s Shoe Repair on Dey Street in the financial district, a business that he ran for more than 25 years. He closed the shop, in the shadow of the World Trade Center, after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, his family said on Sunday.At that point Mr. Mamoukakis was 65, according to his relatives, and after he retired, he turned his attention to hobbies like hiking, cooking and cycling. He biked almost every day in good weather, they said, enjoying rides along the West Side Highway, in Riverside Park and at Union Square where he would linger over the art booths and shop for fresh produce.“Biking was his pleasure,” his brother George Mamoukakis said. “He loved his bike.”The Manhattan district attorney’s office investigates all traffic fatalities in the borough to determine if criminal charges are warranted. The district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., has brought charges in several similar cases under a relatively new city statute, and the bus drivers in both of the deaths could face charges if prosecutors find they were at fault.Mr. Mamoukakis, who had two daughters and six grandchildren, had lived on West 21st Street for decades and one of his neighbors, Rebecca Driber, said his bicycle, which he often parked by the staircase, was a fixture in the building.George Mamoukakis lived across the street and said that he had seen his brother only 15 minutes before he was killed. He said he had invited his brother into his apartment for a cup of coffee, but Mr. Mamoukakis wanted to go biking.“We were waiting for him to come back from his bike ride,” he added. “But he never came back.”