https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/13/opinion/for-refugees-in-lebanon-cash-instead-of-camps.html
For Refugees in Lebanon, Cash Instead of Camps - The New York Times
Lebanon Cash Consortium,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Syria,Lebanon,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Banking and Financial Institutions,Humanitarian Aid,Food,International Rescue Committee,United Nations Children's Fund,World Food Program,United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Sept. 13, 2016
5475
The United States has pledged to accept 10,000 Syrian refugees, and apparently the sky is falling. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said the country shouldn’t  take even orphans under 5 years old.Does 10,000 seem a lot?Consider Lebanon, a country of 4.5 million people that has taken in probably close to 1.5 million Syrians fleeing their civil war. At equivalent levels, the United States would have 107 million Syrian refugees by now.I am not arguing that the United States should take in millions of Syrians. But Americans should appreciate that Lebanon is doing them and Europe a huge favor.And at great cost. Lebanon is not a prosperous country. The economy is weak and its democracy is battered by destructive religious divisions, complicated by outside intervention — Syrian troops occupied the country from 1976 to 2005. There has been no president for two years.Lebanon, of course, is also home to half a million Palestinians, some of them residents of refugee camps for 60 years. Largely for that reason, Lebanon has not permitted the building of camps for the Syrians.Instead, they live in limbo.Until January 2015, Lebanon’s border with Syria was open. Now it is closed and the country has set rules that make life much harder for the refugees who are there. Perhaps 70 percent of Syrian refugees do not have legal residency, which can also mean they can’t get work, shelter, education or health care, according to Human Rights Watch.That leaves them open to all kinds of exploitation. Syrians do off-the-books jobs for a pittance. Their children sell candy on the street. They squat in abandoned buildings with no water or electricity, lodge with families who are struggling themselves, sleep in makeshift tent cities.The French organization Solidarités International has posted an interactive webdoc to show what it’s like to be a Syrian refugee in Lebanon.The world has well-worn systems for dealing with refugees in camps. But how do you help urban refugees?Lebanon’s government and international aid groups are doing something new. Cash is keeping the refugees alive — and it should be noted, off the path to Europe.In 2004, 99 percent of the world’s humanitarian aid came in the form of commodities: sacks of grain, stacks of blankets, building materials. Last year, that number had fallen to about 94 percent, according to a committee financed by Britain’s Department for International Development to study how best to use cash in humanitarian aid.Cash is catching on. A decade ago, the United Nations World Food Program was trying out cash in a few pilot programs. Now cash makes up a quarter of the organization’s portfolio, according to Kenn Crossley, the deputy director of policy and program. (Past Fixes columns here, here and here have reported on early, smaller cash programs.)Cash isn’t the solution everywhere. Goods must be available. Markets must be functional, and large enough so that an infusion of new cash isn’t inflationary. Since it’s easier, safer and carries less risk of corruption to provide cash electronically instead of handing people envelopes of bills, mechanisms should exist for debit cards or cellphone banking.But that covers much of the world, even in emergency situations. It’s no problem in Lebanon, a middle-income country known for commerce. “We’re using in the humanitarian sector what you and I experience in our normal retail life,” said Dominik Heinrich, the food program’s country director for Lebanon.Here’s how it works: Each needy Syrian refugee family gets a banking card. Family members use it to shop for food at the 450 participating stores and markets; a family of five gets about $135 per month.Especially vulnerable families also get cash. They can withdraw $174 per month in cash, to spend anywhere, on whatever they need most.Next month, all the different agencies that give cash will be combining forces to use the same bank card. The food comes from the World Food Program. The cash comes from either the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees or the Lebanon Cash Consortium, which is a collaboration of several private relief groups, led by Save the Children. Unicef also gives cash to families who need it to keep warm in the winter.Many humanitarian groups in Lebanon help with sanitation systems and other in-kind assistance. Many run schools, or provide skills or business training. The cash is intended to address (a little; it’s not really enough to live on) refugees’ most urgent problems: What’s for dinner? Where am I sleeping?“There is nothing that could replace cash,” said Alan Moseley, the Lebanon country director for the International Rescue Committee, a member of the Lebanon Cash Consortium. “If we provided shelter materials, clothing, food or direct rent subsidies, it would be more costly to deliver and people would be getting things they don’t necessarily need.”Research comparing cash and in-kind aid in four countries found that cash allowed more people to be helped for the same money, as many as 23 percent more.Providing cash is also much faster than sending food, which can take months to arrive. Cash is flexible. It reduces waste. It protects dignity — especially important for people who have lost almost all control over their lives. “People prefer to make decisions for themselves,” said Mosely. And there is overwhelming evidence that people do not spend cash on alcohol and cigarettes.Cash has particular advantages for refugees, who are sometimes on the move. A cash card travels better than grain, buckets and blankets.Another major way cash can help refugees: it builds good will with hosts far better than sacks of grain can. Lebanon’s enormous generosity has many critics: politicians demonize refugees, and citizens resent the strain they put on schools, social services and local wages. Locals also see foreigners get help that the citizens themselves could use.When refugees get foodstuffs it can make tensions worse — they often sell their grain for prices lower than in local stores.In Lebanon, however, Syrians go to nearby stores to buy food that has been grown by local farmers and transported in local trucks. Kevin Murphy, senior manager for cash assistance at the International Rescue Committee, said that every dollar in cash assistance generates more than $2 for the Lebanese economy. When the food program cut its payments last year, “we saw a lot of backlash from local vendors,” Moseley said.One study of a cash program to help refugees survive the winter found that those who got cash were more likely to help and be helped by Lebanese neighbors, and less likely to suffer insults.But why not help needy locals as well? “We can’t ignore their vulnerabilities,” said Paula Gil Baizan, advocacy coordinator for the Cash Learning Partnership. “It’s best practice to provide assistance to both. Following the principle of ‘do no harm,’ we should not create tensions in the community where refugees are living.”The International Rescue Committee, for example, runs cash-for-work programs in two regions. About 2,500 people, both Syrians and Lebanese, can earn $200 each month for 10 days of collecting trash, cleaning up public areas and making repairs in parks.On a much wider scale, the food program’s cards also go to the poorest Lebanese. Their card is a different color, but Lebanese families can shop in the same stores. Heinrich said that Lebanon first tried to set up such a program for its citizens in 2008, but the logistics had been troublesome (the program used paper vouchers). The country succeeded only after the refugees’ digital cash system was in place — an example of locals benefiting in some ways from hosting refugees.One problem that cash can’t solve is the big one: There’s not enough aid. Last year a conference of rich-country donors to Syria raised only half its goal. As a result, in July 2015 the food program cut its assistance in half, and Syrian refugees in Lebanon began receiving only $13 per person per month to buy food.Last February, a more successful donor conference allowed the program to do far better, and the assistance went back to $27. But $27 is still subsistence, and the cash grants go to only 46,000 households. Murphy said that number is due to rise to 55,000 by the end of the year. But that still means these grants will reach only half of the very poorest refugees.Some Lebanese politicians have been spewing a lot of language about driving out refugees by making their lives more difficult still. Western donors should not help in that project. The desperate crossing of Syrians to Europe in boatloads in the summer of 2015 occurred at the same time as the cuts in aid — not a coincidence, according to some European officials. And one of the consequences went beyond the fate of the Syrians. The migration flood contributed to the rise of xenophobic right-wing parties across Europe, and to the decision by British voters to leave the European Union.It’s strongly in the interest of Europe and the United States to compensate Lebanon richly for its service to the refugees, and to help Syrians there live lives as close as possible to normal. “Here, home is 50 kilometers away,” said Heinrich. “You are in an environment with the same culture, food, climate, religion. If you have hope, you don’t reach the desperate measures of using your last savings to move thousands of kilometers to a strange country.”