http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/16/movies/16paul.html
Kevin James as a Hapless Security Guard - The New York Times
Motion Pictures,Paul Blart: Mall Cop (Movie)
Jan. 15, 2009
6619
Fat people are funny. Fat people who fall over are funnier. Fat people who fall over and have humiliating working-class jobs? Stop, you’re killing me!This would seem to be the entire guiding principle behind “Paul Blart: Mall Cop,” a tossed-off comedy from Adam Sandler’s production company that makes one long for the comparative genius of “I Now Pronounce You Chuck & Larry.”In the title role, Kevin James plays a lovable New Jersey doofus whose dreams of joining the police are foiled by a hypoglycemic condition that causes him to pass out in ostensibly hilarious contexts. Reduced to working security at a huge, bustling shopping mall located in some economically vibrant fantasyland, Blart falls in love with the perky proprietress of a hair-extension franchise (Jayma Mays).Enter — because why not? — a gang of thieves plotting to hack into the mall’s credit-card profits. Put down the nachos, Paul Blart! It’s time to, well, to fall over some more and bump into things and make silly faces and save the world and get the girl.“Paul Blart: Mall Cop” is directed by Steve Carr, a man who knows how to put a camera in front of things, if little else, and written, sort of, by Nick Bakay and Mr. James.“Paul Blart: Mall Cop” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for slapstick and language. PAUL BLART: MALL COPOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Steve Carr; written by Kevin James and Nick Bakay; director of photography, Russ T. Alsobrook; edited by Jeff Freeman; music by Waddy Wachtel; production designer, Perry Andelin Blake; produced by Todd Garner, Mr. James, Barry Bernardi, Adam Sandler and Jack Giarraputo; released by Columbia Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.WITH: Kevin James (Paul Blart), Jayma Mays (Amy), Keir O’Donnell (Veck), Bobby Cannavale (Commander Kent), Stephen Rannazzisi (Stuart) and Shirley Knight (Mom) .