http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/15/world/asia/pu-zhiqiang-china-trial-weibo-posts.html
China’s Case Against a Civil Rights Lawyer, in Seven Social Media Posts - The New York Times
Pu Zhiqiang,Beijing (China),Civil Rights and Liberties,Political Prisoners,Social Media,Communist Party of China
Dec. 14, 2015
8124
The prominent Chinese civil rights lawyer Pu Zhiqiang, 50, went on trial in Beijing on Monday on charges of “inciting ethnic hatred” and “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” accusations that supporters say were intended to silence one of China’s best-known social activists.The prosecution built its case on seven social media posts that Mr. Pu wrote on Weibo between 2011 and 2014, according to a document carrying the letterhead of the Beijing Mo Shaoping Law Firm, which represents him. The document, first reported by Radio Free Asia, was widely circulated online over the weekend.The founder of the firm, Mo Shaoping, confirmed in a telephone interview on Monday that the prosecution had cited seven social media posts and that a list of those posts had been shared with Mr. Pu’s family. But Mr. Mo declined to comment on the individual posts and would not confirm if the document that circulated online was from his law firm.Mr. Pu is known for speaking his mind, often in creative language that mixes street slang with allusions to classical Chinese literature, and his writings on social media are infused with witticisms that can be difficult for outsiders to grasp. That much is evident in some of the excerpts, below, from the posts in the document:On China’s rubber-stamp lawmakersIn this post, Mr. Pu questioned the competence of Shen Jilan, China’s longest-serving legislator, who has boasted of never having voted against anything in her six decades in the National People’s Congress. He also questioned the qualifications of Mao Xinyu, Mao Zedong’s grandson and a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the National People’s Congress.On China without the Communist PartyThis is part of a comment on a pro-government political treatise titled “China’s Great Logic: Why China Wouldn’t Work Without the Communist Party,” published in 2012.On a company spokeswoman’s evasions of responsibility after a fatal train crashThis was Mr. Pu’s description of Tian Zhenhui, a spokeswoman for a government-affiliated maker of railway signals, deflecting questions at a news conference on why one of its signals failed, leaving at least 40 people dead in 2011.On XinjiangIn a post shortly before he was detained in May 2014, Mr. Pu criticized the Chinese government’s policies of ethnic assimilation in Xinjiang, a region in China’s remote west with a large ethnic minority population, primarily Uighurs, a mostly Muslim, Turkic-speaking group.On ethnic violenceIn a post after a deadly attack by ethnic Uighurs on a railway station in Kunming, in southwestern China, Mr. Pu questioned the Communist Party’s narrative about ethnic harmony.On religionThe Chinese authorities require some buildings in Tibet, including temples, to display portraits of Chinese leaders, all members of the dominant Han ethnic group. Mr. Pu’s take on this was scathing:He also criticized the authorities in Yining, a town in Xinjiang with a large Muslim population, where officials were said to have banned women from wearing veils.