https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/02/world/asia/south-korea-scandal-choi-soon-sil-daughter.html
Daughter of Key Figure in South Korean Scandal Is Detained in Denmark - The New York Times
Politics and Government,South Korea,Denmark,Choi Soon-sil,Park Geun-hye,Extortion and Blackmail,Chung Yoo-ra
Jan. 2, 2017
5126
SEOUL, South Korea — One of the most-wanted figures in the influence-peddling scandal that led to President Park Geun-hye’s parliamentary impeachment last month has been detained by the Danish police, South Korean officials said on Monday.The suspect, Chung Yoo-ra — the daughter of Choi Soon-sil, the longtime confidante of Ms. Park who is at the center of the scandal — has been living in hiding in Europe, ignoring repeated calls from South Korean investigators to return home to face criminal charges.Her mother, Ms. Choi, has been indicted on charges of using her influence with Ms. Park to extort tens of millions of dollars from big businesses. Ms. Park herself has been identified as a criminal accomplice in Ms. Choi’s alleged extortion racket and is now on trial at the Constitutional Court, which will decide whether she should be formally removed from office.But Ms. Chung, 20, has been elusive. Last month, a special prosecutor asked the authorities in Germany, where Ms. Chung, a former member of South Korea’s national equestrian team, had been training, to detain and extradite her. South Korean officials had also asked Interpol to look for her and threatened to invalidate her passport.Ms. Chung was holed up with her infant son, a nanny and two male guardians in a house in the northern Danish city of Aalborg when the local authorities found her on Sunday night, said the South Korean news channel JTBC, which was at the scene when she was apprehended. It said its reporters first alerted the authorities to her whereabouts.“We will request her emergency extradition, working with the special prosecutor’s office,” Lee Chul-sung, the chief of the National Police Agency, said at a news conference in Seoul, the South Korean capital, on Monday.The Danish police said on Monday that they had arrested Ms. Chung after receiving a tip from a South Korean journalist Sunday afternoon and confirmation from the international law enforcement agency Interpol that an international warrant for her arrest had been registered last Tuesday.Ms. Chung confirmed that she was aware that the South Korean authorities wanted to question her, the police said, and added that she was in Denmark for horse racing.The police said that Ms. Chung had not been charged with a crime in Denmark, although prosecutors said they had asked the court to keep Ms. Chung in custody while the question of possible extradition was clarified. South Korea and Denmark have an extradition treaty.Ms. Chung was accused of illegally enrolling in Ewha Womans University in Seoul in 2015, using her mother’s political connections to force the elite school to accept her despite poor qualifications. An inquiry by the Education Ministry revealed that the school had admitted her at the expense of other candidates with better credentials. Her enrollment was revoked in November.The special prosecutor is also looking into accusations that Ms. Choi used millions of dollars from Samsung, South Korea’s largest conglomerate, to finance her daughter’s equestrian career and a luxurious lifestyle in Germany.Ms. Chung has become a lightning rod for public anger as lurid accusations have emerged about her lifestyle. The accusations of illegal enrollment against her have been particularly inflammatory in South Korea, where students cram for years to prepare for intensely competitive college entrance exams. Ewha students were the first to take to the streets to protest the Choi family’s reported influence peddling.After Ms. Chung lost a gold medal to a rival in a domestic equestrian competition in 2013, her family was accused of using its connections to open a government audit of the local equestrian association.Two officials at the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism who looked into the scandal lost their jobs for not siding with Ms. Chung’s family, a former culture minister said. Ms. Park called the officials “bad men,” according to the former minister, Yoo Jin-ryong.Ms. Chung’s family also used its influence to get Ewha to give her good grades even though she hardly attended classes, Education Ministry officials said.On Tuesday, the special prosecutor asked a court to issue an arrest warrant for an Ewha professor who was accused of ordering his teaching assistants to complete assignments for Ms. Chung.“You’ve got nothing but your parents to blame for your lack of resources,” Ms. Chung wrote in a Facebook post in 2014. The post was shared widely in South Korea, where widening economic inequality has fueled increasing public anger.