https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/asia/north-korea-ban-ki-moon.html
U.N. Chief Says North Korea Has Spawned Unprecedented Tension - The New York Times
North Korea,United Nations,Ban Ki-moon,Nuclear Weapons,Missiles and Missile Defense Systems,China,International Relations,United States International Relations,Nuclear Tests
Sept. 14, 2016
4378
UNITED NATIONS — Secretary General Ban Ki-moon warned on Wednesday that North Korea’s repeated tests of nuclear bombs and ballistic missiles had created unprecedented tension in the region.Speaking at a news conference before his last annual General Assembly session as leader of the United Nations, where his two-term tenure as secretary general ends on Dec. 31, Mr. Ban also nudged the United States and China to remain united in their response.“Never in the past have I ever seen such kind of heightened tensions on the Korean Peninsula,” Mr. Ban, a former foreign minister of South Korea and possible presidential contender there, said at the news conference, customarily held a few days before the General Assembly’s annual meeting.He urged the Security Council to take “urgent actions.” But as he has done before, Mr. Ban demurred on what that action should be, saying only that he was heartened that the United States and China had begun negotiations on next steps.In March, the Council adopted a raft of intensified sanctions against the government in North Korea, devised to curtail its ability to secure money and technology to develop nuclear weapons. The new sanctions compel all countries to inspect cargo going in and out of North Korea, ban weapons trade and expand a list of individuals facing penalties including asset freezes and travel restrictions.That China went along with those measures was a reflection of its exasperation with the North Korea, a longtime ally that Mao once called closer than “lips and teeth.”North Korea has responded to the sanctions with defiant boasts, carrying out more tests, including one shortly after a Group of 20 summit meeting in China early this month.President Obama has said his administration intends to “take additional significant steps, including new sanctions” imposed by the Council. Diplomats have said negotiations are underway, though the prognosis for an agreement between the Chinese and Americans remains unclear.Mr. Ban was a child during the Korean War. In his native South Korea, there is wide speculation of his presidential ambitions when he leaves his post as secretary general.He had been expected to visit North Korea this year, but those plans were shelved.Mr. Ban also told reporters Wednesday that despite the Russian-American breakthrough on a temporary cessation of hostilities in Syria, the United Nations had been unable to send in long-awaited aid to besieged areas including Aleppo, the northern city that has been an epicenter of fighting recently.There were no assurances yet that the truck drivers and aid workers making the deliveries would be safe, he said. He did not specify whether the United Nations was awaiting those security guarantees from the government or from the militant groups seeking to depose President Bashar al-Assad.