https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/insider/first-thought-at-the-timess-kabul-bureau-we-are-under-attack.html
First Thought at The Times’s Kabul Bureau: We Are Under Attack - The New York Times
Kabul (Afghanistan),New York Times,News and News Media,Bombs and Explosives,Terrorism,Afghanistan War (2001-14),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Afghanistan,New York Times Kabul Bureau
June 8, 2017
1296
Usually when there is a bombing in Kabul, our first thought at The New York Times’s bureau is this: Can we get on the roof, or on Twitter, to look for indications of where it happened so we can guide our reporting accordingly? We look for signs of smoke rising, or the direction in which the ambulances are headed.But on May 31, when a sewage truck full of military grade explosives was detonated at one of the entrances to the city’s heavily guarded diplomatic enclaves, we didn’t have to look far: Most of our office windows were gone. There was glass everywhere.I was driving to work that morning a little later than usual, because I hadn’t left the office until 8:30 p.m. the night before. The entrance that was blown up is one of a few options we have of getting to the bureau. But the first thought among my colleagues who were in the office was this: We are under attack. And it wasn’t unique to them — people within a wide radius of the explosion felt that way. Such was its sheer size. One senior civilian official, who keeps a loaded AK-47 near his desk, told me he stood in the middle of his office with a cocked weapon thinking assailants would arrive any minute. Sometimes these kinds of explosions are only meant to create an entry path — the real damage is done when militants storm a building amid the commotion and fight for hours.For 15 years, The Times’s bureau in Kabul, Afghanistan, was in a beautiful house on a secure street surrounded by several international missions. Then, a few months ago, a senior Afghan official bought the house, so we had no choice but to leave. After an urgent search, we found another place in the same neighborhood, and our team spent more than a month transforming it into a secure, workable, livable space. New roses were planted. And, of course, all the windows were covered in blast film.That blast film saved a lot of people. The windows blew in, the panes came off (and many of them were flung), but the glass did not shatter and fly into the air.In the hours after the explosion, as our staff members put on gloves and swept up all the debris, a story needed to be reported. I found a spot in the house to write a breaking news dispatch and filed it to our editing hub in Hong Kong, just as New York had gone to sleep.Then our team went out to the field to report — on the 90 people, most of them on their morning commute to work, whose lives were cut short so brutally; on the men and women pacing the hospital halls and searching the morgues for news of their loved ones; and on the funeral processions across the city that have become so frequent these days.I put the final touches on the story around 2 a.m., and it appeared on the newspaper’s front page the next morning. (The death toll has since risen to 150.)Since then, the atmosphere has grown tenser: Protests against the government’s incompetence erupted at the site of the explosion, and when protesters marched on the presidential palace they were met with force.As the crowd was beginning to grow the next morning, an intelligence official I know and trust pulled me aside and whispered in my ear that security forces had credible threats that suicide bombers might be targeting the protest. They had phone intercepts, he told me. I left soon after.The violence that broke out was perpetrated not by the insurgents but by government forces, who just started firing, leaving at least six people dead.I kept returning during the day to check on the conditions; they grew more and more violent. At times, I was reminded of the violence against the protesters during the Arab Spring: water cannons, long stretches of firing with live bullets, even armored military vehicles chasing protesters away. Scenes I never thought I would witness in Kabul, certainly not under a government led by a technocrat who spent most of his life in academia in the West.The next morning, with tensions already high and protests continuing, a funeral procession for one of the protesters gathered near a Kabul hill. In attendance were senior government leaders and politicians. As they raised their hands in prayer, three explosions went off in quick succession among the crowd of more than a thousand. More people fell dead around the deceased protester. As our reporter, Jawad Sukhanyar, watched from near the grave, most of the crowd dispersed. Only about two dozen people rushed the man to his final resting place.In the days after the attack, every time I passed the security guards at the remaining entrances leading to our bureau — on their phones, leaning against the wall in the shade — I thought back to those who were manning the entrance that was blown up. I thought of their commander, a charming man with a warm smile who would wave us in after taking a look at our papers. And I couldn’t help but wonder what went through their minds that morning when they faced the truck. A few men, hoping to return to their families at the end of the day after doing their duty for their country (and for $200 a month), confronting a truck that left a deep crater and shook the whole city.No traces of those men have been found.