https://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/27/business/27party.html
Turning 60, and Doing So With 1,500 - The New York Times
Schwarzman  Stephen A,Blackstone Group,Birthdays
Jan. 27, 2007
9209
Not every Wall Street titan can celebrate his birthday in a place that holds 1,500 people. Unless, of course, that titan is Stephen A. Schwarzman, who is on the verge of clinching the biggest buyout deal ever.Then this would be the moment to keep thinking big.On Feb. 13, many hundreds of his friends, admirers and followers will gather in the drill hall of the Park Avenue armory to celebrate the man on the night before he turns 60. Those who are coming include Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs,  and James E. Cayne, the chief executive of Bear Stearns, as well as Peter Martins of the New York City Ballet and Cardinal Edward M. Egan of the New York Archdiocese. Among the invited dignitaries who have declined to attend are Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr.Rod Stewart, who is known to charge $1 million for private parties, is rumored to be the surprise headline act.For Mr. Schwarzman,  a billionaire several times over, an active Republican donor and chairman of the Kennedy Center in Washington whose influence reaches deep into the worlds of finance, politics and the arts, there could be no better time.The co-founder of the Blackstone Group, the private equity and hedge fund giant, he has been at the forefront of today’s frenzy of buyout deals. Just weeks before his party, he is battling  for control of Equity Office Properties, a deal that at more than $38 billion would surpass the record set by his rival Henry R. Kravis and perhaps cement his legacy as the new king of Wall Street.The party itself represents a more delectable coronation for Mr. Schwarzman, especially as it comes in an arena where Mr. Kravis, a man who has moved easily in New York’s arts and social scene for more than 20 years,  has traditionally reigned.  (An assistant to Mr. Kravis said he would not be attending the party. She said she did not know if he had received an invitation).The guest list, which is a closely guarded secret, appears to be deep and wide. It includes those who are friends like Leonard A. Lauder, the chairman of the Whitney Museum of American Art.“We love Steve,” said Mr. Lauder, who will be donning his black tie for the affair. “He is everybody’s poster child.”The list also includes those who are not, like Colin L. Powell, the former secretary of state.“The general has a high regard for Steve,” said his assistant, “but he is not a close friend.” Mr. Powell would not be attending, she added, although he did do his bit by recording a brief salute on the video that has been sent to those invited.At a time when a crashing wave of capital is minting new billionaires each year, who is a close friend and who is not is less important to a man like Mr. Schwarzman  than his ability to compile such an expansive birthday list.“There is no ladder to climb anymore: he is there,” said Nelson W. Aldrich Jr., the author of “Old Money.” “This party fits the new formula, which is that social life is a way of making money by other means or holding on to money by other means.”New York social history is rich with grand celebrations that have defined a moment in time for those who gave them. Truman Capote’s Black and White Ball in 1966 came in the wake of the triumph of “In Cold Blood.’In 1988, Saul P. Steinberg’s wedding party for his daughter at the Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan Museum of Art was his last and most glorious public offering.Some view such lavish displays as a bleak omen, not least those who are being so honored.“Honey, if this moment were a stock, I would short it,” Mr. Steinberg said to his wife, Gayfryd, at an equally lush party in 1989 for his 50th birthday. For Mr. Steinberg, in the years that followed, there was a stroke, his daughter’s subsequent divorce, the  bankruptcy of his company and, in 2000, the sale of his apartment in New York’s most prestigious co-op, 740 Park Avenue, to none other than Mr. Schwarzman.Still, the practice continues — and in this heady era, it need not be a 10-year milestone that prompts a fancy exultation.Last spring, the wife of David Boies, the corporate lawyer, chartered two jet planes to fly friends to Las Vegas for an all-expenses-paid weekend at Steve Wynn’s hotel and casino on the occasion of his 65th birthday.“It was special —  there was wine tasting on the plane,” said Georgette Mosbacher, the Republican fund-raiser who attended the Steinberg  affairs, but who did not get an invitation from the Schwarzmans. “What is frivolous for some is memorable to others. It’s a party for your friends and family. When you reach 60 and you have succeeded in your goals, you want to show it off.”John Ford, a spokesman for Blackstone, said that Mr. Schwarzman did not think it appropriate to take up the matter of his recent accomplishments and his approaching birthday.“Steve really is a modest person,” said Jacqueline Weld Drake, a society friend and author who is planning to attend.The party is largely being masterminded by his wife, Christine Hearst Schwarzman, an intellectual property lawyer who has organized many of Mr. Schwarzman’s previous celebrations, from his 50th at the St. Regis, where Patti LuPone sang, to his 59th last year at the Four Seasons, where a Marilyn Monroe imitator crooned “Happy Birthday, Mr. Chairman” to Blackstone’s chairman and 100 friends.But it is the couple’s annual Christmas function at 740 Park that has secured their party-making bona fides. One year the interior of their 24-room duplex became a replica of Mr. Schwarzman’s favorite beach, La Voile Rouge, in St. Tropez, where he has a home. Another year they turned their living room into a giant Las Vegas casino. Last month the theme was James Bond, with Mr. Schwarzman done up in a suave tuxedo and model Bond girls circulating among a crowd.“Steve does not like little things, whether it’s deals, Christmas parties or his own homes,” said Roland W. Betts, the chief executive of Chelsea Piers who was at Yale with Mr. Schwarzman.Indeed, organizing such a party has been as complex and sensitive an undertaking as one of his deals.  Rumors abound among his friends regarding the opening musical act. Rod Stewart? Mick Jagger? (After all, the Rolling Stones played at the 60th birthday of David Bonderman, a buyout rival of Mr. Schwarzman’s) How about Michael Bolton  — Mr. Schwarzman is a fan, they say.A staffer, equipped with a video camera, has paid a visit to the offices of many of the invitees to film suitable tributes and roasts. A large book has been circulated in which they have recorded funny stories and remembrances — but please, no presents.“Steve, I always knew you were going places, I just did not know you would end up owning them all,” wrote Jane Stanton Hitchcock, a novelist and an old friend of Mr. Schwarzman’s.Who is on the guest list and who is not  has become a topic of speculation among his friends and associates.“I told Steve if you have me on the list, you must have invited your 1,000 closest friends,” said Daniel W. Lufkin, a founding partner of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, where Mr. Schwarzman got his first job out of college.As tightly held as the guest list is what exactly will the evening be like. Philip Baloun, the society florist and party facilitator, who has  orchestrated some of New York’s biggest parties as well as many of the past celebrations of the Schwarzmans has been charged with decorating the hall — a cavernous 35,000-square-foot expanse that has the feel of an airplane hangar.“Steve likes big things,” Mr. Betts said. “I’m sure no expense will be spared. I just don’t want to get the bill.”