https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/business/obamas-fiduciary-rule-after-a-delay-will-go-into-effect.html
Obama’s Fiduciary Rule, After a Delay, Will Go Into Effect - The New York Times
Consumer Protection,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,Pensions and Retirement Plans,Labor Department (US),Obama  Barack,Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Acosta  Alexander (1969- )
May 23, 2017
7526
New consumer protections requiring financial advisers to put their customers’ interests ahead of their own — at least when handling their retirement money — will take effect next month, putting to rest the question of whether they would be delayed further.The fate of the so-called fiduciary rule, created under the Obama administration, was called into doubt when President Trump signed an executive order seeking a review of it, prompting regulators to delay its implementation to June from April. On Tuesday, Alexander Acosta, the Labor Department secretary, said the basic principles of the rule would indeed take effect on June 9, even as his agency continues to review its finer details.After careful review, the Labor Department has “found no principled legal basis to change the June 9 date while we seek public input,” Mr. Acosta wrote in an opinion piece published Monday in The Wall Street Journal. “Respect for the rule of law leads us to the conclusion that this date cannot be postponed.”The Obama administration had estimated that conflicts of interest embedded in the way many investment professionals do business cost Americans about $17 billion a year, producing annual returns that are about 1 percentage point lower.The proposed fiduciary rule, which the financial services and insurance industries have fought for several years, attempts to eliminate many of those conflicts. It will become partially effective in June before being fully implemented on Jan. 1, 2018.The Labor Department will continue to collect public comments on how to revise the regulations, though some consumer advocates say it will be more challenging to rescind the heart of the rule, which requires brokers and financial professionals to act as fiduciaries, or trusted caretakers, when handling money in their customers’ individual retirement and 401(k) accounts.The Trump administration could make changes to the rule, experts said, though it’s still unclear how far it will go. The financial services industry has long argued that the regulations would hurt smaller investors, forcing them to raise fees, which could reduce access to advice and products. Many financial firms, however, have spent the past year adjusting their systems to incorporate the new rules into the way they do business.“There is no way they can repeal the essence of the rule, which is the fiduciary standard,” said Mercer E. Bullard, a professor at the University of Mississippi School of Law who specializes in corporations and securities. “He will make changes around the edges,” Professor Bullard said, referring to Mr. Acosta.Some consumer advocates, while saying they were heartened by Mr. Acosta’s move, said they continued to worry that the fiduciary standard would be watered down, hurting retirement savers.“What industry lobby groups seem to prefer is a rule that lets them call themselves fiduciaries without requiring them to act like fiduciaries,” said Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America. “Avoiding a further delay at this point strengthens our negotiating position, but we still have a very tough road ahead.”The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, along with the American Council of Life Insurers, a trade group that represents annuity issuers and life insurers, said they were disappointed that the regulation would not be further delayed. “We appreciate Secretary Acosta’s recognition of the rule’s negative impact and his desire to seek public input,” Kenneth E. Bentsen, Jr., the association’s chief executive, said in a statement.Many consumers assume that the people and companies investing their money are operating under the same sort of ethical and legal standards as, say, a family doctor — someone who is obliged to provide the very best advice.But brokers are generally required only to recommend “suitable” investments, which means, for example, that they can push a more expensive mutual fund that pays a higher commission when an otherwise identical, cheaper fund would have been an equal or better alternative.The fiduciary rule has a tumultuous history: Its first version, introduced in 2010, was widely criticized and ultimately rescinded. A new version was formulated and reintroduced in 2015, when it was subject to public comment for several months followed by four days of public hearings that August, which produced the version of the regulation that is currently under review.The new rules have also survived several court challenges brought by industry members. A federal judge in Texas upheld the rule in February, which some consumer advocates say makes it more difficult to overturn.