https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/31/world/europe/emmanuel-macron-eying-french-presidency-resigns-as-economy-minister.html
Emmanuel Macron, Eyeing French Presidency, Resigns as Economy Minister - The New York Times
Socialist Party (France),Hollande  Francois,Macron  Emmanuel (1977- ),Sarkozy  Nicolas,Bordeaux (France),France
Aug. 30, 2016
4439
PARIS — France’s pro-business economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, resigned Tuesday from the Socialist government, clearing a path for him to possibly challenge an embattled President François Hollande in elections next year.His resignation was announced by the French president’s office and has been anticipated for months.Mr. Macron, 38, a former investment banker, was the face of a rightward, free-market tilt by Mr. Hollande’s government. He was from the start an anomaly in the Socialist government, having spent two much contested years challenging party orthodoxies — to relatively modest effect, in the view of analysts.He infuriated France’s unions with his unabashed talk of opening up the country’s relatively rigid economy, loosening job protections, and even rolling back the totemic 35-hour workweek. All through the spring, it was Mr. Macron’s name that was often on the placards at angry anti-government demonstrations.Mr. Macron also alienated much of the Socialist Party’s old left, which regards him as the principal culprit in what they see as Mr. Hollande’s betrayal of redistributionist promises. Mr. Macron’s undisguised ambition in forming his own political movement, En Marche!, or On Our Way, also did little to ingratiate him with many of his colleagues.Mr. Hollande’s office said Mr. Macron was resigning “to devote himself entirely to his political movement,” and indeed Mr. Macron sounded like a candidate in his own statement Tuesday afternoon. He was stepping down to “undertake a new step in my struggle,” he said, and to “build a project that will serve only the general interest.”While Mr. Macron was once Mr. Hollande’s protégé, he now represents a political threat to the president on his right. In polls, Mr. Macron routinely leads his erstwhile boss, whose support languishes in the midteens, and he often comes in second to the putative front-runner and former prime minister, Alain Juppé, who is the mayor of Bordeaux.They are joined by an increasingly crowded field that also includes former president Nicolas Sarkozy, a flock of lesser government veterans, and several of Mr. Hollande’s own former ministers.A quick-on-his feet technocrat, Mr. Macron has followed the traditional French elite path of exclusive schools and early proximity to the powerful, along with a banking stint at Rothschild & Company. He has never held elected office.His one major reform push, forced through a reluctant Parliament last year, did little more than open up intercity travel in France to commercial buses — a first — and allow large stores in some tourist areas to open on Sunday. Many are still shut, blocked by unions.He has had a knack for keeping France’s unions and left on low boil with positions that clearly favor free markets. Since creating his own idealistic political movement in the spring, Mr. Macron has attracted sizable crowds to his rallies, particularly of young people, and has openly considered running for president.But the homogeneous demographic he has attracted — young and largely affluent — also point to Mr. Macron’s potential weakness as a candidate. Many French analysts doubt that Mr. Macron, with his earnest, cultivated style often peppered with literary references, can reach a voting public destabilized by globalization and the Islamist threat.Nevertheless, at a rally in central Paris last month, when Mr. Macron stopped just short of announcing his candidacy, he told hundreds of cheering supporters, “nothing can stop this movement now.”He continued, “This movement, we will carry it together to 2017, and all the way to victory!”