https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/nyregion/naeem-davis-subway-death-ki-suck-han.html
Man Who Pushed Passenger to His Death on Subway Tracks Is Acquitted - The New York Times
Subways,Threats and Threatening Messages,Manhattan (NYC)
July 17, 2017
2975
It was a grisly scene that combined two deep-seated preoccupations for many New Yorkers: the fear of encountering drunk or deranged people on the subway and the terror of being pushed onto a subway track.From the moment of his arrest, Naeem Davis, 34, maintained he acted in self-defense just after noon on Dec. 3, 2012, when he shoved Ki-Suck Han, 58, in the chest, sending him onto the tracks at the 49th Street subway station in Manhattan. A few minutes later, Mr. Han, who was too drunk to climb onto the platform, was crushed by a Q train, while bystanders waved frantically at the driver to stop.The two men had bumped into each other near the turnstiles, and Mr. Davis told the police that Mr. Han had followed him down the platform, berating him with obscenities, grabbing his shoulder and hurling death threats.The Manhattan district attorney’s office never believed Mr. Davis’s story. Prosecutors brought a murder charge against him, arguing that he had shown a “depraved indifference” to Mr. Han’s life when he pushed him onto the tracks. Mr. Davis was also charged with first- and second-degree manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide.On Monday, after a three-week trial, testimony from more than 30 witnesses and four days of deliberations, a Manhattan jury found Mr. Davis not guilty of all charges.“Mr. Davis, you are free to go,” Justice Mark Dwyer said after the jury of seven women and five men rendered the verdict in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.Mr. Davis, a refugee from Sierra Leone who performed odd jobs for vendors around Times Square and had no fixed address, showed little emotion and declined to speak to reporters as he left the courtroom. He had been in city jails for four and half years.The jury forewoman, Gretchen Pfeil, hugged Mr. Davis as he walked out. “For me, there was a lack of evidence,” Ms. Pfeil, 39, who teaches linguistic anthropology at New York University said. “I think the vast majority of us from the beginning of our deliberations believed the prosecution had failed to prove the defendant was not justified in his actions. And by the end of our deliberations, I believe we were of one mind that he was in fact justified in his actions.”Mr. Han’s death became notorious in part because a photographer for The New York Post captured it on film. The tabloid ran a cover picture of Mr. Han with the train bearing down on him and the headline “Doomed.” Early tabloid articles referred to Mr. Davis as a “Subway Fiend.”Evidence at the trial included an hour and 45 minutes of video during which Mr. Davis told two prosecutors he had thrown Mr. Han onto the tracks in self-defense.Mr. Davis also took the stand in his own defense, saying he had feared for his life when Mr. Han accosted him from behind, grabbing his shoulder. “To be honest, I thought the man was mentally ill,” he said.Mr. Davis testified that he had yelled at Mr. Han to go to the other end of the platform and leave him alone, but Mr. Han kept repeating a threat to kill Mr. Davis, a statement one other witness also heard. Then Mr. Davis said Mr. Han had grabbed at his right shoulder with Mr. Han’s left hand. “The man put his hand on me,” Mr. Davis said. “I pushed him off me.”But prosecutors presented two witnesses who said they never saw Mr. Han lay a hand on Mr. Davis during the altercation. One of them, Zachary Block, said he saw Mr. Han remove his hands from his pockets and hold one hand up. Mr. Block said he then saw Mr. Davis crouch and hit Mr. Han in the solar plexus with such force it lifted him off his feet and propelled him onto the tracks.During closing arguments, Mr. Davis’s lawyer, Stephen Pokart, argued that Mr. Davis’s actions had been rational and measured, given Mr. Han had twice threatened him with death and would not leave him alone.He said Mr. Davis, who stands 5 feet 9 inches and weighs 150 pounds, had feared for his life because Mr. Han had appeared and sounded deranged, even though he was 5 foot 3 and 122 pounds. When the smaller man raised his hand, Mr. Davis thought he was going to make good on his threats, Mr. Pokart said.“He took him at his word, and he gave Mr. Han a hard push,” Mr. Pokart said. “Mr. Davis was defending himself.”But Charles Whitt, the lead prosecutor on the case, argued that Mr. Davis, even if he had been afraid, still had a duty to retreat before using force against Mr. Han. He could have pushed Mr. Han to the side and slipped away, Mr. Whitt said, rather than shoving him toward the tracks, where he would be in mortal peril.“This is not a stand-your-ground situation,” Mr. Whitt said. “He could have gone left. He could have gone right. He could have gotten out of there at any moment.”The prosecutor said Mr. Davis must have known Mr. Han was drunk — he reeked of alcohol — and noted he had told the prosecutors who first interviewed him that Mr. Han was staggering. (The medical examiner found Mr. Han had three times the legal limit of alcohol in his blood when he died.)“What he did was the equivalent of throwing a drunk high school student on the tracks, or a feeble old man,” Mr. Whitt told the jury. “He was no threat to Mr. Davis, and Mr. Davis knew it.”Mr. Whitt also noted that Mr. Davis, after seeing Mr. Han crushed by a Q train, had gathered a cup of coffee, his headphones and his jacket, which he had placed behind him during the confrontation, and left the station. Then he continued his normal workday. Mr. Whitt argued that this showed Mr. Davis’s extreme indifference to Mr. Han’s death.“The fact that he went back to his regular routine after he killed someone speaks volumes,” Mr. Whitt said. “He didn’t spill a drop of that coffee.”Mr. Davis, who left Sierra Leone during the civil war there and became an American citizen, left the court house at 100 Centre Street shortly before 2 p.m.He said he was going to Forlini’s Restaurant with his lawyers for a good meal, then in a few days intended to travel to Paris to see his parents and other relatives. He did not say if he would return to the United States.“I feel good,” he said. “I am thankful for my freedom.”