https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-revenge.html
Letter of Recommendation: Revenge - The New York Times
Dating and Relationships,Jews and Judaism,Inferno (Book)
June 21, 2017
6441
A number of years ago (I won’t say how many), I met my first real boyfriend on a teenage summer service trip. We played with orphans, learned about the knotty legal spider web of the international adoption process and then got drunk in a tourist bar. It was about 20 percent altruistic and 80 percent the exact humiliating cliché “teenage summer service trip” calls to mind. It also ended up saddling me with a number of insect-borne ailments. This boy and I continued seeing each other after we returned, and he was a supportive presence from afar as I suffered through a case of dengue fever. As soon as I was cured, I visited his house in Westchester for Sukkot, where he offered me his teenage virginity and I piously accepted. He dumped me three days later.We were both Jewish, raised without a traditional concept of heaven and hell. So when I found out a week later that my dry scalp, which I had asked him to scratch, was actually a festering case of lice, I told him nothing. I left him and his family to figure out and deal with the results on their own. If there was no eternal punishment awaiting him for mistreating me, a nice girl, I’d have to take things into my own hands. A teenage boy guilty of the most typical teenage-boy crime deserves to get lice, at the very least. It’s only fair.I would come across an even more pleasing vision of retribution in college, while reading Dante’s “Inferno.” In it, those condemned to hell are assigned eternal punishments on the principle of contrapasso — that is, the damned suffer the opposite of the crimes they committed in life. For example, if you were a glutton on earth, you’d spend eternity looking at, but never biting into, a six-foot submarine sandwich; the sullen might be condemned to a never-ending string of other people’s birthday parties. While reading the book, terrified and exhilarated, I filled my evenings with grotesque fantasies of the punishments I might receive for my unchecked narcissism and offensive beauty. That is, until I remembered that “Inferno” was fiction and that hell was just an invention, designed to make people fear the consequences of their actions, as well as to comfort those who had been wronged without justice.Now, as an adult woman living in the big, cynical city, I’ve been conditioned to keep my head down and avoid confrontation at all costs. Those willing to identify a misdeed and engage in public sparring, for some reason, are the spectacles — think of the viral video from 2013 of the wailing woman in the Apple Store, furiously claiming that AppleCare misled her about a part she was looking for. Instead, when we’ve been wronged, the socially accepted course of action is to keep quiet and complain about it after the fact — a satisfying but inherently cowardly action.But what if there was a happy place midway between post-facto whining and AppleCare lady? A place where scores were settled and respect reigned? I’m not advocating outsize punishments, the sort that a cartoon villain might dream up for his enemies. I don’t support deep-frying anyone in a pot of oil, even if he or she took the last onion rings from the buffet, nor do I endorse violence, major sabotage or cruelty. Instead, I turn to my arsenal of mostly harmless tactics, designed to make a slighter think twice about his or her slight, to make it known that the fabric of society has been torn asunder, and that it was the slighter’s fault.If a tall man stands directly in front of my nose at a concert, I’ll stick my elbow into his lower back until he thinks he has a kidney infection; should an anti-Semitic or misogynistic troll email me something disgusting, I’ll track down his real name on the internet and call him by it in my drippingly sweet response, so he knows to be on watch; if a middle-aged man shoves past me in line, I’ll shove past him and then place my order for a complicated coffee drink that I don’t want, deliberately speaking as slowly as I can. In this way, without maiming anyone or risking a trip to the clink, you can correct systemic wrongs on a case-by-case basis.As a motivating force, revenge can also inspire us to new achievements that we might never have dreamed of if it weren’t for that initial wrong. Take, for example, Khloé Kardashian’s “Revenge Body,” a show on E! about jilted exes getting better bodies than they ever would have had they not been dumped. I had a similar experience in middle school, when a classmate let me know that I was the “second-best dancer in the grade, after Camille.” Just as Khloé earned her revenge body, I took dance classes every night for 10 years until no one could deny that I was the No. 1 dancer in the grade, even better than Camille, and got someone to give me a certificate that said so. Exacting my revenge often requires an enormous amount of time and resources — but it’s work that I’m willing to do.Besides, doesn’t every decision ultimately originate at that same intersection of selfishness and altruism, exactly like that summer service trip I chose to take, looking at once to learn about the injustices of the world and to make out with boys? Aren’t we all a combination of totally horrible and vaguely heroic? Recognize that contradiction that’s inside you — and definitely inside me — and hold onto it. You’ll feel better, and maybe, incidentally, make the world a better place.