https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/world/asia/india-delhi-fireworks-air-pollution.html
Indian Court Bans Fireworks Sales in Delhi to Fight Smog - The New York Times
Fireworks,Air Pollution,World Health Organization,Delhi (India),India
Nov. 25, 2016
5948
NEW DELHI — India’s Supreme Court on Friday banned the sale of firecrackers in the capital region, reflecting a growing sense of urgency after a thick smog engulfed Delhi for 10 days early this month, trapping its population of 20 million in dangerous concentrations of polluted air.“There’s an immediate ban” on fireworks sales across the National Capital Region until further orders are given, said Gopal Sankaranarayanan, a lawyer who filed the lead petition in the matter and announced the court’s ruling. “It’s something we’re very happy about.”The Supreme Court also gave India’s Central Pollution Control Board three months to file a report on the “composition and content” of fireworks, after which it would contemplate a national ban on their manufacture, Mr. Sankaranarayanan said.The ban is an important step. For generations in India, fireworks have been set off to mark Hindu festivals, and their manufacture is a vast industry. Last year, the court refused to issue a blanket ban on fireworks, arguing that it would infringe on citizens’ rights.This year, however, the hearing came on the heels of an episode that rattled the capital. After acrid smoke from fireworks set off late last month for Diwali, the Hindu festival of lights, merged with emissions from other sources, levels of the most dangerous particles of air pollution rose to more than 16 times the level that the Indian government considers safe.City officials took the unprecedented step of shutting down more than 1,800 public primary schools and advised parents to keep their children inside until the crisis passed. Pervasive alarm over health risks, especially to children, seemed to have spurred the court into action, said Mr. Sankaranarayanan, who had filed the case in the name of his 19-month-old son.“People for the first time, when they stepped out of their house, realized that they could not see more than 20 or 30 feet in front of them,” he said by telephone earlier this month. “It was really, really scary. It gave us a kind of snapshot into a dystopian world into which we would easily descend.”Air quality in New Delhi has been declining for years, but until recently few residents worried about the problem. In 2014, the World Health Organization released findings that ranked New Delhi’s air as the worst in the world, with its average concentration of dangerous pollutants almost three times that of Beijing.Shortly after, the United States Embassy in New Delhi began making its air pollution data public, and the city’s elites began investing in air purifiers and filtration masks. Early this year, the city government restricted the use of private cars in New Delhi to alternate days for two two-week periods.A. Asaithambi, the president of the Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces Manufacturers’ Association, said he had not heard about the order on Friday afternoon. But in an interview this month, he defended the industry.“You can’t blame fireworks as a major part of this pollution,” he said, citing weather conditions and smoke from brick kilns as contributors.But the decision to suspend existing licenses on fireworks sales and to stop issuing new ones is the first major crackdown on pollutants in many years, since a series of orders requiring public buses in the capital to switch from diesel to compressed natural gas, said Mr. Sankaranarayanan, one of the founders of Care for Air, a nonprofit organization based in New Delhi.“For the last 18 years, we have hoped that the government would step in and do something,” he said.