https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/television/emmy-awards-stranger-things.html
Emmy Awards 2017: Millie Bobby Brown on Her Nomination for ‘Stranger Things’ - The New York Times
Emmy Awards,Television,Actors and Actresses,Brown  Millie Bobby (2004- ),Stranger Things (TV Program),Netflix Inc
July 13, 2017
3842
Maybe she saw her Emmy nomination coming all along.At 13, the actress Millie Bobby Brown has already gained a fan following for playing Eleven, a mysterious girl with psychic powers, whose escape from a lab helps set in motion the story of “Stranger Things,” the Netflix science-fiction series set in an Indiana town in the 1980s.On Thursday, Ms. Brown received an Emmy Award nomination as a supporting actress in a drama for her performance. It’s one of 18 nominations that “Stranger Things” earned in its first season, including one for best drama series.In a phone interview, Ms. Brown spoke about the first Emmy nomination of her career and the superpower she’d rather have.[ Emmy Interviews: Samantha Bee | Millie Bobby Brown | Claire Foy | Samira Wiley | Evan Rachel Wood ]How did you learn about your Emmy nomination today?I promised myself that I wouldn’t look, but obviously you have to look. My dad was watching the announcement, and the guy on the live stream was like, “Oh, we’re finished with this.” The live stream stopped, and my dad had three different electronic devices on, like, “Come on! Come on!” trying to find the full list [of nominees]. And then finally my publicist called me and told me. I was just in shock. I thought she was going to call saying, “Ah, better luck next time,” or something like that. But she said congratulations.And how did you react?I’m so happy for the show. The show completely deserves it. The show is 10 times more amazing than my nomination.Will you do anything to celebrate the nomination?I’m working tonight on my new movie, “Godzilla” [“Godzilla: King of the Monsters”]. So I’m going to go to work. Just doing my job makes me so happy. I’m definitely going to get a Starbucks right now, that’s usually my celebratory drink. And then probably do some schoolwork. [Laughs] So it’s going to be a fun day.Do you go to school when you’re not working on a film or TV series?I’m home-schooled, but being on set with the boys [her “Stranger Things” co-stars] is like a school in itself. We argue, we’re like brothers and sister. We laugh. It’s a bunch of fun kids.You’ve already finished work on a coming second season of “Stranger Things.” What can you tell us about it? It’s 10 times better than the last season. You guys are going to love it. It’s everything the fans want, and what they’re not expecting.When people meet you in person now, do they just assume you have psychic abilities?People do think that sometimes I have powers. At the Comic-Cons, they’re like, “Hey, Millie, can you move that Coke can?” No, of course I can’t. But it’s really fun playing someone who has powers, because you get so many opportunities to do some cool stunts.Is there a power you wish you could have?Absolutely. I think healing would be a power that I would like. My No. 1 job is to help people, and if I could, I absolutely would do so. Oh my goodness, so many people are texting me right now.