https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/14/us/politics/dnc-hack.html
New Documents Released From Hack of Democratic Party - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Cyberwarfare and Defense,Democratic National Committee,Russia,E-Mail
Sept. 13, 2016
6977
A hacker who American intelligence officials believe has ties to the Russian government made public on Tuesday a second batch of documents suspected of having been stolen from the Democratic National Committee’s computer system, leaving the organization rushing to contain damage or embarrassment less than two months before the presidential election.The internal documents, which party officials were verifying for authenticity, were distributed at a cybersecurity conference in London.The release was apparently the work of Guccifer 2.0, a self-identified Romanian hacker who claimed responsibility for publishing a trove of the committee’s documents before the Democratic convention in July.Donna Brazile, the interim chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, blamed Russian espionage for the hack and said that foreign agents were trying to help Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, be elected.“The D.N.C. is the victim of a crime: an illegal cyberattack by Russian state-sponsored agents who seek to harm the Democratic Party and progressive groups in an effort to influence the presidential election,” Ms. Brazile said in a statement. “There’s one person who stands to benefit from these criminal acts, and that’s Donald Trump.”The first batch of documents showed that party officials had favored Hillary Clinton over Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the Democratic primary campaign, and their disclosure appeared to have been timed to sow discord before a unifying moment.Ms. Brazile said that the committee had expected more documents to be released and that its legal team was working to determine whether they were real or forged.The documents released Tuesday were not immediately as damaging as the first trove, and they proved difficult to access. WikiLeaks, the anti-secrecy platform, posted multiple messages on Twitter explaining how to download the documents after users struggled to do so. Initial reports suggested that they were old records related to the committee’s donor outreach program.Their release is likely to put more focus on Russia’s efforts to meddle in the presidential election. American intelligence agencies and private investigators concluded in July that the hack was the work of the Russian government.President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia denied involvement in the security breach in an interview with Bloomberg News this month, but he did describe it as a public service.Mr. Trump has dismissed suggestions of Russian involvement, but he drew scorn this summer when he invited Russian hackers to track down missing emails from the private server Mrs. Clinton used as secretary of state.While Mr. Trump laughed off his remark, the Democratic National Committee said Tuesday that the hacking was not a coincidence.“Not only has Trump embraced Putin, he publicly encouraged further Russian espionage to help his campaign,” Ms. Brazile said, calling Mr. Trump’s statements “dangerous, divisive and unprecedented.”