https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/opinion/making-an-example-of-volkswagen.html
Making an Example of Volkswagen - The New York Times
Volkswagen AG,Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV,Clean Air Act,Fuel Emissions (Transportation),Frauds and Swindling,Justice Department,Environmental Protection Agency
Jan. 12, 2017
6778
For too long, big corporations and financial institutions have been able to pay fines for their misdeeds and settle civil cases while escaping criminal indictment. Now, in the final days of the Obama administration, the Department of Justice has delivered a strong message to multibillion-dollar companies and their executives: No one is “too big to jail.”On Wednesday, Volkswagen pleaded guilty to criminal charges related to its emissions-cheating scandal, including conspiracy to commit wire fraud and to violate the Clean Air Act, customs violations and obstruction of justice. The company agreed to pay the United States $4.3 billion in fines. This is on top of the $16 billion it has agreed to pay American diesel car owners. The total is likely to go higher: The company still faces criminal investigations by attorneys general in 42 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.In addition, federal prosecutors announced criminal charges against six Volkswagen executives. One, Oliver Schmidt, was arrested in Florida last week; the other five are believed to be in Germany. Charges include conspiracy to defraud the United States, defraud customers and violate the Clean Air Act.On Thursday, the Environmental Protection Agency accused Fiat Chrysler of installing software that allowed 104,000 diesel vehicles to evade emission standards.Over a period of years, VW equipped millions of diesel cars with software that lowered emissions of nitrogen oxides to legal limits during testing, to hide the fact that those emissions grossly exceeded limits during normal use. In effect, it sold “clean diesel” cars to unsuspecting customers, knowing that the vehicles, when on the road, were spewing pollutants that can cause respiratory illnesses.Rather than own up when the fraud was revealed, VW obfuscated and lied. When an environmental group released a study on the emissions discrepancy to the Environmental Protection Agency in 2014, VW said the study was flawed. After the E.P.A. announced in September 2015 that it had discovered the cheating software, VW’s chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, resigned but denied any wrongdoing. VW offered hollow apologies and promises to fix the devious devices. Meanwhile, employees were directed to destroy incriminating emails.Germany is conducting its own investigation into VW, and questions remain about the role played by other senior executives and board members. And VW, which clearly has little regard for public health, continues to claim its trickery is legal in Europe. The American case against VW sends an important signal to executives that they can be held responsible for crimes committed on their watch.