https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/11/business/two-schools-of-thought-adding-up-to-success.html
Two Schools of Thought, Adding Up to Success  - The New York Times
Mutual Funds,Jensen Investment Management Inc,Janus Capital Group Inc,Polen Capital Management LLC,Stocks and Bonds,Buffett  Warren E,Graham  Benjamin
Jan. 9, 2015
6658
GROWTH and value styles of investing are often described as opposites, but managers of three of the better-performing funds of the fourth quarter of 2014 don’t see it that way.Instead, while they seek companies with steadily growing earnings, they also borrow an attribute from the playbook of Benjamin Graham, the father of value investing and Warren E. Buffett’s professor at Columbia Business School. That is, they aim to invest in companies with sustainable competitive advantages, like a well-known brand or a commanding position in a market, that will enable them to increase their earnings year after year.A Return-on-Equity TestEric H. Schoenstein, a portfolio manager of the Jensen Quality Growth  fund, said he and his colleagues identified promising companies based on return on equity, or R.O.E. — which shows how much profit a company has generated with shareholders’ investments. The fund will not invest unless a company has achieved an R.O.E. of at least 15 percent for at least 10 consecutive years. Companies zipping along like that tend to combine competitive strength, capable management and financial might, Mr. Schoenstein said. They also have “dominant market shares and pricing power,” he said.Consider Becton Dickinson, the fund’s second-largest holding at the end of September. It makes syringes and other medical tools and tests and is expanding in the developing world.The fund also looks only at companies with a market capitalization of at least $1 billion. That requirement, with the R.O.E. screen, limits the pool of candidates to about 200 companies, Mr. Schoenstein said. The managers then winnow further, building a portfolio of only 25 to 30 companies. In contrast, the average actively managed stock fund tracked by Morningstar holds about 150 stocks.Mr. Schoenstein said he and his colleagues believed that active managers should invest with conviction. Actively managed funds that spread their money widely can end up looking like “enhanced index funds,” he said.The managers also sock away stocks for years: The average turnover ratio of the fund’s holdings is just 14 percent. “We believe that enduring wealth comes from owning great companies for a long time,” Mr. Schoenstein said.The fund returned 9.2 percent in the fourth quarter, compared with 4.9 percent for the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index. Over the five years through December, it returned 13.5 percent annualized, compared with 15.4 percent for the index. Its retail shares carry an expense ratio of 0.88 percent.The Hunt for StrengthThe stewards of the Polen Growth fund approach investing in much the same way as the Jensen managers. They seek companies with growing earnings, sturdy financials and competitive advantages, said Daniel A. Davidowitz, the lead portfolio manager. They also invest in just a few stocks — 21 at the end of September — and trade infrequently.Google recently represented about 8.5 percent of the fund. Polen owns Class A and C shares in the company. Mr. Davidowitz said he and his co-manager, Damon A. Ficklin, favored companies, like Google, that dominate their markets. Thus, the fund invests in both Visa and MasterCard. “In the U.S., about 50 percent of personal consumption expenditures are done on credit cards,” Mr. Davidowitz said. “Globally, it’s still 85 percent cash and checks,” with the card share expected to grow. “That’s a huge trend in their favor.”What all of the companies in the fund share, besides competitive muscle, are “pristine balance sheets — flush with cash and little or no debt,” Mr. Davidowitz said..Though the Polen fund invests in growth companies, it always includes some of what Mr. Davidowitz called “safety stocks,” like Nestlé and Abbott Laboratories. These balance riskier bets in fields like biotech. “We’re not looking for cheap stocks,” he said. “We’re looking for that compounded earnings growth.”The fund returned 9.9 percent in the fourth quarter and has returned 16.5 percent, annualized, since its inception in September 2010. Its retail shares carry an expense ratio of 1.25 percent.Favoring Small IndustrialsWhere Jensen Quality Growth and Polen Growth favor bigger, better-known companies, the managers of Janus Venture — Jonathan D. Coleman and Maneesh J. Modi — focus on small-capitalization stocks. Even so, they, too, search for companies with enduring competitive advantages.“We spend a lot of time thinking about barriers to entry,” Mr. Coleman said. “That’s really important in the small-cap world. Many of our companies can have competitors that are larger and better funded.”Their pondering often leads them to the industrial sector; their fund has a larger stake in industrials than the typical small-cap offering tracked by Morningstar. They like the niche because they believe that industrial customers are more reluctant to shop around than retail ones, Mr. Modi said. “Anything I buy in one store, I can get somewhere else,” he said. “But if someone is supplying an aerospace component to Boeing, it’s harder for Boeing to switch, and it’s probably not going to switch for a 5 percent savings.”Insights about buyer inertia also pointed them to software and services companies selling to the financial industry, Mr. Modi said. An example is SS&C Technologies Holdings, which markets to money managers and other financial outfits. “Their client retention is in the 90 percent range,” partly because customers do not want the headaches of switching providers, he said.Mr. Coleman and Mr. Modi aim to invest in high-quality companies, but the returns of small-cap stocks tend to zigzag. “So you need to wear your seatbelt,” Mr. Coleman said. “But we hope, with our fund, you don’t also need a mouth guard and a neck brace.”Janus Venture, whose D shares have an expense ratio of 0.84 percent, returned 12.5 percent in the fourth quarter and 19 percent, annualized, over five years.