http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/30/world/asia/30afghan.html
Ethnic Uzbek Legislator Beaten, Afghans Confirm - The New York Times
Dostum  Abdul Rashid,Afghanistan,Uzbekistan
June 30, 2006
1782
KABUL, Afghanistan, June 29 — A member of Parliament from northern Afghanistan was severely beaten this month and taken to Uzbekistan for medical treatment, Afghan officials said Thursday. The legislator, Faizullah Zaki, an ethnic Uzbek, has been the right-hand man of the ethnic Uzbek general Abdul Rashid Dostum for four years.Abdul Wahab Khetab, the director of the Ministry of Interior's criminal department, confirmed reports of the attack on Mr. Zaki, who won a seat in Parliament in the elections last year. Mr. Khetab said Mr. Zaki was beaten two weeks ago, when he returned to Jowzjan, his home province in the north, for the parliamentary recess. "I have not seen him but I think he has been beaten on the head, chest, arms and legs," Mr. Khetab said.Another legislator, Hajji Ahmad Fareed, who leads a commission on legislators' safety, said, "We heard he was beaten up, intimidated, and now he is in Uzbekistan." The commission could not reach Mr. Zaki for two weeks, and was only now receiving reports that he had been assaulted, Mr. Fareed said. The commission was seeking a briefing about the attack from the interior minister, he said.Mr. Zaki, who has been General Dostum's spokesman for four years, speaks English and is well known among the international population in Afghanistan. He leads the parliamentary commission for the protection of the environment.Many lawmakers have not been able to return to their home provinces for the summer recess, either because of threats from local opponents or because of the insurgency in the south by people suspected of being Taliban fighters.But Mr. Zaki may have fallen afoul of his own political leader and erstwhile protector, General Dostum, after showing independence in his voting in Parliament, in particular supporting President Hamid Karzai's cabinet choices, said one Parliament colleague, who spoke on condition of anonymity, fearing retribution.Rumors were flying around Shiberghan, Mr. Zaki's hometown, that he had been beaten by people loyal to General Dostum, said another legislator who was reached by telephone in Jowzjan.Efforts to reach General Dostum's party office for comment were unsuccessful.General Dostum, a Russian-trained military officer, led a notorious militia during two decades of war in Afghanistan and has been accused of war crimes and of being behind many atrocities committed by his fighters. He was a prominent ally of the United States in the war against the Taliban and Al Qaeda in 2001 and was frequently praised by American officials for his contribution.Yet his men are blamed for some of the worst excesses of that war, including the suffocation of hundreds of Taliban prisoners who were being transported from the battlefield to a prison in Shiberghan in sealed shipping containers in 2001. One of his men badly beat an Afghan journalist investigating those killings in 2003.