http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/19/us/tangled-birth-and-death-of-a-gun-control-bill.html
After Gun Bill Defeat, Reid Calls for ‘Pause’ - The New York Times
Gun Control,Senate,Law and Legislation,Newtown  Conn  Shooting (2012),Schumer  Charles E,Coburn  Tom,Reid  Harry,Giffords  Gabrielle,Flake  Jeffrey L,Manchin  Joe III,LaPierre  Wayne,Obama  Barack
April 18, 2013
7090
WASHINGTON — Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona was in an empty hallway in the Capitol on Tuesday when he bumped into Gabrielle Giffords, the former Democratic member of Congress from his home state who was critically wounded in a mass shooting. Both froze in anticipation of the painful minute about to unfold.Ms. Giffords, who had been fiercely promoting a background check bill for gun buyers, knew that Mr. Flake, a Republican and an old friend, had announced on his Facebook page the night before that he would not support the bill. So Ms. Giffords, who still struggles to speak because of the damage that a bullet did to her brain, grabbed Mr. Flake’s arm and tried — furiously and with difficulty — to say that she had needed his vote. The best she could get out was the word “need.”Mr. Flake looked at the ground. “I said I was sorry,” Mr. Flake recalled Thursday, looking despondent. “I didn’t know what else to say. It’s very hard.”In the end, Mr. Flake’s rebuff of Ms. Giffords and his decision to vote with many of his Senate colleagues against the gun measure helped doom a search among a small group of Republicans and Democrats to find consensus around gun regulations. Their efforts were largely trounced by the intense lobbying of gun rights groups, which declined to support a modest initiative to expand criminal background checks for gun buyers.But the roots of the defeat can be traced to a variety of other factors: timing, convoluted Senate rules that allow minority opponents great influence, and an ultimately counterproductive alliance between Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Tom Coburn, Republican of Oklahoma, which inadvertently helped the groundwork for the opposition. The failure of the bill was complete on Thursday as Senator Harry Reid, the majority leader, said lawmakers would move on to other issues and take “a pause” in the gun control fight.Before its defeat, the background check bill sat on the same legislative runway as an impending immigration bill that soaked up the will of Republican lawmakers, like Mr. Flake, who were not ready to try two tough political sales to their constituents. Even gay marriage, which was bubbling up in the national political conversation, hurt the bill.“There were some who could not sell it back home,” said Senator Joe Manchin III, a West Virginia Democrat with strong support from the National Rifle Association who made the background check measure his passion. “Had some changed their minds on gay issues and taken that out front? Had some been out there on immigration and really had to work hard to sell and didn’t need something else to sell? Because in the end you can really believe in something, but you have to go sell it.”The effort to revisit the emotional and politically divisive notion of new gun laws began on a Friday night in December after 20 schoolchildren and 6 adults were gunned down in Newtown, Conn. That evening President Obama convened his top aides in the Oval Office and weighed whether he should make a big push on new gun control laws, even though he had planned to start the second term focused on new immigration laws.No one thought it would be easy, but aides counseled that Mr. Obama had little choice but to try. They said that it would rightly be seen as a failure of leadership if he did not and that a grieving nation, especially his supporters, would demand action.Mr. Obama edited the speech he would give that Sunday at the memorial for the Newtown victims and inserted a phrase promising to use “whatever power this office holds” to confront gun violence. Aides said his commitment was thus locked in.But the National Rifle Association was fighting back. Only a week after the Newtown massacre, Wayne LaPierre, the group’s executive vice president, held a defiant news conference in Washington and called for putting armed guards in every school in the country. “The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun,” he declared.Mr. Obama, who had deputized Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., to hold public meetings with gun control groups, Hollywood executives and mental health professionals, countered with an impassioned plea for gun safety in his Feb. 11 State of the Union address. The Senate Judiciary Committee soon responded with legislation that included expanded background checks. An assault weapons ban and a measure to limit the size of gun magazines also passed the committee.Tempers sometimes flared. During an early hearing on the legislation, Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat who is a longtime proponent of an assault weapons ban, and Senator Ted Cruz, a Texas Republican and vocal supporter of gun rights, had a sharp exchange. When Mr. Cruz challenged the 79-year-old Ms. Feinstein on her constitutional knowledge, she scolded him. “I’m not a sixth grader,” she said.Newtown continued to shift the mood on Capitol Hill.An early sign of the change in thinking came from Mr. Coburn, who has an A rating from the N.R.A. but was one of the first Republicans to say that a debate over gun safety was needed. On a parallel track with the Judiciary Committee, he began to work with Mr. Schumer on a measure to strengthen background checks to prevent criminals and people with psychological problems from obtaining guns.The two senators held a series of meetings starting in mid-January, even as Mr. Reid — who after Newtown had a falling out with the N.R.A. — was skeptical. Mr. Coburn had a history of flamboyantly engaging Democrats on bipartisan endeavors and then walking away.In this case, Mr. Coburn and Mr. Schumer were soon at an impasse over whether records would be kept for gun sales that did not involve gun stores, as they are for sales in stores. Mr. Schumer and gun-control advocates said the records were essential for effective background checks, but Mr. Coburn, who by now had come under attack from gun rights groups, said he feared it would create a national gun registry.The gun registry fears were stoked by the gun lobby. While the White House and Mr. Schumer vaguely pondered the idea of dropping the record-keeping component, the gun control groups would not stand for it.By mid-March Mr. Coburn had gone his own way, leaving Mr. Manchin, who had worked with him in the negotiations, to look for a new Republican partner. Mr. Manchin cornered members in the Senate gym, on the floor and on planes and trains.Easter recess came and went and hope for a gun bill began to fade. Many senators were balking — not just Republicans but Democrats from conservative states who are up for re-election next year. Mr. Obama and Mr. Biden had met with or called dozens of senators, but at the White House the mood was grim.Mr. Reid became impatient and gave Mr. Manchin, who was now talking with Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, a deadline of April 10 to announce a compromise. Late in the afternoon of April 9, as Mr. Manchin sat in Mr. Reid’s office, aides to Mr. Toomey called Mr. Manchin to say the deal was done: There would be a background check measure that would maintain record keeping, but using the records to create a gun registry would be a felony, punishable by a fine and 15 years in prison.Republicans who opposed the bill did not sit idle. Mr. Cruz, with the help of several other conservatives, said they would filibuster the gun measure to make sure it did not even get a vote.But that effort backfired after Mr. Obama delivered an emotional speech in Hartford, imploring lawmakers to at least give the legislation a chance. He returned to Washington with the Newtown families as his guests on Air Force One. The families and other victims of gun violence spent the rest of the week swarming the Capitol, meeting with lawmakers and holding news conferences.On April 11, a day after Mr. Manchin and Mr. Toomey announced their compromise, 68 senators voted to proceed to the bill. Gun control advocates cheered.Republicans, however, worked to keep their wavering members from signing on to the compromise and began to come up with countermeasures, including a proposal by Mr. Coburn that critics said would unravel current regulations. “This is the only way to get background checks passed,” Mr. Coburn said.Republican leaders then settled on a full-scale alternative gun measure to be drafted by Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, and Mr. Cruz, that would have allocated $15 million over three years to prosecute illegal gun possession.The idea was simple: Mr. Grassley’s name would give stature to the proposal for more moderate Republicans. Mr. Cruz’s name would give it legitimacy for conservatives.It worked.As Mr. Toomey and Mr. Manchin furiously worked the phones last weekend, struggling to get votes, Republicans countered them. Ms. Giffords came to Capitol Hill to lean on members, especially Democrats. But one by one, senators came out against the bill.On Tuesday night, two of the last Republican holdouts, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, announced that they would oppose the Manchin-Toomey amendment and support the Grassley alternative.“This last-minute alternative is apparently being offered so that Republicans who fear crossing the Washington gun lobby can go home and say that they voted for something,” said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont and chairman of the Judiciary Committee. “This is our reward.”Senate leaders also decided to rush the process: They reached a bipartisan agreement to hold nine votes in succession, each with a 60-vote threshold for passage. This, too, spelled doom.On Wednesday, after the Senate killed the measure, Mr. Reid held a news conference with weeping relatives of people who had been killed by guns and promised to try again. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, moved quickly away from the cameras behind them. Many senators and reporters had already turned their attention to the rollout of an immigration bill.Ms. Giffords repaired to the White House for a news conference with a furious Mr. Obama — he called it a “shameful day” in Washington — and then went back on the Oval Office with the president and some of the families. Mr. Obama hugged the brother of one victim, Daniel Barden, who was 7, and told him to take care of his mother, who was sobbing quietly.Ms. Giffords’s group, Americans for Responsible Solutions, had sent out an e-mail appeal moments after the vote to help oust members who voted no. By the time she got back to her hotel from the White House, $200,000 had come in.