https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/magazine/why-couldnt-the-young-boy-walk.html
Why Couldn’t the Young Boy Walk? - The New York Times
Vaccination and Immunization,Medicine and Health,Autoimmune Diseases,Purpura
July 6, 2017
8811
‘‘Dad, I can’t walk!’’ The middle-aged man heard his 8-year-old son’s voice and turned to see him crawling into the living room on his hands and knees, his feet suspended off the floor.The father and his two boys were spending a weekend this past February with friends in Lake Tahoe, Calif. A few days before leaving their Northern California home, the man saw a few red dots on the 8-year-old’s legs. He and his wife considered the possibility of chickenpox, but the child had received the varicella vaccine. Besides, he didn’t look sick at all.He’d also complained about pain in his ankle and another time in his knee. They hurt, he told them, ‘‘from the inside.’’ Neither joint looked red or swollen, and so the mother and father were willing to write off these complaints as some kind of playground injury. And he’d been fine playing in the snow since their arrival.The father hurried over to the boy. An irregular band of solid red ringed both legs, just above the anklebone. The boundary between rash and normal skin was well defined and jagged, like a coastline on a map. The ankles might have been a little swollen. They hurt enough that the boy was unwilling to put any weight on them.The child’s father took pictures of the rash and sent them to his wife. She was visiting friends a couple of states over. Seeing the photos, one friend — a doctor — was concerned enough to suggest that the boy see his pediatrician when they got home. The boy felt a little better as the day progressed and by lunchtime was up and walking.Back at home on Monday, he felt well enough to go to school. The rash remained, and though the boy and his father were ready to move on, the mother, still out of town and still worried by her friend’s assessment, asked her husband to take the boy to see Dr. Wolffe Nadoolman, their pediatrician, that afternoon.The boy liked Dr. Wolffe — as everyone in the family called him — and when the doctor entered the exam room, the child greeted him gaily.‘‘Nice anklets,’’ the doctor said with a smile. ‘‘Where can I get me a pair?’’ The boy explained that he had started off with just a few red dots sprinkled on his legs. They were itchy at first but now were kind of sore. He had no dots on his ankles when he went to bed on Friday night, but the rash was there when he woke up on Saturday.No fever, no stomachache? the doctor asked the boy. No cough or wheezing? No pain when you pee? No bleeding when you brush your teeth? No, no and no. He’d been fine, except for this pain and this rash.Nadoolman examined the child carefully. He had good color in his lips and cheeks, and all in all, he looked well. The doctor felt one slightly enlarged lymph node on the right side of the boy’s neck. But his heart, lungs and stomach were all normal. Scattered over the boy’s legs were a few small, slightly raised red dots. And when Nadoolman pushed on the spots, they didn’t turn pale the way bites or most kinds of rashes do.Do you have this rash anyplace else? he asked the boy. The child shook his head. The pediatrician looked at the father, who agreed with his son’s assessment. But Nadoolman knew that there was one place that probably neither boy nor dad had seen, and a rash there would be an important clue.‘‘I need to look at your bum,’’ he said to the child. Unembarrassed, the child stood up and pulled down his shorts. And there, across the boy’s buttocks, were dozens of the same red spots seen on his legs. But here the spots were larger and much darker. And as with the lesions on the boy’s legs and ankles, pressure didn’t make the rash blanch — an indication that the dots were actually tiny pools of blood deposited within the layers of the skin, a kind of rash known as purpura.Lots of terrible diseases can cause purpura. Severe infection can do it. So can leukemia. An autoimmune disease in which your immune system mistakenly attacks blood-clotting elements known as platelets can also cause this kind of rash. Nadoolman was pretty sure that the child didn’t have any of these. He looked too healthy to have a severe infection. And he said there was no bleeding when he brushed his teeth — that would have suggested a problem with the boy’s platelets. Nor did he have any of the most common signs of leukemia: an enlarged liver or spleen, big lymph nodes, fever or easy bruising.The doctor thought the child had something more common and benign: an autoimmune disorder known as Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP). This disease, first described more than 200 years ago, usually affects children under 12 and is characterized by migrating joint pain and a purpuric rash that is worse in areas of pressure. That would explain the ankle rash — probably a result of pressure from the child’s snow boots — and the lesions on his buttocks. There is no test for this disorder, so the diagnosis is made based on the history and exam. Labs can rule out some of the other possibilities when the diagnosis is in doubt, but Nadoolman thought it was a straightforward case.Current thinking is that HSP is an abnormal version of an allergic reaction. Some exposure — usually an infection — triggers the allergy components of the immune system, so that days to weeks later they attack the very smallest blood vessels in the body, creating this rash. Abdominal pain and bloody urine or stools can also occur when these delicate purpuric lesions develop in the gastrointestinal or urinary tissues. Why this happens is, like so much in medicine, still poorly understood.Nadoolman explained that the disease usually lasts several weeks. It can come back, but if it doesn’t for a year, it’s usually gone for good. He took a urine sample to look for evidence of kidney involvement — one of the most serious complications of HSP — and warned the child to avoid sports or roughhousing for the next few weeks. They should talk every couple of days; if the boy wasn’t getting better, he’d have to consider other possibilities.The next day, the school called. The boy was in the nurse’s office with terrible pain in his ankles. His mother picked him up and brought him to Nadoolman. The rash was unchanged, Nadoolman noted. But because the boy’s pain was so much worse than it had been, he sent mother and child to the E.R. of the Children’s Hospital in Oakland so he could be seen by a pediatric rheumatologist there. The specialists tested the child’s blood and urine to look for other possible disorders, but when the results were normal, they agreed with Nadoolman’s diagnosis. They gave the boy medication for the pain and told him to follow up with his regular doctor.In researching HSP, the boy’s father read that some people thought there might be a link between the disorder and vaccines, particularly the one that prevents measles, mumps and rubella (MMR). He worried that something they’d done to protect their son may have harmed him. In a recent Italian study, eight kids out of 288 with HSP had been vaccinated within the previous 12 weeks. But in other, larger studies, no link was found. In one of the most extensive studies done to date, there were just 28 cases of HSP in the weeks following the vaccination of 14 million children in China. In any case, this boy was years past his vaccinations — well beyond the time for them to be a trigger.The boy had episodes of pain in his joints for weeks. But now, five months after that Lake Tahoe trip, he is back to normal. Sadly, his beloved pediatrician, and my friend, Dr. Wolffe, died suddenly in April. It was a loss for the whole family. ‘‘Dr. Wolffe helped me raise these boys,’’ the father told me. They are looking for another pediatrician but suspect that they will never find anyone to really replace him. ‘‘He was one of a kind.’’