https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/09/world/europe/britain-theresa-may-brexit-european-union.html
Theresa May Resists Pressure to Call Early British Election to Bolster ‘Brexit’ - The New York Times
Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),May  Theresa M,Legislatures and Parliaments,House of Commons (Great Britain),Conservative Party (Great Britain)
March 9, 2017
4734
LONDON — Theresa May, Britain’s accidental prime minister, seems unassailable, with her opposition in disorder.But there are increasing uncertainties around Britain’s decision to leave the European Union and an inevitable gathering of opposition to her decision to go for a hard break with the bloc, particularly in Scotland and Northern Ireland but also, increasingly, in England.A bill to allow the government to start its formal notice of resignation from the European Union, known as Brexit, is wending its way through Parliament. With noisy bouts of disagreement from the House of Lords, pressure is growing on Mrs. May, of the Conservative Party, to call an early general election to solidify her narrow majority in the House of Commons while the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats remain in disarray.Mrs. May has vowed that she will invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the end of March, beginning the two-year process of withdrawing from the European Union. She may do it even sooner, before the other 27 nations of the European Union gather in Rome on March 25 to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome that led to the founding of the bloc. Some are urging her to call for an election at the same time.However, Mrs. May has vowed not to hold an election before the next scheduled vote, in May 2020. And she is usually described as someone with contempt for those who treat promises as ephemeral.But the temptation is strong, articulated this week by William Hague, the former Conservative Party leader, speaking for other Tory legislators, who urged her to capitalize on Labour’s woes.Given the challenges of the Brexit negotiations, new agitation for independence in Scotland, anxiety about the Irish border and a Trump administration, Mr. Hague argued that she and her government would be in a much stronger position “if they had a large and decisive majority in the Commons and a new full term ahead of them.”An election “would catch the Labour Party in its worst condition since the early Thirties, and with its least credible leader ever,” Mr. Hague wrote, referring to Jeremy Corbyn. That, he added, “would strengthen the government’s hand at home and abroad.”The argument was underlined by Mrs. May’s second defeat in the House of Lords over the bill authorizing her to invoke Article 50. She insists that she will pass the bill again through the Commons without amendment (judging that the Lords, the advisory chamber, will then accede to it).That remains most likely. But the amendments reflected wider concern among the political and economic elite of the country that the hard Brexit she envisages — leaving Britain outside the single market and customs union — ought to be subject to some form of credible parliamentary review at the end of the process.To show her toughness on the issue, Mrs. May fired Michael Heseltine, 83, a former Conservative deputy prime minister now in the House of Lords, as a government adviser for voting against her wishes. But her response also seemed edgy and disproportionate.The invocation of Article 50 begins a two-year period of negotiation with the European Union over the terms of the divorce and a framework for a future relationship. The British government is understandably coy now about how it will negotiate, but Parliament will have a final vote on whatever deal is reached in 2019.While some in the House of Lords and the Commons want that vote to be meaningful, others believe that by then it will be too late for Parliament to do more than accept whatever deal the government has managed to secure, since rejection would mean a blunt break with the European Union and no shock-cushioning deals on trade, customs or regulations.But the political mood is already febrile, with Northern Ireland’s politics stalemated, anxiety over the future of the border with Ireland and Scotland talking seriously about another referendum on independence.Scotland in particular has been upset by the Brexit vote, after having voted resoundingly to remain in the bloc. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, told the BBC  on Thursday that autumn 2018 was “the common sense time” to hold a referendum, “if that is the road we choose to go down.”So the logic of an early election is clear. Given the mess of the Labour Party under Mr. Corbyn, and the weakness of the Liberal Democrats, Mrs. May’s Conservatives might be able to win a majority of 100 or so in the Commons, a much safer figure than now, which is a working majority of 17.A larger majority would take a lot of the pressure off Mrs. May in the Brexit negotiations, which are clearly going to be difficult and are unlikely to produce the glorious outcome that some in Britain imagined last June, when they voted for “independence” from the European Union.There would be another benefit. Mrs. May, who became prime minister in a foreshortened vote of her own party when David Cameron suddenly quit, after he was on the losing side of the Brexit referendum, would be able to claim her own personal mandate on her own platform. A larger majority would also put to rest any prospect of a parliamentary rebellion in 2019, when a final Brexit bill would presumably come to a vote.Mr. Hague pointed to the complexity of Brexit, saying that “any deal is bound to be full of compromises which one group or another in Parliament finds difficult to stomach.” And “as British law needs to be amended countless times to take account of leaving the E.U. treaties, the government could face many close votes, concessions or defeats as it tries to implement Brexit.”And that perceived weakness, he judged, “will embolden the E.U. negotiators, and makes an agreement that is good for the U.K. harder to achieve.”Gordon Brown, when he took over as Labour Party prime minister from Tony Blair in 2007, hesitated to call an early election to take advantage of his honeymoon popularity and win a fresh mandate. After the recession of 2008, Mr. Brown lost the 2010 election and stepped down.But Steven Fielding, a professor of political history at Nottingham University, said that he expected Mrs. May to keep her word, about the election timing and delivering Brexit, in the hope of creating a longer lasting political realignment that could keep the Conservatives in power for many years, “long after Corbyn shuffles off the stage.”By carrying out Brexit, “she neutralizes UKIP in the south and takes away the votes UKIP thought they’d get from Labour in the north,” he said. “Brexit has given the Tories an opportunity, and Corbyn has magnified it.” UKIP is a right-wing populist party in Britain.Even if Mr. Corbyn were to be replaced before 2020, by then Mrs. May “will have delivered Brexit as she promised,” for good or ill, “and, if not Corbyn, Labour will have a transitional leader that would have to make big compromises” with his supporters in the party.Mr. Corbyn said that the party would be ready for an election whenever it came, and cautioned, “Do not underestimate the support there is for the Labour Party.”