https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/12/nyregion/citi-bike-death-manhattan.html
Cyclist Killed by Bus in New York’s First Citi Bike Fatality - The New York Times
Traffic Accidents and Safety,Hanegby  Dan (1980-2017),Citi Bike,Chelsea (Manhattan  NY),Bicycles and Bicycling,Deaths (Fatalities)
June 12, 2017
3738
A 36-year-old investment banker was killed in Manhattan on Monday morning when the Citi Bike he was riding collided with a charter bus, the first fatality involving New York City’s four-year-old bike-share program, the authorities said.The bicyclist, Dan Hanegby of Brooklyn, was riding on 26th Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues in the Chelsea neighborhood around 8:15 a.m. when he swerved to go around a parked van, struck a bus next to him that was traveling in the same direction, tumbled off the bicycle and fell under the bus’s rear tires, the police said. Mr. Hanegby sustained severe trauma, the police said, and was pronounced dead at Bellevue Hospital Center.The collision appeared to be an accident, the authorities said, and the 52-year-old bus driver remained at the scene. The Citi Bike program has had more than 43 million trips in the city since it began, a spokeswoman for the service said.In recent years, bicyclists in New York have said city leaders have not done enough to protect riders. They demanded more safeguards in 2016 after the number of bicycle fatalities surpassed the previous year’s total. Through April, four people had been killed on bicycles in New York this year, according to the city.Mr. Hanegby, a director of investment banking at Credit Suisse, lived in Brooklyn Heights with his wife, Sasha, and his children, a boy and a girl. Neighbors said that he was stoic and always focused and that he devoted his weekends to his children. They played at a nearby playground and spent time outside together.Steve Adams, who lives next door, said he saw Mr. Hanegby on weekends wearing cycling clothes and riding a racing bicycle. “That’s why it’s so weird, what happened with him falling,” Mr. Adams said. “Life is so strange.”Mr. Hanegby moved to the United States from Israel in 2003 to study at Binghamton University, according to a 2006 profile of him in The Brown Daily Herald, the campus newspaper at Brown University, where he eventually transferred. He was the first member of his family to move to the United States, the paper reported.Growing up near Tel Aviv, he had a successful academic and military career. He started tennis lessons when he was young and met his wife at age 10 when they were both practicing at the Israel Tennis Centers, the organization said. He dreamed of becoming a professional tennis player and was once ranked as the No. 1 tennis player in the country. But he quit the sport to enlist in Israel’s Special Forces.Mr. Hanegby served in the Israel Defense Forces from December 1999 to December 2002, which covered part of the second Intifada, and rose to the rank of staff sergeant, according to his LinkedIn page.“There isn’t a person in Israel who doesn’t know someone who died in a bombing,” Mr. Hanegby told The Daily Herald in 2006. “So I wanted to do something for my country.”He did not pick up a racket again until after he was discharged in 2002, and he set his sights on playing tennis for an American university. Within a year, he was at Binghamton. While at Brown, he was ranked No. 66 in singles tennis in the United States, The Daily Herald said.Citi Bike, the largest bike-share program in the country, has 593 stations in New York City, with locations in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens. The service averaged 43,846 rides a day in April, according to the most recent data available.