https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/podcasts/the-revelations-of-jay-z-and-beyonce.html
The Revelations of Jay-Z and Beyoncé - The New York Times
Podcasts,Jay-Z,Knowles  Beyonce,4:44 (Album),Lemonade (Album)
July 13, 2017
3792
There was every reason to see the ads for Jay-Z’s “4:44” and think it was a stunt — or, that it was just a stunt. But his 13th (more or less) solo record is also one of his best, in part for its artistry, in part for his version of honesty. The album is Jay-Z’s first recording since Beyoncé turned their marital trouble into a masterpiece called “Lemonade,” an album whose emotional drama included songs about his having cheated on her. It turned him into a kind of pop-cultural villain. On “4:44,” Jay-Z expresses contrition for his infidelity. But he also ruminates on the socioeconomic state of black America and what it means for a black American man to leave his family a legacy.What a complicated album, though. Ingeniously produced by Ernest Wilson, the longtime hip-hop and R.&B. producer known as No I.D., it uses samples — by Stevie Wonder, the Clark Sisters, Nina Simone, the Fugees and Hannah Williams and The Affirmations — to amplify Jay-Z’s state of mind. But his socioeconomic ruminations get knotty and contradictory, especially when compared with the visceral emotional and psychological clarity of “Lemonade.” So while we spend the episode unpacking “4:44” as a work unto itself, exploring its politics and its glorious production, we also unpack it in the context of “Lemonade,” listening to songs from both. We also talk about why the survival — and performance — of this marriage means so much to the culture, the country and us.From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.If you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.On your iPhone or iPad:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying-glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.On your Android phone or tablet:1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. (This link may help.)2. Search for the series. Tap on the magnifying-glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free.4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.