https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/25/opinion/regret-over-a-drones-deadly-damage.html
Regret Over a Drone’s Deadly Damage  - The New York Times
Editorials,Civilian Casualties,Weinstein  Warren (1941-2015),Lo Porto  Giovanni (d 2015),Pakistan,Al Qaeda,Terrorism,Obama  Barack,Drones (Pilotless Planes)
April 24, 2015
5831
For years, the Obama administration has kept its drone strikes shrouded in great secrecy, knowing that what have been described as precision attacks on terrorist targets have also killed innocent civilians. So it was important to see candor and remorse from President Obama in his apology for the killing of two hostages held by Al Qaeda, an American and an Italian, in a drone strike near the Afghanistan-Pakistan border in January.“It is a cruel and bitter truth that in the fog of war generally and our fight against terrorists specifically, mistakes — sometimes deadly mistakes — can occur,” President Obama said on Thursday. “One of the things that makes us exceptional is our willingness to confront squarely our imperfections and to learn from our mistakes.”The deaths of Warren Weinstein, an American development expert, and Giovanni Lo Porto, an Italian aid worker, were a disturbing reminder of the unintended consequences of an execution program of questionable legality. The administration sought to reduce the room for error in 2013, when Mr. Obama instructed the Central Intelligence Agency, which authorized the January strike, to make sure with “near certainty” that imminent strikes would not put civilians in harm’s way.The stricter criterion was adopted in response to growing evidence that drone strikes had killed dozens of noncombatants. The Open Society Foundations said in a report in November that American drone strikes in Pakistan have killed more than 2,000 people, including an undetermined number of civilians. Drone strikes in Yemen have also killed civilians. Their use in both countries has incited deep resentment toward the United States.The administration’s account of the January strike also raises serious questions about just how much intelligence officers have before dropping bombs into remote areas by hitting a switch half a world away.Besides the two hostages, the strike killed Ahmed Farouq, an American citizen accused of having played a leading role in a Qaeda franchise in India. The White House also disclosed on Thursday that Adam Gadahn, an American who was a Qaeda spokesman, is believed to have been killed in a separate strike, also in January. Officials said that neither of the American Qaeda members was deliberately targeted.“These and other recent strikes in which civilians were killed make clear that there is a significant gap between the relatively stringent standards the government says it’s using and the standards that are actually being used,” Jameel Jaffer, the deputy legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said in a statement.Drone strikes might be a tool of last resort to hunt down terrorists in areas where local governments are unwilling or unable to pursue them. But the risks involved in their use are high. Along with Mr. Obama’s apology, the administration says it will provide compensation to the Weinstein and Lo Porto families. The handling of this case stands in contrast to the silence it usually maintains about the civilian victims of drone strikes.Mr. Obama has promised an independent review of the January attack. While that is important, the White House should go further to provide a fuller accounting of what it knows about the number of civilians killed by the drone-based counterterrorism campaign.That information is critical to an informed debate about the merits of the program and how it is carried out.