http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/28/us/charleston-funerals.html
A Day of Determined Hope as Charleston Mourns 3 More - The New York Times
Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Funerals and Memorials,Hurd  Cynthia (1960-2015),Sanders  Tywanza (d 2015),Jackson  Susie (1928-2015),Charleston (SC)
June 27, 2015
7356
CHARLESTON, S.C. —  A day after President Obama called on Americans to end the deep hold of racial discrimination in the country, the lives of three more victims of the church massacre here were celebrated and their deaths transformed Saturday into a clarion call for change.“I am sorry this happened on my watch,” Gov. Nikki R. Haley said at the funeral service for Cynthia Graham Hurd, 54, a librarian and housing rights advocate, “but we will make this right. We will make this right.”Speaker after speaker who walked to the altar of the storied Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church — where services were held Saturday for Ms. Hurd, Tywanza Sanders, and his aunt, Susie Jackson, all longtime church members — spoke about the powerful example the victims had set not just in their daily lives but in their deaths.The Rev. Jesse L. Jackson and others said on Saturday that the deaths of the “Emanuel 9,” as the victims are now called, had joined the pantheon of civil rights touchstones, including the killing of four girls in the church bombing in Birmingham in 1963 and the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. of Charleston described how Ms. Hurd had traded her college degree in math for a career devoted to books and had helped thousands of people embrace learning and reading. He said her gifts would multiply in death.“Her death will lead to change, and Cynthia Hurd will be helping millions,” the mayor said as he talked about the consciousness-raising that had spread across the country.Nearly two weeks ago, on June 17, a young white man walked into the first floor of the Emanuel church, where a Bible study group was discussing verses from the Gospel of Mark. After sitting with the group for about an hour, he took out a gun and killed nine people. Law enforcement authorities have called the killings a hate crime. The victims were all black. Dylann Roof, 21, has been charged with nine counts of murder in the shootings.On Saturday afternoon, Mr. Sanders, 26, a college graduate who was full of ambition and pursuing a career as a record producer, and his aunt, Mrs. Jackson, 87, a longtime devotee of Emanuel, were remembered in the same church, their flower-draped coffins sitting by side. Hers was lavender; his was the color of espresso.The shooting was particularly devastating for the Sanders family because four family members walked into the Bible study group that night but only two of them went home.Reaching for his words, Mr. Sanders tried to dissuade the shooter from killing the men and women in the Bible study group, survivors said. Unmoved, the man unleashed a volley of bullets as Mr. Sanders moved to try to protect his aunt, who sat nearby. Both died in the church basement.Mr. Sanders’ mother, Felicia, dove to the floor with her young granddaughter and whispered to her to lay still and play dead. The two survived, along with a woman in the room who was told by the shooter that she was left alive so that she could tell the world what he had done.On Saturday, Walter Bernie Jackson, Ms. Jackson’s grandchild, broke down as he described Mr. Sanders attempting to shield his grandmother from harm in a society that is filled with so many “cowards.”Ms. Haley, who has attended the funerals of each of the victims, said Mr. Sanders loved his mother “so much that he would tattoo her name on his chest.”His mother warned him that no woman would marry him with both her name and a breast cancer symbol displayed on his chest — a gesture that honored her battle with the disease.“Well, that will be their loss,” Mr. Sanders said, according to the program distributed at the service.During the nearly four-hour service for Ms. Hurd, her relatives and friends spoke of her “beautiful eyes,” her outspokenness, her determination and, as Ms. Haley mentioned, her motto: “Be kinder than necessary.”The services for all three victims were so full that an overflow room was set up in a nearby church. Lines stretched around the block as people waited to get inside; Red Cross workers passed out water bottles.Despite the heat, the chorus inside sang hymn after hymn. And yet again the Rev. Norvel Goff, the presiding elder at Emanuel, set aside his own exhaustion and sense of loss, and stood at the pulpit, guiding the mourners through their grief and jubilation over the victims’ arrival in heaven.For this, he was praised repeatedly, even by Ms. Haley, who said that he and his church are so dynamic that every time she walks out of a funeral service, wearying as they are, “I am convinced I’m going to become an A.M.E. member.”Ms. Hurd’s brother, Malcolm Graham, a former state senator in North Carolina, spoke with tenderness about a sister who always took the time to find out how everyone was doing and dispensed as much love as advice.Whenever he had a speech to write, Mr. Graham said he would pick up the phone to call Ms. Hurd and ask for help. “Tell me how to word this,” he said. “Tell me how to write this.”This week was no different, he said, except there was no answer.A onetime ice-cream server at Swensen’s, Ms. Hurd went on to college and graduate school, knowing a good education was a requirement in her family. But her love of books was profound. Mr. Graham said she plunged into the encyclopedia as a child after the family bought a set from a traveling salesman.“That was her first library,” he said, as he spoke surrounded by large photos of his sister beaming with her husband and family. Ms. Hurd was always the person in the family he would call to find out what the family was up to because “Cynthia knew everybody’s business.”Her wedding with her husband, Steve, was her most cherished moment, the one she wished to relive if given a choice. In her spare time, Ms. Hurd also served as a commissioner of the Charleston housing authority, a passion of hers. She was a public servant who delighted in helping others and saw it as her mission.Mr. Jackson reminded members of her family that their work is not over. They must now work to keep their memories alive.“God has more for families to do than just mourn,” he said.The Civil War may have started in South Carolina, Mr. Jackson said, but now, “maybe she can end the Confederate War right here.”Later that afternoon, Mr. Sanders’ relatives talked about his love of poetry. He had written a book of poems titled “Tragedy,” and a cousin shared one of the works, a rhyming meditation on violence, poverty and inequality.Shirrene Goss, Mr. Sanders’ sister, who was 14 years his senior, said sister and brother were often mistaken for mother and son. She had the habit of calling him, “My Wanza.”Now forced to share him with the world, Ms. Goss led the congregation members in their own embrace of Mr. Sanders. “My Wanza,” she said. “Our Wanza,” the crowd responded every time.Then, in a moment of humor, Ms. Goss shared an inexplicable fear that Mr. Sanders harbored: flushing a toilet. She found it perplexing, at best, she said.“Look at what he did last week,” Ms. Goss added. “He wasn’t afraid of anything.”