http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/28/arts/dance/boris-charmatzs-levee-des-conflits-extended-at-moma.html
Boris Charmatz’s ‘Levée des Conflits Extended’ at MoMA - The New York Times
Dancing,Charmatz  Boris,Museum of Modern Art
Oct. 27, 2013
3903
Several times this past weekend, 24 people sat in the atrium of the Museum of Modern Art and scrubbed the floor with circling hands. Sometimes they did this in near unison. Sometimes one person did the scrubbing, while the other 23 did 23 other actions: rocking, rolling, running, spinning, leaping. Sometimes 24 actions were happening, and scrubbing wasn’t one of them.This was “Levée des Conflits Extended” (“Suspension of Conflicts Extended”) by the French choreographer Boris Charmatz. It was the second installment in Musée de la Danse: Three Collective Gestures, the three-weekend series Mr. Charmatz is presenting at the museum. The concept at the core of “Levée” is mathematical. The dance consists of a sequence of 25 simple and repetitive movements, but there are only 24 dancers. So when each of the dancers is executing one of the movements, something is left out.I won’t pretend that with 24 dancers swirling in front of me, each cycling through the sequence, I could always (or ever) discern what was missing. The memory game remained an intellectual tickle, as my attention was absorbed by other aspects. Each dancer has his or her own speed, attack and relation to the audience. There are clever linkages. One action involves dragging something invisible; another involves being dragged. Occasionally that pair of actions syncs. Or the action of caressing the floor finds a head (in the action of lying down) to caress instead.The sequence of movements is ingeniously designed for variety: sitting and standing, in-place and covering ground. But each movement seems to flow from the preceding one and into the following. There are moments of stasis and spasm but mostly an endless rocking, accelerating and slowing, expanding and subsiding, so that floor scrubbing oscillates into rear-end wagging, and rolling into running.The piece begins with one dancer, and it takes 30 to 45 minutes for all 24 to join in. (The score — bits of Henry Cowell and Conlon Nancarrow interrupted as if by hip-hop and pop radio stations — seems to provide cues.) By that point, it’s quite a sight: an infinite-seeming chaos built out of finite elements; a throbbing, circulating mass of individuals, mechanical and mathematical and organic. The interest of it ebbs and flows with the energy of the performers. They’re an excellent bunch, capable of wonderfully relaxed precision, but the work is a long haul.The dancers coalesce in the center, as if circling a drain (the black hole of the missing action?). They clump in a corner, looking like Géricault’s “Raft of the Medusa.” (Oops, wrong museum.) About 30 minutes after they’ve all arrived, they do the sequence together, at slightly different rates, and it’s satisfying to see the motions, now familiar, executed en masse. (On Saturday, the clumping drew audience members like a magnet; a few wags made the dance participatory.) As soon as the unison begins, dancers start to subtract themselves by bowing out.For this “extended” version, Mr. Charmatz sandwiched two daily presentations of the dance with solo presentations of the full sequence. On Saturday, he danced one of these solos arrestingly. But even though he didn’t dance the group version, he was ubiquitous as a Waldo figure, red-haired and red-bearded, now watching from this side, now from above: the 25th figure, choreographer and mastermind, nowhere and everywhere.