https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/04/sports/basketball/nets-and-dodgers-ponder-a-complex-deal-to-merge-assets-.html
Nets and Dodgers Ponder a Complex Deal to Merge Assets  - The New York Times
Los Angeles Dodgers,Brooklyn Nets,Prokhorov  Mikhail D,Guggenheim Partners LLC,Basketball,Baseball,Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Barclays Center (Brooklyn  NY),Ratner  Bruce C
Oct. 3, 2014
9260
Four years ago, the Russian billionaire Mikhail D. Prokhorov swept into the United States and paid $223 million for 80 percent of the then-New Jersey Nets and 45 percent of the unfinished Barclays Center.He bought a team that was losing tens of millions of dollars and finished the 2009-10 season with 12 wins. As bad as the Nets were, Mr. Prokhorov still got a major sports franchise in the New York area for a low price.A few months later, for example, the Golden State Warriors were acquired for $450 million, suggesting that Mr. Prokhorov got a bargain.Now, Mr. Prokhorov is trying to capitalize as N.B.A. team values soar and new national media contracts with ESPN and TNT that are about to be announced promise a big leap in revenue for each team.In a complex transaction, he is trying to create a new company by combining his team and arena assets with those owned by the investor group that bought the Los Angeles Dodgers two years ago for $2.15 billion. In his current negotiations — first reported by the NetsDaily blog and confirmed by a person familiar with the talks — the team has been valued at $1.7 billion and Barclays Center at $1.1 billion.If the deal comes to fruition, Mr. Prokhorov and Bruce C. Ratner, who sold Mr. Prokhorov the stakes in the team and arena, will receive $2.8 billion in cash, stock and potentially other forms of payment.Before Mr. Prokhorov and the Dodgers’ investors started talking, Mr. Ratner had hired an investment bank to try to sell his 20 percent in the Nets.But now, Mr. Ratner is an active participant in the talks with the Dodgers’ group, according to the NetsDaily story.Mr. Ratner led a group of investors in buying the Nets in 2004 for $300 million so he could move them to Brooklyn as the anchor tenant of Barclays Center, an integral part of his Atlantic Yards residential and commercial project. He was also the development partner of The New York Times’s headquarters building.For now, the parties are not speaking publicly about the details of their proposed joint venture, making it difficult to determine whether Mr. Prokhorov would remain the Nets’ controlling owner and how far the negotiations have gone between Mr. Prokhorov and Mark Walter and Todd Boehly, the top executives of Guggenheim Partners, an asset management and financial services company.Mr. Prokhorov almost certainly would not be getting $1.7 billion for the Nets if not for the Milwaukee Bucks selling for $550 million and Steve Ballmer paying $2 billion to buy the Los Angeles Clippers after racially insensitive comments by Donald Sterling, their former owner, were made public.A major rationale for the high price of those acquisitions was the impending renewal of the ESPN and TNT contracts.Marc Ganis, a sports industry consultant, said that the values set for the Nets and the arena were higher than they were worth.“They’re getting a high valuation, which tells me there’s some creative financial engineering involved,” he said. “Todd Boehly is the one who came up with the clever way for Guggenheim to use insurance company money to buy the Dodgers and to monetize the TV contract to pay back the insurance companies, which was, effectively, a leveraged buyout in the sports industry.”Mark Shapiro, the chief content officer of IMG who was the chief executive of Dick Clark Productions when Guggenheim acquired it in 2012, said Mr. Boehly “has a history of seeing and creating value where others believe it doesn’t exist.”“He’s done it with the Dodgers, he did it with Dick Clark Productions and he’ll do it again and again,” Mr. Shapiro said.He added: “Todd doesn’t do deals just for the sake of doing deals. He will evaluate this opportunity six ways to Sunday, and if it doesn’t work, he’ll walk away.”The transaction under consideration would potentially create a formidable force in sports that could acquire other teams and other properties in sports and entertainment.Still, the synergy of the Nets’ and Dodgers’ properties was not immediately apparent to some investment bankers who questioned the blending of assets from disparate markets.The deal, if completed, would require that Mr. Prokhorov be approved by Major League Baseball owners and that the Dodgers’ group be approved by the N.B.A. board of governors.Even though Mr. Prokhorov bought the Nets for what appeared to be a bargain price, he has been saddled with other costs. He had to agree to finance up to $60 million in losses until they moved into Barclays in 2012, and he has been responsible for 80 percent of the continuing losses since. He also became responsible for 80 percent of the team’s steep debt.And, in Mr. Prokhorov’s zeal to build a title contender through high-priced player contracts, he has incurred $103.5 million in luxury tax bills the past two seasons — $90.6 million of it in 2013-14.But the price that the Dodgers’ investors are willing to pay should assuage any of the financial pain suffered by Mr. Prokhorov through his ownership of the Nets.Bringing together the two sides’ assets in the sports industry is not unheard-of. In 1999, the Yankees and the Nets merged into an entity called YankeeNets. But because the Yankees were valued much more highly, the Nets’ owners had to put in $225 million to even out their partnership. In 2000, an affiliate of the combined company acquired the Devils, and a year later, the YES Network was formed, creating an enormously valuable asset. But by 2004, the Nets were sold to Mr. Ratner, the Devils were acquired by Jeffrey Vanderbeek, and YankeeNets was dissolved.The Nets’ move to Brooklyn from East Rutherford, N.J., has helped alter their identity from a suburban to urban team, and more important, pushed their average attendance from 13,961 in 2011-12, their last season at Izod Center in the Meadowlands, to 17,251 last season.In the first nine months of 2014, Barclays Center has sold more tickets to concerts and touring shows than any other United States arena, according to Pollstar, the concert industry trade magazine.