https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/19/nyregion/silk-road-online-black-market-reduced-users-risks-defense-says.html
Silk Road, Online Black Market, Reduced Users’ Risks, Defense Says - The New York Times
Silk Road (Web Site),Drug Abuse and Traffic,Ulbricht  Ross William,Black Markets,Computers and the Internet
May 18, 2015
9588
The already novel criminal case against Ross W. Ulbricht, the recently convicted founder of the website Silk Road, has taken yet another unusual turn.Mr. Ulbricht could face life in prison when he is sentenced on May 29 in Federal District Court in Manhattan for his role in running Silk Road, a once-thriving black market for the sale of heroin, cocaine, LSD and other drugs. And although prosecutors have not yet said what length of sentence they will seek for Mr. Ulbricht, 31, they have told Mr. Ulbricht’s lawyers that they intend to introduce evidence of six overdose deaths attributable to drugs bought from vendors on Silk Road, according to a recent defense filing.Now, in the latest twist in a case that has been flush with technological intrigue, Mr. Ulbricht’s lawyers are asking the judge to disregard the overdose deaths at his sentencing by raising an argument that has probably never been heard in a traditional drug case.Mr. Ulbricht’s lawyers contend in a filing on Friday that “in contrast to the government’s portrayal of the Silk Road website as a more dangerous version of a traditional drug marketplace,” the website “was in many respects the most responsible such marketplace in history.”Silk Road operated on a hidden part of the Internet, made deals with the virtual currency Bitcoin and offered anonymity to buyers and sellers, the defense noted.As a result, Silk Road was “a peaceable alternative to the often deadly violence so commonly associated with the global drug war, and street drug transactions, in particular,” wrote Meghan Ralston, a former “harm reduction manager” for the Drug Policy Alliance, a group seeking reform of marijuana laws and other drug policies, in a declaration included in the defense’s filing.She added that transactions on Silk Road did not result in people’s having guns pulled on them at the moment of purchase, or require buyers to even visit dangerous neighborhoods. Silk Road had begun to “revolutionize” drug selling, she wrote.In the filing, Mr. Ulbricht’s lead lawyer, Joshua L. Dratel, cited Silk Road’s “harm reduction ethos” and said the site also had a physician who specialized in drugs and addiction, called himself Doctor X and provided expert advice and responded to requests for assistance.“Indeed, the distinction between Silk Road and traditional drug selling is as dramatic as it is unique,” Mr. Dratel wrote.The defense’s position at trial was that Mr. Ulbricht had created the Silk Road website but gave control to others before he was later lured back in and set up to be arrested. The government has said Mr. Ulbricht was involved throughout, running Silk Road under the pseudonym Dread Pirate Roberts. More than 100,000 individuals bought drugs and other illicit goods and services on the website, which generated more than $213 million from January 2011 to October 2013, the government has said.The office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, has not offered details of Silk Road’s link to the overdoses. The office has told Judge Katherine B. Forrest that parents of two overdose victims are expected to address the court at sentencing.Mr. Dratel, in a brief phone interview, said the defense, which retained Dr. Mark L. Taff, a former chief medical examiner of Rockland County, to review the six cases, believes that the government’s claims with respect to the deaths “is insufficient to attribute to Silk Road, much less Ulbricht.”Mr. Dratel added that since prosecutors “opened up the whole issue of dangerousness, we think the harm-reduction measures exist on their own as a mitigating factor.”The defense filing says each person who died of a drug overdose “had a history of chronic substance abuse as well as medical and psychiatric problems prior to death, which could have caused or contributed to their death.”Mr. Bharara’s office had no comment.