https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/world/europe/beating-death-of-american-bakari-henderson-in-greece.html
9 Charged in Fatal Beating of American in Greece - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,University of Arizona,Austin (Tex),Greece
July 12, 2017
8884
ATHENS — Nine men were arrested and charged this week with intentional homicide in a brutal attack outside a bar on the Greek island of Zakynthos that left an American tourist dead.Five of those men were ordered to be jailed ahead of their trials, a police official with knowledge of the case said, after an initial hearing on Wednesday. The other four suspects will have hearings later this week.The American, Bakari Henderson, 22, was attacked by several men early Friday in the island’s popular party resort of Laganas, renowned for the rowdy, alcohol-fueled antics of young tourists.The investigation and witness accounts suggest that the brawl began inside a bar after an argument about a female bartender around 3 a.m. on Friday. Things quickly escalated.As Mr. Henderson and his friends were leaving, the police official said, the suspects followed and attacked them in the middle of a busy street.“There seems to have been some sort of flirtation, then a misunderstanding,” the official said. “Everyone had been drinking, and it escalated.”The attack lasted about 30 seconds, the official said, adding that Mr. Henderson died of head injuries caused by multiple kicks and punches.Three of the suspects are expected to appear before a prosecutor on Thursday, and the final suspect has a court date on Friday.The suspects are a 32-year-old British citizen of Serbian origin, who worked as a bouncer at the bar where the brawl broke out, a 34-year-old Greek bartender and seven Serbian men.A 15-minute security camera video from another bar shows a group of men chasing Mr. Henderson down a street, before a person knocks him into a parked car. Several men then begin kicking and punching him as bystanders watch in horror, before the crowd is eventually broken up.Mr. Henderson, a recent college graduate from Austin, Tex., was traveling in Greece and was working on a photo shoot for the opening of a clothing line, according to his family.The Henderson family released a written statement to the local news outlet KVUE confirming Mr. Henderson’s death.“Bakari loved spending time with family and friends, traveling, and meeting new people,” the statement said. “Bakari was an inspiration to all he met. He loved life and lived it to the fullest.”Mr. Henderson attended the University of Arizona on a full academic scholarship and graduated in May.Jan Richardson, Mr. Henderson’s aunt, who is acting as a spokeswoman for the family, said she did not want to elaborate on what information Greek authorities had given them.“All we know is that he was murdered,” Mrs. Richardson said. “He was killed in Greece. We are focusing on getting him home now.”The family is working with the American Embassy in Greece to return Mr. Henderson’s body to the United States.The resort of Laganas is known as a party resort and attracts young tourists, mostly Britons, seeking to enjoy cheap alcohol in bars that tolerate — and sometimes organize — extremely boisterous gatherings. With young vacationers regularly drinking large quantities of alcohol, violent fights are not unusual. A British man was stabbed to death in Laganas in 2011.In recent years, the authorities have made an effort to curb alcohol-fueled crime without alienating foreign visitors. Law enforcement officials had met with the mayor to discuss ways to keep the peace in the resort just hours before the attack on Friday, the police official said.