http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/05/opinion/sunday/turning-clutter-into-joy.html
Turning Clutter Into Joy - The New York Times
Orderliness and Clutter,Books and Literature,Kondo  Marie,Computers and the Internet,Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up  The (Book)
April 4, 2015
6328
RECENTLY, I went for a drink with a friend who said, “Are you reading that Japanese tidying book everyone is reading?” I wasn’t, but I needed to be.I had a keeping problem. I kept all my pocket trash, from grocery and A.T.M. receipts to paper scraps that are less transactional, and more implicitly narrative: airplane boarding passes, museum ticket stubs, an optimistic fortune from a cookie, the poem I read at my friend’s daughter’s bat mitzvah.For years I’d been emptying my pockets into my desk, and now nothing more could fit into it. I hoped, with the help of Marie Kondo — the tidying guru — that I might repurpose my desk for use as a desk rather than as a paper storage receptacle. The plan was to throw all this paper away.But discarding is hard. The desk’s contents, as I sorted through it, reminded me of many meaningless or mostly meaningless days I had forgotten, until re-encountering this visitor pass or that concert bracelet. My mind is the equivalent of my desk before I cleaned it — no more taxi receipts can fit inside. At best a fleeting impression of a ride is made, and only when some corroborating evidence comes to light can I summon the past event (where I was traveling to or from, and why, and with or without whom).Still, the tidying guru’s rules are strict. An inability to discard does not count as a reason to keep. “Does this spark joy?” is her primary criterion. She recommends holding the item close to your body to see how, or if, your body responds.I did this. Joy was not sparked by my trash, not even when I pressed it against my sweater, which had once belonged to a French actress, whose daughter had sold it to me on eBay after her mother’s death. (Ms. Kondo would commend her ability to discard.) But other people’s trash sparks lots of joy in me. My eBay habit could be broadly categorized as “joy in other people’s trash.”Another of my most joy-producing activities is volunteering at the “keeping society” in the Maine town where my family lives for part of the year. Keeping societies exist in places too small to warrant museums, and are often curated by the elder statesmen of the community, who themselves are a vital part of the exhibit. Their stories give value to the typical holdings of a keeping society: dented tobacco tins and rusted egg beaters and glass tonic bottles and ledgers full of sums.Much of what is displayed in our keeping society is, by strict definition, trash, found in one of the many vintage trash heaps the former inhabitants created in the woods behind our houses before the establishment of a public dump (called, aptly and intriguingly, a “transfer station”). These backwoods objects are unearthed by the new inhabitants, and then donated, and then cataloged in a prefab building behind the Town Office. They are tiny hints of what a “historic” but basically unremarkable day in our town might have looked like, and to whom that day might have belonged.Our own barn proved to be (and to have been, long before we came to own it) a secret keeping society when my daughter and I discovered, under a dusting of desiccated insects and mouse droppings, an old steamer trunk. In that trunk we found 60-year-old tax returns filed by a priest, piano sheet music scores and many get-well cards for “Liza.” What history we cobbled together from this evidence wasn’t very comprehensive — we think Liza broke her leg riding her bike on a nearby island, and that the priest (we think it was the priest) liked to play waltzes — but the gaps were as interesting as the clues that created them.Which window did Liza stare out of while bedridden? Where, in our tiny house, had the priest put his piano? We understand our living space differently now. It was once witness to a very different kind of day.Clearly, the get-well cards and the sheet music had, at one point, sparked joy in their owners, but eventually they hadn’t. The joy lay dormant for decades. Then we opened the trunk and the joy came alive again.There is also joy, reignited by the act of discovery, in the items preserved by the official keeping society — the menu from a boardinghouse long closed, elementary school achievement certificates and military records from a world war that ended decades before I was born. I do not need to press these things against my body to test how they make me feel. Of the dead strangers who once walked along the same gravel shoulder to the same (more or less) general store, I now know that one ably played the flute and that another was stationed, for a brief time, in Japan.The keeping society borders the cemetery, and this feels apt, like a form of unspoken permission. We are not behaving pruriently. We are not spies. We are saying to the people buried a rock’s toss away from the random paper bits they stored in an attic, and that their successor’s successor discovered, and that we’re now tagging for display: You may not be around to take joy in these things, but we are. You were very wise when you failed, despite your best efforts to be tidy, to throw them completely away.So though my trash failed to bring me joy, I decided that it might, in the future, bring somebody else joy (that somebody might be me), and in preparation for that possibility, I should preserve it. I should make a keeping society — a virtual one, exhibited online, where there’s plenty of space — from my desk trash. And so I have.I am driven not only by the certainty of my own eventual extinction, but also by the likely future extinction of the type of paper evidence that filled my desk drawers. I no longer generate material proof of a day at the same rate I once did. Receipts are electronic. Boarding passes are electronic. I read bat mitzvah poems from my phone. Soon my pockets, no matter how far I’ve traveled and no matter how much I’ve eaten or seen or done, will be empty.Last summer, when my daughter and I were volunteering at the keeping society, a man stopped by to make a donation. In his attic he’d found a black-and-white photo, dating back to the early 1900s, of a house on fire. In front of the burning house stood a silhouetted woman. She resembled a soot-like brush stroke. The handwritten caption identified the location. We talked about the land and which family currently owned it, by way of determining who the woman might have been. We continued to stare at the photo. The image was unsettling. We weren’t worried about the house, which was already engulfed by whiteness, and barely discernible as a house anymore, and besides, we already knew what end it had met. What worried us was the unknown woman.She stood so close to the blaze as she watched her house — and all of the objects marking her life to that point — quickly fail to exist. The fire, the photo seemed to imply, was coming next for her.