http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/30/world/asia/north-korea-declares-kim-jong-un-as-supreme-leader.html
North Korea Hails Kim Jong-un as ‘Supreme Leader’ - The New York Times
North Korea,Kim Jong Un,Kim Jong Il,Defense and Military Forces
Dec. 29, 2011
5246
SEOUL, South Korea — The declaration on Thursday that Kim Jong-un is now the “supreme leader” of North Korea was an emotional turning point for the hermetic country — reaffirming support for the young heir after nearly two weeks of national mourning for his father, Kim Jong-il.The naming of Mr. Kim as supreme leader was partly a formality — all signals have pointed to his taking over both the military and the powerful Workers’ Party — but it was also an important step in the push to strengthen his position in any power struggles that might follow.Mr. Kim is young — believed to be in his 20s — and untested, making him more vulnerable to challenges.The announcement on Thursday of Mr. Kim’s elevation was made by Kim Yong-nam, the president of the North Korean Parliament, who is considered the ceremonial head of state. It was followed by similar speeches by top party and military officials.“Respected Comrade Kim Jong-un is now supreme leader of our party, military and people,” Kim Yong-nam said, adding that Kim Jong-un “inherits the ideology, leadership, courage and audacity of Comrade Kim Jong-il.”The announcement was made before a crowd of tens of thousands that gathered in a central square in Pyongyang, the North’s capital, for the last official day of mourning for Kim Jong-il.In the past few days, North Korea has showered Kim Jong-un with the honorific titles reserved, until now, for his father: “great leader,” “dear leader,” “peerless leader,” and “the sun of the 21st century.” He was even referred to as the nation’s parent, a designation that North Korea had used for Kim Jong-il and his father, Kim Il-sung.The ceremony on Thursday was particularly symbolic of Kim Jong-un’s rise to the top leadership post: for the first time since his father’s death, he was facing a huge crowd of North Koreans alone — without his father standing by him.Though North Korea declared Kim Jong-un its top leader throughout the carefully choreographed ceremony, and in the relentless pronouncements of the past week, he has yet to take any official titles, like supreme commander of the 1.2 million-strong Korean People’s Army and general secretary of the Workers’ Party. Those are bestowed at meetings of top party and government officials, most likely in the coming months, that in the past have been mere formalities.At noon on Thursday, the country observed three minutes of silence nationwide in memory of Kim Jong-il. Trains and ships sounded their horns, state news media reported. Similar but smaller ceremonies were held in cities across North Korea, the country’s official Korean Central News Agency reported.