https://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/23/science/space/23sandage.html
Allan R. Sandage’s True Love Was the Stars - The New York Times
Sandage  Allan R.,Stars and Galaxies,Space,Science and Technology
Nov. 22, 2010
9410
The first time I met the eminent cosmologist Allan R. Sandage, who died  Nov. 13 at 84, he refused to talk to me.In the late 1970s I was junior editor at Sky & Telescope magazine. An astronomer had just made some remarkable measurements of quasars that dovetailed with recent work by Dr. Sandage I’d read about in this newspaper, indicating that the expanding universe would eventually close in on itself and collapse in a Big Crunch. If true, that was big news, so I called him up.Dr. Sandage answered — a newsworthy event in itself — but he said there was nothing to talk about. The newspaper reporters had screwed it up again and mistakenly interpreted his observations. In fact he was on the other line with The New York Times demanding a correction. “So you see,” he said cheerily, “you have no story.”And just like that I was ushered off the line, feeling very junior indeed.At the time we didn’t talk, Dr. Sandage was a little over 50, much younger than I am now, but he had already been Mr. Universe, the man the newspapers called for the latest word on the state of the cosmos, for nearly three decades.He had inherited that role at the age of 27 from Edwin Hubble, the astronomer who first showed that blurs in the sky were galaxies beyond our own and then went on to show that they were all flying away from us.At the time, our conception of the universe was almost as young as Dr. Sandage, who was born in 1926, three years before Hubble discovered the cosmic expansion. During his life, Dr. Sandage saw the debates over the Big Bang and Steady State theories of the universe give way to dark energy and dark matter; astronomers went from wearing electrically heated flight suits to ride in a telescope all night to downloading pictures from the Hubble Space Telescope.Once upon a time, women weren’t allowed to work on Mount Wilson, where the galaxies had been discovered; today a woman, Wendy L. Freedman, is the director of Carnegie Observatories, as Mount Wilson Observatory in Pasadena, Calif., came to be called. Once upon a time, there was only one cosmologist  in the world: Dr. Sandage. By the time he died, there were thousands, most of them following the program and techniques he had laid out in the 1950s and ’60s to find the few sacred numbers that would spell out the size, age and fate of the universe.Measuring the universe took its toll on Dr. Sandage. The cosmos quaked every time he got more data on the distant galaxies and gave another interview, and so he stopped giving them after he had been wrong a few times, as any scientist will be. His isolation grew when he became embroiled in a seemingly endless and bitter controversy now known as the Hubble wars, about the Hubble constant, a number that told how big and old the universe was. Depending on whom you talked to, the universe was either 10 billion or 20 billion years old, with no room to compromise — which was weird since the stars themselves were 12 to 15 billion years old.A decade after our first nonconversation, I eventually did get Dr. Sandage to talk to me. Over years of lunches and dinners, I wheedled his life story out of him. They were the hardest and most rewarding interviews I’ve ever done. Dr. Sandage complained often that he didn’t know why he was talking to me — only bad could come of it — but he kept talking.What came out of it was a book he swore he would never read. I was terrified he would go back to not talking to me, but he still kept talking anyway; no trip to Los Angeles was ever complete without a long lunch with Uncle Allan. He could, as he thought the occasion warranted, charm, tease, curse like a sailor, excoriate his rivals or discuss philosophy and theology like a minister. On his bad days, Dr. Sandage would sometimes deny that he had ever been a cosmologist. His real love was the stars. “Cosmology is a boring burden of pride,” he once said, adding that he had only been dragged into it out of duty.But he never lost his enthusiasm for the delights of the sky, and he could go giddy with glee over some nugget of starry lore. I loved the guy because he had seen everything; to me he was a King Lear of the cosmos.His office at the Carnegie Observatories was a shrine to Hubble’s day, when data came not in computer files but on glass photographic plates that astronomers  squinted at with magnifiers, like jewelers sifting gems. His plate reader was hung with a clove of garlic, his shelves and filing cabinets were full of marked-up photographs of galaxies. Sitting around in yellowing envelopes were photographic plates taken half a century earlier by the pioneering giants of cosmology. Sometimes it seemed that those guys — and they were all guys — were in the room with us.Dr. Sandage once spent an evening taking me through a recent compilation of data  — some of it dating back to those old plates — on nearby galaxies. At the end as we charted it, the hair rose on the back of my neck: there, rising out of a scruff of dots on a graph was the expansion of the universe, the cosmic riddle itself.It’s dangerous for a journalist to get too sympathetic with any side in a genuinely scientific debate; in fact, I liked everybody on both sides of the Hubble wars, including John Huchra, a Harvard professor who became one of Dr. Sandage’s challengers in the 1970s and who died in October. As the gap between estimates of the age of the universe narrowed in recent times from an embarrassing factor of 2 to about 15 percent — enough to accommodate the stars’ ages —  I hoped, as did many astronomers, that Dr. Sandage would just declare victory and go on with the rest of his illustrious career.It was not to be.The Hubble wars are over now. The universe and cosmology might make a little more sense now, at least numerically, but we still don’t know where we came from and where the galaxies are going, Trying to find out won’t be quite as much fun again without Uncle Allan.