https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/05/nyregion/abacus-bank-found-not-guilty-of-mortgage-fraud-and-other-charges.html
Abacus Bank Found Not Guilty of Mortgage Fraud and Other Charges - The New York Times
Abacus Federal Savings Bank,New York State,Federal National Mortgage Assn (Fannie Mae),Banking and Financial Institutions,Mortgages,Hayes  Roger S,Manhattan (NYC)
June 4, 2015
9518
A jury found Abacus Federal Savings Bank and two of its senior officers not guilty of grand larceny and other charges on Thursday after a four-month trial, rejecting the Manhattan district attorney’s attempt to prove that the bank systematically lied for years to the Federal National Mortgage Association about the qualifications of its mortgage applicants.After a court clerk read the 240 counts in the indictment and repeated the words “not guilty” after each one, members of the Sung family, which founded and owns the bank, wept and embraced one another in State Supreme Court in Manhattan. The charges included grand larceny, conspiracy, falsifying business records and residential mortgage fraud.The bank’s founder, Thomas Sung, 79, said the office of the district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., had persecuted a community bank with a misguided prosecution. Legal bills had drained his family’s resources, he said, costing more than $10 million, and had hamstrung the bank’s business for three years.“This entire wrongful prosecution has exhausted a small community bank such as ours,” Mr. Sung said. “This is a gross injustice, not only to a small bank, but is casting a shadow on our community, that this community somehow condones or conducts illegal activity.“This is totally prejudicial and incorrect.”Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for Mr. Vance, called Mr. Sung’s comments disingenuous. She said the investigation had grown out of a complaint from a borrower to the local police and had revealed widespread fraud in the bank’s loan department. Eight employees, including several loan originators, later pleaded guilty to engaging in fraud by falsifying documents.“Abacus is a bank, not a community service organization,” Ms. Vollero said. “Abacus made millions of dollars off those fraudulent loans.”The jurors deliberated for nine days, sending out notes three times saying they were deadlocked on the charges against the bank. Justice Roger S. Hayes encouraged them to keep trying.Abacus is a small bank with a major presence in New York City’s Chinese community, providing mortgages to many recent immigrants who live in a cash economy and have hidden assets, according to the bank. The bank, with headquarters on Bowery Street in Chinatown, has about $300 million in assets.The district attorney’s office brought charges against the bank and 19 of its former employees in May 2012, alleging that they took part in a companywide scheme to inflate the income and other qualifications of applicants, falsifying documents to obtain mortgages through the Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae.Ten of the defendants pleaded guilty, and some of those agreed to testify for the prosecution against their superiors.But the bank’s chief credit officer, Yiu Wah Wong, and Raymond Tam, who was the loan origination supervisor, went to trial in late January, along with the bank itself, as a corporate entity. Seven former employees still await trial.Mr. Wong and Mr. Tam were found not guilty of all charges against them, including grand larceny, conspiracy, falsifying business records and mortgage fraud. They argued at trial that they were unaware of the fraudulent documents being created by loan originators, who earned commissions and had a financial incentive to burnish the borrower’s credentials.“The real conspiracy was between the borrowers and the loan officers,” Mr. Wong’s lawyer, Sanford Talkin, said. “They did everything they could to conceal their crime from Mr. Wong and the bank.”Mr. Tam’s lawyer, Thomas C. Rotko, said: “Since this case began, Raymond Tam has maintained his innocence. After several months of trial, a jury of his peers agreed.”From the start, it was a difficult case for prosecutors to prove. Loan originators and borrowers testified they had colluded on loan after loan — evidence related to 32 mortgages was presented — to overstate the income and exaggerate the job titles of mortgage applicants. Yet few of the bank’s loans went into default. The bank’s default rate was 0.3 percent during the period covered by the indictment, from May 2005 to February 2010 — far below the national average.Still, prosecutors argued that Fannie Mae had been sold mortgages based on falsified documents, likening what the bank had done to a merchant who sells someone a product that does not meet the customer’s stated requirements.“Fannie Mae is the victim in this case,” the lead prosecutor, Rachel Hochhauser, said during her summation on May 20. “They are the victim because it was a crime to misrepresent material facts to Fannie Mae and thereby induce Fannie Mae to give the bank their money.”At trial, the former bank employees testified they often overstated the income of applicants to meet requirements for the federally backed mortgages. The witnesses also said applicants were urged to lie on employment verification forms, giving themselves impressive job titles. Loan officers also employed a ruse to disguise large cash deposits from borrowers, listing them as gifts toward a down payment rather than cash savings, witnesses said.But Kevin Puvalowski, a lawyer for the bank, argued that the owners and top executives acted quickly to root out dishonest loan officers once they were discovered, starting in December 2009. In his closing argument, he repeatedly made the point that, in the end, the borrowers turned out to be qualified, since the vast majority never defaulted on the mortgages.“Fannie Mae has received every penny, every dime, every dollar that it’s entitled to,” Mr. Puvalowski said in his summation on May 19. “It’s never lost a penny. How’s that stealing?”