https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/world/asia/taliban-attack-lawmakers-kabul-home.html
Taliban Attack Lawmaker’s Kabul Home - The New York Times
Taliban,Kabul (Afghanistan),Wali  Mir
Dec. 21, 2016
4486
KABUL, Afghanistan — Taliban gunmen attacked the Kabul home of a prominent lawmaker on Wednesday, killing at least seven people in an overnight assault that lasted nearly 10 hours, Afghan officials said.The lawmaker, Mir Wali, who survived the attack, is a prominent figure in the southern province of Helmand, and his family has long been a target of the Taliban. Mr. Wali’s son Hekmatullah, a district commander in Helmand, was killed last year by the Taliban.Fraidoon Obaidi, who oversees criminal investigations for the Kabul police, said three gunmen targeted the house Wednesday afternoon, leaving seven people dead and four wounded. The assailants were also killed, in a battle with the police that lasted until 3:30 a.m. Thursday, Mr. Obaidi said. “The operation took a long time because security forces tried to save civilians,” he said.Mr. Wali was rescued with minor injuries, Mr. Obaidi said.A spokesman for the Kabul police, Abdul Basir Mujahid, had slightly different information, saying that the gunmen had killed eight people and wounded six. Among the dead were two of Mr. Wali’s grandchildren, one of his nephews and the son of the lawmaker Obaidullah Barakzai, he said. Eighteen people were rescued by security forces, he said.Abdul Bari Barakzai, a former leader of the Helmand provincial council, confirmed that one of Mr. Wali’s grandchildren had died. “Mir Wali’s grandson, who was martyred tonight, was the son of Hekmatullah, who was killed by the Taliban,” he said.Obaidullah Barakzai’s son, Hafiz Barakzai, who recently returned from studying in India, turned 26 last month and became engaged to be married two weeks ago, according to posts on his Facebook page. “I survived 25 years, and I welcome the 26th with a smile,” he wrote on his birthday.The Taliban, in a statement posted on their spokesman’s Twitter account, claimed responsibility for the assault. The statement said the group’s fighters had attacked the guesthouse of Mr. Wali while a security meeting involving prominent officials from Helmand was underway.