https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/14/nyregion/four-killed-ms-13-gangs-long-island-honduras.html
Eluding Gangs in Honduras, Then Falling Victim to One on Long Island - The New York Times
Gangs,Immigration and Emigration,Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13),Central Islip (NY),Honduras,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides
April 14, 2017
2961
Jefferson Villalobos fled from gangs in Honduras three years ago and found refuge in South Florida, only to die on a family vacation on Long Island, most likely at the hands of gang members.Jefferson, 18, a high school senior in South Florida, came April 7 to visit his extended Honduran family in Brentwood, according to a cousin, Yensy Fuentes.Jefferson and another cousin, Michael Lopez Banegas, 20, went out Tuesday night and never came home. Their bodies were  found with two others on Wednesday night on the edge of a town park in Central Islip, the police confirmed on Friday.The police also confirmed the deaths of Jorge Tigre, 18, who was born in Ecuador, and Justin Llivicura, 16, who was born in the United States but has Ecuadorean family members.“At this point, all indications are that this was the work of MS-13,” said Timothy Sini, the Suffolk County police commissioner, at a news conference Friday in Bay Shore, N.Y. He was referring to the street gang La Mara Salvatrucha.Last year, the gang was responsible for 11 deaths in Suffolk, including two teenage girls from Brentwood Ross High School, who were murdered with machetes and baseball bats, the police said.Mr. Sini said that the brutal deaths of the four young men appeared consistent with the MS-13’s methods and that they were most likely killed by a sharp weapon. But he emphasized that the investigation was continuing.“MS-13, part of their trademark, throughout the country and not just here, is to prey on recent immigrants,” Mr. Sini said. “That is because, many times, recent immigrant families are in vulnerable positions.”He added: “It boils down to the notion that MS-13, they are individuals who prey on the vulnerable. They engage in acts of violence, they engage in acts of savagery, against those who can’t defend themselves as effectively as some others in our community.”MS-13 was formed in Los Angeles in the 1980s by immigrants from El Salvador escaping civil war. The gang developed in El Salvador after some members were deported, growing into a transnational gang throughout Central America. It developed in the Latino immigrant-heavy towns of Suffolk County — Brentwood and Central Islip — around 1998, and over the past two decades has been organized in cliques bearing names like the Brentwood Locos Salvatruchas.Ms. Fuentes said she had heard about how vicious the gang had become in Brentwood. “But I would never imagine anything like this,” Ms. Fuentes, 20, said on Friday. She said that Jefferson had become a soccer star at his Florida high school and that he, along with his father, sister and grandmother, came to visit from Pompano Beach last week.After they were notified by police of the deaths, Ms. Fuentes and her mother drove all night from Florida. Jefferson, Ms. Fuentes said, was identified by a tattoo on his arm: “In God’s hands.”“They both always had a great attitude,” she said of Jefferson and Michael. “They were never mad and they were always trying to make sure everybody else was O.K.”Ms. Fuentes said that Jefferson had been in the process of applying for asylum because in Honduras, “the gangs are waiting for you on every corner.” Instead, his body will be buried in his hometown, Santa Rita, Honduras.