https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/13/world/americas/venezuela-vice-president-sanctions-trump.html
U.S. Imposes Sanctions on Venezuela’s Vice President, Calling Him a Drug ‘Kingpin’ - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Venezuela,Drug Abuse and Traffic,El Aissami  Tareck
Feb. 13, 2017
3039
CARACAS, Venezuela — The Trump administration announced sanctions against Venezuela’s vice president on Monday, calling him a drug “kingpin” in its first moves against the country’s leftist government, which President Trump railed against during his campaign.Vice President Tareck El Aissami, according to a Treasury Department statement, was being sanctioned for “playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking.” The sanctions mean that Mr. El Aissami, 42, will be blocked from financial dealings with Americans and will have any American assets frozen.Such actions against officials in the government of President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela are nothing new in a long and fraught relationship between Washington and Caracas. But the accusation that Mr. El Aissami, the next in line for the presidency, is a drug trafficker is certain to set a new, more hostile tone in relations.“This can be seen as the opening salvo of the Trump administration in dealing with Latin America’s deepest crisis,” said Michael Shifter, the president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a policy group in Washington. “It is hard to imagine that, with this decision, Washington will now be inclined to offer many carrots to the increasingly authoritarian regime.”Since taking office, Mr. Trump has come under increasing pressure by Republicans and some Democrats to take a tougher stance on Venezuela, which has suffered an economic collapse punctuated by food and medicine shortages and soaring crime, even as its government has taken a harsher stance against dissent.In a letter on Feb. 8, 34 members of the United States Congress urged the president to “take immediate action to sanction regime officials.”The Treasury Department document contained wide-ranging accusations against Mr. El Aissami, the result of years of investigation, officials said.“Power and influence do not protect those who engage in these illicit activities,” said John E. Smith, the acting director of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control. “Denying a safe haven for illicit assets in the United States and protecting the U.S. financial system from abuse remain top priorities of the Treasury Department.”Venezuelan officials had no immediate public comment on Monday evening. Mr. Maduro did not mention it during a television address.In its announcement, the Treasury Department said Mr. El Aissami’s history of drug trafficking went back years through his previous political positions, which included a state governorship and establishing a national police force at the Interior and Justice Ministry.Mr. El Aissami “facilitated shipments of narcotics from Venezuela, to include control over planes that leave from a Venezuelan air base, as well as control of drug routes through the ports in Venezuela,” the department said.Additionally “he oversaw or partially owned narcotics shipments of over 1,000 kilograms from Venezuela on multiple occasions, including those with the final destinations of Mexico and the United States,” according to the statement. It did not specify what kinds of drugs were involved.The department also said Mr. El Aissami had protected accused drug traffickers, including the Venezuelan drug lord Walid Makled García and the Colombian kingpin Daniel Barrera Barrera. The accusations linked Mr. El Aissami to shipments destined for the Zetas drug cartel in Mexico.The department also said a Venezuelan businessman, Samark López Bello, had assisted Mr. El Assami, and now faced similar sanctions.The sanctions come as Mr. El Aissami has been consolidating power in Venezuela. He was appointed as vice president by Mr. Maduro on Jan. 4 after rising from a job as a rural student leader. David Smilde, an analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America, an advocacy group, said he was seen as the front-runner for the leftist candidacy in the 2018 elections.Since appointing Mr. El Aissami to the post, Mr. Maduro has granted him expanded powers, including over the economy and expropriating businesses.Mr. El Aissami also heads a newly formed “commando” unit, meant to root out dissidents that the government accuses of plotting coups. The group has so far arrested at least five people.Mr. El Aissami does not have a good history on human rights, Mr. Smilde said, adding that while he was governor of the state of Aragua “he presided over a police force that came to be one of the most violent and abusive in the country.”