https://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/11/health/11brod.html
Short? No Worries: Just Ask This Texan - The New York Times
Height (Stature),Children and Youth,Human Growth Hormone,Hormones,Medicine and Health
May 10, 2010
8690
People of normal height or taller might be inclined to assume, as that silly Randy Newman song put it, that “Short people got no reason to live.... Short people got nobody to love.”As someone who never broke the 5-foot mark, I can attest that most assumptions about short people are just that: assumptions. Here are a few facts.¶Children who are naturally short are no less socially competent or intelligent than taller ones.¶Being short was no deterrent to the likes of Yuri Gagarin, who, at 5-foot-1, was the first man in space; the actor Danny DeVito or the pop singer Prince, both 5-2; former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, a mere 4-10; or George Stephanopoulos, TV correspondent and talk show host, just over 5 feet.¶Short people can run countries (though not necessarily well): Napoleon, Caesar, Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin, Franco.¶Being short is no impediment to financial success: Ross Perot and Michael Bloomberg.¶Even professional basketball is not out of reach: Spud Webb, 5-6, and Muggsy Bogues, just 5-3.These examples can be found in a charming and informative new book, “Short: Walking Tall When You’re Not Tall at All” (Roaring Brook Press), written especially for teenagers (and I hope their parents will read it, too) by a colleague at The New York Times, John Schwartz, who stands tall at 5-3.Mr. Schwartz is a funny and talented man, highly successful in his career and his life, married to his college sweetheart, father of three children. While honest about the occasional challenges he faced growing up in the “tall” state of Texas, his book is also encouraging —  presenting well-researched facts and life experiences that counter the myths and misinformation associated with being short, especially for boys and men.Managing UpAs a girl, I did not face the same slurs often flung at short boys by insecure taller ones. Instead I was labeled “petite.” As an adult who played hard-and-fast tennis with men, I was nicknamed Mighty Mite.In elementary school, I sat in the front of the classroom and stood first in line. Being close to the teacher was much to my academic advantage. In crowds, I could wriggle my way to the front of the pack. Or I could easily hide in the mob if I wanted to hear but not be seen.As a student and then as a professional who wanted to be noticed, I knew I had to be assertive, which strengthened my personality and sharpened my wit. And though it irritated my tall friends, all my serious boyfriends and the man I married were at least a foot taller than I.On airplanes, I can sit comfortably in coach and save my money and my miles for more rewarding adventures. There’s always a kind soul to put my carry-on in the overhead bin.There are disadvantages, I admit —  like sitting right behind a tall person at a performance. So in the theater and concert halls, I opt for mezzanine seats somewhat to the side, or request a booster seat.In movie theaters, I may have to move more than once or sit on my coat, though some considerate six-footers will offer to move if they are blocking my view.When talking to very tall people at a gathering, I ask them to sit down so I won’t have to strain my neck and they won’t have to bend over to be heard.My kitchen counter was built six inches lower than usual to facilitate food preparation, and I keep frequently used items at arm’s reach. Stools and “grabbers” throughout the house are used for upper shelves.When I lecture, I ask for a short podium or a six-inch riser behind a tall one. I’ve given speeches standing on service trays, milk crates, classroom blocks and bar mitzvah stools.If I have one nagging complaint, it is that tall women have a much easier time finding  elegant clothes. Virtually everything I buy has to be shortened. But these last few years a short friend and I have basked in a fashion break: capri pants, most of which fit us perfectly as long ones. For decades, I saved money by wearing my sons’ outgrown shorts and sweats for sports activities.Myths and MisinformationThe idea that “short kids have social problems,” as Mr. Schwartz puts it, is largely a myth, eagerly embraced by makers of human growth hormone.“When Eli Lilly was telling the government that it should be allowed to sell its growth hormone to kids who were simply small,” he writes, “it presented studies that supposedly showed that short kids are prone to teasing and bullying and ‘exclusion’ and they suffer from ‘social isolation’ and a ‘perception of lower competence.’ ”But David E. Sandberg, a psychologist at the University of Michigan, reports that “short kids actually cope pretty well with being small.” In a study of hundreds of children in the Buffalo area, Dr. Sandberg found there was no real problem with being short and “there is little benefit to being tall.”Summarizing the research, Mr. Schwartz writes:  “Height didn’t affect the number of friends the kids had, or the height of those friends. It had nothing to do with how well students were liked by others, what the others thought of them, or even of their own perception of their reputation within the school.”Earlier  research suggested that short people did not do as well on cognitive tests or were at a disadvantage in getting jobs and making money. But those studies, Mr. Schwartz writes,  either failed to control for contaminating factors or were not supported by later research. For example, in testing children for intelligence and later earning potential, a number of the short ones may have had their growth stunted by disease, poor nutrition or other factors that can impair cognitive development.Still, Mr. Schwartz  wisely advises youngsters to make sure they maximize their growth potential by eating healthy meals that include protein (meat, chicken, fish and soy versions thereof) and plenty of fruits and vegetables, drinking milk instead of soda, and getting regular weight-bearing exercise to stimulate the growth plates in their long bones.“There’s no evidence,” he concludes, “that being short is a terrible problem for people or that it predicts a second-rate life for us. You don’t have to be psychologically burdened by being short.”