http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/24/sports/in-delhi-pushing-through-the-wall-of-air-pollution-.html
In Delhi, Pushing Through the Wall (of Air Pollution) - The New York Times
Running,India,New Delhi (India),Air Pollution
Nov. 23, 2014
2018
NEW DELHI —  They wore turbans, headbands, crazy wigs and baseball caps, but almost none of the runners in this city’s annual half-marathon wore masks Sunday despite air pollution levels that were among the worst in the world.Ankit Jaitley, stretching near the start of the course in the predawn gloaming, said he was excited to try a half-marathon, covering 13.1 miles, for the first time. But Jaitley, 26, of Delhi, said he was worried about the pollution.“I’m allergic to pollution and dust,” he said. With intense levels of both in Delhi, how did he manage his morning training runs?“It’s a problem,” Jaitley said. “But I think it’s better to run than not.”First held in 2005, the Delhi half-marathon has become a signature sporting event in this capital city and was expected to draw more than 12,000 runners for the half-marathon and 18,000 for a seven-kilometer (4.35-mile) fun run.The Delhi event is one of a growing number of running races across India, which does not have much of a sporting culture outside cricket. Middle-class children here are expected to study intensively for all-important exams in the 10th and 12th grades, and few are given time for after-school sporting events.But more than 125,000 Indians travel to the United States for college each year, and India’s vast diaspora includes millions living in countries where sports are culturally important. Those who return have served as the core for local running groups that have sprung up in recent years across the country.Dilip Jayaram, chief executive of Procam International, which organizes the Delhi race, said India had 150 well-organized road races annually. It had almost none 15 years ago, he added.“Running has just taken off,” Mr. Jayaram said.While runners lavished praise on Delhi’s course layout and organization, some complained that other races in India could be chaotic.The lead runners in last month’s Bangalore half-marathon lost their way and had to ask for money from passers-by to take a train to the finish line after the vehicle guiding them missed a turn. Delayed drivers became so angry that some drove onto the course, forcing runners to dodge speeding cars.India’s traffic is the deadliest in the world, and traffic lights and road signs here are often so widely ignored that they seem mostly decorative. Delhi has tens of thousands of stray dogs and monkeys, and walkers here often carry sticks to beat them away. But Sunday’s runners said they had long since gotten used to trying conditions.“When I first moved here, everyone told me that I wouldn’t be able to run,” said Eve Bugler, who is from London but now spends much of her time in Delhi. “Stray dogs, crazy traffic, safety, bad pollution — everyone had a reason. But I found the running community here to be really welcoming.”Sunday’s air pollution, however, was intense. Most of the city’s government-run air monitors were suspiciously off-line at the time of the race, but one of the monitors reported readings over the previous two days of a minimum level of PM2.5, the very fine particles that cause the most damage to lungs, of 236 micrograms per cubic meter and a maximum value of 738.The United States Environmental Protection Agency considers any reading above 200 “very unhealthy” and recommends that children avoid all physical activity outdoors in such conditions.Such readings would almost certainly cause highway shutdowns and near-panic in Beijing, where awareness of the problem is far higher.In Delhi, which has the highest pollution levels in the world, few pay much attention.Jason Coleman, a teacher at the American Embassy School in New Delhi, was one of the few runners wearing masks.“Apart from doing the right thing for me, I wore it in hopes of bringing some awareness of the problem,” Coleman, 38, said. “I want people asking why this guy is wearing a mask.”Even some of the world’s elite runners, who competed for a $262,167 purse, said they had trouble with the smog. Jos Hermens, a sports agent who represented some of the elite runners in Sunday’s race, said Guye Adola of Ethiopia, who won the race in record time, had an unusually bad cough at the end.Adola nodded when asked a few moments after winning if the air had been a problem. And Gladys Cherono, a Kenyan who came in second among the elite women, said: “It’s hard to breathe. Completely.”But most of the Indians interviewed after competing were nonchalant when asked about air pollution, now one of the leading causes of death in India, and many said they would have run regardless of the air.They may be right. While environmental regulators in the United States recommend against exercising in intense air pollution, they presume such pollution levels are rare, which they are in the United States. Following American guidelines in Delhi would mean almost never exercising.In a prerace telephone interview, C. Arden Pope III, a professor of economics at Brigham Young University and one of the world’s foremost experts on the health consequences of air pollution, said the benefits of exercising in places like Delhi where air pollution levels were always high probably outweighed the risks.“It’s just awful air, but I would probably exercise anyway,” he said.Suresh Srinivasan of Delhi, who said Sunday was the sixth time he had run the Delhi half-marathon, simply shrugged when asked about the pollution.“The only thing that caused me problems were my shoelaces,” he said. “I had to stop and retie them.”