https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/05/sports/mark-cavendish-peter-sagan-tour-de-france-disqualification.html
Cavendish Cites ‘Courage’ of Tour de France Jury for Sagan Disqualification - The New York Times
Tour de France (Bicycle Race),Bicycles and Bicycling,Froome  Christopher,Sagan  Peter,Cavendish  Mark,Aru  Fabio
July 5, 2017
3732
VITTEL, France — The British rider Mark Cavendish has commended the “courage” of Tour de France jurors for disqualifying Peter Sagan, the world champion, for a horrific crash that took both of them out of the race on Tuesday.Speaking on Wednesday before the Tour set off without him from the spa town of Vittel on Stage 5, Cavendish said his immediate concern after he hit the deck was a profusely bleeding finger on his right hand.“There was just a puddle of blood on the floor. I thought, ‘I’m going to bleed to death here,’ ” he said. “But my teammates were around and they helped me to my feet.”Cavendish, the winner of 30 Tour stages in a stellar career, sustained a broken right shoulder blade and withdrew from the race. Sagan, who appeared to elbow Cavendish before he fell at high speed, stayed on his bike but was disqualified for endangering Cavendish and other riders in the sprint finish at Vittel.Cavendish said that he bore no hard feelings toward Sagan, and that his actions did not appear malicious. He emphasized that they were good friends and said Sagan called him Tuesday evening while he was being examined in hospital.Sagan’s explanation for extending his right elbow into Cavendish’s path — as the Briton was speeding up alongside the Slovak, shaving the barriers — was that he was just trying to stay upright.“He said it was keeping himself balanced, so it was nice to know,” Cavendish said. “He said he didn’t know it was me coming up. It was the elbow, which I said I was confused about. I spoke to Peter about that. Whether or not it was intentional, it doesn’t look great.”Cavendish dismissed suggestions that he was trying to squeeze into a space that was too small.“I know what kind of gaps I can fit through,” he said.Cavendish praised Sagan for immediately coming to his team bus after the crash to apologize.“It was an honorable thing to see Peter there at the bus, already come to apologize,” he said. “It shows our relationship, shows the man he is, and I really appreciate that more than anything.”But he also commended the jurors for their decision to disqualify Sagan, calling them “among the most experienced jury that I’ve ever witnessed at the Tour de France.”“It’s just sad that we’ll both be out of the Tour de France,” Cavendish said of Sagan and himself. “We’ve spoken, we’re fine.”The Tour race director, Thierry Gouvenou, said that he supported the jury’s disqualification of Sagan. He said Sagan “also was at fault” in a first crash that took down more than a dozen riders in the final stretch on Tuesday, before the crash that wiped out Cavendish and others in the finishing sprint.“Ultimately, there are no attenuating circumstances,” Gouvenou said. “I think they made a good choice.”“We all complain about the crashes in the first week of the Tour,” he said. “It gets to the point where the riders just have to respect each other.”Enrico Poitschke, head sports director for Sagan’s Bora-Hansgrohe team, said there would be no appeal of the decision.“In our eyes, it’s the wrong position,” Poitschke said. “It was the wrong decision from the commissaries.”In Wednesday’s Stage 5, Fabio Aru of Italy beat the three-time Tour de France champion, Chris Froome, to the top of the first mountain climb of this year’s race.Aru powered away from Froome and other top riders with a burst of acceleration on the sharp ascent to the Planche des Belles Filles ski station and clung on to the finish.Dan Martin of the Quickstep team was second, with Froome third. Froome still rode well enough to take the race leader’s yellow jersey off the shoulders of his teammate, Geraint Thomas, who could not stay with the leaders on the ascent, which was made doubly punishing by the hot temperatures.Froome leads Thomas by 12 seconds. Aru jumped from 25th to third in the standings, and is 14 seconds behind Froome.Froome, 32, played down Aru’s show of strength in winning Stage 5, noting there are still 16 more days of racing to go. But he also acknowledged that he did not reacting quickly enough when Aru broke away on the climb.Froome got the message, loud and clear.“This is going to be the hardest-fought battle I’ve had,” he said. “We definitely cannot give Fabio that kind of space again.”