https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/movies/5-george-romero-films-to-remember.html
5 George Romero Films to Remember - The New York Times
Romero  George A,Movies,Dawn of the Dead (Movie),Night of the Living Dead (Movie),Monkey Shines (Movie),Creepshow (Movie),The Crazies (Movie),Horror
July 17, 2017
236
George A. Romero, the maverick film director who died Sunday, brought zombies into our cultural consciousness decades before those in “The Walking Dead” were even crawling. Here’s a look at five of his most memorable films.Mr. Romero’s black-and-white zombie shocker was a horror movie game-changer. Set on a Pennsylvania farm under siege by the undead, the low-budget film featured a horror rarity: a heroic black leading man, played by Duane Jones, who tries to calm a house of white folks. (It doesn’t go well for him, or anyone, really.) It also kicked off the modern zombie film genre, and did so with social commentary — about race and violence, most notably — in its blood. (Mr. Romero called the racial themes in the film “an accident.”)The director Jordan Peele cited “Night of the Living Dead” in interviews about “Get Out,” his megahit horror film this year about black trauma and white monsters. “The way that movie handles race is so essential to what makes it great,” Mr. Peele said. [Read the review]Mr. Romero turned to bio-horror in this frenzied film about the United States government’s attempt to contain the release of a deadly biological weapon, nicknamed Trixie, in a small town. Lesser-known than Mr. Romero’s other films, “The Crazies” emerged alongside ’70s contagion disaster films like “The Andromeda Strain,” but with Mr. Romero’s signature focus on the lives of working-class innocents compromised by the incompetence of the powerful. [Read the review]Mr. Romero’s big zombie follow-up to “Night of the Living Dead” had capitalism in its cross hairs. (“If there’s something I’d like to criticize, I can bring the zombies out. And I get the financing that way,” he told Time in 2010. “So I’ve been able to express my political views through those films.”Set in the aftermath of a mass-zombie uprising, this gory film is most memorable for scenes of gray-faced, bell-bottomed zombies ambling through an empty shopping center. The movie was filmed at the Monroeville Mall in Pennsylvania, which became a holy place for horror pilgrims.It is also the granddaddy of works about malls as places of menace, like the 1986 killer robot film “Chopping Mall” or the new Spike TV series “The Mist.” [Read the review]As slasher films like “Halloween” and “Friday the 13th” ushered in a golden age of horror in the late ’70s and ’80s, Mr. Romero looked to the horror storytelling of his youth for this dark anthology. Inspired by the 1950s E .C. Comics — best known for “Tales From the Crypt” — this movie features five vignettes based partly on short stories by Stephen King, who made his screenwriting debut. Mr. Romero’s starrier-than-usual cast included Ted Danson, Hal Holbrook, Ed Harris and Adrienne Barbeau; Mr. King also made a cameo. The reviews were mixed. “The best things about ‘Creepshow,’” wrote Vincent Canby in The New York Times, “are its carefully simulated comic-book tackiness and the gusto with which some good actors assume silly positions.” [Read the review]Based on Michael Stewart’s novel of the same name, this comic-creepy film is about a paraplegic man and his seemingly telepathic relationship with his monkey helper, named Ella. (“The man was the prisoner,” goes the film’s trailer. “The monkey held the key.”) The reviews were not good; it “has more coincidences than a Sidney Sheldon mini-series, more clichés than a Jackie Collins potboiler,” Caryn James wrote in The New York Times. But, much like introducing a black protagonist in “Night of the Living Dead,” “Monkey Shines” did something that, to this day still, few horror movies do: put a character with a disability in the spotlight.