https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/31/podcasts/the-daily/non-compete-clauses.html
‘The Daily’: Labor Lockdown - The New York Times
The Daily,Labor and Jobs,Kushner  Jared
May 31, 2017
2411
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherKeith Bollinger had worked in textiles in North Carolina since 1982, but the recession hit hard and his paycheck shriveled. When a rival textile company offered him a job and a big raise, he jumped at the chance to better provide for his family.After he’d been at the new job only a few weeks, a man showed up at his door, handed him an envelope and told him he’d been served.On today’s episode:• How a piece of paper is gaining power over the American worker, turning a life’s work into a liability. Conor Dougherty, who covers economics for The Times, talks about how noncompete clauses keep workers locked in. And we speak with one such worker, Mr. Bollinger, who spent three years in a legal battle that wiped out his savings.• President Trump returned to Washington with some family business to attend to. Peter Baker fills us in on the state of the White House after his trip abroad.Background reading:• Mr. Dougherty’s story on noncompete clauses.• Mr. Baker and Maggie Haberman on recent staff changes at the White House.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’t enough, we can even text.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”