https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/us/oregon-shooting-victims-umpqua-community-college-students.html
A Snapshot of Students Lost: Young and Old, but All Striving  - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Roseburg (Ore),Colleges and Universities,Harper-Mercer  Christopher (1989-2015),Cooper  Quinn,Johnson  Jason,Alcaraz  Lucero,Levine  Larry,Eibel  Lucas,Dietz  Kim Saltmarsh,Carnes  Rebecka Ann,Moore  Sarena Dawn,Anspach  Treven Taylor,Oregon,Umpqua Community College
Oct. 2, 2015
7077
ROSEBURG, Ore. —  The instructor was a gray-bearded, pipe-smoking fisherman who honed his love of literature through years of writing about chasing summer steelheads. His students were the face of community colleges across America — a mix of young and old, some on the path to bright careers, some returning after decades of wrong turns. All had just begun a class on the art of constructing a reasoned argument when suddenly, the incomprehensible literally burst through the door.A day after Thursday’s mass shooting at Umpqua Community College, as this normally placid town in the Oregon countryside was trying to come to grips with the violence, officials released the names of the nine people who were killed. In a somber news conference, they read brief statements from three of the victims’ families, offering snapshots of those who were lost.Quinn Cooper, 18, graduated from Roseburg High School in June, his family said.“Yesterday was his fourth day of college,” they said. “Quinn was funny, sweet, compassionate and such a wonderful, loving person. He always stood up for people.”At 6 foot 2 and 300 pounds, Mr. Cooper could deadlift more than 400 pounds, and was close to achieving his brown belt in American Kempo Karate, said Susan Ferris, the public affairs director for the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians, where his mother, Janet Cooper, works.But he also loved music and swing dancing, and planned to major in theater.Ms. Ferris said Ms. Cooper had seen reports about the shooting possibly being motivated by religion, but said that her son was not religious. “She said if you were to ask Quinn if he were Christian, he would have said, ‘I am agnostic,’ ” said Ms. Ferris. “She said he had his own faith.”Jason Johnson, 34, had come to college after years of wandering, including arrests for drug possession and theft, according to court records. In a statement, his parents described him as “proud to be a Christian” and proud to be going to school, and said they felt “Jason had finally found his path.”His mother waited as buses brought the survivors from the school, but he never got off, his grandmother Marlene Giffin said. She added that she had received the phone call about his death on her 81st birthday.“He was shot down,” Ms. Giffin said of her grandson, who has a twin brother. “He was very considerate and loving and kind.” She added, “He went to college to get a better education, to do something with his life.”Officials also gave an update on the wounded on Friday. Of the 10 taken to Mercy Medical Center in Roseburg on Thursday, one died; three were transferred to an advanced trauma hospital; two were treated and released; and four underwent surgery. Two of the people who had surgery have been discharged, and two remain hospitalized.Before the victims’ names were released, neighbors of a small gray house near Rose Elementary where the Alcaraz family lives saw ominous signs. Extended family was gathering at the house. They solemnly passed in and out of the doors and paced in the yard, clutching phones.“They were crying all night long,” said a next-door neighbor, Krystle Modglin. “The whole family was in their front yard crying all night long.”Late Friday, Lucero Alcaraz, 19, one of six daughters of a landscaper who grew up in the small home, was listed among the dead.Ms. Alcaraz, whose first name means “bright star” in Spanish, was an honor student on a scholarship at Umpqua, set on becoming a pediatric nurse, a cousin said.Larry Levine, the adjunct professor teaching the class where the gunman first opened fire, was 67. While his Facebook page listed his hometown as New York, in recent years he lived in a small cabin hidden behind fir trees on the bank of the North Umpqua River, where he could hear the water rushing by from the porch.A reader, writer and outdoorsman, he worked as a summer fishing guide and published a number of essays on the joys of fishing the Northwest’s rivers.Patricia Lee, who works at the Steamboat Inn on the North Umpqua River, a favorite haunt of local fishermen, said Mr. Levine would often stop in after trips on the river, and was active with groups that sought to protect it.“He lived for the river and chasing the summer steelhead,” she said. “He had a real passion for life.”Looking out at his classroom, he would have seen a spectrum of young and old faces, all tapping away at the same assignment — an essay in which students had to choose a subject and support an argument with evidence and reason.Blond-haired Lucas Eibel, 18, a rosy-cheeked officer in the Future Farmers of America who had won a number of academic awards, was enrolled alongside silver-haired Kim Saltmarsh Dietz, 59, who had worked for years as a caretaker at a winery.Originally from Britain, Ms. Dietz had become a United States citizen in the 1980s, before most of her classmates were born, and was attending college with her daughter, according to a Facebook post. Her daughter was not harmed in the shooting.Mr. Eibel loved nature and wildlife, his family said in a statement. He spent last summer as a “junior zookeeper” at Wildlife Safari, a wild animal park in Winston, Ore., and in particular liked to take the zoo’s badger for walks, said Leila Goulet, the education director there. “Anything that we asked him to do, he just loved to help,” she said.The gunman was also enrolled in the class, although it is not known whether he ever attended.Rebecka Ann Carnes, 18, a high school softball player with long brown hair, had just months before worn a graduation cap that read, “And now the adventure begins.” She was from Myrtle Creek, a town of 3,400 a half-hour drive from Roseburg, along thick woods and winding creeks.Friends said faith and her three sons were the bedrock of Sarena Dawn Moore’s life, and when they read news reports that the gunman had interrogated victims about their religion, their thoughts turned to Ms. Moore, 44. She was a Seventh-day Adventist and often spoke with friends about Christianity, and would call and ask them for prayers for her or an ailing friend. She had moved to Oregon for a fresh start for herself and her youngest son after a divorce, said Teresa Oakley, a friend who lived next door to her in Northern California.Said John Kizziar, another friend from California: “She was trying to improve her life by going back to college. She had high aspirations.”Treven Taylor Anspach, 20, was a 6-foot-4 forward for the Umpqua Riverhawks basketball team and the son of a firefighter in town.“We love him and will miss him greatly,” his coach, Daniel Leeworthy, wrote on the team’s Facebook page. “All he wanted to do in life was to marry his high school sweetheart, be a firefighter like his dad, and to serve others.”