https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/22/arts/dance/review-ballet-preljocaj-offers-a-trilogy-of-deconstruction-and-chain-reactions.html
Review: Ballet Preljocaj Offers a Trilogy of Deconstruction and Chain Reactions - The New York Times
Dancing,Joyce Theater,Preljocaj  Angelin,Empty Moves: Parts I  II & III (Ballet),Cage  John,Ballet Preljocaj
April 21, 2016
9532
Walking out in the middle of a performance, as some audience members did while watching Ballet Preljocaj at the Joyce Theater on Wednesday, is a relatively mild form of protest. It may be a little disruptive, but it hardly compares to what happened on Dec. 2, 1977, at the Teatro Lirico in Milan, when spectators caused a heckling uproar in response to John Cage’s “Empty Words.”That performance — in which Cage intoned deconstructed text from the journals of Henry David Thoreau, producing an array of seemingly random sounds and syllables — was recorded, jeering and all. Decades later, the recording inspired “Empty Moves: Parts I, II & III,” by the French choreographer Angelin Preljocaj, who has brought the full trilogy, created between 2004 and 2014, to New York for the first time. (Parts I and II came to the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 2010.)At nearly two hours, with no intermission, the work is a test of endurance for both the audience and the four striking dancers of Ballet Preljocaj. But not an unpleasant one (though Wednesday’s deserters might disagree). What’s fascinating is how Mr. Preljocaj, exploring his own modes of deconstruction, resists repeating himself over such a long and movement-dense period of time, while also developing a contained, coherent world. The dancers (Nuriya Nagimova, Yurié Tsugawa, Fabrizio Clemente and Baptiste Coissieu) rarely rest; even their water break is choreographed. Yet they keep going — like Cage through the gathering storm of whistling, chanting, hooting and stomping — immersed in discovering what comes next.Crisp and clear, the choreography echoes the disjointedness of Cage’s text, yet it’s also rich in chain reactions, one move propelling another, like a game of pinball. One dancer’s outstretched leg, bent at the knee, sets another dancer hinging backward, where another, without us noticing, has already arrived to catch her. To describe these events obscures how swiftly and efficiently they happen.The lack of repetitiveness doesn’t mean that nothing repeats; the opening phrase, for instance, recurs three or four times. But each appearance reveals some new oddity. Elsewhere, Mr. Preljocaj presents a phrase that he later breaks up — two duets become four solos, partnered motions become partnerless — much as Cage dismantled sentences into words into syllables into increasingly elemental sounds.As the Milan riot grows wilder, so do the dancers, and Part III of “Empty Moves” proves the least compelling for how closely it mimics the score. The more emptied of discernible meaning, the fuller this trilogy feels.