http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/02/books/endgame-and-iraq-by-michael-gordon-and-bernard-trainor.html
‘Endgame’ and Iraq, by Michael Gordon and Bernard Trainor - The New York Times
The Endgame: The Inside Story of the Struggle for Iraq  From George W. Bush to Barack Obama (Book),Gordon  Michael,Trainor  Bernard E,Books and Literature,Iraq War (2003-11),Endgame  The (Book)
Oct. 1, 2012
2797
A mid-2004 American military plan for Iraq began with a Japanese proverb: “Vision without action is a daydream, but action without vision is a nightmare.” “The Endgame,” Michael R. Gordon and Gen. Bernard E. Trainor’s book on the later stages of the Iraq war, is a meticulous record of the daydreams and nightmares that war represented, and should be required reading for anybody considering another such exercise.A worthy successor to the authors’ accounts of the gulf war and the 2003  invasion of Iraq, this new volume traces the story of American involvement from the fall of Baghdad to the final departure of United States troops at the end of 2011. It primarily presents the view from the American military command in the field. The White House, the Pentagon, the State Department, Iraqi and Iranian politicians — all come into the picture as aids or (mostly) obstacles to the long-suffering soldiers just trying to do a thankless job, getting a broken country back up and running smoothly.Somewhere between journalism and history — Mr. Gordon is the chief military correspondent for The New York Times, General Trainor a former correspondent for The Times and retired Marine Corps lieutenant general — the book occasionally reads like a note dump, with mountains of detail and minimal commentary. But thanks to the authors’ extraordinary research and sobriety, the accumulation of one well-documented fact after another is compelling.The action unfolds in a prelude, three acts and an implied epilogue. A few pages trace the George W. Bush administration’s road to Baghdad. Then comes a lengthy treatment of the period from mid-2003 to mid-2006, when American military and political leaders kept looking for the exits as Iraq slipped into insurgency and then full-blown civil war.The heart of the book describes the “surge,” the new United States counterinsurgency strategy that helped reverse the course of the war in 2007-8. The final section shows the Obama administration reverting to the earlier course, pocketing the gains of the surge it opposed and using them to buy a relatively quick and painless exit. Without American forces helping to keep Iraq on the straight and narrow, the authors suggest, it is likely to slip back into tyranny or civil strife or both.The argument is not original — you might even call it the dominant view among most established Iraq watchers — but rarely has it gotten so careful a treatment, buttressed with such impeccable sourcing. The book’s heroes are familiar: H. R. McMaster, Sean B. MacFarland, David H. Petraeus, Ray Odierno, Ryan C. Crocker. Recognizing a fiasco in the making, they had the imagination and boldness to reject the Bush administration’s initial approach to the war and come up with a completely different one, putting it into practice against fierce opposition from all sides. (General Petraeus as a new commander in 2007, to a bright young major using a highly unorthodox tactic to get results: “One, don’t let our Army stop you. Two, don’t let the Iraqi government stop you. Solve the problem.”)Mr. Gordon and General Trainor’s assessment of the surge is persuasive. “As a military event,” they write, it “succeeded beyond any reasonable expectation in tamping down sectarian violence, breaking the back of Al Qaeda in Iraq,” and then, in an unexpected final chapter, damaging and sidelining the Mahdi Army.Their analysis of its interaction with the Sunni Awakening, the revolt of moderate Iraqi Sunnis against the insurgency, also seems correct: “By coming in fighting and looking like they meant to stay, American troops gave Iraqi civilians — and many former insurgents — a partner they could trust,” helping galvanize local opposition to radical Sunni and Shia extremists. The political goals of the surge, however — to push Iraq’s dysfunctional factions to reform and cooperate — never got far.The book’s true villains are the seemingly endless supply of local and regional players willing and eager to do unspeakable things to all their enemies, foreign and domestic. But in the authors’ telling, these are unconsciously helped by a secondary class of villains, those Americans too obtuse or uncaring to appreciate the role that the United States could and should play in helping solve Iraq’s problems.Here the book essentially lumps together Mr. Bush’s initial national security team and the Obama administration, neither of which had much of a taste for counterinsurgency. This seems a bit unfair. The Obama administration does come off as somewhat callous and shortsighted, but it was simply finishing off a job it never wanted to do in the first place.The Bush administration, in contrast, was the one that initiated a war out of the blue but couldn’t be bothered to plan for what would happen when the fighting stopped. Had Donald H. Rumsfeld,  Tommy Franks and their colleagues taken their responsibilities more seriously in the beginning, the heroics of General Petraeus, General Odierno and the rest later would never have been necessary.This is where the book’s tight focus on operational challenges could have been usefully supplemented by more discussion of larger issues. If the surge worked in 2007, for example, how would a similar approach have fared in 2003, put in place right after the toppling of Saddam Hussein’s regime? And if midwifing the birth of a new Iraq would always have been a long, costly and difficult business, should the United States have invaded in the first place?Mr. Bush eventually came to understand that war involves not just destruction but also construction — that “regime change” means not only getting rid of a bad regime but also finding a way to replace it with something better. “The Endgame” shows just how hard that process can be — and, by implication, how crazy it is to start a war without good plans for how to finish it.