https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/11/magazine/pictures-in-the-aftermath.html
Pictures in the Aftermath - The New York Times
Japan Earthquake and Tsunami (2011),Nuclear Energy,Photography
April 11, 2017
6434
In an essay titled “Late-Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler’s Ninth Symphony,” the physician and essayist Lewis Thomas wrote: “I cannot listen to the last movement of the Mahler Ninth without the door-smashing intrusion of a huge new thought: death everywhere, the dying of everything, the end of humanity.” The essay was published in Thomas’s 1983 book of the same title, and he was talking about the likelihood of nuclear apocalypse. When I first read it in the mid-’90s, I appreciated its mournful lyricism, even as it felt like a time capsule of the worries of a different generation.But I’ve been thinking of Thomas’s essay again. Recently, some video clips of American nuclear-weapons tests from the ’50s and ’60s were made available to the public for the first time. A few dozen of the clips have been uploaded to YouTube by the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Many are shorter than a minute, and none are longer than eight minutes. On the flickering screen, I have been watching various iterations of the infamous nuclear cloud spraying radioactivity into the atmosphere above Nevada or the Pacific. Several of the clips simply show a mysterious white circle glowing against a dark field. We can watch these videos because they have now been declassified, assessed as belonging safely to the past. But the fears Thomas wrote about back in the ’80s now feel real to me. The nation’s nuclear stance is back to belligerence, one more significant turn for the worse in a world suddenly full of turns for the worse. Considered with one eye on current news, the clips are terrifying and mesmerizing, and are made more so by the absence of sound. The unspeakable unfolds in silence.If Americans are back to brooding about nuclear disaster, Japanese people have had no break from it since the Second World War. There was the staggering legacy of being the only nation to have been attacked with nuclear weapons (the two American bombs that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki). This legacy permeates Japanese society at all levels, provoking questions about what it means to mourn, to move on, to confront the past as both aggressor and victim.Japan’s subsequent embrace of nuclear-power plants was a fateful choice in a country not only laden with such a traumatic past but also vulnerable to earthquakes and tsunamis. The earthquake that struck the Pacific off the coast of Tohoku, in the northeastern part of Honshu, in March 2011 triggered an enormous tsunami and caused immense damage: towns flooded, infrastructure wrecked, forests splintered and more than 15,000 people dead. The earthquake cut off the external power supply to the Daiichi nuclear power plant in Fukushima, and floodwaters from the tsunami damaged the plant’s backup generators and disabled its cooling system. Overheating ensued. Fuel in three of the reactor cores melted, leading to a release of radiation. And so to the fast-moving disaster of a tsunami was added the slow-motion disaster of a nuclear calamity.The tripartite catastrophe of earthquake, tsunami and nuclear accident is known in Japan as 3/11, because it began on March 11. The calendrical naming indicates something of the seriousness with which those events were viewed. And as befits a date so crucial, there has been a varied and widespread set of responses to it — in politics, of course, but also in journalism, photography, literature and in the arts in general.The 3/11 disaster was perhaps the first major one in Japan to be so thoroughly captured as it unfolded. Footage from surveillance cameras and webcams shows the water coming in, the roads being swept away and the towns and harbors being destroyed. And in the immediate aftermath, extensive documentary work was undertaken by photographers from Japan and abroad. The meticulous photographic documentation of ruins, debris, cleanup and relief operations by the photojournalist Kazuma Obara was typical: His pictures showed the gut-wrenching scale of the destruction, the professionalism of the emergency crews and the fortitude of the survivors.But with the passage of time, less direct photographic responses to 3/11 began to emerge, and many of Japan’s most respected photographers turned their attentions to Tohoku. Shortly after the earthquake, the Japanese government put into effect a zone of exclusion around the damaged Fukushima power plant that forbade unauthorized persons to breach an invisible perimeter at a radius of 20 kilometers from the reactors (a semicircle on land, because the other half of the circle was in the Pacific Ocean). The photographer Tomoki Imai undertook a two-year project of photographing the irradiated landscape. The photographs in his series “Semicircle Law” were made at different locations on or near the 20-kilometer perimeter, with his large-format camera directed at the damaged reactors in the distance. Sometimes the reactors are barely visible, and often they aren’t visible at all. The resulting images are simple landscapes in various seasons. Some of them are banal; others are beautifully pensive. They are decisively transfigured only by our knowledge of the circumstances under which they were made.Equally subtle is the work of Shimpei Takeda, which at first glance looks like a series of images of the night sky. But his white-flecked black pictures are actually photographs of the soil — or, more accurate, they are photograms, as they were made without a camera. Takeda obtained soil samples from a number of locations around Fukushima and nearby prefectures and placed them on photosensitive film in a light-tight chamber for a month. Depending on the amount of radioactivity in the soil, the resulting images contain a few white dots or enough to create nebula-like white splotches. These enigmatic images make visible the otherwise unseen toxicity of the ground.I saw Imai’s and Takeda’s images earlier this year at an exhibition of post-World War II Japanese photography at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. In the same exhibition was work by Rinko Kawauchi, whose ability to infuse gentle diaristic images with intense spiritual power I have long admired. Kawauchi’s response to 3/11 (not presented in the San Francisco exhibition) was published in a book titled “Light and Shadow.” A key theme of the sequence of photographs in her book was a pair of pigeons, one black, the other white. Kawauchi photographed them in and above the wreckage of Tohoku, often capturing them both in a single frame. In Kawauchi’s account, these birds were homing pigeons rendered distraught by the devastation below, circling restlessly, uncertain where to land. Their starkly oppositional colors lent the series a further air of symbolism and a sense of the miraculous.In countless ways, people make images in response to disaster. Seeing is part of our coming to terms. Oblique responses, like those by Imai, Takeda and Kawauchi to 3/11, are especially resonant. They are reactions to a tragedy, but they also reach beyond it and give us new language. In each case, a focused and delimited view of the catastrophe is offered, and this delimitation enables the images to transcend their subject.As I silently watch the grim old footage of American bomb tests, it occurs to me that the unsteady black-and-white imagery is decontextualized and hints at abstraction. Like the photographs from Japan, it is simultaneously primordial and futuristic. The extreme uncertainty I feel in our current political moment helps me understand for the first time the curious twinship of mourning and premonition. What was endured can hint at what is yet to come. Takeda’s radioactive cosmos, Imai’s brooding landscapes and Kawauchi’s dazed pigeons take me through several registers of thought simultaneously: information about the tragedy, sorrow for the suffering it caused, gratitude for the work that makes that sorrow visible, foreboding about the future.An alert flashes across your phone. Something terrible has happened far away, a flood, an airstrike. Soon, there’s footage of people picking through the wreckage of what used to be their homes. It is easy to pity them, but difficult to imagine that this could be you, suddenly bereft of a solid place in the world. And yet it is precisely this expectation of solidity, this notion that things are probably going to be fine, that I sense falling away from us once again. Listening now to Mahler’s Ninth Symphony, I find it inflected by Lewis Thomas’s essay, and steeped in a gloom similar to his. It’s not just Mahler’s Ninth: Listening to anything that touches on the sublime makes me apprehensive, whether it’s Coltrane or Bjork or even the silence that greets me when I wake up in the middle of the night.I think of the reckless policies being rushed into law all around us, the undermining of scientific consensus, the breakdown of diplomacy, the tweeting president and his confrontational temperament, and I wonder which events we in America are doomed to undergo in our own turn, events we may already be well in the middle of, whether by an act of war or by an act of God, whether with a nuclear element or not, events that will expose our utter unreadiness, alter our experience of the world permanently and require us to find new ways of seeing, and new ways of mourning.