https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/04/movies/zoe-saldana-guardians-of-the-galaxy-vol-2.html
Zoe Saldana, Sci-fi Queen, on the ‘Guardians’ Sequel - The New York Times
Movies,Actors and Actresses,Comic Books and Strips,Science Fiction,Saldana  Zoe,Marvel Entertainment,Gunn  James (1970- ),Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 2 (Movie)
May 4, 2017
9485
As a young actress, Zoe Saldana didn’t imagine being painted green, or blue. But, she said, playing sci-fi characters the hue of bright Crayolas helped her avoid being trapped in a box — or the pain of being rejected for roles because of her skin color.“Rather than dealing with that heartache, I did rely spiritually and artistically on the freedom that these science-fiction roles gave me with their different colors of skin,” she said. “And it challenges me as an artist putting voices to those roles of females that are more action driven and diverse in a way that defies gravity.”In “Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2,” Ms. Saldana flies high again as Gamora, Marvel’s mean, green killing machine and a major player in the galactic team of heroes led by Peter Quill (Chris Pratt). Her biggest enemy this time is her sister, Nebula (Karen Gillan), who has vowed to fight Gamora to the death. Chances are she’ll survive: Ms. Saldana will reprise the role in “Avengers: Infinity War,” as well as return as the cerulean-splashed Neytiri in three “Avatar” sequels.The forthright Ms. Saldana, 38 — born in New Jersey and reared in Queens and in the Dominican Republic — now nests in Los Angeles with her artist husband, Marco Perego, and their three young sons. In a phone interview from London, where she was recuperating from a manic premiere party, she spoke about female empowerment and raising men. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.All that sci-fi! How did this happen?I don’t know how to say no to these filmmakers. First I booked “Avatar,” and as I was shooting that, J. J. Abrams was getting ready to do “Star Trek.” And those collaborations got the attention of [the “Guardians” director] James Gunn. I really didn’t want to say yes because this was the third sci-fi film I’d be doing, and I was afraid it might not be great for my career. But I got the sense that I would be missing out on something so incredibly special that I said yes.People are saying that the sparring between you and Nebula passes the Bechdel test,  as you talk  about something other than a man. What’s it like generating that much girl power?It feels wonderful. It feels like that’s the way films should be, with more of a female presence. Give them a story, give them their own arc. And it felt great to balance off of a woman and play a sister. I’m one of three sisters, and that’s a topic I feel strongly about.I’m betting you don’t argue like that.Oh god, no, and I hope we never will. We have a production company called Cinestar Pictures. We work together, we collaborate together. When you’re busy doing all of those things, you don’t have time to quarrel.What was Kurt Russell and his windswept hair like?It was a check on my bucket list. He’s such a risk-taker and an artist who follows his heart. And we were laughing so hard at that hair. But he was the one laughing the loudest.Peter Quill’s mixtape plays a huge role. What would be on yours?I’m more a kid of the late ’90s, so I’d add some Prince and George Michael, and then take it way back with Ella Fitzgerald and Nina Simone.You took flak for portraying Simone in the biopic “Nina.”There was a lesson learned there. I think as an actor you have to choose the people you work with better, and make sure you know exactly what they’re doing. A lot of things raised a red flag, even before shooting, and I should have been braver and stronger and put my foot down. [Simone] has always been someone I loved, and she lives within me. I should honor that over what a person thinks [about the film]. And in the end, I can’t regret anything I’ve done.What did studying ballet bring to your life?I think I would have never booked “Avatar” if it weren’t for my ballet background. The actress James Cameron wanted was physically able. I thank god for something like ballet, which gave that space for me to be by myself and find peace. Ballet was my meditation, my therapy, my escape, my answer.You have so many influential women in your life, and yet you’re the mother of boys.Me having only boys is the universe being absolutely ironic, and I’m accepting the challenge with much love and humility. The biggest enigma is that after so many women, it’s now all about men — seeing them at a very tender age, learning about their biology, understanding who they are and why they are such precious creatures.