https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/12/world/asia/north-korea-kim-dong-chul.html
Man Claiming to Be American Tells CNN He’s Detained in North Korea - The New York Times
North Korea,Kim Dong-chul,Espionage and Intelligence Services,South Korea,CNN,Political Prisoners,United States International Relations,Kim Jong-un,News and News Media,National Intelligence Service (South Korea)
Jan. 11, 2016
5309
SEOUL, South Korea —  A man claiming to be a naturalized American citizen told CNN that he has been held in North Korea since October on charges of spying for the South, the network reported Monday.The North Korean authorities took the man, identified as Kim Dong-chul, 62, to a hotel in Pyongyang, the North’s capital, to be interviewed by a CNN reporter, the network said. If his claim of American citizenship is true, he would be the latest American held in the North, whose government has detained several Americans over the years on charges of illegal entry or spying and other “antistate” crimes.CNN said it had acquired what North Korea said was a copy of Mr. Kim’s American passport. The State Department declined to comment on the case.When North Korea has held Americans in the past, it has often allowed outside news media to talk to them in interviews that analysts have said are intended to increase Pyongyang’s leverage over Washington. In those interviews, detainees typically admit to crimes and ask the government to help them.Mr. Kim said he had lived in Fairfax, Va., before moving to Yanji, a Chinese town near the border with North Korea, in 2001. Later, he said, he ran a trading and hotel services company in Rason, a special economic zone that North Korea runs near its borders with China and Russia.Mr. Kim said he began spying on behalf of “South Korean conservative elements” in 2013, by bribing residents to collect data about the North’s military and its nuclear program. He said he was arrested in October while he was meeting his local source, a former North Korean soldier.