http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/15/nyregion/for-brooklyns-district-attorney-year-one-is-a-trial-by-fire.html
For Brooklyn’s District Attorney, Year One Is a Trial by Fire - The New York Times
Thompson  Kenneth P,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Gurley  Akai,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Blacks,Brooklyn (NYC),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,District Attorneys,Race and Ethnicity
March 13, 2015
7375
One Sunday morning in February, Kenneth P. Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, showed up with some fellow politicians to celebrate the 249th anniversary of the African Wesleyan Methodist Episcopal Church. The event, in Bedford-Stuyvesant, was supposed to be one of those occasions elected officials love: a straightforward, stress-free gathering of voters that focused on history, not headlines.But as the service neared the end, the Rev. Mark Taylor, a firebrand of a preacher, rose to give the sermon and opened his remarks with a pointedly political introduction. “Here with us today is Brooklyn’s first black district attorney,” Mr. Taylor roared. “He has done something no one else has done. He has indicted a police officer who murdered a black man!”Though the packed church broke into applause, Mr. Thompson, who was sitting with his old friend Hakeem Jeffries, the Brooklyn congressman, acknowledged the ovation with a cautious nod. Like many prosecutors, Mr. Thompson’s behavior is a bit austere in public, and this time he had reason. Mr. Taylor was mistaken: the officer in question, Peter Liang, had been charged with manslaughter, not murder. More important, the shout-out from the pulpit had not-so-subtly reinforced a lingering perception that Mr. Thompson had been struggling to deflect: that his decisions in that controversial killing had been filtered through the politics of race.It was a complicated debut year for Mr. Thompson, who after a rancorous campaign against the longtime incumbent, Charles J. Hynes, assumed his post in January 2014 promising not only to revitalize an office that had fallen prey to scandal, but also to recalibrate the way that Brooklyn’s criminal-justice system deals with its minority communities. Rising to power on the same progressive wave that swept Mayor Bill de Blasio into City Hall, he took over the position flush with optimism, vowing to reinvestigate dozens of his predecessor’s dubious convictions and to end — against the wishes of the police — the prosecution of minor marijuana busts.But even as he set about enacting his agenda, events overtook him. Seven months into his tenure, Eric Garner died in Staten Island after being put in a chokehold by Officer Daniel Pantaleo. One month later, Michael Brown was fatally shot in Ferguson, Mo., by Officer Darren Wilson.Then, in November, just days before two grand juries impaneled in these cases failed to bring charges against either of the men, Officer Liang discharged his service weapon during a late-night “vertical patrol” in a dark stairwell of the Louis H. Pink Houses in the Brooklyn neighborhood of East New York. The ricocheting bullet killed Akai Gurley, 28, who had just gotten his hair braided for Thanksgiving and had entered the stairwell with his girlfriend.Mr. Thompson heard about the shooting early the next morning. From his 19th-floor executive suite, he suddenly faced the prospect of dealing with the death of another unarmed black man in a city already embroiled in some of the most racially divisive protests since the 1991 Crown Heights riots. He found himself, as Mr. Jeffries put it, “right there in the middle of it all.”Even taking race out of the equation, it is often said that district attorneys are damned if they do and damned if they don’t in investigations of possible police brutality, which pit two constituencies — ordinary residents and police officers — against each other. If that is true, then Mr. Thompson, 49 this weekend, evidently falls into the damned-if-he-did camp.In The Daily News, Mike Lupica wrote recently that Mr. Thompson had practiced “politics, and that means racial politics,” in the Gurley shooting, which, he added, was connected to the Garner case as “Brooklyn and Staten Island are connected by the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge.” At much the same time, Stephen C. Worth, Officer Liang’s lawyer, and some in the city’s Chinese-American community  publicly expressed their own concerns that the defendant, who is of Chinese heritage, had been offered up as a sacrificial lamb.Perhaps anticipating these charges, Mr. Thompson held a lengthy news conference last month, telling reporters that the Liang indictment had “nothing to do with Ferguson or Eric Garner or any other case.” He has added, privately, that he took great pains to investigate the shooting, going so far as to personally visit the stairwell where Mr. Gurley was killed.A few weeks earlier, Mr. Thompson gave a radio interview to WNYC promising a fair investigation, but arguing that district attorneys, despite the old maxim about ham sandwiches, exercise less control over grand juries than people think. He took a call from a young black woman who wondered if he could be fair, given that he worked so closely with the police. Mr. Thompson seemed taken aback, even pained, to face questions about the very things he cares about most: his integrity, his impartiality and his ability to separate his personal history from his professional judgments.“I’m quite sure that Ken’s upbringing as a person of color in New York has helped to shape him and give him sensitivity to the plight of people of color,” said the Rev. A. R. Bernard, pastor of the Christian Cultural Center in Canarsie, who says he has served as Mr. Thompson’s spiritual adviser for nearly 20 years. “But it hasn’t colored his lens on how he sees the issues.”Some have likened Mr. Thompson, a Democrat, to District Attorney Daniel M. Donovan Jr. of Staten Island, a Republican, who was criticized in the Garner case for failing to gain an indictment. But the comparison, while instructive, is limited. Although Mr. Donovan was also attacked for supposedly letting race play into his decisions, he does not walk to work each morning down a hallway hung with portraits of predecessors who do not share his skin color. Nor is it likely that he has ever been called Staten Island’s 12th “white district attorney.”“I know now that some people see me as an African-American D.A., who just wants to help people of color,” Mr. Thompson said a few weeks ago, from his regular seat at the Barclays Center, where he had taken his son, Kenny Jr., 8, to watch a Brooklyn Nets game. “But the truth is I want to help all people. I believe, I really do, that it’s fundamentally important to be fair to all.”In late 2012, as he prepared for his campaign, Mr. Thompson was a successful lawyer in private practice, known largely for having represented Nafissatou Diallo, an African working as a housekeeper in a Manhattan hotel, in her sexual-assault case against Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who led the International Monetary Fund. Though he had supported previous attempts to unseat Mr. Hynes, Mr. Thompson finally ran for the position himself because, he said, “The office had lost its way.” Upon investing a portion of his own money into the race, Mr. Thompson went looking for support and found it early on, from, among others, Representative Jeffries and 1199 S.E.I.U., the largely black union of health care workers.A product of Brooklyn’s Democratic machine, Mr. Hynes had served for 23 years, and by that point had been weakened by mounting allegations of malfeasance by lawyers in his office and charges that he had been slow to pursue child sex abuse cases among his allies in the borough’s ultra-Orthodox Jewish community. A three-way campaign ensued when Abe George, a former Manhattan prosecutor, entered the race. Mr. George soon dropped out and supported Mr. Thompson, who emerged for many as the anyone-but-Hynes choice.In the end, Mr. Thompson prevailed not merely because of his opponent’s flaws, but also because his critique of police policy and his narrative of growing up in Harlem public housing — as the son of a single mother who was one of the city’s first female police officers — fit well with the progressive tide that rose in response to Michael R. Bloomberg’s three terms as a pro-business, law-and-order mayor.“Thompson got support in central Brooklyn’s African-American communities,” said George Arzt, who served as Mr. Hynes’s campaign spokesman, “but he also picked up the liberal Park Slope-Boerum Hill cohort: the people who voted for de Blasio.”Armed with a relentless work ethic — he rarely leaves the office before 9 or 10 p.m. — Mr. Thompson ruffled a few feathers in his first months in the job, and some employees whom he fired accused him recently of being a capricious leader, who places more significance than he acknowledges on race.“He sees himself almost as a modern-day Martin Luther King,” said one former staff member who, like others, spoke on the condition of anonymity, expressing fear that friends still in the office could suffer recrimination. “He feels that black folks have all these expectations of him and that white folks are waiting for him to fail.”With the same meticulous approach that he brings to his prosecutions, Mr. Thompson countered that he believes in meritocracy and wants only the most committed people serving under him. He also noted that although he was raised in the Robert Wagner Houses, his mother, Clara, eventually moved the family to Co-op City in the Bronx, where they did not live in Section 5 — “where the black folk live,” he said — but in Section 2, where he spent his teenage years as a bookworm and a paperboy for his neighbors, most of whom were Jewish.At 18, Mr. Thompson nearly followed in his mother’s footsteps, applying to the New York Police Department, but chose instead to attend John Jay College of Criminal Justice. His parents are divorced. He remains in distant contact with his father, William, a retired city highway worker, but it was his mother who reared Mr. Thompson and his siblings: an older brother, William Jr., a city transit worker, and an older sister, Catherine, who works for the Essex County prosecutor’s office in New Jersey.“I love my father,” Mr. Thompson said, “but I am what I am today because of my mother.”He is also what he is today because of a talent shown throughout his career for attracting strong black patrons, father figures like Mr. Bernard, the pastor, or Ronald K. Noble, a onetime treasury official and secretary-general of Interpol, who taught Mr. Thompson at New York University Law School and persuaded him to become a federal prosecutor. In accepting a position under another powerful black man, Zachary W. Carter, the former United States attorney in Brooklyn and now the city’s corporation counsel, Mr. Thompson had a bit of professional luck.One day in 1997, two years after joining the United States attorney’s office, he got a call from a law school classmate who told him that a client, a Haitian immigrant named Abner Louima, had just been brutally attacked with a broomstick by police officers in Flatbush. Mr. Thompson, in turn, told Mr. Carter, who quickly filed federal civil rights charges, taking control of the case from Mr. Hynes. Though only a young assistant, Mr. Thompson was assigned to the prosecution, which soon became one of the city’s most infamous police brutality matters, and worked on a team with Loretta E. Lynch, who is now poised to become the nation’s next attorney general.Mr. Thompson had for some time been thinking of running for office, but at that point Mr. Bernard counseled him to wait. “I said, ‘Politics cost money,’ ” Mr. Bernard recalled. “I told him, ‘Go to work, man,’ and he did.”He first worked at the Park Avenue law firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, where he mainly defended corporations accused of workplace discrimination. “Neither one of us was satisfied with what we were doing,” said Douglas H. Wigdor, a former colleague at Morgan Lewis.So in 2003, the two men founded Thompson Wigdor L.L.P., now known as Wigdor L.L.P., which tends to represent plaintiffs in discrimination cases. The firm was quietly successful for the better part of a decade, allowing Mr. Thompson to build a comfortable life in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, with his wife, Lu-Shawn, a nurse, and their two children. But in 2011, he was hired, in part because of the Louima case, by Ms. Diallo, who had accused Mr. Strauss-Kahn of attacking her in his suite at the Sofitel New York.The case erupted into scandal, not least because Mr. Thompson orchestrated a series of sensational — some have said unseemly — publicity events. And when it began to crumble, because of inconsistencies in Ms. Diallo’s story, he took the uncommonly aggressive step of accusing Cyrus Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, of being too cowardly to see the prosecution to its end.The Strauss-Kahn case was widely seen as Mr. Thompson’s springboard into politics; in much the same way, the Gurley case might one day be a testing ground in a run for higher office. One result of the 2013 elections is that they brought to power a new generation of black officials, people like Letitia James, the city’s public advocate, and Eric L. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president. Mr. Bernard and Mr. Wigdor used the same words to describe Mr. Thompson’s ambitions: “He isn’t done yet; there’s more for him to do.”While the shootings haven’t ended, it appears that the conversation about race and the police is slowly starting to change. Just last month, James B. Comey, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, gave a speech in which he said that American law-enforcement officers have long protected a status quo that has been “brutally unfair to disfavored groups.” Not long after, William J. Bratton, the New York City police commissioner, spoke at a black church in Jamaica, Queens, saying that the finest hours in black history would have been impossible without the police, before he added: “Many of the worst parts of black history would have been impossible without the police, too.”Sitting at the Barclays Center days later, Mr. Thompson seemed only marginally interested in discussing such comments. “It’s a good thing,” he murmured. “I agree.” He had been much more passionate the week before, laying out his plans to reduce gun violence in black neighborhoods by going after repeat offenders using a database of intelligence reports. The targeted approach, he said, would help get the “bad guys” and would lessen the impact of invasive police work on ordinary people.Because of all the attention to the Gurley case, initiatives like this have been obscured by talk, much of it about Mr. Thompson. He is not naïve. He grasps why people want to know about his background and whether, say, he himself has ever experienced police discrimination. He says he has, sort of.A few years ago, while headed to court with Mr. Wigdor, he was pulled over on the highway in his Range Rover. A police officer accused him of speeding and asked Mr. Wigdor, who is white, whose car it was, though Mr. Thompson was driving. “I just didn’t understand that,” Mr. Thompson said, shaking his head.But getting it does not mean liking it. One night, Mr. Thompson called to say he was concerned that he had left the wrong impression about where he comes from. He repeated the story about growing up in Co-op City, adding that he never meant to suggest that he had come from the streets. Then he said: “I was just a black kid who got the chance for a better life among all sorts of different people. Isn’t that the story of New York?”It was a Friday night, almost 8 p.m., and he was still in his office, having just wrapped up a meeting. Once he had said his piece, he hung up the phone and went back to work.