http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/16/world/asia/philippine-government-signs-pact-with-muslim-rebels.html
Philippine Government Signs Pact With Muslim Rebels - The New York Times
Philippines,Moro Islamic Liberation Front,Aquino  Benigno S III,Muslims and Islam,Mindanao (Philippines)
Oct. 15, 2012
8154
MANILA — The government of the Philippines signed an agreement on Monday with the country’s largest Muslim rebel group that both sides say they hope will lessen the chronic violence and poverty that have plagued the southern island of Mindanao.“Sons and daughters who have had to sweep bullet casings from their yards will now get to pick fruit,” President Benigno S. Aquino III said during the signing ceremony. “Families who once cowered in fear of gunshots will now emerge from their homes to a bright new dawn of equity, justice and peace.”The 13-page framework agreement creates a new political entity that will govern the predominantly Muslim areas of Mindanao, offering a degree of autonomy and more access to taxes and natural resources. As part of the deal, the 11,000-strong military of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front will gradually be disarmed.The signing Monday was witnessed by Prime Minister Najib Razak of Malaysia, who helped broker the deal. The ceremony marked the first time that the rebel group’s chairman, Al Haj Murad Ebrahim — a former military leader who was once one of the most wanted insurgents in the Philippines — had ever visited the presidential palace.“I come in peace,” Mr. Murad said shortly after he arrived.An important part of the agreement is the establishment of a transition committee that will work out the details. Several hundred people gathered outside the presidential palace Monday to celebrate, though many said they did not have a deep understanding of the pact.“We are in celebration mode,” said Jolly Lais, secretary general of the Bangsamoro Solidarity Movement, which helped organize the rally. “The framework agreement is an outline. It is a skeleton. We don’t have the details yet, so we don’t have anything to oppose yet.”The government has said that the new region to be established, called Bangsamoro, will have a degree of autonomy but that it will not be an independent state.Mr. Lais said that should be determined by the transition committee. “The definition of Bangsamoro is yet to be finalized,” he said. “Are the people of Bangsamoro still Filipinos? That is one of the details that needs to be discussed.”Another important issue is that many in the Muslim areas of Mindanao feel that the taxes on the region’s natural resources rarely stay in the impoverished areas where they are needed. The tax code allows companies with operations in Mindanao to pay their taxes in the Makati business district in Manila, where their headquarters are located.While much of the country celebrated the signing of the preliminary peace deal, a lone protester showed up at the palace Monday to oppose the announcement.“They want power and territory,” said Jose Kwe, 64, from Navotas, north of Manila. “They call themselves Bangsamoro. Bangsa means country. They want to establish their own separate country. That is their hidden agenda.”Mr. Kwe said he also feared that Christians living in the Bangsamoro area would not be allowed to practice their religion freely. He said leaders in the area should focus on economic development rather than political power.“They should talk about poverty, not about making a different country,” Mr. Kwe said. “They should be building more schools and more roads in those areas, improving the livelihoods. Those are things that will actually improve their lives.”The framework agreement faces significant legal and constitutional challenges before it can be fully implemented. Once the details are worked out, the finalized agreement must be passed by both houses of Congress, signed by the president and approved in a plebiscite.Once the agreement is enacted into law, it must also withstand likely challenges in the Supreme Court. A 2008 agreement between the government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front was struck down by the high court as unconstitutional. Despite the formidable challenges, people gathered outside the presidential palace Monday said they were hopeful that the deal could bring lasting peace to the troubled area.“We can dream,” Mr. Lais said. “It’s free to dream.”