https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/04/us/death-of-gunman-in-oregon-college-shootings-is-ruled-suicide.html
Oregon Gunman’s Father Dismayed by Lack of Gun Legislation - The New York Times
Mercer  Ian (1960- ),Harper-Mercer  Christopher (1989-2015),Gun Control,Colleges and Universities,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Oregon,Roseburg (Ore),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Umpqua Community College
Oct. 3, 2015
7084
ROSEBURG, Ore. —  The father of the gunman who killed nine people at a community college here called on the nation to change its gun laws on Saturday, saying the massacre “would not have happened” if his son had not been able to buy so many handguns and rifles.“How was he able to compile that kind of arsenal?” the father, Ian Mercer, said in an interview with CNN at his home in Tarzana, Calif. He said he had no idea that his son owned more than a dozen firearms.His comments came as officials here confirmed that the gunman, Christopher Harper-Mercer, died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound after exchanging fire with police officers who responded to the shooting at Umpqua Community College on Thursday morning.As grieving families across this hilly corner of southwest Oregon made plans to bury their dead and tended to wounded relatives at area hospitals on Saturday, investigators offered a few new details of the rampage. A new timeline of the response to the shooting showed that officers arrived five minutes after the first 911 calls. Two minutes later, they had engaged Mr. Harper-Mercer. Two minutes after that, they reported, the shooter was down.They also said they had found another gun at Mr. Harper-Mercer’s apartment, the 14th they had confiscated. Mr. Harper-Mercer, a student at the community college, was armed with six guns, spare ammunition magazines and body armor when he walked into a writing class and opened fire around 10:30 a.m. Thursday. All of the weapons had been purchased legally by Mr. Harper-Mercer or a relative, law-enforcement officials have said.Despite Mr. Harper-Mercer’s online interest in high-profile shootings and neighbors’ memories of him as an enthusiastic gun collector who frequently went target shooting with his mother, the gunman’s father told CNN he did not know his son owned guns.Mr. Harper-Mercer’s parents divorced a decade ago, and he had lived with his mother. The father said he had not seen his son since he and his mother, Laurel Harper, moved to Oregon about two years ago, but said there was no “disharmony or any bitterness” between him and his son.Adding a raw, personal voice to the debate over gun control in the wake of this latest mass shooting, he said the United States needed to tighten gun laws.“It has to change,” he said. “How can it not? Even people that believe in the right to bear arms, what right do you have to take someone’s life?” He would not discuss his son’s mental health issues, deferring to the police investigation. “Obviously, someone who goes and kills nine people has to have some kind of issue,” he said.Standing on his lawn, Mr. Mercer said the shooting had devastated his family. “But we’re not alone in this,” he said. “My heart goes out to all the families that were affected by this.”His interview came on the same afternoon that relatives of one of the students wounded in his son’s rampage also stepped in front of the microphones, here outside the front doors of Mercy Medical Center in Roseburg.Bonnie Schaan, the mother of Cheyeanne Fitzgerald, said that her daughter had been shot in the back during the massacre in her classroom. Tears welled up in her eyes as she explained that a bullet had clipped her daughter’s lung and lodged in one of her kidneys, which had to be removed. Cheyeanne, 16, a nursing student, remains in intensive care.Mr. Harper-Mercer asked the young woman about her religion, according to her aunt, Colleen Fitzgerald, but “she didn’t answer.” Instead, Cheyeanne played dead next to her friend, Anastasia Boylan, a student who was also shot. Ms. Schaan said that her daughter did not know Mr. Harper-Mercer. After hearing the news about the shooting on campus, Ms. Schaan said she texted her daughter and said, “I’m on my way to school.” Instead she went to the hospital.Cheyeanne has begun to talk with her father about the ordeal, Ms. Schaan said. Now, even a chair being moved unsettles her. Her mother added, “She’s mentioned all the blood.”Dr. Jason Gray, the chief medical officer at Mercy Medical Center, said only two victims were still in the hospital. One was in critical condition and the other in fair condition. They were expected to be released in two to five days.The hospital treated seven victims in total, Dr. Gray said. Two were released Thursday, four went into surgery and one died in the emergency department. Three other people were being treated for wounds at PeaceHealth Sacred Heart Medical Center at RiverBend in the town of Springfield.On Friday, about 300 people showed up at Mercy Medical Center to donate blood, Dr. Gray said. The hospital set up a donation station nearby to handle the crowd.