https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/opinion/australia-parenting-television.html
Relax and Let Your Kids Indulge in TV - The New York Times
Television Sets and Media Devices,Parenting,Computer Monitors,Games,Computers and the Internet,Smartphones
July 3, 2017
9606
SYDNEY, Australia — My mother blames my father. Born before television arrived in Australia, let alone the coastal towns and logging villages where he grew up, he never tired of its novelty. From the first time he glimpsed it in snowy black and white on a visit to the city in 1960, he was taken by it. He never grew irritated by the quiet murmur of television in the background of his life.But he cannot take all the blame. In the late spring of 1978 it was for my mother that he lugged a television set up the hospital stairs, to entertain her while she waited for my birth. It was the first television set of my childhood, squat and heavy with a metal dial to change the settings, like a washing machine.However it came about, we are a family addicted to television, through three generations. Our family temperament can be one of pathological productivity but at the end of the day we like to return home to the blue flicker of our electronic hearth.Through my childhood and teenage years, so many happy hours were spent slumped on our peach velour sofa in front of the box. Along with my brother, we watched the great and not-so-great sitcoms of the 1980s — “Family Ties,” “Family Matters,” “Full House” — and the nightly installments of the Aussie soap operas. Through the nightly news, we saw our first glimpses of the world of politics and war. By the 1990s, as a teenager on school vacation, I was indulging in the illicit thrill of the daytime talk shows, my beloved Oprah, Phil Donahue and Ricki Lake, all available here in Australia.Of course the screens in our homes have multiplied and differentiated, and we talk now not of television time but of screen time. The single television set of my childhood has been replaced by a house of screens, seeping into every room, out to the garden and into the car. Tablets, smartphones, flat screens and laptops, propped next to the bath, secreted under tented quilts. And I find myself passing on to my children the addiction, at a time when this topic has become a focus of parental guilt and judgment.A  survey conducted by the Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne and released last month gives a glimpse of what we have become. The researchers found that a third of preschoolers and two-thirds of primary-school-aged children have their own smartphones or tablets, and half of them are using them unsupervised.The director of the survey, Anthea Rhodes, rightly expressed concern about the potential impact of screen time on sleep, given that almost half of children regularly use their devices at bedtime. She recommended keeping screens out of the bedroom and not using them in the hour before bedtime, for better quality sleep.But the ability of parents to limit screen time, like the ability to limit unwholesome food, has become more than a matter of health. It has become a statement of class, order, purity and parental authority.We are told that tech billionaires, including Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, limited screen time strictly for their own children. The internet is awash with articles linking screen time to depression, A.D.H.D., even psychosis.This is where I should defend my parenting by telling you about all the time we spend in the outdoors, how we bushwalk and swim and play with dogs; this is all true. I should also tell you that when we return home to our screens, we are watching nature documentaries and educational programing; this is not true.My children, aged 5 and 7, prefer less edifying things: videos of their favorite YouTubers playing the games “Minecraft” and “Hello Neighbor.”I grow nostalgic for the good old days, my days, a simpler time when we had the initiative to play computer games ourselves. We opened our own Kinder Eggs; we would not dream of wasting five minutes watching a video of someone on the other side of the world doing the same.I am in no position to judge, however. When I carry baskets of clean laundry upstairs, my laptop is often open on the top of the pile, playing the worst thing of all, “Real Housewives.”While it is tempting to look to the way that technology is worse now, in so many ways it is better. Last year the American Academy of Pediatrics actually softened its stance on screen time for young children. The guidelines acknowledge that there are positives about modern media, not just dangers. The core message is to make sure screen time is not displacing other important activities, such as adequate sleep and physical activity.With these guidelines in mind, although not always met, I have come to accept that we are a family of screen addicts. Through screens children learn to interact with the world, and they keep in contact with family far away. They learn about internet etiquette and safety, and they experience the joy of participating in the popular culture of their generation, which they will one day feel nostalgia for, which will connect them to others all around the world.Perhaps my writing this is just an attempt to wash away guilt, but I have even made peace with our love of poor-quality screen time, so long as we are still doing the other things that make up a good life. There are too many problems in the world worth worrying about for bourgeois parents like me to waste energy and resources perfecting and regimenting our little worlds.And what is this teaching my children? I hope it is teaching them that it is O.K. to waste some of the 24 hours in a day. I hope it is teaching them that there is value in making space in your life for laziness and pleasure, for the purposeless passing of time.