https://www.nytimes.com/1998/06/29/world/clinton-in-china-women-first-lady-visits-center-for-women-and-the-law.html
CLINTON IN CHINA: WOMEN; First Lady Visits Center For Women And the Law - The New York Times
CHINA,ALBRIGHT  MADELEINE K,CLINTON  HILLARY RODHAM,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,WOMEN,CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US,LAW AND LEGISLATION
June 29, 1998
4977
The First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright traveled to the outskirts of Beijing this morning to visit a women's legal aid center that operates on the leading edge of China's developing legal system, tackling a wide range of issues affecting women -- from rape to job discrimination to family planning.Guo Jianmei, the center's executive director, told the American visitors that the center takes on cases ''representative of social issues women are facing,'' adding, ''We are confident our work will promote women's rights and the progress of Chinese society.''Mrs. Clinton, herself a lawyer, praised the center's work as ''ground-breaking.'' Ms. Albright  said the center had ''earned a place in Chinese legal history'' for its ''innovative and courageous work.''The two-year-old center, affiliated with the Beijing University law school, is in many ways an anomaly: an aggressive legal aid center in a country whose emerging justice system remains riddled with flaws; an organization run by outspoken women in a country where discrimination against women is rampant, and a nongovernmental organization in a country where the Government ultimately calls the shots.''They're doing some really difficult work against tremendous odds, since the legal system is still quite weak and they're representing people who have neither power nor money,'' said Phyllis Chang, a legal expert with the Ford Foundation in Beijing, which finances the center. ''Given that, I think they've been surprisingly effective.''The center's very existence is evidence of the progress achieved by China's decade-old effort to update its legal system.The Government is showing increasing interest in legal aid, and legal aid centers for the poor have sprung up around China in the last two years, generally under the Justice Ministry. The country has 180 mostly tiny centers, with about half set up in the last six months.American assistance for the legal aid system is among the initiatives announced on Mr. Clinton's state visit. So it was not surprising that the First Lady, Ms. Albright and the President's special adviser on the White House Rule of Law Initiative, Paul Gewirtz, came here to learn what such centers can accomplish.''The United States wants to work with Chinese citizens and its Government as you strive to strengthen your legal system,'' Ms. Albright told the center's staff.Ms. Guo explained that the center's goal was to use the law to improve the lot of women in China. But it also seeks to promote the development of the emerging legal system, publicizing and trying to resolve its many flaws and contradictions.Although Chinese legislators have drafted a number of laws during the last decade aimed at protecting personal rights, many are vague or are ignored by often poorly trained judges. The courts, paid by local governments, tend to favor authority. And judgments are hard to enforce.''Our 1992 law of the protection of women's rights is quite comprehensive, but it is not always carried out,'' Ms. Guo said in an interview.A sampling of the center's cases:*It helped prosecute a high school principal in Chengde who raped a 16-year-old who died in childbirth. The principal was found guilty of a lesser charge of hooliganism and put on probation. The center said the judge never received all the evidence.*The center brought a class-action suit against a factory in Beijing on behalf of 20 workers, rural migrants who had not been paid in months.*The center has been representing female engineers whose employer forced them to retire earlier than their male colleagues, even though  such discrimination is prohibited. Although a judge has found in the women's favor, the company has refused to give them their jobs.Most recently the center has taken up the case of a former banquet organizer at a state-owned hotel who sued her employer over a huge fine that the hotel had imposed when she and her husband had their first child, without the company's approval. Urban employers are charged with enforcing the national family planning policies. The plaintiffs argued that the penalties imposed by the hotel were excessive.In a country where most citizens still go to great lengths to avoid controversy, Ms. Guo does not mind jumping into the fray. She said the center's staff of young lawyers, law students and volunteers have won more than half the cases that they have taken on. However, they find they must often appeal to senior officials or resort to public pressure through the press to enforce the court decisions.