https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/business/dealbook/obstruction-tax-supreme-court.html
What Constitutes Obstruction? A Tax Case May Narrow the Definition - The New York Times
Supreme Court (US),Federal Taxes (US),Justice Department,Jacobs  Dennis G
July 4, 2017
2065
Prosecutors have enormous discretion in the American criminal justice system, aided greatly by catchall provisions in statutes.Congress often adopts broadly worded laws to catch a wide range of conduct, especially for white-collar crimes, and regularly tacks on a section to catch actions that might otherwise slip through the cracks.Over the past few years, the Supreme Court has shown a conspicuous concern when the Justice Department seemed to push the envelope of what constitutes a crime in a way that could reach ostensibly innocent acts, or at least conduct that does not deserve the severe punishment meted out under federal law.Last week, the justices agreed to review the conviction of Carlo J. Marinello II for obstructing the administration of the tax laws, presenting another opportunity to cut back on the scope of white-collar prosecutions under a catchall section.Mr. Marinello was convicted of failing to file tax returns and obstructing the tax laws for not submitting returns for himself or his company, a courier service in upstate New York, and for taking funds from the business to pay for personal expenses. He discarded most of his business records, like bank statements and receipts, and paid employees in cash without any withholding or providing annual income statements.The issue in the case was not the failure to file tax returns, which he essentially admitted despite being told to do so by a lawyer and an accountant. He objected to the obstruction charge brought under a provision known as the “omnibus clause,” making it a crime for a person who “corruptly” or by force or by threats of force “obstructs or impedes, or endeavors to obstruct or impede, the due administration of” the Internal Revenue Service laws.This is a felony offense that can result in a sentence of up to three years in prison, unlike the failure to file charges, which are only misdemeanors. Mr. Marinello asked the trial judge to instruct the jury that the government had to prove he knew about an I.R.S. investigation or audit when he destroyed records and failed to provide the required information. The judge refused, and after the conviction sentenced Mr. Marinello to three years in prison.The general obstruction of justice statute, about which we have heard much lately, applies to conduct that affects the “due administration of justice,” which means a pending judicial proceeding or grand jury investigation. The tax obstruction provision applies to actions affecting the administration of the tax laws, but it is unclear whether it requires that the I.R.S. be scrutinizing a person’s taxes at the time or only that the conduct somehow touch on the filing of returns and payment of what is due.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan affirmed Mr. Marinello’s conviction, stating that the “omnibus clause criminalizes corrupt interference with an official effort to administer the tax code, and not merely a known I.R.S. investigation.” That means a wide range of conduct that could affect the collection of taxes can rise to the level of obstruction, regardless of whether that is what the defendant intended.In an opinion dissenting from a denial of Mr. Marinello’s request that the full appeals court review the case, Judge Dennis Jacobs wrote that this broad reading “had cleared a garden path for prosecutorial abuse.” Such a reading, he added, means that anything making it harder for the I.R.S. to enforce provisions of the federal tax code — “a slow read in 27 volumes” — could be subjected to prosecution. He argued for a narrower reading of the omnibus clause because “at some point, prosecutors must encounter boundaries to discretion, so that no American prosecutor can say, ‘Show me the man and I’ll find you the crime.’”Judge Jacobs’s words echo the approach taken by the Supreme Court over the past few years when the Justice Department defended prosecutions brought under broadly written provisions that seemed to reach too far.In Yates v. United States, a 2014 decision, the court overturned the conviction of a fishing boat captain, who had thrown overboard undersized red grouper found on his vessel, for violating an obstruction of justice statute that prohibits destroying or altering “any record, document or tangible object.” The justices found that the law covered only physical items that held information, but not fish disposed of to frustrate an investigation.That conclusion drew a sharp retort from Justice Elena Kagan in a dissenting opinion, who wrote that “a ‘tangible object’ is an object that’s tangible.”This narrow interpretation of the obstruction law in the Yates decision required a majority of the justices to ignore the obvious meaning of “tangible” to impose a limit on prosecutorial discretion. Accepting the government’s position would mean almost anything that someone changed or disposed of could result in an obstruction of justice charge, especially because the statute applies to conduct even when there is no pending investigation.In McDonnell v. United States, decided in 2016, the court unanimously overturned the conviction of a former Virginia governor who had received over $100,000 in gifts from a friend interested in securing government support for a new dietary supplement. The justices concluded that merely “arranging a meeting, contacting another official or hosting an event” did not constitute an “official act” under federal bribery and unlawful gifts law.The court expressed concern that “we cannot construe a criminal statute on the assumption that the government will use it responsibly.” The narrower interpretation keeps prosecutors from using the statute to reach conduct many would consider to be a part of ordinary politics.On June 22, the Supreme Court announced its decision in Maslenjak v. United States, overturning a conviction for unlawfully procuring citizenship by making a false statement on an application. The government argued that any false statement in seeking citizenship can result in a violation, regardless of whether the response contributed to the decision to approve the application.In rejecting that broad approach, which could result in the automatic loss of citizenship, the court explained that “if whatever illegal conduct occurring within the naturalization process was a causal dead end — if, so to speak, the ripples from that act could not have reached the decision to award citizenship — then the act cannot support a charge that the applicant obtained naturalization illegally.”The court expressed a concern that the Justice Department’s analysis “opens the door to a world of disquieting consequences.”The apprehension in these decisions is that prosecutors are essentially arguing that judges should not be too concerned about a broad interpretation of the law, because the government can be trusted to bring only those cases that involve real misconduct and not mere technical violations. The problem with this approach is that it is often difficult to distinguish benign conduct that might be illegal under a broad interpretation of the law but should not be pursued from wrongdoing acts truly worthy of a criminal prosecution.That issue is especially pertinent in white-collar cases when the impact of simply filing criminal charges can be so significant. An accusation alone can lead to the loss of a job along with spending all of one’s savings to pay for lawyers to defend the case, while a “not guilty” verdict does little to restore a reputation.In Mr. Marinello’s case, he clearly violated the requirement of filing annual income tax returns and did not appeal his convictions on those charges. Whether one can obstruct the tax laws by destroying documents and not reporting the income of workers is a different issue, because almost anything that might reveal your tax liability could be a violation under the approach taken by the Second Circuit.The Supreme Court’s concern with provisions that serve as a catchall is that they appear to catch too much. Mr. Marinello may find his name added to the list of defendants who skirted crossing over the line of criminality under a narrower view of the law.