http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/31/magazine/richard-branson-searches-for-virgins-next-big-thing.html
Richard Branson Searches for Virgin’s Next Big Thing - The New York Times
Branson  Richard,Books and Literature,Virgin Galactic,Virgin Records,The Virgin Way: How to Listen  Learn  Laugh and Lead (Book),Virgin Way  The (Book)
Aug. 29, 2014
6523
The entrepreneur talks to Amy Chozick about airplanes, spaceships, submarines and second chances.A poll in Britain found that one in four respondents chose you as their “dream boss.” Is that what inspired you to write this book on management, “The Virgin Way”? Well, polls are always flattering when they’re nice. I’ve been an entrepreneur for nearly five decades, so I’ve learned quite a bit over those years. I think, by and large, people who work for Virgin are happy. They enjoy working for Virgin. They don’t like leaving Virgin.When I fly, I often get the sense that people are unhappy working in the airline industry. It’s not necessarily the staff’s fault they’re disgruntled. They’re not given the tools to do the job properly. For example, if somebody wants a kosher meal and it’s not on the plane, the crew member has to explain that to the passenger, and the passenger takes it out on the crew member. If that happens day after day, you soon turn a friendly person into someone defensive and unfriendly.You’ve floated the idea of starting a “Kids’ Cabin.” When can we expect it? We’re still pushing regulators to allow us to do that. They’re nervous that if there’s an incident, you know, parents are going to be running in one direction and kids in another direction. We’ve been flying for 30 years without an incident. And in any event, we’ve got cabin crew to look after them. Have you got children?I don’t. I’m one of those travelers who don’t want to sit next to little kids. O.K., perfect. We’ll put them in the back of the plane for you.In the book, you tell a story about an employee at Virgin Records who stole from you. You didn’t fire him, and he went on to discover Boy George. Should managers follow your example? We hire a lot of ex-convicts, and not one of them has reoffended. They’re just human. I messed up with the tax man when I was a teenager, and I was given a second chance then. If I hadn’t had that second chance, there wouldn’t be 60,000 people working for Virgin today. We wouldn’t be going to space in a few months’ time. Second chances should be allowed. But, I mean, not always.You asked Twitter to come up with potential titles for your book. I think my favorite was “I’m Considerably Richer Than You.” Wealth is something that Americans dwell on. But most entrepreneurs don’t. They love to create things they’re proud of. And they hope that more money will come in than go out.Was selling your record label to save the airline in 1992 a difficult decision? People thought we were absolutely mad taking our money out of a really successful industry and putting it into a very perilous industry. But it turned out to be the right decision.Is Virgin Galactic’s maiden space voyage really going to happen soon?  It has taken longer than we thought, but we have a date in mind.Do you worry that you’ve turned a trip to space, which costs $250,000, into just another luxury product? Not at all. If you go back to the 1920s, when aviation started, it cost the equivalent of about $200,000 to cross the Atlantic. Over the years, the price has come down. You’ve got to start somewhere.The British tabloids have been speculating about whether you would allow your pregnant daughter to travel to space or not. Would you? My wife definitely would not allow my pregnant daughter to go to space. And in truth her father would not like to see his daughter in space right now. I think the pressure most likely wouldn’t be ideal for twins.You’ve also looked into submarine tourism with Virgin Oceanic. Is that easier than going up into space? It’s difficult. I mean, it’s easy to put — well, not easy — it’s easy-ish to put a lump of metal to the bottom of the ocean, hit the bottom, come back up again. But to get a submarine that you can see out of and can travel at the bottom, to build it strong enough to withstand 1,600 times the pressure of an airplane, that’s hard.You could incorporate that into your Virgin cruise ships. We may launch spaceships from our cruise ship. Who’s to know?