http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/14/world/americas/14colombia.html
Colombia Extradites 14 Paramilitary Leaders - The New York Times
Colombia,Uribe  Alvaro,Extradition,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Bush  George W,Human Rights Watch,Politics and Government
May 14, 2008
5775
CARACAS, Venezuela — Colombia extradited 14 jailed paramilitary leaders  to the United States on Tuesday, in an effort by President Álvaro Uribe to take a hard line against the warlords and defuse a scandal that has tied them to senior lawmakers in the Colombian Congress and members of his own family.The extraditions of so many paramilitary leaders at once was unprecedented in Colombia’s long history of trying to dismantle the hydra-headed syndicates that export cocaine to the United States. They come at a delicate moment for Colombia’s government, which is trying to win approval of a trade agreement  with the United States.Senior Democrats in Congress have opposed the trade deal, saying that Mr. Uribe has not made enough progress in curbing human rights abuses and prosecuting those responsible.The extraditions seemed to indicate a new push by Mr. Uribe’s government to prevent the rearming of the paramilitary armies after years in which violence in Colombia’s internal war has waned.The extraditions were carried out by surprise in the early hours of Tuesday with dozens of elite police officers gathering the men from three high-security prisons in Colombia. Interior Minister Carlos Holguín said the men were put aboard a plane in Bogotá bound for the United States, where they will face drug-trafficking charges.“Most of the top bosses are there,” Mr. Holguín said, speaking on Colombian radio. “In some cases they were still committing crimes and reorganizing criminal structures.”The extraditions are likely to add fodder not only to the fierce debate around the trade agreement, but also to the debate in Colombia about the best way to prosecute those accused of committing some of the worst atrocities in Colombia’s long war.Human rights groups say the extraditions will put the warlords outside the reach of Colombia’s judicial system. While the men may now face lengthy sentences in the United States for drug-trafficking offenses, their crimes related to the war in Colombia may go unpunished, they said.“These men are not going to be held accountable for the human rights violations they committed,” said José Miguel Vivanco, Americas director for Human Rights Watch. “Victims in Colombia will not be able to confront their tormentors and receive the reparations they deserve.”Still, some of the men extradited to the United States could  spend more time in prison in the United States on drug trafficking charges than they would in Colombia for their actions during the war. It was also clear that some warlords had effectively controlled their armies from prison, thwarting efforts to prevent a paramilitary resurgence.Reports of an increase in extrajudicial slayings this year, in particular a rise in killings of union members, have plagued Mr. Uribe’s attempts to win approval of the trade deal in the United States Congress. In the past, paramilitaries were responsible for many of those killings, though it was unclear whether any of the extradited leaders were directly linked to the recent crimes.In any case, the move by Mr. Uribe demonstrates a resolve to confront the paramilitaries despite a slow-burning scandal of revelations of ties to the militias that had ensnared the president’s political supporters, including top lawmakers and  Mr. Uribe’s former intelligence chief.“This is an astonishing move for Uribe, who is trying to demonstrate to the U.S. Congress that rumors of his ties to the paramilitaries are false,” said Bruce Bagley, an expert on the Andean drug war at the University of Miami. “This should go over well with the Democratic Congress.”Still, perceptions of justice will depend on the sentences meted out. Mr. Bagley said human right groups would closely follow the sentencing, especially after moves by the Bush administration to reduce prison terms for top drug traffickers in exchange for information about the functioning of their networks.American officials were vague as to whether prison sentences would be lenient or long. The Justice Department in Washington said in a statement that it had assured Colombia’s government that it would not seek life sentences for any of the defendants.The paramilitary leaders extradited to the United States included a top warlord, Salvatore Mancuso, who oversaw atrocities like the massacre of 15 civilians and displacement of more than 600 people in 1997 in the town of El Aro, which has come to symbolize the path undertaken by the militias  throughout the 1990s.Mr. Uribe’s government, the Bush administration’s top ally in Latin America, has already extradited more than 700 Colombians to the United States since 2002. Most of those extraditions  were of low-level operators in Colombia’s resilient cocaine trade.Despite the disbursement of more than $600 million a year in aid from the United States to fight drug trafficking and leftist guerrillas, Colombia remains the world’s largest cocaine producer and the source of about 90 percent of the cocaine consumed in the United States. Paramilitary leaders came to control many of the thriving drug syndicates.Landowners established the private armies in the 1980s to combat the leftist insurgencies, but the paramilitaries eventually attained broad influence in Colombia’s economic and political structures. Disclosures of ties between the paramilitaries and prominent political   supporters of Mr. Uribe have recently shaken the country.For instance, Mr. Uribe’s cousin and close political collaborator, Mario Uribe, a former senator, was detained in April on charges of collaborating with the paramilitaries. And more than two dozen other members of the Colombian Congress have been arrested on claims of having similar ties.Some of these revelations were obtained from the jailed warlords as part of a peace process that demobilized thousands of combatants in the private armies. That process is now thrown into doubt with these extraditions.“The idea that the United States will require the paramilitaries to collaborate with the victims is a lie that is being sold to the country,” said Eduardo Bocanegra, the lawyer for Rodrigo Tovar Pupo, one of the extradited warlords.“The reparations were not only monetary,” Mr. Bocanegra said. “They were also symbolic; the paramilitaries were providing information about the bodies found in mass graves.”But Mr. Uribe said on Tuesday that an agreement had been reached for the proceeds obtained from fines and confiscations of property from the paramilitary leaders in the United States to go to Colombian victims or their families. “This is notice,” Mr. Uribe told reporters in Bogotá, “that the law must be respected.”