https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/books/mario-livio-why-what-makes-us-curious.html
Tell Us 5 Things About Your Book: ‘Why,’ About the Science of Curiosity - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Livio  Mario,Why? What Makes Us Curious (Book),Psychology and Psychologists,Brain,Physics
July 16, 2017
3167
The physicist Richard Feynman once wrote of the universe’s vastness: “It does not do harm to the mystery to know a little about it. For far more marvelous is the truth than any artists of the past imagined!” In his new book, “Why? What Makes Us Curious,” the astrophysicist and best-selling author Mario Livio writes about Feynman and other historical figures who have exhibited great and varied interest in the world around them. He also investigates the different shapes curiosity can take, how it expresses itself and the regions of the brain in which it appears to reside. Below, Livio talks about the latest research about the subject, how the book changed as he wrote it, Albert Einstein and Leonardo da Vinci, and more.When did you first get the idea to write this book?I was always a very curious person, and I wondered about the mechanisms of curiosity for a long time. But I wasn’t sure whether I could write a book about this, because psychology and neuroscience are not my fields of expertise. Then about five years ago, I was invited to give a TedxMidAtlantic talk, and they allowed me to choose the topic. So I thought, this is an opportunity. Let me spend maybe six months or so exploring the topic of curiosity, which will be enough for my talk, and this will give me an idea of whether I’m able to get into the topic deeper and write a book. I then spent the next four years finding out what research results were being produced on both the psychology and neuroscience sides, interviewing many scientists working in the field, visiting labs.What’s the most surprising thing you learned while writing it?I was surprised to discover that somehow, in spite of the fact that curiosity is driving almost everything we do, the number of researchers that focus exclusively on the study of it is relatively small. I would have thought that lots of psychologists and neuroscientists would be interested in curiosity. There definitely are people who are studying it, but I was surprised at the total number.The other thing that became a very important part of the book: I realized that curiosity really represents a whole family of both states and mechanisms. For example, the curiosity we feel when we see something that is surprising or puzzling or ambiguous, that doesn’t agree exactly with our previous knowledge or presumed knowledge, is not the same as the curiosity we feel as the love of knowledge — what drives research in science, for example. The first one is associated with a state of mind that is aversive. It’s an unpleasant feeling, which we try to get rid of. It even activates regions of the brain that are associated with conflict, or hunger and thirst. The second type, which represents this lust for knowledge, is associated with a pleasurable state, and in our brain activates regions that anticipate rewards, like when you finally found tickets to “Hamilton” and you’re sitting in the theater expecting the curtain to go up. If we had known what we know now, we might not have used the same word to describe both feelings.In what way is the book you wrote different from the book you set out to write?It’s quite different. I thought I would write only about the research on the nature of curiosity. What are the mechanisms in the brain? What psychological states does it represent? But as I was writing, I kept thinking about all these extraordinarily curious individuals, both from the past and some who live today, who are fascinating, and it occurred to me that I could not write about curiosity without somehow trying to get into the minds of these people.So I ended up doing, for example, an entire chapter on da Vinci, who is perhaps the most curious person to ever live, and another on Richard Feynman. But I also interviewed nine people who are alive today, people like Brian May, the lead guitarist for Queen who also has a Ph.D. in astrophysics. Or Fabiola Gianotti, who helped discover the Higgs boson and is also a musician, an accomplished pianist. I’m sure there are some readers, perhaps, who are really not that interested in the precise mechanisms in the brain, but they may still be intrigued by these people.Who is a creative person (not a writer) who has influenced you and your work?I’m not sure about influence, but certainly inspiration. I’m primarily trained as a physicist, and I also did a degree in mathematics. So my icon clearly is Albert Einstein. Not even for everything he did, though that is very inspiring. When you work in experimental physics, or observational astronomy, you can make discoveries that are extraordinarily important but serendipitous. Usually you have to be somewhat prepared to make those discoveries. But like Louis Pasteur once said, luck helps the well prepared. In theoretical physics, that cannot be. Usually progress there is fairly incremental. Everyone adds another piece to the puzzle. But every now and again, you have someone, like Einstein, who comes up with something that is not in the air at all. And that is how Einstein’s general relativity is. To this very day, I cannot understand how he thought of that. So that’s the kind of thing that I’m in awe in front of.Persuade someone to read “Why” in less than 50 words.Curiosity inspires the most exciting things in our lives, from conversation to reading books to seeing films. It drives all scientific research, and education. Other species are curious, but they don’t have the ability to ask why. This is uniquely human. I think everybody should be curious about curiosity.This interview has been condensed and edited.