http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/04/opinion/sunday/remember-kyoto-most-nations-dont.html
Remember Kyoto? Most Nations Don’t - The New York Times
Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Kyoto Protocol,Carbon Dioxide,Global Warming,United States,China,India,Durban (South Africa),Editorials
Dec. 3, 2011
567
Delegates from 194 countries will meet this week in Durban, South Africa, to see whether the world can do a better job of controlling the man-made greenhouse gases that scientists believe will lead to sea-level rise, floods, drought and famine. Over the years, there has been far more talk than action.In 1997, these nations collectively promised as a first step to reduce emissions by about 5 percent below 1990 levels by 2012. But only 37 industrialized nations agreed to binding targets under the treaty, known as the Kyoto Protocol; the developing nations promised simply to do their best.The overall results have been dismal, even by Kyoto’s modest standards. That agreement expires next year, and there is almost no chance that the delegates in Durban will agree on a replacement. Even 1997 signatories like Japan and Canada will not endorse a new treaty unless the Chinese do, which they won’t. What we’ll see is another set of aspirational targets that will mean little if countries choose to ignore them.On this point, history is not encouraging. From 1990 to 2009, global emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas produced by burning fossil fuels, rose by a whopping 38 percent. The increase would have been far worse were it not for the economic collapse of the old Soviet bloc; emissions from those countries dropped by about one-third.The first chart traces the change in CO2 emissions around the world in the past two decades. Western Europe has managed to reduce emissions by 5 percent by adopting a cap-and-trade system that effectively puts a price on carbon emissions; substituting natural gas for coal; and, in Germany’s case, greatly expanding the use of renewable energy sources like solar power.The biggest obstacle to global progress has been countries like China and India that made no pledges at Kyoto because, they argued (and continue to argue), the industrialized world caused most of the problem and thus bore most of the responsibility for solving it. This reasoning has lost much of its punch as those two countries have become economic powerhouses. Over all, emissions in countries that did not agree to targets have more than doubled, while China’s have tripled.What of the United States? As the largest per capita emitter of greenhouse gases among big economies, America should have taken a leadership role. It did not. The Senate refused to ratify the Kyoto accord, President George W. Bush flatly repudiated it, and Congress failed to put a price on carbon. Having pledged to reduce greenhouse gases by 7 percent, America saw its carbon emissions rise by almost that amount.The trends were not wholly negative. Carbon dioxide emissions rose steadily in the 1990s, as the second chart shows, partly because the economy took off after the 1992 election, and power plants and factories started operating at full capacity. Emissions then leveled off after 2000, partly because some manufacturing moved abroad but also because rules requiring more energy efficiency began to kick in.And further improvements are within reach. In the United States, old coal-fired power plants are closing, the price of natural gas (which emits only half the carbon dioxide of coal) is dropping, and automobiles are becoming more efficient. Clean energy sources like solar power are being introduced in poor African nations, and the Chinese are investing heavily in clean energy as well. Are these bits and pieces enough? Almost assuredly not. Many scientists say we need a wholesale shift in the way the world produces and uses energy, and the time window for such a shift is closing. The question at Durban is whether the world can act before the window slams shut. 