https://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/07/world/asia/a-clash-of-goals-for-chinas-leader.html
Chinese Leader’s Economic Plan Tests Goal to Fortify Party Power - The New York Times
China,Economic Conditions and Trends,Xi Jinping,Communist Party of China,Agriculture and Farming,Urban Areas,Rural Areas
Nov. 6, 2013
2394
HONG KONG —  China’s president, Xi Jinping, is about to plunge the country and himself into a risky experiment: an attempt to carry out market-driven economic overhauls while reinforcing the Communist Party’s pillars of political and ideological control. This mixed agenda has magnified doubts about whether he can deliver on his promises of transformation.At a meeting, or plenum, of the party’s Central Committee that starts Saturday, Mr. Xi will enumerate his plans for an economic overhaul, and state-run news media has promoted the event as a turning point. Mr. Xi and Prime Minister Li Keqiang have indicated that they want to nurture healthy, sustained growth by encouraging more market competition, private business, financial liberalization and individual consumption, leaning away from the state-focused policies of the past decade.Yet, Mr. Xi wants to achieve this economic shift away from the state while strengthening the ruling party, which derives power and wealth from its extensive role in the economy. Many analysts say a fundamental overhaul would require a top-down campaign to change prevailing notions about state control over crucial sectors like finance that Mr. Xi shows no signs of embracing.In fact, for much of this year, he has pursued campaigns to reinforce ideological conformity, tighten censorship of the Internet and mass media, and expunge liberal political ideas.“There are inescapable contradictions that Xi Jinping will have to face,” said Wu Wei, a former aide to central party leaders who was involved in planning China’s market overhauls in the 1980s.“In one hand, they’re holding up the leftist banner. On the other hand, they say there must be reform,” Mr. Wu said. “They don’t show any desire to take on political issues, but if you don’t take on issues at the political level, most of these economic reform measures will fall apart before they’re completed.”Mr. Xi and Mr. Li do appear eager to reconfigure China’s economy. Their predecessors — the party leader Hu Jintao and his prime minister, Wen Jiabao — made similar pledges a decade ago, but many economists say they failed to make enough headway. Rapid growth has been accompanied by choking pollution, worrisome local government debt, inefficient and corrupt monopolies, and residency and landholding rules that make it hard for rural residents to share in the nation’s urban-centered prosperity.Since Deng Xiaoping’s time as party leader in the 1980s, the economy has expanded rapidly under a mixture of state sponsorship and market opportunities. But Chinese society is now much more diverse and divided than it was under Mr. Deng. Big bureaucracies, state-owned conglomerates and their patrons in the Communist Party elite derive enormous wealth and influence from a more state-centered system of power, and they tend to be wary of proposals to open protected industries to market competition.If Mr. Xi is serious about remaking the economy, his hard-line political positions will stand in the way of attracting ideas and support, said Minxin Pei, a professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in California who studies Chinese politics.“I don’t see a political strategy,” Mr. Pei said. “If there is one, it is counterproductive. It is to limit the voices of the liberals; it is to limit grass-roots pressure for reform.”The Central Committee meeting is likely to endorse broad objectives to loosen government controls over capital flows, interest rates, natural resource prices, the leasing and development of farmland, and the settlement of people from villages in towns and cities, according to several investment analysts’ reports and Chinese newspaper articles.“It’s really fundamentally about the role of the state in a modern economy,” said Fred Z. Hu, the chairman of Primavera Capital Group, who has advised the Chinese government. “The Chinese state is still just way too powerful, with too much excessive, unchecked, opaque power occupying the commanding heights.”The goals endorsed at the meeting will be made public only after it ends on Tuesday. The government will then begin to formulate policies to accomplish those ideas. The reaction to the meeting will essentially be a referendum on whether officials, investors and citizens believe that Mr. Xi can achieve measured economic liberalization in the coming years.Some think the need for change will overcome political misgivings and resistance.“I think some optimism is warranted, but there’s always the risk that these guys will get captured by the vested interests,” said Christopher K. Johnson, an expert on China at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.Mr. Xi has at times indicated that he would like to be seen as the next Mr. Deng, an audacious pioneer. Doubters say he risks following the example of his more cautious immediate predecessor, Mr. Hu.The party has emphasized the significance of the coming Central Committee meeting for setting Mr. Xi’s agenda. One of his colleagues, Yu Zhengsheng, said Mr. Xi would unveil “unprecedented” overhauls to an assembly of hundreds of central and provincial officials.Under Mr. Hu, the Chinese economy, previously the world’s sixth largest, grew to the second largest. Yet, many economists said, Mr. Hu shrank from making the changes needed to sustain that growth and to address worsening environmental and social problems.To overcome these challenges, Mr. Xi and Mr. Li plan to expand cities and towns to absorb more rural people into urban life. They want to stop relying on heavy industry and low-end manufacturing to provide most jobs for rural migrants. By encouraging cleaner industries and the service sector, they hope to generate relatively more jobs, as well as clearer skies and waterways. But that transition will require channeling more bank loans, opportunities and policy support to smaller, private businesses.“Transformation of economic growth is entirely interlocked,” said Yuan Xucheng, a former official who is now deputy secretary general of the China Society of Economic Reform, a think tank in Beijing. “You can’t transform one part without transforming the others.”Because the proposed changes entail subduing state-owned companies, ministries, local governments and even urban residents who want to preserve their privileges, they are likely to encounter political resistance.Giving rural migrants a firm foothold in urban society will require a bigger, more costly social safety net, and privileged city residents will have to share their schools and hospitals with newcomers. Persuading farmers to move permanently into cities will require changes in land policy that allow the farmers to sublease their land more easily and to earn more when it is taken for development. That, in turn, will require new sources of revenue for local governments, which depend on taking farmland for little compensation and selling it to developers.State-owned companies and their government patrons, which have benefited from cheap, free-flowing loans from state-owned banks and privileged access to land and natural resources, are likely to resist shifts that would expose them and the banks to stronger competition from the private sector, experts said.It is this thicket of interests, not ideological conservatism or elite factional rifts, that poses the biggest obstacle to economic change, said Mr. Wu, the former aide who helped design market reforms in the 1980s. “Perhaps outwardly they’ll declare their support for reform,” he said, “but in reality they’ll resist reforms that involve them.”As the meeting approaches, signs have already emerged of how contention and compromises could limit proposals for far-reaching economic change. Researchers at a government think tank, the State Council Development Research Center, who favor bolder liberalization, issued their own proposal called Plan 383. But officials and commentators in several Chinese newspapers said the ideas were unlikely to win top support.Central ministries and local governments have resisted initiatives that would give farmers a bigger share of land taken for development, said Tao Ran, director of the China Center for Public Economics and Governance at Renmin University in Beijing, who supports such changes.“Many local government officials and central officials, they know this is not sustainable,” Professor Tao said. “But reform would finally, maybe, reduce their power. You know what is good, but you may not want to do it.”