https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/world/asia/philippines-duterte-drug-killings.html
Rodrigo Duterte’s Police Chief Blames Suspects for Toll in Philippine Drug War - The New York Times
Duterte  Rodrigo,Philippines,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Targeted Killings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Crime and Criminals,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Police
Aug. 23, 2016
8218
MANILA — The soaring number of killings by the police in the Philippines is being caused by drug suspects who choose to battle officers instead of surrendering, the nation’s top police official told lawmakers on Tuesday.“If they did not fight it out with police, they would be alive,” said the national police chief, Ronald dela Rosa, who is heading the country’s deadly antidrug war.He said the number of deaths since the campaign began on July 1 had jumped to 1,916 — 137 more than the figure he gave senators on Monday, the first of two days of hearings devoted to the killings. He said on Tuesday that reports of killings came in daily from police units around the country. “As I was presenting yesterday,” he said, “there were people killed.”Of the total dead, he said, 756 were suspects killed by the police and 1,160 were killed “outside police operations,” many of them by vigilantes. Eighty bodies have been found with cardboard signs proclaiming them to be drug dealers, he said. Not all the killings were drug-related, he said, and the police are investigating.The campaign to eradicate drugs, mainly methamphetamine, was started by the Philippines’ new president, Rodrigo Duterte, who has made going after drug dealers and users his highest priority since taking office on June 30. He has repeatedly called for eliminating drug sellers and addicts, and gave the police shoot-to-kill orders when facing suspects who resist.The president’s campaign against drugs has broad public support, and Chief dela Rosa said members of the public were pleased by what he asserted was an immediate reduction in all categories of crime once the police effort began.The wave of killings, however, has come under attack from human rights advocates and some elected officials who contend that those accused of a crime should have a chance to defend themselves in court, not be gunned down in the street.In addition, some family members of victims have challenged the police version of events and say their loved ones were not resisting arrest when they were killed.The two days of hearings on the killings were held by the Senate’s Committee on Justice and Human Rights and the Committee on Public Order and Dangerous Drugs. The Human Rights Committee has identified witnesses and relatives in at least 11 suspected wrongful killings, but most of them were not called to testify.One senator, Panfilo Lacson, a former national police chief, said the antidrug campaign was both “impressive and alarming,” and he asked whether the police were following standard operating procedures.Chief dela Rosa called the drug eradication program “a total war” but said the police were following established procedures. Officers have not been ordered to kill drug dealers, he said, but have become more aggressive because they know they have Mr. Duterte’s support.“We are not butchers,” he said.Before becoming president, Mr. Duterte was mayor of Davao City, where a similar wave of killings starting in the 1980s reduced drug dealing and other crime. Chief dela Rosa was the police chief in Davao, the Philippines’ largest city outside metropolitan Manila, before Mr. Duterte named him to head the national police.The police also are trying to eradicate drugs and criminal behavior within their own ranks, the chief told the senators. Eleven rogue police officers have been killed in police operations, 130 officers have tested positive for drug use and 20 have been arrested, he said.Fatalities outside police operations in the recent spate of deaths have included two police officers, eight soldiers, 29 elected officials and 10 government employees, he said. The deaths are under investigation.Lawmakers heard testimony on Monday from Mary Rose Aquino, who said her parents were police informers and were killed by corrupt officers who took drugs for themselves and feared being identified. On Tuesday, Chief dela Rosa said he had suspended five officers connected with that case, pending an investigation.Lawmakers also heard on Monday from Harra Kazuo, whose husband, Jaypee Bertes, and his father, Renato Bertes, were killed by officers inside a jail cell at the Pasay City police station. The chief said on Tuesday that the two officers involved would face murder charges.“It pains us to file a murder case against them,” he said. “Otherwise, people will say we are covering up for them.”During a news conference on Sunday in Davao City, Mr. Duterte responded to criticism about his human rights record from American officials by citing police shootings of black men in the United States.“Why are you Americans killing the black people there, shooting them down when they are already on the ground?” he asked. “Answer that question, because even if it’s just one or two or three, it is still human rights violations.”Mark Toner, a spokesman for the State Department, said the United States was “by no means perfect, but we strive to have in place a justice system that treats all people with respect and respects their human rights.”