https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/us/fox-news-moderators-look-for-ways-to-keep-10-candidates-on-their-toes.html
 Fox News Moderators Look for Ways to Keep 10 Candidates on Their Toes - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Debates (Political),Fox News Channel,News and News Media,Republican Party,Baier  Bret,Kelly  Megyn,Wallace  Chris
Aug. 5, 2015
7254
CLEVELAND — Just over 24 hours before the first Republican primary debate here, more than a dozen Fox News executives and producers gathered Wednesday with their debate moderators — Bret Baier, Megyn Kelly and Chris Wallace — backstage at Quicken Loans Arena for a final run-through of logistics.The Fox News team had already spent weeks discussing how to handle the challenges that have made this debate, 15 months before Election Day, such highly anticipated viewing: a robust field of 10 candidates, including, of course, the man atop the polls, Donald J. Trump, known for his ability to overtake almost any event and upend the rules of political discourse.“I don’t think anybody knows — maybe he doesn’t know — what you’re going to get from Donald Trump,” Mr. Wallace said after the meeting. “What makes it such compelling television is that sense of, at the very least, uncertainty, and at the very most, danger.”And so they found themselves, sitting at a long table, trying to minimize danger and uncertainty, while maximizing the sleek and high-octane television for which Fox News has become known. The team had already decided to eliminate opening statements from the field, to save time. Instead, at 9 p.m. sharp, the questions will begin.To keep the debate on schedule, the Fox team was also discussing a possible alternative to the usual gentle ding sound that signals that a candidate’s time has expired: the actual shot-clock buzzer used during Cleveland Cavaliers basketball games, which are played at the same arena.“You could make it about synergy in that arena: Use the very same buzzer that LeBron James hears on the court when the shot clock runs out,” said Mr. Baier, who had come up with the idea over dinner Tuesday night at a local bistro. (“I was inspired,” he said with a smile, “by a beer.”)Though the best debates often turn on unexpected moments, television networks spend months trying to script their own parts, down to the very last word and camera angle. And for Fox News, the highest-rated cable station in the country, the stakes could not be greater.With the number of primary debates reduced by roughly half from the 2012 presidential race, and a seemingly endless field of Republican candidates now vying for position, Thursday night’s debate, with Facebook as a co-sponsor, has taken on outsize proportions, not only as a possible ratings coup but also as a potential turning point in the early campaign. (Even Fox News’s announcement on Tuesday evening, declaring which 10 candidates had earned a coveted spot on debate stage, became an event unto itself.)The network gave a reporter behind-the-scenes access to debate preparations — everything from ensuring that the lecterns are evenly spaced (42 inches apart, to be exact) to the precise moment the candidates will take the stage (at 30 seconds after 8:56 p.m., sharp) to tweaking the wording of the questions (strictly off the record, until the debate begins).“There’s really no margin for error,” said Jay Wallace, vice president for news and senior executive producer of news and politics.“So many people are just so interested in this debate. Whether it’s the number of candidates or Donald Trump, there’s been a spotlight on this one that is unlike any other debate we’ve ever had.”Fox News has perhaps more on the line than other debate hosts. The network occupies an exalted place among the conservative base, which views it as the one of the few fair alternatives to what it sees as the otherwise liberal news media.But Fox News journalists, including the three moderators, are known for their hard-hitting questions, often putting Republicans on the spot and on the defensive. Each of the moderators can point to moments — whether in an interview with a Republican candidate or during a previous debate — when they earned plaudits for their tough questions and revealing answers.“If you look at last time, we got a lot of criticism from the right wing saying we were too tough, and I think that in the main, that’s O.K.,” Mr. Baier said. “How are you going to go up against the Clinton machine if you can’t handle us?”The challenge, however, is balancing the desire for good television — which Mr. Trump and his outbursts provide — with the rigors of an informative debate.“It’s like 100 details must be done right, and the high-wire act of it is, if the most important one or the least important one fails, then it can take the whole thing down,” said Michael Clemente, the executive vice president for news editorial of Fox News. “Even bad lighting on a candidate can make all the difference in the world.”The network is also trying to seize every opportunity. In the editorial meeting Wednesday, Chris Wallace suggested that once the entire group of candidates was onstage, it might be nice to have a quiet moment to observe the body language dynamic. “You always kind of want to see who is ignoring whom, who is talking to whom,” he said.Then they got down to business, talking through questions. The moderators have spent weeks writing (and rewriting) about 100 potential questions, roughly half of which will actually be asked. Though they have eight to 10 broad topics they plan to raise, including immigration and the economy, the moderators found themselves working down to the wire to refine their questions and think through smart follow-ups.“Everyday I spend a fair amount of time on my iPhone tightening them, redoing them, refining them, further researching them, bolstering them, eliminating them, and starting anew on some,” Ms. Kelly said.Bill Sammon, vice president for news and Washington managing editor, urged the group to keep in mind two additional types of queries: timely ones off late-breaking news and ones “we might have missed.”“You don’t want the weird, ‘If you were a tree, what kind of tree would you be?’ but you might want questions that are more 30,000-foot altitude questions,” Mr. Sammon said. Citing the growing size of the federal government, he added, “You know, a question off a broad overarching theme that’s going to be important to a voter that’s dialed in at home.”In addition to the buzzer, the network will have a staff member in the control room with a stopwatch, timing the candidates and making sure that everyone is receiving roughly equal broadcast time.And if they still go long, the moderators are prepared to politely cut them off. “I have no problem doing that,” Ms. Kelly said with a laugh.On Wednesday afternoon, the moderators dialed into a New York editorial meeting led by Roger Ailes, the Fox News chairman and chief executive. After walking the group through programming logistics and details like lighting and camera angles, he signed off by reminding them that Fox News has become must-watch viewing for presidential debates.“Fifty years ago, the broadcast networks owned politics and the presidential debates, and now our one cable channel that we built less than 20 years ago is where everyone turns to watch these events,” Mr. Ailes said. “Go out there and be confident and be yourselves. I know everyone will do a great job, and I’m proud of all of you.”Later, Ms. Kelly referred back to advice Mr. Ailes often gives her: Aim to hit singles, not home runs. “We have very tough, pointed questions for these guys, but I am not trying to hit any home runs,” she said. “I only want to advance the debate about the candidates. If we can flesh out some of the issues and some of their character and help the audience have a better feeling for who they are — as men and as candidates — then I’ve done my job.”