https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/insider/wimbledon-reporting-tradition-strawberries.html
At Wimbledon, Strawberries and Tennis Make a Perfect Match - The New York Times
Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,England,Tennis
July 12, 2017
1066
Wimbledon, the oldest tennis tournament, is full of strawberries but above all memories, and I have been reporting here long enough that I see a few ghosts of my own.These days, I walk down the steps leading toward the south end of the All England Club and still look for the Crow’s Nest, a small green observation tower with an exterior ladder that I used to climb on the sly for a panoramic view of the grounds — but which has since been demolished.The Crow’s Nest was a particularly useful vantage point when I first arrived in 1990, because it allowed a tennis writer to keep track of the action on as many as 10 outside courts at a time. At day’s end, reporters from different outlets and nations would share notes on the best and oddest of what they had observed all over the grounds. It was the only way to come close to following all the action.Twenty-seven years later, the press room has touch-screens that allow us to watch live video from any court, along with up-to-date statistics, a live feed from two different interview rooms, and most useful, a video playback feature that allows us to go back and watch key moments in key matches long after they have finished. (Was it a forehand return or a backhand return that Roger Federer hit on that big break point? Tap. Tap. Tap. Voila!)You could literally cover Wimbledon without leaving your seat. (I’ve seen a few journalists sleep here over the years, too: foreheads on their desks.)But that is a bit like spending all your time in Paris ordering room service and looking up fun Paris facts on Wikipedia.This, after all, is Wimbledon! — a place greeted with an exclamation point even by jaded sportswriters trained not to arch an eyebrow at spinning dunks, buzzer-beating jumpers and diving volley winners.As a reporter, it has become more of a challenge to beat the system and find exclusive material. The access to players and officials is much more controlled now. News conferences are broadcast live online, which has reduced the quality of the dialogue (veteran reporters save their best lines of inquiry for more private settings rather than surrender them to the public domain). Detailed questions about the matches themselves — the turning points, the winning patterns — are now much rarer; the questions more general and often vacuous.But to capture what makes the tournament unique, it is happily best to get out of the press room and into the green: still the dominant color at Wimbledon, with its grass courts and sloping lawns.The speed of the players and the concussive power of the modern game are still not captured by television. Neither is the extreme topspin on a Rafael Nadal forehand or the way the net cord shakes after being struck by a Venus Williams serve.More than at any other tennis tournament, there is also an appetite for stories that deal with the setting, the history, the quirks and the traditions.If they change the price of the fish tacos at the United States Open, it’s not a story. If they change the price of the strawberries and cream, the signature treat at Wimbledon, as they did in 2010, it’s time to email your editor using capital letters.Covering Wimbledon also means covering camping — the overnight queue for fans lives on — and fashion. The players wear all white, but not the spectators, who still tend (mostly) to dress up for Wimbledon as if it’s a garden party.And watching grass grow here is not necessarily as pointless an exercise as elsewhere. Over the years, I have written about how it’s planted, how it’s trimmed and how it’s maintained, even under the new retractable roof that was put in place in 2009.Until then, you always had to have a rainy-day story in your notebook — or at least your head, because there were no guarantees any matches would be played.Now tennis is a sure thing on Centre Court, which has made tennis reporters a bit less creative. But at least it guarantees us daily access to the most atmospheric place in the sport, opened in 1922 when the club relocated to this site from Worple Road.So much has changed here and elsewhere since then, but Centre Court remains true to its original spirit: more a theater than a stadium. Capturing that feeling is part of covering Wimbledon, too.