https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/15/business/world-economic-forum-davos-shifting-us-stance-on-climate-change.html
In Davos, Bracing for a Shifting U.S. Stance on Climate Change - The New York Times
Davos (Switzerland),World Economic Forum,Global Warming,Trump  Donald J,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,Oil and Gas Climate Initiative,Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
Jan. 15, 2017
1897
LONDON — However slowly and tentatively, nations around the globe appear to be taking some steps to confront the growing threat of climate change.But on Friday, Donald J. Trump, a self-described climate change doubter, will assume the presidency of the United States. And the same week, half a world away at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, climate experts will be pondering what his ascent means for their efforts to make progress on the issue.After all, Mr. Trump has threatened to scupper the Paris deal on climate change and questioned the science of global warming, and he may try to roll back regulations devised to curb greenhouse gas emissions.“I think there is going to be a lot of talk about what the rest of the world does with the United States’ not playing leadership roles, especially on climate,” said David G. Victor, a professor of international relations at the University of California, San Diego, who plans to moderate panels at Davos on the changing energy industry.Mr. Victor forecast that some participants would be “critical of the United States” and try to figure out which governments could fill any vacuum created by Mr. Trump’s administration.This is not an easy question to answer, he suggested. France and Germany, European Union heavyweights, might have been expected to step up, but they are distracted by issues like migration and “Brexit,” Britain’s effort to withdraw from the union.While it may not become apparent at Davos, Mr. Victor said, “I expect in the real world the Chinese are going to become one of the leading countries” on climate change.The future of the energy industry is also likely to be paramount. Because fossil fuels like oil, coal and natural gas produce the bulk of greenhouse gas emissions blamed for global warming, major changes that are already underway in how we generate electric power, fuel our vehicles or heat our homes are required to address climate change, most experts say.A gathering like Davos, of course, has no real power, but it brings together influential people with important messages. “All these perspectives come together in one place,” said Daniel Yergin, the oil historian, who has been going to Davos for a quarter-century. “You pick up signals earlier for change,” said Mr. Yergin, who is also vice chairman of IHS Markit, a research firm.Ideas that bubble up in the snowy Swiss mountains can take root in the world outside. In 2014, for instance, Christophe de Margerie, the charismatic chief executive of the French oil giant Total, told fellow oil chiefs that they needed to take a much more active role in shaping the climate agenda, which was likely to be crucial for their industry.Mr. de Margerie was killed in a plane crash that fall, not long after major European oil companies including Royal Dutch Shell and Italy’s Eni, along with state-owned companies like Saudi Aramco and China’s CNPC, formed a group called the Oil and Gas Climate Initiative. The group, now chaired by Robert Dudley, BP’s chief executive, has acknowledged that its activities and products contribute to greenhouse gas emissions blamed for climate change, and it announced in November that it would spend $1 billion on technology to reduce emissions.A strong contingency of energy executives is expected to gather again at Davos this year at a time when major changes are roiling their industry. The surge in wind and solar energy has electric utilities, especially in Europe, scrambling to adapt. Digital advances are opening the way for new power providers and traders, while electric cars are taking off.Several sessions planned for Davos will focus on this energy transition, according to Roberto Bocca, a former oil executive who is head of energy industries at the World Economic Forum, the Geneva-based organization that runs the conference. The organizers will try to highlight promising technologies that could make a dent in global warming.Innovations in fracking and drilling have also created ferment in the oil and gas industry. The boom in North American output set off by those innovations has upended the traditional industry, slashed prices and put financial pressure on the major exporting countries.In the latest chapter, after pumping hard to let prices fall and force American output down, OPEC, led by Saudi Arabia’s oil minister, Khalid al-Falih, who regularly attends Davos, and Russia have agreed to trim output to prop up prices.Some analysts say these shifts, which are transforming the energy industry, will move ahead regardless of which governments, including the Trump administration, are in power. “A historian who looks back 50 years from now is likely to say this was the time when the game changed,” said Dieter Helm, a professor of energy policy at the University of Oxford. “I think the climate change issue is being addressed by technological change” like electric cars, the next generation of solar and other advances.A question likely to come up at Davos is whether these changes are happening fast enough to avoid dangerous levels of global warming. Noting forecasts that demand for oil would continue rising until 2040, Mr. Yergin referred to “a conviction on the part of many that the technology is not there now to achieve those goals.”“The answers will ultimately come from technology, and it is just not there now,” Mr. Yergin said.He also suggested that the United States would remain a crucial variable in the climate and energy equation. “What happens in the United States will be very important,” he said.