https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/16/arts/international/east-meets-west-at-hong-kong-art-fair-but-who-is-buying.html
East Meets West at Hong Kong Art Fair, but Who Is Buying? - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Art Basel (Festival),Art,Far East  South and Southeast Asia and Pacific Areas
May 15, 2014
5320
We are about to enter the Asian Century. According to the latest calculations of the World Bank, China will probably overtake the United States in purchasing power by the end of the year.This eastward shift in economic might has not escaped the notice of the world’s leading art dealers, 245 of whom are exhibiting this week at Art Basel in Hong Kong, the region’s most prestigious fair devoted to modern and contemporary works.This second Art Basel-branded edition, which previewed on May 14, originally started life as ART HK in 2008. The fair was bought by MCH Swiss Exhibition (Basel) Ltd. in 2011 and now joins Art Basel and Art Basel Miami Beach in a triumvirate of destination events that sits on top of a crowded international calendar of more than 270 fairs.The quality of art is assured in Hong Kong, as it is in Switzerland and Florida, by the presence of international mega-galleries such as Gagosian, White Cube, Pace, Hauser & Wirth, David Zwirner and Emmanuel Perrotin. Last year’s edition, which maintained the fair’s 50-50 split between Western and Asian exhibitors, attracted 63,000 visitors.The potential of Art Basel in Hong Kong is obvious. By 2015, high-net-worth individuals in the Asia-Pacific region are forecast to hold $15.9 trillion in assets, beating America and Europe, according to an annual report by the European Fine Art Foundation, or Tefaf, published in March.Serious art remains a minority activity, though, with less than 2 percent of the 31.7 million millionaires in the world classified as mid- to high-level collectors, according to the report. But if only a small fraction of Asia’s disposable wealth was spent at the fair, it would create the sense of a feeding frenzy that is sometimes felt at the events in Switzerland and the United States.Many dealers, particularly from the West, are still waiting for this frenzy to happen in Hong Kong.“It’s tough to squeeze out the sales,” said Glenn Scott Wright, director of the Victoria Miro Gallery, an exhibitor from London, who was aware of the modest business some of the big Western dealers were doing at last year’s fair. “It’s a small pool of buyers. You have to be sensible and show artists who are known in the region. It’s naïve to think you’re going to sell Western artists they’ve never seen. You really need to cultivate relationships.”Meanwhile, Victoria Miro enjoyed its best-ever fair at Art Basel in Hong Kong in 2013. Miro, sharing a booth with Ota Fine Arts, a Tokyo dealer, sold 18 works by the veteran Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama, priced at as much as $2 million each, during the first three days. Ms. Kusama was at that time collaborating with Louis Vuitton. The combination of an instantly recognizable international artist and a luxury brand appealed to wealthy Asian buyers, who are wary of the unfamiliar and tend to prefer to buy at auctions, reassured by the competition of others bidding.For American and European dealers, it’s all about showing Western works that might strike a chord in Asia, apart from works with obvious crossover appeal like “Mao” by Andy Warhol. This year, Miro is presenting sculptures, priced at as much as 400,000 pounds, or $674,000, by the British artist Conrad Shawcross, who has a solo show opening at the Artmia Foundation in Beijing on May 29.The Van de Weghe gallery of New York has brought a 1985 circular Keith Haring canvas of multilegged Chinese dragons, priced at $1.7 million. Galerie Gmurzynska of Switzerland is showing pre-circulation dollar bills inscribed with gunpowder — the favored medium of the Chinese artist Cai Guo-Qiang — by the California celebrity tattooist Scott Campbell. These are priced at $30,000 to $40,000 each.The primary focus of all three Art Basels is contemporary art. For the moment, the wealthiest Asian collectors, with a few exceptions, feel more comfortable with the trusted names of modernism. On May 7, at a Sotheby’s auction in New York, Asian bidders bought works by Pablo Picasso, Alberto Giacometti and Henri Matisse for $13 million to $19.2 million each. Asian billionaires feel less confident about spending that kind of money on Christopher Wool or Jeff Koons.Tellingly, Sotheby’s and Christie’s do not yet hold specialist sales of international contemporary art in Hong Kong.“Older Asian collectors are more conservative — they want the blue chip,” said Adrian Cheng, 34, part of a wave of internationally minded Chinese “super-collectors” and the Harvard-educated son of Henry Cheng, the billionaire real estate developer.Other prominent players are Liu Yiqian and his wife, Wang Wei, and the Chinese-Indonesian entrepreneur Budi Tek, who have recently opened private museums on the West Bund waterfront area in central Shanghai. Lu Xun, a Cambridge University alumnus, has built the futuristic Sifang Art Museum in Nanjing. Qiao Zhibing houses his collection of international and Chinese contemporary works in his karaoke palaces in Beijing and Shanghai.However, this thin stratum of superwealthy collectors in China is not as yet underpinned by a deeper infrastructure of affluent middle-class buyers who can support bread-and-butter sales at an international art fair. In China in 2013, those with wealth in excess of $100,000 represented less than 3 percent of the population, according to the Tefaf report. And China’s nascent middle-class collectors prefer to buy their own antiques and modern art, rather than 21st-century Western conceptualism, which is subject to import taxes of more than 20 percent when bought outside the mainland.That said, things change quickly in Asia. Beijing is rapidly gaining a reputation as the Berlin of the region, with thousands of emerging artists selling their work through a growing network of local galleries. Unlike Berlin, Beijing has a burgeoning population of wealthy local consumers.“There’s definitely a need for cross-cultural understanding,” Mr. Cheng said. “But there’s now a second generation of collectors who studied in the West and they’re talking the same language as the rest of the art world. There are young collectors’ clubs springing up all over China.”Mr. Cheng is planning a show of contemporary Chinese art at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris and has even more ambitious plans for an “ecosystem” of artists’ villages and “lifestyle art malls” bearing his K11 brand across China.“Art Basel is a great platform for Chinese artists,” Mr. Cheng said. “It gives them a chance to become global names.”During the 1990s and early 2000s, Western collectors invested heavily in  Political Pop and Cynical Realist artists such as Yue Minjun, Zhang Xiaogang and Zeng Fanzhi, whose works would routinely sell for more than $1 million at auctions in New York, London, Hong Kong and mainland China. These artists continue to set occasional auction highs in China, but international demand has cooled since the art market crash of 2008-2009. Western collectors, still mindful of the long-term investment potential of Asia as a region, are now looking for a new crop of younger, emerging artists, and they regard a fair like Art Basel in Hong Kong as a place to discover them.“Since Art Basel took over, we’ve seen a lot more American, Swiss and German collectors coming to the fair,” said Katie de Tilly, director of the Hong Kong-based exhibitor 10 Chancery Lane. “The scene has changed in Asia. Younger artists are more introspective, less sociopolitical, not so loud.”Chancery Lane is showing new works by the sought-after Vietnamese artist Dinh Q. Le, who makes “woven” photo collages that blend fragmentary images of the Vietnam War with modern consumerism. These signature works are priced at $50,000 to $60,000.Photography is the medium of the moment in Asia. Chen Wei, who is based in Beijing and was born in 1980, is part of a new generation of Chinese photographers evoking, without overt political comment, the rapid pace of change in the country. Ben Brown, who has galleries representing him in London and Hong Kong, is offering his large-scale inkjet prints at the fair, priced at $6,400 to $10,100.Mr. Brown, when speaking about Asia as a market for international art, sees challenges and opportunities for many dealers taking part in Art Basel in Hong Kong, which this year clashed with New York contemporary art auctions in May. (Next year the fair is moving to March).“I said it would take five years,” he said last month at the Art Cologne fair, in Germany. “Well, I opened in Asia five years ago and it’s still only just begun. At the moment, my galleries sell more to Belgians than the Chinese. But make no mistake, this market is going to be huge.”