http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/02/world/asia/china-approves-sweeping-security-law-bolstering-communist-rule.html
China Approves Sweeping Security Law, Bolstering Communist Rule - The New York Times
China,Xi Jinping,Communist Party of China,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,National People's Congress (China),National Security Commission (China),Ministry of Public Security of the People's Republic of China,Amnesty International,Foreign Aid
July 1, 2015
7867
BEIJING —  The Chinese government announced Wednesday that it had enacted a new national security law, one that amounts to a sweeping command from President Xi Jinping to maintain the primacy of Communist Party rule across all aspects of society. The law is expected to bolster the power of the domestic security apparatus and the military.The law says “security” must be maintained in all fields, from culture to education to cyberspace. A draft version of the law was released in May, leading to intense discussion about its long-term impact, but the version approved Wednesday is even wider in scope — adding, for instance, that security must be defended on international seabeds, in the polar regions and even in outer space.The law is one of three that are being scrutinized by foreign leaders and corporate executives, who say Mr. Xi is moving to severely restrict the influence and actions of foreign organizations in China.The other two laws are expected to be passed soon; one would regulate foreign nongovernmental organizations and place them under the oversight of the Ministry of Public Security, and the other is a counterterrorism law.While those two laws, currently in draft form, have specific details on controlling foreign groups, the national security law is a more abstract statement of principles, aimed at exhorting all Chinese citizens and agencies to be vigilant about threats to the party. Legal scholars and analysts in China say it will probably lead to the security apparatus amassing more power, and to courts employing a broad definition of national security violations. Human rights advocates expect the same and say they are worried that defendants accused of such violations will have little legal protection.“It is as much to do with protecting the Communist Party and punishing those that criticize the leadership as addressing national security,” William Nee, a researcher at Amnesty International, said of the law.The law, which was passed Wednesday by a committee of the National People’s Congress, a pro forma legislature, also assigns oversight of national security to a central agency. Analysts say this is a reference to the National Security Commission, established and run by Mr. Xi, which is widely seen as a party rather than a government organization.Zheng Shuna, deputy director of the legislative affairs commission of the National People’s Congress, said Wednesday at a news conference in Beijing that China’s national security situation was “increasingly grim” and that “from the inside we are dealing with the double pressure of maintaining political security and social stability.” She added that both internal and external elements of national security were “more complicated than at any other time in history.”Citing articles in the law, Ms. Zheng said that the goal of maintaining national security also applied to Hong Kong and Macau but that the law would not be enacted there. Those territories are, at least in theory, governed by their own laws, and any attempt by Beijing to apply the national security law there could lead to bitter legal and political battles, especially in Hong Kong, where there has been rising resentment of heavy-handed party rule.On Wednesday, the Hong Kong government issued a statement saying that “the law shall not be applied” in the city. It said safeguarding national security would instead be guided by local legislation in accordance with Hong Kong’s mini-constitution.A summation of ideas expressed by Mr. Xi in speeches and policy statements since he took power in late 2012, the law contains the widest statutory interpretation of threats to the Communist Party since the Mao era, as well as the most expansive definition of the party’s footprint across the world.Ms. Zheng said the law’s references to safeguarding national security in space, on seabeds and at the poles were meant to give China “legal support” for its projects in those realms. The inclusion of seabeds is almost certainly the result of growing tensions over disputes involving China, the United States and Southeast Asian nations in the South China Sea. Most recently, the United States has criticized China for land reclamation efforts aimed at building islands in the contested Spratly archipelago.Analysts say one purpose of the new law is to further indoctrinate ordinary Chinese with Communist Party ideology and the party’s perception of what constitutes an external threat.Joshua Rosenzweig, a lecturer at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said the law’s emphasis on party primacy was noteworthy. “All these things are brought together in a way that links the idea of the nation or the state with the security of a political regime,” he said. “Everybody knows this is the understanding that the Communist Party has, but it’s rarely put this explicitly in national law. That’s just striking.”