https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/world/americas/fugitive-venezuelan-pilot-helicopter-attack-appearance.html
Fugitive Venezuelan Pilot Makes Brazen Public Appearance - The New York Times
vis-multimedia,Politics and Government,Pilots,Maduro  Nicolas,Caracas (Venezuela)
July 14, 2017
388
Venezuelan authorities have been hunting for Óscar Pérez since late last month after he claimed that he had been involved in a brazen — and bizarre — attack on two government buildings in Caracas, the capital.On Thursday night, Mr. Pérez, a former police officer who said he had piloted a stolen helicopter used in the attack, made an audacious public appearance at an opposition rally in the capital, surrounded by a small number of masked supporters.“It’s time for this narco-government to fall on July 18,” Mr. Pérez said in a brief interview.He then urged Venezuelans to vote on Sunday in a symbolic referendum organized by the opposition-led National Assembly in response to President Nicolás Maduro’s plans to change the country’s Constitution.“We will be on the streets defending the people,” he said at the rally, which honored the more than 90 people who died during the anti-government protests that have gripped the country since April.Then, Mr. Pérez raised his fist in the air, shouted the word “freedom” and sped off on the back of a motorcycle, with a group of masked supporters following behind.On June 27, a police helicopter swooped down on Caracas and dropped at least one grenade on the Supreme Court building before someone opened fire on the Interior Ministry building.A banner was unfurled from the helicopter that read “350 Freedom,” a reference to Article 350 of Venezuela’s Constitution, which gives citizens the right to “disown any regime legislation or authority that violates democratic values of the country.”The government of Mr. Maduro has called the attackers terrorists.Some experts speculated that the attack might have been a stunt organized by the government to discredit the opposition, but no evidence has been uncovered to support this theory.Mr. Pérez posted a five-part video manifesto to his Instagram account on the day of the attack, denouncing the government and calling for an uprising. The clips have since been deleted, but a copy can be seen below.“We have two options: to be judged tomorrow by our conscience and the people, or from today to rid ourselves of this corrupt government,” Mr. Pérez said in the video, and he demanded the immediate resignation of Mr. Maduro. “We are warriors of God, and our mission is to live at the service of the people. Viva Venezuela.”Mr. Pérez, a trained pilot, was reportedly a member of Venezuela’s intelligence and investigative organization. Posts on his Instagram account, now deleted, showed him sky diving with a German Shepherd strapped to his chest and posing with a rifle. He also starred in a low-budget 2015 movie, “Suspended Death.”Some Venezuelans assumed that Mr. Pérez had fled the country, after the helicopter used in the attack was found near the Caribbean coast, according to the police.But last week, he reappeared in a video, detailing how he had made an emergency landing in the remote area before returning to Caracas.In the clip, Mr. Pérez, looking gaunt as he sat in front of a Venezuelan flag with a rifle by his side, warned of a “new phase” of the opposition movement.