http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/28/world/europe/kasparov-tired-of-being-a-pawn-to-putin.html
Kasparov tired of being a pawn to Putin - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
March 28, 2005
3846
NEW YORK — Garry Kasparov is certain that his place in history as a chess player is secure. But now he says he has a new goal: nothing less than achieving real democracy in Russia. Kasparov, the world's top-ranked player for the last 20 years, announced on March 10 that he was retiring from competition.Recently, he discussed his legacy and plans in an interview at a Manhattan hotel. "I don't think that someone else can do what I did," Kasparov said. "It is hard to keep the No. 1 rating for five years. That would already be an accomplishment." Although he is 41, past the usual peak for chess players, Kasparov's announcement took many fans by surprise. He had just won his second elite tournament in a row and seemed to be playing with a vigor that he had not shown in some time. No one has retired while ranked as the world's top player since Paul Morphy, an American, did in 1859. Kasparov said his decision had been building for some time. He said it was partly fueled by his frustration with the World Chess Federation because it had been unable to arrange a match between him and its current champion, Rustam Kasimdzhanov. But "I had no more goals in chess," he continued, adding, "I want to do things that excite me." His priority now, he said, is to help drive President Vladimir Putin from power. "Democracy does not exist in Russia right now," he said. Over his career, Kasparov has rarely, if ever, been prone to self-doubt. In 1985, at 22, he became the youngest world champion in history. Known for enormous creativity and energy at the board, he has always been reluctant to admit that someone, or something, might be his equal at chess. After he lost a match in 1997 to Deep Blue, a computer developed by IBM, he accused the company and the computer's programmers of cheating by having grandmasters help it find the best moves. In 2000, he lost a world championship match to Vladimir Kramnik, a former protégé. But while he says that Kramnik beat him fairly, he insists that Kramnik did not clearly establish that he was a better player, because he did not consent to a return match and his later tournament results were inferior to Kasparov's. Kasparov said the fact that he continued to be No. 1 in the world's ranking system proved that he was better than Kramnik. Kasparov's interest in politics is not new. For years, he has written op-ed articles for The Wall Street Journal critical of Russia's government and of Putin, whom he recently compared to the Roman dictator Caligula. In the early 1990s he was briefly involved with the Democratic Party of Russia and supported Aleksandr Lebed's unsuccessful presidential bid in 1996. In January 2004, he helped form Committee 2008: Free Choice, a group that includes disaffected politicians and journalists who want Putin to step down or at least ensure that the constitution is not changed to allow him to run for a third term in 2008. The committee, established after the poor showing of liberal politicians in the 2003 elections, includes Vladimir Ryzhkov, the most prominent liberal member of Parliament; Boris Nemtsov, a leading liberal politician and businessman; Irina Khakamada, leader of a new liberal party called Our Choice; Ludmila Alexeeva, chairwoman of the Moscow Helsinki Group, a human rights organization; and Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of the Yabloko Party. Kasparov is chairman. Although Putin has denied plans to run again, Kasparov expressed doubts. "We think the government is testing the waters to see if the president can be appointed for life," he said. Since Kasparov's announcement of his retirement from chess and fresh focus on politics, some in Russia have questioned his prospects and commitment, partly because he has helped found and then abandoned political parties. Even some like-minded politicians have raised doubts. Yavlinsky suggested that Kasparov had yet to prove his political acumen. "Let him try to create a party, and succeed or fail," he told the magazine Itogi. "And we will talk to him after that." Stanislav Belkovsky, a political analyst in Moscow, said in an interview last week that Kasparov would be no more able to unify Russia's divided democratic forces than he was able to unify the chess world. "Garry Kasparov is undoubtedly a brilliant chess player," he said, "but he has never proved to be a good manager or politician." The Kremlin, not surprisingly, has said nothing. Kasparov said he believes that his reputation as an honest man would make it harder to take action against him, but he has acted to protect himself. Kasparov, who lives in Moscow and has made millions of dollars from chess and endorsements, said he had recently hired bodyguards for himself and his family. His second wife, from whom he is divorced, and his 8-year-old son also live in Moscow, and in June he plans to marry again. "Am I scared about our safety?" he asked. "Seriously concerned. It is a dangerous game." While Kasparov is concentrating on politics, he is not turning his back on chess. He is writing a book, "How Life Imitates Chess." He said he also planned to complete his series, "Garry Kasparov on My Great Predecessors," about chess champions who came before him. "Garry Kasparov on Fischer," was published recently by Everyman Chess. He also plans to continue working with his Kasparov Chess Foundation to promote teaching the game in schools. And what about playing top-level competitive chess again? "Could I imagine a day in 6 months, or 12 months, when I wake up and say, 'Oh, I can't live without this?"' he said. "It's possible. But I have other things I want to do now." Still, the pull of competition remains strong. As the interview drew to a close, Kasparov logged on to his laptop to check results from the Melody Amber tournament in Monte Carlo. "Anand is four out of four," he said, referring to the world's No. 2 player, Viswanathan Anand. "Bravo. He is encouraged now that I am out." Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Moscow. 