https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/fashion/sophie-turner-emilia-clarke-kerry-washington-hbo-emmys-after-party.html
Sophie Turner, Emilia Clarke and Kerry Washington Party After the Emmys - The New York Times
Emmy Awards,Parties (Social),Clarke  Emilia,Washington  Kerry
Sept. 19, 2016
3836
WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. — If parties reflect the host’s self-esteem, HBO displayed no shortage of confidence.With five huge burbling fountains, eight sprawling bars and a sultry sequined songstress backed by a six-piece band, the cable network’s Emmy after-party was no shrinking affair. Clearly, HBO (much like the prom queen who gets an early peek at the ballots) expected to win big.And it did, racking up 22 Emmys this year. But really, the personalities were the ones who made the gathering of about 2,500 at the Pacific Design Center feel like a raucous suburban wedding.“There’s my mother looking lost and she don’t know where to go,” the comedian and actress Niecy Nash said. She started screaming: “Mother! Mom! Mama!”“Hey, want me to go get her?” said Amy Schumer, who wore a black off-the-shoulder Vivienne Westwood gown. The comedians hugged as Ms. Schumer said that she had traded in her Tom Ford heels for flip-flops. Ms. Nash sighed and said, “My mama has mine in her bag.”This year’s party was a study in cerulean, and the theme extended all the way to the napkins. Luckily, most actresses eschewed wearing blue.“My boyfriend said I looked like a big banana, and my son called me Big Bird,” Minnie Driver said of her snug bright yellow Versace gown.The fashion was largely tame. Ms. Nash and Anna Chlumsky of “Veep” both turned to the “Project Runway” alumChristian Siriano for their looks, a white strapless gown (for Ms. Nash) and a caped silver cocoon dress (for Chlumsky). Mr. Siriano dressed nine actresses this year and has become the go-to guy for Hollywood women who don’t shimmy into a sample size 4.Emmy Rossum and Tracee Ellis Ross arrived looking ready to exhale, having swapped their award show attire for less constricting party frocks.Ms. Ross said that her second outfit, a vintage Yves Saint Laurent dress, came from her closet. Talk then turned to her love for making people laugh. “I was always silly,” she said. “My friend recently reminded me that a teacher once said to me, ‘Please stop doing that.’ I said: ‘I can’t. That is me!’ and now I’m getting paid for that.”When the seemingly endless “Game of Thrones” cast and crew sauntered in at around 10:30, the room electrified as if the wedding party had finally shown up. There was Jon Snow, looking much smaller without his fur anorak, and Brienne of Tarth (Gwendoline Christie), somehow looking taller in person. The show scored 12 awards, surpassing “Frasier” with its record 38 awards to date.Glinting Emmys abounded. “I’m too drunk to talk,” the series co-creator David Benioff said as he took a seat at a table next to his wife, the actress Amanda Peet. “I don’t want to say anything stupid.”A few seats away, the author George R. R. Martin (whose work is the basis for “Thrones”) texted with his wife, who wasn’t feeling well and had returned to their hotel. “Honestly, I hate parties,” he said with a wry smile. “But so far, this one isn’t so bad.”