http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/world/middleeast/migrant-boat-capsizes-off-egypt.html
Migrant Boat Capsizes Off Egypt, Killing at Least 42 - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Maritime Accidents and Safety,Egypt,Mediterranean Sea,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Immigration and Emigration,Frontex
Sept. 21, 2016
5545
CAIRO — A boat carrying African migrants headed for Europe capsized in the Mediterranean Sea near the Egyptian city of Alexandria on Wednesday, killing at least 42 people, the Egyptian authorities said.The Egyptian Army gave the toll in a statement, saying that it had “thwarted an illegal immigration attempt” and that the boat had been 12 nautical miles off the coast when it sank.A Health Ministry spokesman, Khaled Megahed, said the total number of dead was still unknown. An official from Beheira Province, Alaa Osman, said the migrants were from several African countries. He added that more than 150 people had been rescued so far but that bodies were still being pulled from the water.Egypt’s official news agency, MENA, said the boat was carrying 600 people when it sank near the coast, more than 100 miles north of Cairo, the capital. Mr. Osman said it was likely that the boat had departed from Kafr el Sheikh Province, farther to the east.Thousands of migrants fleeing war and poverty have made the dangerous voyage across the Mediterranean in recent years, mostly by way of Libya. Thousands have drowned.The number of migrants trying to cross the Mediterranean to Europe from Egypt has increased significantly in the past year, Frontex, the European Union border agency, said this month. More than 12,000 migrants arrived in Italy from Egypt from January to this month, compared with 7,000 in the same period last year, the agency said.Experts say smugglers in Egypt mostly use old fishing vessels, stuffed far beyond capacity both below and above deck.New and more dangerous smuggling practices and attempts to reach Europe by riskier routes have led to more deaths of migrants trying to cross the Mediterranean, the International Organization for Migration said in a report last month.The report said newer routes, particularly from Egypt, were longer and riskier, leading to search-and-rescue efforts that were often carried out farther from land. It said 2,901 people had died or disappeared crossing the Mediterranean in the first six months of 2016, a 37 percent increase over the first six months of last year.In May, hundreds of migrants died after a wooden boat traveling from Libya capsized, even as the Italian Navy rushed to the rescue. European rescue boats, including naval vessels, often patrol off the Libyan coast to try to prevent such disasters.The migrant crisis has proved deeply divisive in Europe, which has struggled to come up with a unified response. Right-wing nationalist parties opposed to taking in more migrants and refugees have made gains, including in Germany, which has accepted more migrants than any other European country.Migrants rescued by the Italian Navy near Europe’s southern borders are taken to processing centers and offered accommodation while they apply for asylum. But many of the thousands registered each month travel on toward Europe’s richer north, in hopes of settling there.More than 60,000 migrants and refugees are stranded in Greece — just across the Mediterranean from Egypt — and those who arrived after March 20 have been restricted to five islands in the Aegean Sea under a deal brokered by the European Union to deport them to Turkey. The agreement has had numerous delays, however, and most of the people in island camps have applied for asylum in Greece, setting off a lengthy process during which they cannot be deported.