https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/17/world/europe/germany-migrants.html
Readers Speak Out: Living in a Germany Reshaped by Migration - The New York Times
Refugees and Displaced Persons,Germany,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Syria
March 16, 2016
5467
As Germany takes the lead in trying to stem a chaotic flow of migrants to Europe, it is also grappling with a challenge at home: how to integrate some of the  million migrants who arrived on the Continent last year.The New York Times asked longtime residents and recent arrivals in Germany to share their experiences with migration. Responses — in Arabic, German and English — included stories of learning a new language, developing an ear for punk rock and getting to know new neighbors. Here is a sampling of the submissions, which have been edited and condensed.I’m German. My boyfriend is from Syria. He arrived here last October via Turkey, Greece and the Balkan route. I’m working at a refugee camp, and we met there. I would never have thought that I would ever fall for someone who doesn’t agree that Moss Icon is probably the best punk band to ever exist. But what do you know? Though my parents have met Fadi, they don’t know about the nature of our friendship, as my dad is a regressive conservative and avid supporter of the Alternative for Germany party. My parents live in a small village, and my dad strongly feels that both Europe and Germany will lose its autochthonal heritage to “strangers” who are “overrunning” the Continent and thus endanger a vision of a (rather) heterogenous white, Christian Europe. I see the largest racist mobilization since the pogroms and waves of lynchings and hate crimes in the early 1990s (something I’m too young to actually recall), and it scares me.I am a Syrian student. I came to Germany four and a half years ago with a student visa, while the revolt in Syria began. I think, in principle, migrants can build a better life here. “In principle” is the key word, because not much works without integration, and nothing works without the intention of the migrants to integrate themselves.I believe that the atmosphere of welcome will slowly become weaker and the mood of the native citizens will change. Other integrated migrants, like me, are afraid of this change, because the refugees are in the limelight, and anything they do influences the public opinion in contrast to my accomplishment. Therefore, I have mixed feelings according to the recent refugees and migrants.I am Hamza Jarjanazi, a Syrian journalist, refugee, who moved to Berlin 10 months ago. From my point of view, yes, Berlin is a very good city for me to build better life. Now I am practicing journalism in a local newspaper called BZ and another one called Bild Berlin. I am learning German and working on my English, too. My colleagues here are more than wonderful, and my manager is like a mentor for me. I am looking forward to continue working with them, and this, for me, is more than a dream.What most outsiders don’t realize is that the majority of people entering Germany in 2015 are not refugees. Hundreds of thousands of people took advantage of the open borders to stream in from places such as Albania, Morocco, Mali, Algeria, Tunisia, Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Serbia, Egypt and literally dozens of other countries. Most of them are young males who have no claim to asylum under international or German law. They are not activists, writers or journalists. They are simply people hoping to find a better-paying job.I am 25 years old, working in biomedical engineering and from Syria.I fled to Germany at the end of last summer and found nothing here but a generous people who made me feel welcome at this new place.I don’t know if Germany is the place to build the best life we could. I think that this is a question for the future to answer, but there is one thing I know: that leaving home, leaving Syria, wasn’t an option. It was a choice of either life and death.I’ve spent part of my childhood in Germany, and I speak and look as if I could be German. These qualities have come in useful when I’ve wanted to disguise my Bulgarian nationality here. While most people I know of my generation are accepting and open-minded, older people and especially authorities are often biased by a bad reputation that Eastern Europeans have acquired here. I’ve often heard comments such as “There are too many Bulgarians and Romanians living here,” “Really? But you don’t look Bulgarian” or “Good thing you live west of the river” (the richer, less migrant-populated area of the city). It’s because of comments like these that when I am in a position to speak to a bureaucrat or police officer, I most often reply in my Canadian English, rather than risking that they hear any small errors in my German and ask for my national ID.My wife supports a family from Afghanistan by helping them learn German, and with it she also learns a lot about foreign countries and traditions and similarities. The exchange is hampered the most by the lack of a common language: The children of the families are a central link because they can communicate in English.Without playing down the challenges of integration, the refugees cause ourselves less worry than the consequences in Europe and in the whole world: National thinking without any compromises seems to increase greatly, as if there wasn’t the 20th century with its teachings.German society is becoming more diverse. The social solidarity will define itself more by shared values and the rules of coexistence, as about appearance, language or origin.Since the new year, a lot changed, people and their opinions changed. There is no day without the word “refugee.” People see the problems but can’t see potential. People see the danger but can’t see the danger in not helping and ignoring. People are afraid, but the question is, afraid about what? There is no general answer to this. People are asking themselves, “Is Germany strong enough?” My answer is yes.