https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/23/world/middleeast/assad-supporters-weigh-benefits-of-us-strikes-in-syria.html
Blamed for Rise of ISIS, Syrian Leader Is Pushed to Escalate Fight - The New York Times
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Syria,Assad  Bashar al-,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Raqqa (Syria),Terrorism,Aleppo (Syria),Homs (Syria),Free Syrian Army,Syrian Army
Aug. 22, 2014
8352
BEIRUT, Lebanon —  The extremist militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria have attacked Syrian troops with new ferocity in recent weeks, taking over three northeastern military bases, beheading scores of soldiers and seizing new territory.The jihadist offensive has prompted some panicked supporters of the Syrian government to sharply criticize the leadership, questioning why it appeared to allow ISIS to build a base in the northern Syria province of Raqqa over the last year while claiming the Syrian Army was fighting terrorism. As far back as June, as ISIS fighters swept back into Syria with American weapons looted in Iraq, Elia Samaan, a government adviser, exclaimed, “Where is our air force?”Now, the rising pressure from the militants, and from the Syrian government’s own supporters, is forcing President Bashar al-Assad’s forces to confront the possibility of a more direct battle with ISIS, a fight that had not appeared to be the government’s top priority even as the group amassed fighters and resources that helped it seize a swath of territory stretching across the border and into Iraq.The escalating confrontation between Mr. Assad’s forces and ISIS is another indication of just how much the rise of the radical group has erased borders and upended alliances around the region, and the world. President Obama, who has long called for the ouster of Mr. Assad, is facing similar pressure to attack ISIS inside Syria after his top military adviser said the group cannot otherwise be defeated.With other Syrian-led insurgent groups struggling, ISIS and the Syrian Army increasingly find themselves facing each other across a crucial front line, around the northern city of Aleppo. If they choose to clash head-on, that would transform the complicated three-year battle into a showdown between a powerful jihadist force and Mr. Assad and his allies.Critics of Mr. Assad have long speculated that he allowed ISIS to thrive because it served as a foil and battled Syrian rebel groups, while validating his government’s claim that it was fighting terrorists. Though analysts say there is no evidence of a formal alliance, they note that the Syrian government benefited in some ways from ISIS, which has focused mainly on trying to establish Islamic rule in the areas it controls, and has fought the Islamist and nationalist insurgents more focused on ousting Mr. Assad.But now, Damascus residents are increasingly demanding tougher action. Often giving only first names for fear of retribution, they voiced new fears that ISIS would reach the capital. More and more of the private citizens who had long used their Facebook accounts to post messages supporting the government are now complaining that the military did not better support the few isolated garrisons facing ISIS in the east; one noted that the minister of defense was not worried “because his sons are safe in Damascus.”In recent weeks, the air force has carried out new strikes against ISIS in its northeastern stronghold of Raqqa and in Deir al-Zour, to the southeast, where ISIS recently overwhelmed insurgent rivals and crushed local tribal resistance. Soldiers say the army will stand against the militants as they bear down on Aleppo, Syria’s largest city and the linchpin of the north.Both Mr. Assad and his armed opponents have at times used the flow of foreign militants into the country for their own purposes. Many Syrian insurgent groups, including the United States-backed Free Syrian Army, have relied on well-armed, well-financed foreign extremists and their enthusiasm for battle. Many later turned on ISIS after the group sought to rule rebel-held areas and attacked political activists and other insurgents.“Both sides wanted to play with it, but they lost control,” said a Damascus businessman who opposes Mr. Assad and is critical of armed insurgents. He asked not to be named for fear of retribution. “The magic turns on the person who plays with it, and the cook of the poison will taste it.”When ISIS first took over large new areas of Iraq in June, taking the world by surprise, many in Damascus expressed what one humanitarian worker, who also requested anonymity, called “a guilty relief” that ISIS might simply “go away.”But days later, at a Damascus cafe alive with patrons watching the World Cup after midnight, the government adviser, Mr. Samaan, said he was surprised that the air force was not already bombing militants returning with looted American heavy weapons.Mr. Samaan, who works with the Ministry of Reconciliation, rejected a theory popular among insurgents and their supporters that the government established and controls ISIS and avoids attacking it.“It’s not true that they don’t attack each other,” he said. “But it is not a first priority.”He said officials had been “happy to see ISIS killing” insurgents from the Free Syrian Army and the Qaeda-affiliated Nusra Front and believed that in light of the ISIS threat, “the world would support the regime.”But with the threat growing, he said he hoped the government would now focus mainly on fighting ISIS.Since then, the growing fears over ISIS have marred, for Mr. Assad, a period that was meant to be a victory lap after he won a new term in a disputed election shortly after solidifying control of the crucial corridor from Damascus through Homs to the coast. ISIS’s advances reveal that while Mr. Assad’s original armed opponents are struggling, his government and war-weary military still fail to control large areas of the country and face a newly formidable foe.On the day Mr. Assad was inaugurated for his new term, July 15, ISIS attacked an oil field in Homs Province, starting a battle that left scores of soldiers, oil workers and pro-government militiamen dead. Two weeks later, ISIS swept into Division 17, the army’s lone remaining outpost in the city of Raqqa, and routed the soldiers, killing many, sweeping on to two more bases farther north.A government employee and military wife from Mr. Assad’s hometown, Qardaha, sputtered with outrage at a Damascus cafe over the ISIS victories.“Our military leadership should have sent more weapons and reinforcements to help the blocked soldiers and officers or evacuated them by helicopters,” she said earlier this month, giving only her first name, Sana.Two weeks ago, supporters of Mr. Assad staged a protest in Umayyad Square in central Damascus — the first of its kind seen in the capital — demanding that the government secure the release of people kidnapped by another insurgent group, the Army of Islam.Some Assad supporters, including Sana, the military wife, say they hope the United States will hit ISIS in Syria in addition to its recent air attacks on the group in Iraq.Amid the rubble of the central city of Homs — which Mr. Assad retook in May in a campaign focused on crushing mainly homegrown rebels while ISIS flourished — a member of a pro-government Christian militia was recently asked whether he would welcome American strikes on ISIS in Syria. His message to the United States was straightforward: “Solve the problem.”That some government supporters would welcome United States intervention is a startling turnabout a year after President Obama threatened airstrikes against the Syrian government over chemical attacks that killed hundreds near Damascus. Then, Mr. Assad rallied supporters against what they saw as an assault on Syrian sovereignty.To Mr. Assad’s partisans, the armed Syrian opposition that emerged after the suppression of political protests in 2011 now seems practically quaint and relatively surmountable, whether through military defeat or political agreement with fighters the government once called terrorists.The Damascus businessman said that if the government did not turn its air force toward protecting civilians from ISIS — and stop what he called its own terrorist bombings of civilian neighborhoods — more people would believe “the regime really is ISIS.”State news media have reported numerous new airstrikes on ISIS, and United Nations officials in Damascus say there have been more direct clashes between the group and Syrian forces. Syrian insurgents and civilians in Raqqa say only a few of the strikes have scored direct hits on ISIS there, though its headquarters is well known.An ISIS fighter there who identified himself only as Khaled said recently over Internet messaging, “Most of the airstrikes have targeted civilians and not ISIS headquarters,” adding, “Thank God.”