http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/21/washington/21prexy.html
Bush Declines to Lift Veil of Secrecy Over Israeli Airstrike on Syria - The New York Times
Israel,Syria,Atomic Weapons,International Relations,North Korea
Sept. 21, 2007
5287
WASHINGTON, Sept. 20 — President Bush pointedly declined on Thursday to discuss an Israeli airstrike in northern Syria on Sept. 6 that Israeli officials say hit a nuclear-related facility that North Korea was helping to equip.Mr. Bush did, however, warn North Korea that the United States expected it to dismantle its nuclear weapons programs and to stop selling weapons or expertise abroad, as it promised to do this year. He emphasized that he was speaking generally, not specifically, about whether North Korea provided assistance to Syria.“I’m not going to comment on the matter,” Mr. Bush repeated twice when asked about the strike at a news conference at the White House. When pressed, he added, “Saying I’m not going to comment on the matter means I’m not going to comment on the matter.”Mr. Bush’s remarks — a relatively rare instance of a president flatly declining to comment — also reflected the extraordinary secrecy here in Washington surrounding the raid. Most details of what was struck, where, and how remain shrouded in official silence.A day earlier, Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli opposition leader and former prime minister, became the first public figure in Israel to acknowledge that an attack even took place. Until now the only public information about the raid has been a muted and vague diplomatic protest from Syria that Israel had violated its airspace and a condemnation by North Korea’s Foreign Ministry of what it called “a very dangerous provocation.”In a television interview on Wednesday evening, Mr. Netanyahu said: “When the prime minister takes action in important and necessary matters, and generally when the government is doing things for the security of Israel, I give it my endorsement. I was party to this matter, I must say, from the first minute, and I gave it my backing, but it is still too early to discuss this subject.”Mr. Netanyahu faced criticism for saying as much as he did.One former diplomat who has spoken to Israelis involved in the decision to attack said the airstrike was aimed at what Israel believed to be a Syrian nuclear program in cooperation with North Korea. The two countries already have a relationship that has concentrated on missile technology, which North Korea has long exported.The former diplomat, along with current and former American and Israeli officials, said a shipment of North Korean material labeled as cement  arrived by ship three days before the attack. That material was transferred to a facility, which Israel bombed.Current and former American and Israeli officials have said the Israelis gave the Bush administration advance notice of the attack.North Korea’s public reaction prompted speculation about a possible link to the Syrian target, though whether the target involved nuclear activity, missiles or something else remained unknown to all but a handful of officials briefed on what had happened.This week China abruptly canceled a new round of diplomatic talks that had been planned to discuss a schedule for disbanding North Korea’s nuclear facilities under a deal negotiated in February. It is not clear when those talks may resume.Mr. Bush said Thursday that the United States expected the North Koreans “to honor their commitment to give up weapons and weapons programs, and to the extent that they are proliferating, we expect them to stop that proliferation.”Some current and former American officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because information about the raid remained classified, said they believed that the site was involved in Syria’s missile program. They said that Israeli intelligence officials believed that they had evidence that the activity at the site involved North Korean engineers believed to work in the nuclear program.So far, several current and former American officials who have been involved in evaluating the Israeli claims say they are not yet convinced of a nuclear connection. Yet the enormous secrecy around the findings, both here and in Israel, suggests that the activity that prompted the Israeli attack involved “more than a run-of-the-mill missile transaction,” one official said, noting that the Israelis took considerable risks in carrying out the attack.“The Israelis are very proud of what they are doing; they are boasting about it,” said one senior American official who has been dealing with Israeli officials. “But we don’t know enough yet about what they actually hit.”In Israel, military censors have prohibited the press from reporting any details, while Prime Minister Ehud  Olmert’s government has succeeded in remaining silent about the raid. The head of Israel’s military intelligence, Gen. Amos Yadlin, appeared to refer to the matter obliquely when he told the cabinet that Israel had “restored its deterrence” in the region.The deputy chairman of the Israel Atomic Energy Commission, Gideon Frank, warned delegates at the International Atomic Energy Agency on Wednesday in Vienna that Israel could not ignore the efforts of various countries in the Middle East to develop weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them.“We can hardly remain oblivious to intensive efforts by some in our region to develop W.M.D. and their means of delivery, accompanied by sustained denial of the very legitimacy of our sovereign existence and calls for our destruction,” Mr. Frank said in remarks that were interpreted to refer to Syria, as well as to Iran.