https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/nyregion/penn-station-track-repairs-commute.html
Smooth Sailing as Penn Station Repairs Begin, but It’s ‘Only Day 1’ - The New York Times
Pennsylvania Station (Manhattan  NY),Metropolitan Transportation Authority,Amtrak,Long Island Rail Road Co,New Jersey Transit,New York Waterway,Commuting,Transit Systems,Stations and Terminals (Passenger),Ferries,Buses,Port Authority of New York and New Jersey,Cuomo  Andrew M,Lhota  Joseph J,New York City
July 10, 2017
3460
The widely dreaded first day of intensive track repairs at Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan was far less hellish than forecast, but New York City’s hardened commuters were reluctant on Monday to exhale in relief too soon.Many of them were still figuratively holding their breath as they trudged homeward in the evening, in some cases forced to try out different routes than the ones they had taken in the morning. After a series of train derailments in the past few months, they all knew a devilish disruption could occur at any moment.“This has been the best commuting day of my life so far,” Barbara Strautman, 58, said as she waited for a Long Island Rail Road train home to Port Washington. She had started out just 10 minutes earlier than usual in the morning, and all had gone smoothly.Still, she said, “everybody is very wary; this is only Day 1.”She was referring to the first of 44 days of reduced train service at Penn Station, the busiest train station in the country. The three railroads that use the station — the Long Island Rail Road, New Jersey Transit and Amtrak — have all cut back their schedules, canceling some trains and rerouting others, to accommodate emergency work on the station’s tracks.The involuntary changes to the routines of tens of thousands of people came just days after the third derailment of a train at the station since late March. As apparent as the need for an overhaul may be, commuters still chafed at the disruption to well-established patterns.Kelly Faetanini, 32, a business owner from South Orange, N.J., had to transfer at Hoboken Terminal to the PATH train — not her favorite mode of travel. “Overcrowding, standing, a million stops,” she said, describing her ride on the PATH to Manhattan. “Kind of uncomfortable.”Ms. Faetanini, who is prone to carsickness, said she often packed Dramamine with her when she took the PATH because it lurches. “I feel like a kid,” she said.She had been one of 8,700 passengers on New Jersey Transit’s Morris & Essex line whose trains took them to Hoboken instead of straight to Penn Station. In the evening, she would be among a crowd of additional travelers through Hoboken that New Jersey Transit estimated would surpass 12,000.The absence of major problems was a testimony to preparation. Commuters left home early to troubleshoot new routes, and stations were covered with signs and were staffed by transit workers ready to offer guidance.For the most part, the hordes remained civil — and sober.“Being angry is not going to get you anywhere except an early heart attack — or punched in the face,” Connie Finn, 59, said as she waited for a Long Island Rail Road train to Patchogue.Ms. Finn, who works for a Manhattan law firm, maintained a cheery outlook — buoyed, perhaps, by the fact that her morning commute had not been much affected, and that she did not have to reroute on her way home.Commuters often bemoan the quality of the transit agencies’ communications and preparations. But having been given several weeks’ notice by Amtrak, which owns and operates Penn Station, the agencies seemed to have thought of — and tried — everything. Schedules were coordinated; extra buses and ferries were lined up.New Jersey Transit said additional buses it ran from train stations to Manhattan carried more than 3,400 passengers. An additional ferry service to Manhattan from Hoboken carried 1,264 passengers, it said.“We have buses, we have ferries, so there’s been all sorts of extraordinary measures,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said. “We’ve done everything you can possibly do short of call in the military with some type of parachuting ability.”Joseph J. Lhota, the newly appointed chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates the Long Island Rail Road, said at an evening news conference at Penn Station that the railroad actually had increased ridership on Monday. About 3,000 more people rode the trains compared with an average Monday this time of the year, Mr. Lhota said.“Everything seemed to go right,” Mr. Lhota said, but he added that “tomorrow is another day, and we have to be as vigilant.”Thunderstorms forecast for Tuesday could affect the commute, he said, as could passengers deciding not to take alternate routes, or a mishap in the tunnels leading to Penn Station. (“I live in absolute fear of what happens in those tunnels,” he said.)It was unclear whether some commuters took the day off or chose to work from home to see how the transit agencies performed on the first day of what Mr. Cuomo had said could be a “summer of hell.”“This is a treat,” Peter Ross, 55, said as he stood on the deck of a ferry from Hoboken taking photographs of the skyline as the vessel cruised across the Hudson River to a dock on the Far West Side of Manhattan. Mr. Ross, who lives in Millington, N.J., was enjoying a route he said he normally found too expensive to use.Mr. Ross’s assessment reflected the view of many veteran commuters to Manhattan who have become accustomed to bad news.“So far, this is nice,” Mr. Ross said. “But we’ll see what happens.”Not all travelers had it so easy. Rosie deus Santos, a home-care assistant from Astoria, Queens, was fuming as she stood in Penn Station after missing by a few minutes an Amtrak train she has taken for 14 years to Hudson, N.Y. That train had been combined with another Amtrak train, and the departure time had been moved up.Ms. deus Santos woke up early, checked the news and got wrong advice from a train employee, she said. Now, she would arrive two hours late to care for a family.“I can feel my blood pressure going up,” Ms. deus Santos said.At his 6 p.m. news conference, Mr. Lhota promised that problems with one New York City subway line, the E train, would be resolved as quickly as possible. For Susan Bodossian, 50, of Port Washington, that promise cannot be fulfilled quickly enough.“On the E train, people were dripping wet, packed up against the window,” Ms. Bodossian said of her morning commute, during which she took her usual route from Penn Station to the E train to her job at Cartier on Fifth Avenue.On her way back to Penn Station in the evening, she waited 20 minutes to board an E train as several trains passed without room for her to step on. As a result, she missed her usual train out of Penn Station back home.Her sister, who lives in Connecticut, had just texted her after seeing on the news that the first day of the summer of hell had gone smoothly.“I said: ‘I’ve been waiting in Penn Station for 45 minutes. What do you mean, smooth?’” Ms. Bodossian said.Ms. Bodossian joked that she would ask an aunt in Manhattan to take her in for the summer, or take up permanent residence from Monday through Thursday at a hotel. Her friend in New Jersey had told her that her commute had not been badly affected — but a move to the Garden State, Ms. Bodossian said, was not in her backup plans.“No, thank you,” she said with a laugh. Then she paused to reconsider. “Catch me tomorrow,” she said. “I’ll still be standing here.”