https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/03/fashion/for-haim-rinse-repeat-and-rock-n-roll.html
For Haim, Rinse, Repeat and Rock ’n’ Roll - The New York Times
Haim (Music Group),Hair,Music,Haim
Oct. 2, 2013
6326
The first thing you spot when the band Haim comes on stage is their hair. It falls over their shoulders in long pleats, parted at the center, layered just enough to move with them as they begin to dance.All three members, sisters named Este, Danielle and Alana Haim, have the kind of flowing manes that usually take a ream of extensions and several hours to achieve. But the Haims say they have never touched an extension. “They were just born with truly excellent genes,” said the band’s stylist, Candice Birns.The sisters’ good genes are not confined to their appearance; they scored gigs on David Letterman’s show and at big festivals like Glastonbury and Austin City Limits even before the release of their record, “Days are Gone,” on Sept. 30. But like that of the Hanson brothers before them, their hair, which seems to surround each girl like a halo as she bounces around the stage, has become almost as much of a conversation topic as their music.“Those girls are my little Shaggy McShaggersteins,” Ms. Birns said from her salon in Los Angeles. “And they’ve inspired all my other clients to go au naturel. When I first met the Haim girls, they talked about cutting their hair to distinguish between them, and I said: ‘No way. I’ll never cut it.’ When you have hair that good, you keep it all.”Arushi Khosla, who has a fashion blog called Bohemian Like You, said of the Haim sisters: "Their hair is pretty flawless. It looks tousled, undone all the time. They’ve just got that elusive insouciance and the flower-child-hair-meets-downtown-style aesthetic helps.”While many young women are still following the model Karlie Kloss and cropping their locks for fall, “I think there’s something wonderful and carefree about longer hair,” Ms. Khosla said. “It looks a little more effortless, a little more carefree."Indeed, Danielle Haim, 24, who plays guitar and sings lead vocals, said after a recent set, “We’ve never really gotten formal haircuts.”“Mine is the thickest,” Alana, 21, chimed in. She plays keyboards and goes by the nickname Baby Haim. “I have a legitimate wall of hair on stage. I like to say that my spirit animal is Cousin Itt.”“It’s got to be wild, like we are a little wolf pack,” said Este, 27, who plays bass. “So having long, somewhat messy hair is all a part of that.”But in fact Ms. Birns said that a good deal of work is required to achieve this casual look, which Este said was partly inspired by Jane Birkin and Chrissie Hynde. “It takes me hours to do the Haim hair,” she said. “They all have a very specific layering system that works on their own heads. Alana has thick, beaded strands. Este has an omber look, which tends to thin you out, so we have to bulk up her layers. And Danielle gets a cut called transient length, which is more of a shag so that the hair will move when she does. Because that girl loves to bang her head.”Another key to the look, Ms. Birns said, is an arsenal of products. She has the Haim girls on a strict regimen: Davines shampoos and conditioners, an Oribe dry texturizing spray to add grit and volume, and Rene Furterer Naturia Dry Shampoo for the days between shows.“Depending on what you use, you can make someone with the same long cut look like they’ve walked off Victoria’s Secret runway or a dirty greasy rock show,” she said.