https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/24/opinion/lee-kuan-yews-mixed-legacy-in-singapore.html
Lee Kuan Yew’s Mixed Legacy in Singapore  - The New York Times
Lee Kuan Yew,Singapore,Editorials,People's Action Party (Singapore),Politics and Government
March 23, 2015
9568
Lee Kuan Yew, the founding leader of Singapore who died Monday morning, was a towering figure on the global stage who helped transform his small city-state into an economic powerhouse. President Obama went so far as to describe Mr. Lee as a “true giant of history.”But praising Mr. Lee, who was 91, for his vision, as many have, would be incomplete. His leadership undoubtedly helped make Singapore one of the richest and least corrupt countries in the world. His “Singapore model” of economic development inspired other leaders, including Deng Xiaoping of China, toward free-market policies. He was also an autocrat who silenced critics and sent opposition leaders to jail, suppressing dissent and intimidating the press.Mr. Lee did not deny these tactics and, indeed, reveled in them. “Nobody doubts that if you take me on, I will put on knuckle-dusters and catch you in a cul-de-sac,” he said in 1994. And that was after he had ostensibly stepped aside as prime minister to become senior minister, a position from which he continued to exercise significant influence. People on the receiving end of those dirty tricks like the opposition politicians J.B. Jeyaretnam and Chee Soon Juan were ruined financially after losing defamation suits brought by Mr. Lee and his family.By the standards of Southeast Asian autocrats, Mr. Lee was hardly a tyrant. He did not brutalize and impoverish his country, unlike military leaders in Myanmar and Cambodia. And he has been far more successful at turning Singapore into a developed nation than other strongmen in neighboring Malaysia and Indonesia. Nevertheless, he and his protégés in the ruling People’s Action Party — including Lee Hsien Loong, his eldest son and the current prime minister — maintained tight control over politics and speech long after other fast-growing Asian nations like South Korea and Taiwan became competitive democracies, and long after Singapore had achieved the kind of prosperity that Mr. Lee had cited as a reason to limit free expression and multiparty democracy.If there ever was a moment for Singapore to embrace democratic principles fully, it is at hand. The country’s 5.6 million people appear to be increasingly unhappy with one-party rule and growing income inequality. In an election in 2011, despite formidable obstacles, opposition parties got 40 percent of the vote, though a much smaller share of seats in Parliament. And, in recent years, poorly paid migrant workers from China and South Asia have held protests and, in late 2013, rioted in the streets.As Singapore reflects on Mr. Lee’s legacy, in seven days of national mourning, many people will focus on the country’s economic growth under his rule. But a leader’s accomplishments should not be measured by material achievements alone. The next generation of leaders should make Singapore a political model, not just an economic one.