https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/12/sports/basketball/lebron-james-to-return-to-cleveland-cavaliers-leaving-miami-heat.html
LeBron James to Return to Cavaliers, Leaving Miami Heat - The New York Times
Miami Heat,Cleveland Cavaliers,James  LeBron,Basketball
July 11, 2014
9256
Four years after he bolted to Miami from Cleveland in pursuit of the N.B.A. championships that had eluded him, LeBron James is returning home.At age 29 and with two N.B.A. titles now in his possession, James announced Friday that he would rejoin the Cavaliers, for whom he played in the first seven seasons of his storied professional career.Vilified in Cleveland when he left for the Heat, denounced and mocked by the Cavaliers’ owner, James is likely to find that just about all is forgiven, and more, as he embarks on an effort to bring a championship to a city that has not celebrated one in any major sport in 50 years and that, in recent weeks and days, was almost comically looking for any clue at all to divine what James might be thinking.In the end, everyone found out together when James, who grew up in nearby Akron, Ohio, and is widely regarded as the greatest basketball player of his generation, made the announcement through Sports Illustrated’s website. “My relationship with Northeast Ohio is bigger than basketball,” he said at one point in an elaborate 952-word statement. “I didn’t realize that four years ago. I do now.”In the statement, which he prepared with the sportswriter Lee Jenkins, James compared his time in Miami to going to college — an experience he never had after jumping straight to the N.B.A. from St. Vincent-St. Mary High School in Akron. But now, he wrote, he felt prepared to return and take a responsibility to be a leader, not just on the court but in his home state.It was all in stark contrast to the way he announced his departure in 2010 — in a televised special on ESPN called “The Decision” that struck many viewers as self-serving, particularly when James stated that he was going to “take my talents to South Beach.” And a day later, when he was elaborately welcomed in Miami, he boastfully spoke of how many titles the Heat would now win, saying, “Not two, not three, not four, not five, not six, not seven. ...”This time, James was far more modest and circumspect. “I’m not promising a championship,” he said in Friday’s statement, as if to knowingly caution the city of Cleveland to calm down a bit. “I know how hard that is to deliver.”He added: “Of course, I want to win next year, but I’m realistic. It will be a long process.”James’s departure from Cleveland in 2010 left deep psychic wounds on the city. On the night of his televised decision, fans burned replicas of his jersey and tossed memorabilia into trash bins. Dan Gilbert, the Cavaliers’ owner, posted a vitriolic letter to the city on the team’s website in which he referred to James as “our former hero” and described his move to Miami as a “cowardly betrayal.” Gilbert also pledged that the Cavaliers would win a championship before James did.Gilbert, of course, was incorrect. But the letter remained online until early this week, when it was removed. By then, James had secretly met with Gilbert in Miami to clear the air and allow Gilbert to make amends.In his statement, James described his meeting with Gilbert as “face-to-face, man-to-man.”“We’ve talked it out,” James added. “Everybody makes mistakes. I’ve made mistakes as well. Who am I to hold a grudge?”On Twitter on Friday, Gilbert essentially opened his arms to James and said no city was more deserving of a winner than Cleveland. Gilbert also wrote that his 8-year-old son had asked if this meant he could wear his LeBron jersey again. “Yes it does!” Gilbert wrote.In James’s four-year absence, the Cavaliers were one of the league’s worst franchises, compiling a 97-215 record without making a single playoff appearance. But the team does feature a young, talented core led by Kyrie Irving, a 22-year-old point guard who recently signed a long-term extension. In his statement, James said he viewed himself as a “mentor” and an “old head” who could help Irving become one of the best players in the league.James’s decision to return to Cleveland — where he is likely to be paid $88 million in a maximum four-year deal — came after a long run of rumors and speculation in which every little detail or oddity became a clue — photographs of James posing with friends from Akron on his Instagram account (that must mean something!), or the convoy of moving vans parked outside his home in Miami (although James always ships his cars to Ohio for the summer).Then came the owl at the Cleveland Zoo who, alas, predicted that James would return to the Heat. But a clam that was said to have psychic abilities went with the Cavaliers. Meanwhile, commentators on ESPN spent an enormous number of hours attempting to analyze James’s decision-making process. But in the end, no one quite expected that James would make his announcement in the manner that he did.In leaving Miami, and the Heat, James is ending a remarkable four-year partnership with Pat Riley, the Heat’s president, and with Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh, his co-stars on the team. It was Riley who figured out how to team up the three players and fit them within the league-imposed salary cap.Once he did, it all quickly came together. The Heat went to the N.B.A. finals for four straight seasons and won the championship in two of them (2012 and 2013). And James collected his third and fourth Most Valuable Player awards along the way as he emerged as the league’s most unstoppable force, with an almost superhuman blend of speed, strength, skill and savvy.Still, the past season concluded in sobering fashion for James, with the Heat swatted aside by the San Antonio Spurs in an N.B.A. finals that lasted only five games and exposed the Heat’s lack of depth. The series also made it clear that Wade, at 32, was a diminished player on chronically aching legs.In the wake of the defeat, James opted out of his contract so he could explore free agency. It did not necessarily mean that he was leaving the Heat — he could always re-sign — but it seemed apparent that he wanted to see what sort of personnel moves Riley was capable of making to reshape the roster.Other teams, meanwhile, got busy clearing financial space so they could potentially accommodate James’s salary. He delegated his agent, Rich Paul, to meet with officials from the Cavaliers, the Dallas Mavericks, the Houston Rockets, the Phoenix Suns and the Los Angeles Lakers. The franchises lined up, eager to make their pitch.But if the process itself felt familiar to 2010, with James entertaining offers from a smorgasbord of suitors, it was ultimately very different this time around.On Wednesday, James met with Riley for about an hour in Las Vegas, where James was hosting an annual basketball camp for elite high school players. It was a chance for Riley to make his last pitch, to keep everyone together. On Thursday, James flew back to Miami, with Wade joining him on the plane.It was a symbolic moment for the two players, a chance for them to be teammates one last time, on one final leg across the country. Wade is likely to remain with the Heat, as is Bosh, who, in a surprise, has apparently decided to turn down an $88 million free-agent offer from the Rockets, a deal everyone assumed Bosh would accept if James decided he would no longer be his teammate.Earlier this week, Riley had also signed two capable veterans — Josh McRoberts and Danny Granger — as part of his effort to persuade James. As a result, Riley is not exactly bereft of talent, but for now, at least, he no longer has a title contender.None of that is of any concern to Cleveland, which watched Riley steal James away four years ago. On Friday, the city was giddy to win him back.“I looked at other teams,” James said in his statement, “but I wasn’t going to leave Miami for anywhere except Cleveland. The more time passed, the more it felt right. This is what makes me happy.”