https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/world/asia/hong-kong-bookseller-lee-bo.html
Hong Kong Bookseller Returns From Mainland China, Denying He Was Abducted - The New York Times
Lee Bo,Hong Kong,Mighty Current Media,Freedom of Speech and Expression,China,Kidnapping and Hostages,Communist Party of China,Book Trade and Publishing
March 24, 2016
7873
HONG KONG — A Hong Kong bookseller whose disappearance in December provoked protests and concern over the state of media freedom here returned to this semiautonomous city from the Chinese mainland on Thursday, the Hong Kong police said.The bookseller, Lee Bo, was one of five people associated with the company Mighty Current Media to have disappeared, only to emerge in mainland China, apparently in detention. The company published gossipy books on elite politics in China, and the detentions were seen by many in Hong Kong as an effort to clamp down on media voices critical of the Chinese Communist Party.The case of Mr. Lee, also known as Lee Po, was particularly troubling to civil society advocates because he disappeared from the streets of Hong Kong, and it is still unclear how he crossed a border with Guangdong Province on the mainland. He is widely suspected of having been taken by mainland security officers, although he told the Hong Kong authorities that he had “returned to the mainland by his own means voluntarily and it was not an abduction,” the police said in a statement.The authorities said Mr. Lee had been handed over to police and immigration officers on Thursday afternoon at a checkpoint on Hong Kong’s border with the mainland city of Shenzhen. He told the police that he had traveled to the mainland to help with an investigation.A co-owner of the publishing house, Gui Minhai, was taken from his apartment in Thailand last year. He has since appeared on Chinese television confessing to violating probation for a drunken-driving fatality and saying he broke Chinese law by shipping books from Hong Kong to the mainland.Mr. Lee told the police that he was “free and safe” while in the mainland and asked for his missing person case to be dropped.Two other men associated with Mighty Current, Cheung Chi Ping, whose name is also spelled Zhang Zhiping, and Lui Por, whose name is also spelled Lu Bo, also met with the police in Hong Kong this month after returning from the mainland. They both asked that their missing-person cases be dropped but provided little other information.The Hong Kong police statement on Thursday indicated that Mr. Lee was under investigation by the city for possible immigration offenses regarding his crossing the border to the mainland.But because he “did not provide thorough information about his last departure, no arrest has been made against him at this stage,” the statement said.