https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/magazine/how-to-park-an-18-wheeler.html
How to Park an 18-Wheeler - The New York Times
Trucks and Trucking,Parking
July 7, 2017
2010
‘‘You have to be perfect, because sometimes spots are really tight,’’ says Prabh Simran Singh, a long-haul truck driver from Southern California. Be strategic about where you stop. Whenever possible, park where you can pull forward to exit. ‘‘Backing up is the hardest part,’’ Singh says. Four times a month he sets off for the Eastern Seaboard in a 73-foot-long 18-wheeler loaded with fresh produce and returns several days later, carrying mostly house paint. Singh maintains what he calls ‘‘a brain map’’ of memorized landmarks, among them stunning vistas and truck stops with easy parking. A semi is a hulking piece of machinery; after a few months, you’ll become accustomed to the heft, but never forget how destructive some 80,000 pounds can be.Eventually you will have to back into or out of a parking spot. ‘‘Always get out and look so that you don’t hit anything,’’ says Singh, who sometimes climbs down from his cab five or even 10 times while parking. Get out, walk around, visualize your line and make sure you have sufficient clearance, including up top. When going backward in a car, you turn the steering wheel in the direction you want to go. With a semitrailer, do the opposite. ‘‘The first time I was like, ‘Oh, my God, this is a blunder, I can’t do it,’ ’’ Singh says. Go slowly, and pull forward to make corrections. Truckers call the passenger side the blind side; avoid backing on this side if possible, even if it requires circling the block to find a better approach. Find a spot that allows you to reverse by turning left, toward the driver’s side, so you can see the trailer out your window and side mirrors.Ask for, receive and offer assistance; there’s no shame in needing it, especially when parking after dark. Singh drives with his uncle, swapping 11-hour shifts, and he relies on the extra pair of eyes. But strangers will look out for you, too. Occasionally, Singh’s turban and long beard set off bigoted motorists — many in the Sikh community are truckers, including Singh’s father and cousin — but he has never seen that ugly behavior from fellow truckers. ‘‘It doesn’t matter if you’re speaking Punjabi or Spanish, or if you’re black or white,’’ Singh says. ‘‘You help each other.’’