http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/30/world/asia/30china.html
Sudan Leader, Bashir, Welcomed in Beijing Visit - The New York Times
Hu Jintao,Bashir  Omar Hassan Al-,Sudan,China,International Relations
June 29, 2011
8376
BEIJING — The president of Sudan, who faces indictment by an international court on war crimes and genocide charges, met President Hu Jintao of China and reviewed an honor guard in Beijing on Wednesday, a ceremonial start to a visit overshadowed by the impending division of Sudan into two nations next month.Meeting in the Great Hall of the People on Tiananmen Square, the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, called Mr. Hu “a friend and brother” before the two entered private talks. Earlier, the two nations signed agreements to expand cooperation in oil exploration and to finance a range of agricultural programs.China’s state-run news agency Xinhua said the leaders would discuss Sudan’s partition and the conflict in Darfur. China has long supported Sudan, which supplies roughly 7 percent of China’s oil, despite longstanding accusations of Sudanese atrocities against civilians in Darfur.That relationship has been complicated by Sudan’s planned breakup into two nations. South Sudan, which is separating from the Khartoum government, controls much of the region’s oil. But the oil is largely carried to ports through a pipeline that crosses the north.Mr. Bashir’s visit began a day late, apparently because his aircraft was denied permission to cross the airspace of Central Asian nations obligated by treaty to enforce an arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court in The Hague.Mr. Bashir had sought to fly to China from Iran, where he was attending a conference. Neither Sudan nor the Chinese Foreign Ministry has explained the reason for the delay. Mr. Bashir has denied the court’s charges.Leading human rights organizations have condemned China’s decision to host Mr. Bashir. Human Rights Watch said in a statement that his conduct “should be cause for condemnation, not an invitation.”At a regular Tuesday briefing, a spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Hong Lei, said that China was not a signatory to the United Nations convention empowering the International Criminal Court and that the government has “serious reservations” about the charges against Mr. Bashir.