http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/arts/music/for-mumford-sons-the-road-is-like-home.html
For Mumford & Sons, the Road Is Like Home - The New York Times
Music,Mumford & Sons
Sept. 21, 2012
6519
HOBOKEN, N.J.WITH the downtown Manhattan skyline as a backdrop, a big rock concert stage had been constructed for the first time at Pier A Park here, a grass-covered former pier on the Hudson. Loud bursts of static competed with airplanes flying overhead as the last components of the sound system were plugged in. It was the day before Mumford & Sons would headline a triple bill at the park, playing for 15,000 people to start the band’s late-summer United States tour.When everything was plugged in, Mumford & Sons would do a thorough sound check. But in the meantime the four members — the guitarist, lead singer, main songwriter and sometime drummer Marcus Mumford; the bassist Ted Dwane; the keyboardist Ben Lovett; and the banjo player Winston Marshall — sat out in the park, dining on steak and potatoes from takeout containers and sharing an interview. Adele’s album “21” blared to test the speakers; “I’d love to write a country album with Adele,” Mr. Mumford mused, perfectly serious.The tour would include daylong festivals — named Gentlemen of the Road Stopovers, after the band’s own label — that had Mumford & Sons headlining along with half a dozen kindred bands on two outdoor stages. (Hoboken only had three acts and one stage.) It was headed for cities like Dixon, Ill.; Bristol, Va.; and Portland, Me., places that aren’t on the standard circuit for million-selling rock bands like Mumford & Sons, whose folky, foot-stomping songs about dark nights of the soul have gathered a fervent audience worldwide.“We love playing live, and there’s that whole adrenalin-filled thing,” Mr. Mumford said. “But we’re still singing about some darker things because it’s just songwriting that comes from our heads. There are those corners in our heads that are obviously there, just like anyone, so they’ve got to be expressed. Just because they’re expressed in a major key with a banjo doesn’t mean that they’re any different. And that can be quite fun, playing a jolly-sounding tune with darker lyrics.”Setting up its own festival at untried locations, each one diligently coordinated with city government, was a typical choice for Mumford & Sons, a band that unites the age-old troubadour impulse with the instincts of arena-scale rock.“It is a lot of work trying to set up our own shows,” Mr. Mumford said. “We just wanted to do things our own way. We wanted to do shows off the beaten track.”Making a career on the road as performers, as Mumford & Sons have done almost continuously since the band was formed in 2007, is a practical choice in the 21st-century rock universe, where multiplatinum album sales like Mumford’s are increasingly rare. But for Mumford & Sons, hitting the road had little to do with careerism, said their manager, Adam Tudhope. “They’re made for it,” Mr. Tudhope said in Hoboken. “They just love meeting people. They just happen to be really gregarious people. If you don’t love it, it’s a really tough job.”Mumford & Sons’ late-summer concerts included previews of songs from the band’s second album, “Babel,” (Glassnote) which comes out on Tuesday. It was long in the making, largely because the band kept touring as its audience grew. For every band, how to find the balance between touring and recording is always an open question — and will remain one for Mumford & Sons. For now the band leans toward the Grateful Dead model: constant touring, sporadic recording. For “Babel” “we pulled ourselves off the road to record and at first we were kind of bent, and torn, like we wanted to be on the road really,” Mr. Mumford said. “The studio means adopting a different set of disciplines.”He added: “We don’t want our touring cycles to be dictated by albums so much. We just like playing shows. The albums can fit into that and be adverts for our live show, but we hope that our live work can have a path of its own, separate to albums. That might or might not happen.”From the beginning the band was geared for longevity, Mr. Mumford said. “We designed it from the beginning so it could last if we wanted it to,” he said. The band financed its debut album itself before offering it to labels, and it owns all its master recordings. It chose higher royalty rates over large advances from labels. “I remember our lawyer saying to us, ‘If you make it to a certain level in America, you can have a career for the rest of your lives,’ ” barring drug problems or band infighting, Mr. Mumford said. “We wanted to be smart about it.”Band members say they are happiest by far on the road. “We formed the band because we wanted to tour,” Mr. Marshall said. “That was our common interest.”In Britain, Mumford & Sons promote their own tours, independent of large companies like Live Nation; the Gentlemen of the Road shows collaborated with local promoters. Last year Mumford & Sons rented a train to barnstorm the southern United States, including Austin, Tex., and New Orleans, with bands it had brought together including Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeroes and the Old Crow Medicine Show; “Big Easy Express,” a DVD documentary of the excursion, shows Mumford & Sons merrily jamming with its tourmates all along the way.“Babel” follows the band’s 2009 album, “Sigh No More,” which has sold 2.4 million copies in the United States alone — a startling figure for a band playing songs featuring banjo picking and four-part harmony. With hits like “Little Lion Man” and “The Cave,” each of which sold more than a million digital downloads, “Sigh No More” proved that rootsy, hand-played music has an eager audience, even when Top 10 radio stations favor programmed rhythm tracks and robotic, Auto-Tuned vocals.Mumford & Sons got a huge lift in the United States from a brief appearance on the 2011 Grammy Awards, where they played “The Cave” before backing Bob Dylan. It sent their album to No. 2 on the Billboard album chart.Unlike folk-rockers of eras past Mumford & Sons aren’t concerned with traditionalism. “In my head I’m a little bit confused when people say we hearken back to times of old,” Mr. Lovett said. “We’re not that at all. For me I feel more contemporary, and it just happens to be that we’re using these instruments. But that’s just because the textures and the timbres and the sonic qualities of the instruments that we’re playing, they’re great. The energy in the banjo, and the beef in the bass. They’re good tools to express yourself.”Mr. Mumford and Mr. Dwane are steeped in jazz; Mr. Marshall said he initially took up banjo simply because he was a session musician and there was too much competition for guitar gigs. The turning point in Mr. Mumford’s listening wasn’t exposure to Britain’s deep folk heritage, but to a Hollywood take on old-timey American music: the soundtrack to “O Brother, Where Art Thou?”So folky reserve isn’t part of the band’s mandate. As its lyrics grapple with questions of self-doubt, betrayal and redemption, the music rouses itself to huge, cathartic crescendos.“Babel” expands on the sound of “Sigh No More” with heftier arrangements and longer instrumental passages; it’s the sound of a band collaborating more closely and growing used to bigger venues. “In songwriting you take these very private moments, and you make them public,” Mr. Mumford said. In the studio, he continued, “we were taking up very public songs and making them as private as we could.” The band’s producer, Markus Dravs, has never seen the band live, Mr. Mumford added, “so he has no emotional attachment to anything we do live, which is very helpful in making a record.”But the album captures the hurtling dynamics of the band’s songs. Mr. Mumford’s voice climbs to raspy shouts and mournful confessions, as he sings about unnamed wrongs and begs for forgiveness: “I’m worried that I blew my only chance,” he sings in “Whispers in the Dark.”While folk-rock never exactly vanished, the success of Mumford & Sons may well have rekindled a movement, opening doors for other folk-rooted, strum-and-build songwriters and groups like Ben Howard, Ed Sheeran, Michael Kiwanuka and Of Monsters and Men. But Mumford & Sons resist the thought of being standard-bearers. “We were thinking about it just as music,” Mr. Mumford insists. “We were always trying to just make the best noise we could make with what we had in our hands, with what instruments we had at hand.But Mumford’s minifestivals like Gentlemen of the Road purposefully introduce the audiences to folky, twangy bands they may not have heard of. And Mr. Lovett helped create what has become an infrastructure for what he calls “quality songwriting”: Communion, which began in 2006 (before Mumford & Sons formed) as a small London club night introducing new singer-songwriters. He started it with friends simply because, he said: “I love hearing music that’s just been written, more than older stuff. I get a kick out of hearing someone turn up with a song they wrote last night and play it because it’s so fresh and so real.”Communion has since expanded to include a studio, a record label, and club nights in nearly a dozen cities. “I don’t think they purposely set out to make a scene,” said Mr. Kiwanuka, a Communion discovery who was just nominated for the Mercury Prize, a prestigious British music award. “But it has become one as the band has become successful. And now it’s a singer-songwriter’s dream. You get to meet like-minded people.”In Hoboken the Gentlemen of the Road show began under tentative sprinkles as the openers — the songwriter Aaron Embry and the literate country-rockers Dawes — performed. But before Mumford took the stage, the sky cleared and a rainbow arched above the Hudson, like a benediction for Mumford & Sons’ excursions ahead. “We just want it to keep going,” Mr. Lovett said. “It’s hard to believe you can continue adult life like this.”