https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/30/business/labor-activist-detained-ivanka-trump-factory.html
China Detains Activist Who Worked at Manufacturer of Ivanka Trump Shoes - The New York Times
Labor and Jobs,Factories and Manufacturing,Trump  Ivanka,China Labor Watch,China,Dongguan (China),Hua Haifeng,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Political Prisoners
May 30, 2017
3271
BEIJING — A labor activist who had been working undercover at a Chinese factory that makes shoes for Ivanka Trump and other brands has been detained by the police, as concerns rise over a crackdown on the country’s advocacy groups.The activist, Hua Haifeng, who was working on behalf of the advocacy group China Labor Watch, was detained on suspicion of illegal eavesdropping, his wife, Deng Guimian, said late Tuesday. Mr. Hua and two other labor activists had been undercover at two Chinese factories that make shoes for Ms. Trump and other brands. They all disappeared on Saturday, according to their employer, China Labor Watch.They were last seen in Ganzhou, a large city in southern Jiangxi Province. It is unclear whether the other two were detained.The group had been investigating labor conditions at the two factories, one in Ganzhou and another in Dongguan. Their preliminary findings, which had not yet been made public, detail that workers were subject to exceptionally long hours.Ms. Deng said a police officer from the Public Security Bureau in Jiangxi Province in south-central China called her on Tuesday afternoon to officially notify her of the detention. Mr. Hua could be held for days or weeks before being formally arrested.Ms. Deng said her husband had worked for nongovernmental organizations, mainly related to labor issues, for more than a decade. She added that without his pay, it would be difficult to care for the couple’s daughter, 7, and son, 3, as well as three elderly relatives.“I was panicked, very angry and almost lost control of my temper,” when the officer phoned, she said.Li Qiang, the director of China Labor Watch, said that the three labor activists did not have any illegal eavesdropping equipment, and speculated that Mr. Hua and the other activists might have been detained over the use of cellphones. “Jiangxi police are just looking for an excuse,” he said.The Ivanka Trump brand declined to comment on the detention. The White House did not immediately reply to a request for comment.A spokeswoman for Marc Fisher Footwear, which licenses the Ivanka Trump brand for shoes manufactured in China by Huajian International, said, “We were unaware of the allegations against” the Chinese manufacturer and would look into them immediately.A woman answering the phones on Tuesday night at the Ganzhou Public Security Bureau, the municipal unit of the Jiangxi Province Public Security Bureau, said that an official statement, if any, would have to wait until Wednesday, after the end of a three-day, national holiday.The detention follows rising pressure on advocacy groups in the country. Dozens of human rights activists have been arrested in the past year, prompting broad alarm within the advocacy community.Mr. Li, who set up China Labor Watch 17 years ago and has conducted hundreds of investigations of Chinese factories, said this was the first time any of his activists had been detained in a criminal case. China Labor Watch has previously looked into labor conditions at Apple and Samsung.In his view, the unusual action by the Chinese police appeared to be a response to his group’s decision to investigate a manufacturing operation related to President Trump’s family. But he offered no evidence for his opinion.The Trump family’s relationship with China has drawn significant attention since the campaign. While Mr. Trump has blamed the country for taking manufacturing jobs from the United States, his family has also looked to profit from China’s market.Mr. Trump has recently secured more than 75 trademarks in China. The family of his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, is trying to raise money from Chinese investors for a real estate project, efforts that have highlighted White House connections.The factories belong to Huajian International, one of the world’s largest manufacturers of women’s shoes. The Ivanka Trump brand, according to Huajian, represents only about 100,000 pairs of shoes a year out of its production of 8 million pairs a year, including brands like Coach and Alain Delon.Huajian’s spokesman, Wei Xuegang, also declined to comment, citing the holiday. Mr. Wei had said that he had not heard of any labor activists in any of the company’s factories.In interviews on Sunday and Monday outside the Huajian factory gate in Dongguan, many workers described working 10 or more hours a day, six days a week. Mr. Wei said that the company had encountered a busy season in which workers had agreed to work extra hours but were paid overtime. He added that the factory also had quiet seasons when the hours were less.Mr. Hua had been working undercover in Huajian’s main factory in Dongguan. The factory, about 50 miles up the Pearl River from Hong Kong, has about 5,000 employees. Another activist, Su Heng, was working in Huajian’s second factory in Ganzhou, which has about 3,000 employees.Huajian produces the heels for Ivanka Trump shoes in Dongguan, along with the full production for many other brands. It then ships the heels north to Ganzhou, where Ivanka Trump shoes are assembled.A third activist, Li Zhao, was dismissed after working undercover for just five days in the Dongguan factory in April; he was discovered taking photos with his cellphone. Many factories have strict policies against photography to prevent industrial espionage.Li Zhao was phoned by local police but not actually brought in for questioning, according to China Labor Watch. He soon fled to Ganzhou and then disappeared.At the direction of China Labor Watch, Mr. Hua had left his job and tried to go to Hong Kong last Thursday for meetings with China Labor Watch and journalists, including a reporter from The New York Times. Mr. Hua was denied permission to exit mainland China by a Chinese immigration agent at the border with Hong Kong, and told to phone the local police in Shenzhen, the mainland border city with Hong Kong.Mr. Hua called the police, who asked him to come in for questioning, according to China Labor Watch. When he arrived, the police told Mr. Hua that they knew he had been investigating the Huajian factory in Dongguan, Mr. Li said.After the questioning, Mr. Hua, 36, fled to Ganzhou last Friday, only to disappear soon after, the advocacy group said.