https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/us/slime-eels-oregon.html
Chain-Reaction Crash With Minor Injuries, Except for the Slime Eels - The New York Times
Fish and Other Marine Life,Traffic Accidents and Safety,Oregon,Hagfish,Eels
July 14, 2017
3168
If you thought you were enduring a “summer of hell” commute, consider the repulsive mess created on an Oregon highway on Thursday in a collision of modern transportation and prehistoric fish.Picture the scene from the 1984 “Ghostbusters” movie in which Dr. Peter Venkman, played by Bill Murray, complains about being “slimed.” Then multiply that a thousandfold, and you’ll get some idea of what happened on a coastal highway in Depoe Bay, Ore., about 100 miles west of Portland.A truck hauling 7,500 pounds of hagfish, also known as slime eels, was traveling on Highway 101 around noon, transporting the fish to be exported to South Korea, where some diners consider them a delicacy.Traffic was halted for road construction, but the truck driver was unable to stop. The truck’s load shifted, causing one of the containers carrying the hagfish to “fly across the highway,” the Oregon State Police said.The other containers then spilled, leading to a chain-reaction crash involving four vehicles. Only minor injuries to the people involved were reported, the police said.Workers used bulldozers and hoses to clean up the wriggling fish, which coated the road and cars in a slime that they produce copiously for protection and when they are stressed.That section of the highway reopened seven hours later.A “single hagfish can fill a 5-gallon bucket with slime, seemingly instantly,” Dr. Andrew Thaler, a deep-sea ecologist and population geneticist, wrote on the website southernfriedscience.com.Hagfish have been documented escaping from sharks by choking them with “enormous amounts” of slime, Dr. Thaler wrote, adding that the slime is so tough that scientists are exploring ways to use it to create natural Lycra.In an email on Friday, he described the slime as a “semisolid gel” that is like “Spider-Man’s webbing crossed with a jellyfish.”As for your clothing? It’s best to throw them out if the hagfish have touched it, he wrote. (In a tweet, the state police showed a picture of a trooper standing in a sea of slime and asked, “What to tell the #drycleaner?”)Hagfish, which have been around for 300 million years, may make humans squirm, but Dr. Thaler described the creatures as “magnificent.”Eyeless and gray-pink, they are equipped with rows of sharp teeth to tear into carcasses. They are known to enter fish through the mouth or digestive tract and eat them from the inside out.“They’re efficient, tough and stubborn,” Dr. Thaler wrote. “They are weird and they are wonderful.”Mark your calendars: Hagfish Day is the third Wednesday in October.