http://www.nytimes.com/1977/11/16/archives/swami-prabhupada-hare-krishna-head-founder-of-movement-81-came-to.html
SWAMI PRABHUPADA, 'HARE KRISHNA’ - The New York Times
HARE KRISHNA SECT,PRABHUPADA  A C BHAKTIVEDANTA  SWAMI,DEATHS
Nov. 16, 1977
9526
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, a one‐time Calcutta chemist and Sanskirt scholar who brought the Hare Krishna movement to the United States, died Monday at his temple in Vridaban, India.He was 82 years old and had been ill six months. His remains were buried yesterday in the temple courtyard after his disciples had held an all‐night kirtana, or chanting ceremony, and then arrived his body on a wooden platform through the streets of Vrindaban, near New Delhi.Swami Prabhupada was regarded by his followers as the successor to an unbroken chair of Hindu spirited teachers dating back 5,000 years. He was known to his followers as acharya, or teacher.The swami founded the International Society for Krishna Consciousness in New York in 1965, shortly after he arrived in the city from Calcutta with $50 in rupees and a pair of cymbals: His aim was to spread the teachings of Lord Krishna, a supreme diety in Hindu mythology.The swami sat on a sidewalk in the East Village and began a chant that, through the years, has become familiar to city dwellers around the world as sung in public places by his disciples.“Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rma, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.He arrived in Aferica when young people were beginning to dissociate themselves in large numbers from conventional society and experiment with drugs. He reached out to those in the East Village, offering them a relatively ascetic life of devotion to religion and proselytizing.Soon the Swami was holding religious classes in an empty storefront on Second Avenue, spreading the word of the ancient Vedic scriptures at the base of Hinduism.His young followers, known generally is Hare Krishnas, usually wore saffroncolored dhotis, the flowing garment favored by many Hindu men, or the saris of Indian women. The men shaved their heads except for a topknot.They chanted, rang hells, thumped on drums and sold books by the swami, including translations of scriptures from Sanskrit. He has published 52 books on ancient Vedic culture. At the core of his teachings is a belief that the souls of outsiders will be elevated by hearing the name Krishna.The swami set up 108 temples in major cites around the world. Organiztional headquarters is at 340 West 55th Street, New York. Estimates of the number of his followers vary from relatively few to “hundreds of thousands.”To encourage them, the swami once said: “If you sell diamonds, you cannot expect to have many customers. But a diamond is a diamond even if there are no customers.”Born in Calcutta,. he was married and the father of three ions, but renounced all family ties when,” he said, he was instructed by his spiritual teacher to spread the word of Krishna in the West.According to news agency reports, he died early Monday in his quarters int he rear of the temple at Vrindaban as his disciples chanted. After his death, they contihued to chant for 24 hours.Swami Prabhupada