https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/06/upshot/q-and-a-with-feds-eric-rosengren-still-bullish-on-economy.html
Q. and A. With Fed’s Eric Rosengren: Still Bullish on Economy - The New York Times
Federal Reserve System,Rosengren  Eric S,United States Economy,Interest Rates,Inflation (Economics)
Oct. 5, 2015
9091
Eric Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, says he thinks the American economy is doing pretty well, and a disappointing September jobs report hasn’t changed his mind. Not yet, anyway.“Up to now, I thought the incoming data was consistent with a reasonably strong U.S. economy,” Mr. Rosengren said in an interview Friday. “We’ll have to see if the data continues to ratify my idea that the economy is reasonably strong or whether there’s a sign of broader weakness than I was expecting to see.”Mr. Rosengren acknowledged that the Fed was unlikely to raise rates at its next meeting, in late October, but said he continued to view an increase in the near future as the most likely and appropriate outcome.He spoke during a Boston Fed conference focused on a longer-term question: what the Fed can and should do to prevent future crises. Disconcertingly, most of the gathered experts — including a number of Fed officials — regard the Fed as poorly equipped for that task. Mr. Rosengren said that was one reason for the Fed to raise rates, to discourage the emergence of problems it cannot solve.The text of our conversation is lightly edited for clarity.Q. You said last month you were satisfied with the pace of labor market growth, but worried it wouldn’t continue. Does the latest jobs report validate that concern?A. We want to put it in the context of what’s happening. The trade data has been weak, and that’s somewhat consistent with the unemployment report. On the other hand, consumption has been coming in reasonably strong and we have reason to believe that residential investment will continue to be reasonably robust.It’s one report. I think we’re going to have to put it together and see if this is the beginning of more weak data or whether this ends up being a little bit on the anomalous side. If the economy is continuing to grow faster than 2 percent, then we would expect that over time we’ll see further improvement in labor markets and this will seem anomalous, in which case it would be appropriate to be tightening. On the other hand, if we start getting a string of weak data, then obviously we don’t need to be tightening if the economy is slowing down.I don’t think one data report one way or the other would shift either the timing or what I thought was appropriate. It’s too soon to tell. Fortunately we’re not voting today, so we’ll have a little bit of time to think about how the incoming data comes in.Q. Can you resolve those uncertainties before the Fed’s October meeting?A. Certainly getting a weak employment report makes the case for October weaker than it otherwise would have been. We’ll want to see some more data to make sure that the unemployment reports is anomalous. But I don’t want to rule anything out. I think every meeting should be live.Q. Do you need to convince investors that you’re going to raise interest rates before you actually raise interest rates? Measures of market expectations now show most investors don’t expect a rate hike until next year.A. Market expectations don’t get a veto over monetary policy. I think it would be better if the market was aligned with our own views. So I think that’s the reason to have better communication. If it’s out of line with what we’re planning on doing, then we should communicate a little bit better. But by itself I don’t think that would prevent us from doing something if that was the right thing to do.Q. Some prominent economists profess puzzlement you would even be thinking about raising rates in the coming months. How is it that you’re looking at the same data and reaching such different conclusions?A. The unemployment rate is at 5.1 percent. In previous cycles, we tightened at a much higher unemployment rate than we currently have. What is different this time around is that inflation is below our target. Some of the disconnect is how much you worry about tight labor markets starting to have an impact on inflation and how much you actually want to see it in the data.I think a second disconnect may be if you want to tighten a little bit earlier and make sure you can do it gradually vs. being willing to wait longer and then possibly having to tighten more abruptly. The risk of waiting longer and having to tighten abruptly is, if you look at the history of mistakes, sometimes we overshoot and then overshooting can slow down the economy much more than we want it to. So my own personal preference would be that we actually have a fairly gradual increase in interest rates and that we don’t wait so long that we end up getting behind the curve and we end up having to tighten more abruptly.And then another area is, how do you weight financial stability concerns? So when unemployment is very high and inflation is very low, maybe you don’t put much weight on the financial stability concerns. But as labor markets and inflationary pressures seem like they may be a little more imminent, it makes more sense to think about the potential cost of keeping interest rates close to zero for a very long time. I think all of those factors can lead people to come to different conclusions with roughly the same data and roughly the same models.Q. Paul Krugman suggested Friday that the unemployment rate is the only economic indicator justifying a rate hike. Are you putting too much weight on it?A. I do think that overstates it a little bit. Even in a fairly weak employment report today, [broader measures of unemployment] did come down. If you look at the unemployment rate, it’s not a good summary by itself, but the rate is quite low. And you actually see it in terms of, it’s not hard to see companies that are hiring, and certainly anecdotally I’m starting to hear more businesses saying it’s getting a little bit more difficult to hire workers, particularly in some skilled areas.Q. What about inflation? If labor markets are approaching good health, why aren’t wages and prices rising more quickly?A. We usually expect the pressure to occur after we’re at full employment, and arguably we haven’t been to that point yet. So we haven’t had a lot of data that’s invalidating the underlying idea. I’m reasonably confident that if labor markets get really tight, that at some point people will be getting higher wages and that that’s going to be reflected in higher prices as well. I think there’s a great deal of uncertainty about where full employment actually is. My own assessment I have reduced down to 4.8 percent. That is an indication that I have become less confident about where the point is that unemployment is low enough that we start getting wage and price pressures. But I think the underlying logic that at some point markets get tight enough that you start seeing more rapid wages, more rapid price increases, that underlying logic I still expect to hold true.Q. You want to start raising rates relatively soon in part because you want to raise rates relatively slowly. What’s so great about moving slowly? Why not keep rates lower for longer and then hike more abruptly when necessary?A. If we start doing things in large amounts and fairly abruptly, I think there is a greater risk than if we move rates more gradually and start doing things more slowly. A number of the recessions that have occurred in the past have been in situations where we have tightened too rapidly and slowed down the economy much more than we expected. I’m a little more concerned than maybe some academics that we have enough certainty about how the economy works or how monetary policy works that we can move in large increments and be confident that we won’t end up slowing down the economy much more than we expected.In most models that we use, you don’t get market overreactions to Federal Reserve actions. But the reality is we know that we can affect short-term rates, but [we don’t know] how the markets decide to process that and how much long rates and interest rate spreads move. We can look at historical relationships, but I don’t think we have a large degree of confidence that we’re going to capture that. That’s somewhat hard to pick up in some of the academic models that we frequently utilize. Particularly after being at the zero lower bound for a long time, I think moving in large discrete amounts would be a risky strategy.Q. Indeed, every major central bank that has tried raising rates since the crisis has been forced to reverse course. Do you worry that you’ll be next?A. I worry about mistakes in both directions. Clearly we’ve waited a pretty long time already, and I think the reason for waiting a pretty long time was that we are less confident that there was enough underlying strength. I think the risk at this stage where the unemployment rate is down to 5.1 percent, where we have seen the broader measures of unemployment come down pretty dramatically, the risks are a little bit different as we start seeing relatively tight labor markets.Q. How much of the justification for raising rates is a desire to limit or pre-empt excesses in financial markets that might threaten financial stability?A. It is a consideration. It’s certainly not the sole consideration. I do think all other things equal that it would be nice to be able to normalize rates so we don’t have as much incentive to reach for yield. How do you trade that off against concerns that inflation is a little below the target that we want, actually a fair bit below the target that we want? I do think we should put a little bit of weight on people reaching for yield and the fact that rates have been very close to the zero lower bound for quite some time now. Some normalization of interest rates when we start getting back close to full employment does seem to be appropriate. A gradual tightening would still keep us very far from where a more normalized interest rate environment has been. I think that we need to factor all of these things.Q. Do you see evidence of significant threats to financial stability?A. I’m not expecting a financial crisis to occur. I think we’re actually in a very good spot. But I also think that we need to take some precautions to make sure that we don’t have a buildup of pressures that over time could become more disturbing. The effect of a financial crisis is very substantial.Q. Why not rely on financial regulation to constrain risk-taking?A. This conference has highlighted the humility that we ought to have about what causes financial instability, and about uncertainties around macroprudential tools.Too much reliance on any one set of tools is probably a little bit worrisome given the lack of confidence we have in any one set of tools, and there is a limited number of macroprudential tools that we currently have. That does mean that monetary policy may have to play a larger role than if we had a broader set of macroprudential tools to deal with buildups in particular sectors.Q. The next time you do end up in a pickle, you’re likely to have less room to lower interest rates. Your own estimate is that the Fed’s benchmark rate will reach its next peak at around 3.5 percent. During past downturns you’ve generally lowered rates by significantly more than 3.5 percentage points.A. It is a challenge that, if the equilibrium interest rate ends up around 3.5 percent, that does mean that we have less space to react to financial shocks or other types of shocks. That would be one reason for potentially being more careful on the supervisory side to make sure we don’t get the kind of financial shocks that we experienced in 2007 and 2008.Q. Are negative interest rates a viable option?A. There are European countries that are utilizing it. I don’t think it’s a panacea. Europe doesn’t seem to be growing particularly rapidly. I think it’s a tool that is being explored. Like many of the tools that have come out of the financial crisis, it’s a little bit new and a little bit soon to make a full assessment. I do question whether negative short-term rates of a limited amount are actually going to have that much stimulus effect. They may have some, but I’m not sure by themselves they’re a sufficient tool to avoid concerns with not being able to hit an inflation target or getting back to full employment in a timely way. We’re certainly seeing that in Europe, that some of those countries do have negative interest rates and they still haven’t seen much progress on inflation or on unemployment.Like anything else, there are trade-offs and fortunately Europe is trying the tool. And we’ll get to see whether the tool seems to be effective and see what their experience is. Some of the institutional features would be a bit different here, but we’ll have an opportunity to look and see how successful it is in other countries.