http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/18/business/dealbook/goldman-sachss-asia-pacific-chairman-to-retire.html
Goldman Sachs’s Asia Pacific Chairman to Retire - The New York Times
Goldman Sachs Group Inc,Schwartz  Mark,Far East  South and Southeast Asia and Pacific Areas,Appointments and Executive Changes
Oct. 17, 2016
6041
SAN FRANCISCO — One of Goldman Sachs’s top bankers in Asia is planning on retiring after nearly three decades at the firm.Mark Schwartz, who is chairman of Goldman’s Asia Pacific region and a vice chairman of the firm, will retire at the end of the year, the firm said in an internal memorandum on Monday.His departure comes as Goldman faces challenges in Asia, particularly a slowdown in investment banking in the region for all Western firms. Goldman is expected to lay off a significant number of its bankers in Asia. (Mr. Schwartz’s plans were unrelated to those issues.)He has catered to some of the firm’s biggest clients, including the Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan. Mr. Schwartz was one of Goldman’s point men on Alibaba’s $25 billion initial public offering, the biggest on record, and was on hand at the New York Stock Exchange when the Chinese e-commerce behemoth began trading.Over his career, Mr. Schwartz became an influential member of Goldman’s inner circle, spearheading some of the firm’s biggest businesses. He joined Goldman in 1979 and later founded the firm’s high-yield debt department. He was made partner in 1988. He later led its global debt capital markets business from 1991 to 1997.Mr. Schwartz later moved to Asia, becoming president of Goldman Sachs Japan and then assuming the chairman role for the Asia Pacific region from 1999 to 2001. He then left the firm in 2001 to work for George Soros’s hedge fund, later becoming its chief executive from 2003 to 2004.The banker then co-founded MissionPoint Capital, an investment firm focused on clean energy, before returning to Goldman as chairman of the Asia Pacific region, but moved the position to Beijing.“Mark’s leadership, expertise and focus on client service have been invaluable in further integrating our activities across Asia Pacific, building on previous successes and advancing our leading franchise in the region,” Lloyd C. Blankfein, Goldman’s chief executive, and Gary D. Cohn, the firm’s president, wrote in the internal memo.“Over the years, Mark has demonstrated an unwavering focus on supporting and enhancing Goldman Sachs’ culture, reminding us that the caliber of our people, combined with our history of serving clients, has differentiated us in our efforts to build successful businesses across geographies.”Upon retiring, Mr. Schwartz will become a senior director.Here’s the memo from Mr. Blankfein and Mr. Cohn, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal: