https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/politics/wilbur-ross-commerce-secretary-trump-trade-nafta.html
Wilbur Ross Vows to Push Trump’s Trade Agenda, Starting With Nafta - The New York Times
Ross  Wilbur L Jr,International Trade and World Market,North American Free Trade Agreement,Commerce Department,Trump  Donald J,Protectionism (Trade),Labor and Jobs
Jan. 18, 2017
6065
Wilbur L. Ross, the billionaire investor who is President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice to become commerce secretary, vowed on Wednesday to make sweeping changes to the North American Free Trade Agreement his top priority as the incoming administration moves to overhaul its commercial partnerships around the world.Mr. Trump made Nafta one of his favorite targets of derision during the presidential campaign, using it to blame Democrats for the loss of millions of industrial jobs. At his Senate confirmation hearing on Wednesday, Mr. Ross made it clear that the United States’ northern and southern neighbors should prepare to renegotiate a pact that for decades has eased the flow of commerce among the countries. He said “all aspects” of the agreement were on the table.“As to Canada and Mexico, the president-elect has made no secret in his public remarks, nor have I, that Nafta is logically the first thing for us to deal with,” said Mr. Ross, who will take a leading role in executing Mr. Trump’s trade agenda. “We ought to solidify relationships the best way we can in our own territory before we go off into other jurisdictions.”Next on his list could be China, Mr. Ross suggested, as he assailed the country’s high tariffs and what he described as empty claims of embracing free trade. Mr. Ross said he wanted to bring “the reality closer to the rhetoric” when it comes to China.“China is the most protectionist country of the very large countries,” he said. “They talk more about free trade than they actually practice.”But in spite of his promises to crack down on countries that are cheating on trade, Mr. Ross also tried to assuage concerns that Mr. Trump’s “America First” philosophy will lead to protectionism and, potentially, economic disaster.“I am not anti-trade,” Mr. Ross insisted. “I am pro-trade. But I am pro-sensible trade.”As for the tariffs that Mr. Trump has called for imposing on some imports, Mr. Ross said he had learned the lessons of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, which raised import taxes on thousands of goods in the 1930s and is widely believed to have extended the Great Depression.The act “didn’t work very well then, and it very likely wouldn’t work now,” Mr. Ross said.Senator Dan Sullivan, Republican of Alaska, said he was worried that some of Mr. Trump’s more provocative ideas, like a 35 percent tax on companies that sell products in the United States but manufacture them elsewhere, could be a drag on economic growth.Mr. Ross suggested that Mr. Trump, a fellow deal maker, was simply being a shrewd negotiator.“I think the president-elect has done a wonderful job preconditioning some of the other countries with whom we will be negotiating that change is coming,” Mr. Ross said.Mr. Trump has faced criticism for packing his economic team with rich patrons of Wall Street after running a populist campaign focused on lifting the middle class. Known in some circles as the “king of bankruptcy,” Mr. Ross, 79, made his fortune as a private equity titan who bought and sold the kinds of struggling industrial companies that Mr. Trump has promised to revive, often cutting jobs in the process.Although the hearing was largely cordial, Mr. Ross was heckled at one point by protesters who accused him of sending jobs offshore as a businessman. An analysis by Reuters this week found that companies controlled by Mr. Ross moved about 2,700 jobs to other countries since 2004 by relocating production from the United States. Mr. Ross on Wednesday defended his record as a job creator.However, Mr. Ross did have to let go one employee in recent weeks. In an unexpected revelation, he admitted he had unknowingly employed a household worker who might have been undocumented, a fact he said he discovered while preparing for his Senate confirmation process.Mr. Ross said the employee had presented a Social Security card and a valid driver’s license, both bearing that person’s name, when hired in 2009. But during a check over the past month, the employee had been unable to provide similar documentation and was fired immediately, Mr. Ross said.“We did the best that we thought we could do in order to verify the legality of the employment, and it turned out that was incorrect,” Mr. Ross said.Like many of Mr. Trump’s cabinet selections, Mr. Ross is facing scrutiny for a long business background that raises the potential for conflicts of interest. In a filing released this week, Mr. Ross indicated that he planned to divest at least 80 assets and investment funds and step down from dozens of funds and firms in which he has financial stakes.Some Democrats on the committee, like Senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, expressed concern that conflicts of interest could be a problem for the administration because of Mr. Trump’s vast financial portfolio and his refusal to divest his holdings. Noting the financial sacrifice that Mr. Ross is making by becoming a public servant, Mr. Blumenthal asked if Mr. Trump should do the same for the sake of the country.Mr. Ross said that he was not fully aware of the breadth of Mr. Trump’s holdings but that he did know that presidents are held to different standards regarding conflicts of interest.“I think it is appropriate for him to judge,” Mr. Ross said.