https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/30/world/asia/taliban-attack-election-panel-headquarters-before-afghan-voting.html
Taliban Attack Election Panel Headquarters Before Afghan Voting - The New York Times
Taliban,Independent Election Commission (Afghanistan),Terrorism,Kabul (Afghanistan),Elections,Afghanistan War (2001- )
March 29, 2014
5844
KABUL, Afghanistan — Taliban fighters unleashed a barrage of gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades at the headquarters of Afghanistan’s election commission on Saturday, a week before Afghans are to vote for a new president in an election that the Taliban has vowed to disrupt. There were no immediate reports of casualties.Afghan officials and witnesses said the attack began shortly before 1 p.m. when at least three militants entered a building overlooking the headquarters of the Independent Election Commission, a grassy compound of low-slung buildings on the eastern edge of Kabul.Sediq Sediqqi, the spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said the militants had not managed to get beyond the building from where they launched the attack. They were quickly holed up inside, surrounded by regular police officers and elite paramilitary commandos. The building was some distance from the election commission’s compound, he said.“The attackers have started engaging with our police units and soon they will be flushed out of the building,” Mr. Sediqqi said in a brief telephone interview.The Taliban quickly took credit for the assault on the election commission, presenting it as the latest move in their bid to violently derail the coming election. The insurgents’ threats against the election have proven credible in recent days – Saturday’s attack was their third in Kabul this week, adding to the tension in a city where, until recently, the Taliban appeared to have had trouble mounting successful attacks.Zabiullah Mujahid, the spokesman for the insurgents, said on Twitter that “a number of martyrdom seekers have entered fake elections’ main headquarters.”Mr. Mujahid, who often offers inflated accounts of Taliban attacks, described what by now has become a familiar insurgent tactic in Afghanistan: He said a car bomb was used to breach the commission’s defenses, and gunmen then rushed inside.“The battle is ongoing,” Mr. Mujahid wrote, adding that the commission’s chairman, Ahmad Yousuf Nuristani, was inside the compound. His claims could not be immediately verified.An election commission employee who had taken refuge in one of the safe rooms at the compound said that gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades were coming from multiple directions. The employee asked not to be identified because he was not supposed to talk with the media.Noor Ahmad Noor, the election commission’s spokesman, said the attack began with a pair of rocket-propelled grenades hitting the compound.“But nobody from our staff has been wounded were killed,” he said in a brief telephone interview, adding that he could still hear bursts of gunfire.The compound “is in total lockdown and we have moved our staff to bankers and safe houses,” he added. “None of the insurgents have managed to breach our security and enter.”