https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/18/us/politics/obama-condemns-baton-rouge-shooting-and-calls-again-for-unity.html
Obama Condemns Baton Rouge Shooting and Calls, Again, for Unity - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Attacks on Police,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Baton Rouge (La),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Long  Gavin Eugene (1987-2016)
July 17, 2016
7043
WASHINGTON — President Obama condemned a shooting on Sunday in Baton Rouge, La., that killed three police officers and wounded three others, calling for Americans to “focus on words and actions that can unite this country rather than divide it further.”“We need to temper our words and open our hearts — all of us,” Mr. Obama said in a five-minute statement from the White House briefing room.While he said the motive of the gunman was not yet known, he added that “nothing justifies violence against law enforcement.”“Attacks on police are an attack on all of us, and on the rule of law that makes society possible,” he said.Noting that the Republican and Democratic National Conventions were beginning soon, Mr. Obama warned against inflammatory political speech, which he said would worsen tensions. “It is up to all of us to make sure we are part of the solution, not part of the problem,” he said.It was the fifth time in nine days that Mr. Obama had spoken publicly about shootings involving the police — three times during a trip to Europe, once at a memorial service for five slain police officers in Dallas, and once in Washington, at a meeting of law enforcement officials and activists Mr. Obama had gathered to discuss ways to stop violence between the police and their communities.The president’s words on Sunday were familiar, though he appeared more terse and resigned than he had in previous appearances. As he has before, Mr. Obama appealed to both sides to show restraint and open-mindedness.Earlier on Sunday, Mr. Obama spoke by telephone with Gov. John Bel Edwards of Louisiana and Mayor Kip Holden of Baton Rouge. In a statement, the president condemned the assault “in the strongest sense of the word.” Mr. Obama described such shootings as “attacks on public servants, on the rule of law, and on civilized society, and they have to stop.”“A bullet need happen only once,” Mr. Obama concluded. “But for peace to work, we need to be reminded of its existence, again and again and again.”