https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/fashion/mens-style/jahnkoy-puma-bergdorf-goodman.html
A Cultural Mash-Up at Bergdorf Goodman - The New York Times
Kazakova  Maria,Bergdorf Goodman,Men's Fashion Week,Jahnkoy (Fashion Label)
July 14, 2017
9780
The Malian kora player Yacouba Sissoko was seated on the floor of Bergdorf Goodman’s Men’s Store, strumming and singing, in a space barely cleared of its usual racks and rails. Every so often, a crew of performers and models in sportswear bearing the Puma logo and the name Jahnkoy crowded the floor to the delight of a thick cluster of photographers. That made for a change: a gridlock of confused customers browsing Chrome Hearts and Balmain, and a crush of Fashion Week visitors angling in for a look.Jahnkoy’s designer, Maria Kazakova, who had orchestrated the scene, sat serenely at the center, hand-stitching a Puma sneaker, her dreadlocks piled on her head, her lips colored a dark blue.It wasn’t the usual Wednesday night at Bergdorf, where, not far from the melee, salespeople were working to send off designer jeans to their customers. But this is the kind of happening that Fashion Week can visit on an unsuspecting city.Ms. Kazakova was only one of about four dozen designers and labels who showed at the just-wrapped New York Fashion Week: Men’s. As far as I am aware, she was the only one to book a kora player.Ms. Kazakova was one of the week’s most unusual entrants: a Russian-born designer of Siberian descent who lives in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and works out of Bedford-Stuyvesant. The elaborate beading and embroidery she favors, done entirely and painstakingly by hand, recalls, in her words, “the traditional way of adornment of human beings,” harking back to a mix of traditions that include, but are not limited to, African, Central Asian and South American.What differentiates Ms. Kazakova is that she applies her handiwork to the sportswear and fast fashion hawked on the streets of her neighborhood. She is not the only designer to have hit on the idea of embellishing everyday fashion, but she has powerful patrons: Puma, which provided the apparel and shoes for Ms. Kazakova to customize and rework; and Bergdorf Goodman, whose men’s fashion director, Bruce Pask, fell in love with her work and shepherded her into the store.“The clothing was something I had never seen before,” Mr. Pask said. “The craftsmanship, the expansive vision — it was truly moving. I’m going to sound like a sap, but it really brought me to tears.”Earlier this year, Ms. Kazakova was one of the finalists for the LVMH Prize. She presented her collection to a panel of the company’s top designers — Karl Lagerfeld, Phoebe Philo and Maria Grazia Chiuri among them. But she is still in her fledgling years, working out of a studio at the RestorationArt center as an artist in residence. She said she was hoping to train neighborhood residents as craftspeople and collaborators.There is, admittedly, the slight jar of Ms. Kazakova, who is white, at the center of an almost exclusively African-American grouping, especially at a time when appropriation is a freighted subject in fashion (and beyond). But she dismissed that idea.“These are the people who surround me,” she said. “They come from different backgrounds. We create something based off all of our different knowledge.”Globalization and diaspora, in any case, mean that, despite their great differences, there are also points of connection and overlap between Ms. Kazakova and the dancers, musicians and artists she surrounds herself with.“Sportswear is the clothing that is worn everywhere,” she said. “I come from Siberia. I grew up around tracksuits. This is what people wear on the streets normally — same as here.”Same as on Fifth Avenue, as it turns out. According to Mr. Pask, within 30 minutes of the presentation’s start, two pairs of Ms. Kazakova’s embroidered sneakers had sold at nearly $1,300 a pop.