https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/20/insider/seventy-one-migrants-dead-in-a-truck-why-reporters-notebook.html
Reporter’s Notebook: 71 Migrants Dead in a Truck. Why? - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Europe,Austria,Libya,Human Trafficking
Oct. 21, 2015
5556
Seventy-one anonymous migrants found dead in a meat truck in the middle of Europe. Who were they, where did they come from and how did they wind up suffocating in a truck? The Times asked me to find out and gave me the resources to follow the trail.It led to a question of human psychology: What force compelled so many people into an airless refrigeration chamber? And it ended with a search for just one migrant: Yusuf el-Sheikh, a 39-year-old Syrian businessman from the town of Deir al-Zour, who held the missing piece of the puzzle I wrote about earlier this week.The reporting began with Arabic- and Kurdish-speaking researchers for The Times — principally Hwaida Saad in Beirut and Kamil Kakol in Erbil — who saw reports in social media about families notified by the Austrian government that their relatives had died in the truck.I tried to meet as many of the families as I could — traveling over the course of a week from London to the towns of Mersin and Urfa in Turkey; then the cities of Erbil and Sulaimaniya in the Kurdistan region of Iraq; and finally to Vienna, the provincial capital of Eisenstadt, and the stretch of highway where the truck was discovered in Austria.I ultimately spoke with relatives of more than a dozen migrants who died on the truck. I met even more in the parking lot outside the Eisenstadt Police Headquarters, where they had come to give DNA samples in the hope of identifying family members and claiming their bodies.I expected to hear about war, poverty and desperation, but the stories I heard surprised me. Many of the migrants were educated. Some had come from affluent families.They took precautions to minimize the risks of their journey. Some told relatives they had crossed the Mediterranean from Izmir, Turkey, to Greece in “a yacht” rather than in an overcrowded raft. Other paid thousands of dollars extra to travel by land through Bulgaria and avoid the sea passage. Still others kept clear of smugglers for much of their journey, until they reached the borders of Hungary.The families showed me cheerful photographs and played confident audio recordings that the migrants had sent home over the Internet. Family members recounted detailed conversations with relatives at each step along the way. All the migrants had been aiming for Germany. All had made it safely as far as Belgrade, in Serbia. All had made their last contact some time on the same night, Aug. 25, two days before the truck was discovered on the side of an Austrian highway just inside the Hungarian border.None of the families believe that their relatives had willingly entered the truck. They traded rumors that smugglers had drugged the migrants or even killed them before packing them in. In Erbil, the mother of a dead migrant showed me a news photograph of the tangled bodies inside the truck and tried to convince me that a small dot on an arm might be a bullet hole.The pictures and audio recordings, though, were more convincing. They seemed so full of life, so far from surrender: Why would any one of these people enter an airless meat truck in which they risked near certain suffocation?On previous assignments in Libya, I interviewed migrants who tried to make it by sea. . Human smugglers carry them out from the beaches at night in small rafts to flimsy, overcrowded fishing boats. Some saw the dangers and begged to return to the shore, but the smugglers would not let them. Smugglers cannot allow witnesses to remain behind and, in Libya, they have forced migrants into the boats at gunpoint. Could smugglers in Serbia have used such force to cram the 71 people to the truck found in Austria?Yet none of the migrants reported to their families that their smugglers carried guns. None recalled beatings or threats. Their recorded voices, until their last days, sounded unafraid, even confident. They had nearly reached their final destination.I emailed my question — Why would anyone have freely entered the back of a meat truck? — to a social psychologist, Stephen D. Reicher of St. Andrews University, who is known for studies of the behavior of crowds under pressure. He sent back an exceptionally thoughtful response, which I will paste here (edited only slightly to correct typos):The question you ask is fascinating, and, of course, the short answer is I don’t know. It is always hugely dangerous to try and explain phenomena when you don’t really know the details. It is a bit like asking a doctor to diagnose a patient they haven’t examined and where the symptoms are only hearsay. At the same time, the doctor could say something about the disease and how it works — leaving it open as to whether that applies in the specific case.So I can say something in general about some (possibly) relevant processes.Have you ever had that experience of going into a shop (for me, it is generally a bookshop) just to browse and without the intention of spending any money, then seeing three or four things that are interesting and feeling deeply conflicted about which two to buy — putting any back seems agonizing. Then you leave and realize that you were not particularly concerned about any of the books and quite happy not to have shelled out your hard-earned money on any of them. In other words, the nature of your choices and the value you put on any particular choice changes dramatically according to where you are.So, in much more extreme form, when you are deciding whether to leave your country or not, the idea of going into a poorly ventilated truck might seem absurd. It threatens an extreme loss (of life) when you aren’t even convinced of the overall gain of leaving. But then you do make the choice to leave. You are near your destination. Now the choice is very different indeed. It is whether to fail, to have wasted all the efforts (and risks) involved so far or else to take a further risk and to (possibly) succeed.In terms of Daniel Kahneman’s classic prospect theory of decision-making, the dilemma of the truck shifts from being taking a big risk to achieve a possible gain (getting to Europe) to taking a risk in order to avoid an otherwise certain loss (failing in one’s attempt to flee). And prospect theory tells us we are far more likely to take the latter risk.There is controversy as to why. Is it a cognitive process or a social process? I incline to the latter. On the one hand, having committed oneself to leave makes one a huge failure if one doesn’t succeed. On the other hand, the nearer you get, the more real and the more valuable the gain of getting to the West might seem. Again, to invoke a trivial comparison, if you are in the bookshop deliberating over whether to buy that book, and while you are thinking someone comes along and buys the last copy before you, then suddenly it seems much more desirable.But there is another reason that is so. If someone else buys the book it makes it seem like a good bet. Similarly, while you waver about going into the truck and you see others going into it — people like you, people with similar backgrounds and perspectives and values — then that will change your calculations. If they want to go, then the goal must be attractive. If they are prepared to go, perhaps the risks are not what you thought. If they decide to go, space on the trucks becomes a rarer and more valuable resource. In all these ways, what others do is critical to what you do.So, over all, I think that these awful and catastrophic decisions are based on ordinary processes of thought. I think we do a final disservice to these people who have died by suggesting that they were desperate, emotional and irrational and that is why they died. That is blaming the victim.But I needed a firsthand explanation. I needed to find a migrant who survived such a journey. In Turkey, members of the Sheikh family from Deir al-Zour, Syria, told me that a trick of the smugglers had broken up a group of seven relatives who had traveled together to Belgrade. Four ended up among the 71 in the meat truck.Three other members of the family had waited in Serbia two days longer, without knowing what became of the others. Then those three — Yusuf el-Sheikh and a teenage niece and nephew — were picked up by the same smugglers, evidently carried along the same route, and somehow survived.I found Mr. Sheikh by accident, in a temporary apartment in Vienna with a group of other Syrians and Iraqis. They had come to identify bodies, and he had come for the same reason.Two of them were Syrian-born physicians married to each other and raising a family in Germany, and as with all the other relatives of the dead migrants they insisted their family members would never have willingly entered the truck.So I asked Mr. Sheikh, where had the smuggler taken him? The smuggler led him and about 25 others bound for Germany on a seven-hour walk through the night to a safe house in a Hungarian forest. They had a close brush with the Hungarian police but passed undetected. The following evening the smuggler brought them all to a meeting point where he promised to come back with passenger cars that would take them to Germany.Instead, the smuggler pulled up with a truck.“He just came back and said, ‘Get in,’ ” Mr. Sheikh told me.The smuggler wanted to pack them standing together without room to sit for what was expected to be a nine-hour drive, and the smuggler would not let them see the face of their driver. Even before he knew about the meat truck, Mr. Sheikh wondered if there would be enough air to breath.“We just wanted the journey to be over, and we kept asking, ‘Where is our family?’ ” he said. “The smuggler told us, ‘You are going to meet them in Germany.’ ”It was what Dr. Reicher might have called “an ordinary process of thought.” Without further coercion, Mr. Sheikh and the 25 others all climbed into the truck.