https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/briefing/antarctica-donald-trump-wimbledon.html
Antarctica, Donald Trump, Wimbledon: Your Thursday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 13, 2017
225
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• The map of Antarctica will have to be redrawn now that a chunk of ice twice the size of Luxembourg has broken off. It’s one of the largest icebergs ever recorded, weighing more than a trillion metric tons.A team of our reporters recently returned from Antarctica with 10 terabytes of video after two weeks of reporting there. Read their dispatches from a continent undergoing drastic change.Meanwhile, southern Europe is experiencing another heat wave: Temperatures in the Iberian Peninsula are set to soar. Hundreds of tourists in Sicily had to be evacuated as wildfires spread across southern Italy. And in Athens, the Acropolis had to be temporarily closed._____• President Trump denounced reports about his son’s meeting with a Russian lawyer as part of “the greatest witch hunt in political history.”We took a closer look at Rob Goldstone, a British publicist who brokered the meeting, and his client Emin Agalarov, a Russian pop star. Our reporter discussed unearthing Mr. Goldstone’s emails on our podcast The Daily.The email leaks show how we have dangerously overcommitted to this form of communication, our tech columnist writes.Christopher Wray, Mr. Trump’s nominee for F.B.I. director, pledged to resist pressure from the White House during his confirmation hearing. Meanwhile, Democrats are going to try to block the Republican health care bill by exploiting procedural rules._____• Mr. Trump arrived in Paris earlier this morning. Alongside President Emmanuel Macron, he will watch as American troops participate in the Bastille Day parade tomorrow.The visit could help secure Mr. Macron’s position as Mr. Trump’s primary contact in Western Europe. Before Mr. Trump’s arrival, Mr. Macron will host Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany for talks._____• Kurdish fighters in Syria this week announced the deaths of foreign combatants on the outskirts of Raqqa, the Islamic State stronghold.We traced the journey of one of them, Robert Grodt, above, from the Occupy Wall Street protests in New York to Syria’s civil war.Drone video from Mosul shows that the battle to seize Iraq’s second-largest city isn’t over. In a separate video, we look at what is known about Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the Islamic State’s leader, who is said to have been killed._____• At Wimbledon, Venus Williams, above, will take on Johanna Konta in the semifinals, and Garbiñe Muguruza will face Magdalena Rybarikova.Among the men, Roger Federer is the only member of the so-called Big Four still playing, after the elimination of Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic.In the Tour de France, Marcel Kittel of Germany won his fifth stage. And in soccer news, Dani Alves is moving to Paris St.-Germain.• There’s a new breed of employers: They build a team, do the job and say goodbye.• A court in Paris rejected a French 1.12-billion-euro tax bill for Google, arguing that its Irish European headquarters could not be taxed in France.• In the U.S., tech companies united to protest the government’s plan to scrap net neutrality rules.• Moon Express hopes to launch a soda-can-shaped lander to the moon this year, a prelude to its regular delivery service to space.•  Here’s a snapshot of global markets.•  Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the enormously influential Brazilian ex-president, was convicted of corruption and sentenced to nearly 10 years. [The New York Times]• In Poland, lawmakers voted for a bill that would give them greater say in the appointment of judges, a move that critics say infringes on judicial independence. [Reuters]• In Britain, Prime Minister Theresa May’s plan to withdraw from Euratom, the European treaty governing nuclear energy, is facing stiff opposition. [The New York Times]• Ms. May’s government is expected today to release its Repeal Bill, with which it seeks to achieve a smooth departure from the European Union. [Reuters]• In a medical milestone, a gene-altering leukemia therapy got an unanimous vote of confidence from a U.S. regulatory panel. [The New York Times]• Lawmakers in Malta voted 66 to 1 to legalize same-sex marriage. [The New York Times]• The chief executive of Sweden’s biggest security firm was falsely declared bankrupt after his identity was stolen by hackers, who applied for a loan in his name. [Bloomberg]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• A few minutes of meditation a day can help athletes, and everyone else, withstand stress.• Does your phone run out of power midday? Choose your charger wisely.• For something light, go with an herb and radish salad with feta and walnuts.• True bilingualism is a relatively rare and beautiful thing. “It’s worth it, but it’s a lot of work,” a psychologist said.• A “dad look” has suddenly become stylish: the tucked-in T-shirt.• “10000 Gestures,” a French choreographer’s ambitious new piece, debuts at the Manchester International Festival today.• Finally, a writer reflects on his discovery of the Greek island of Sifnos, and why it’s best to avoid tourist hot spots.Recent reports that the Pentagon spent millions to license a camouflage pattern that replicates lush forests — to be worn in largely arid Afghanistan — got us thinking about the famous design.As it turns out, the word “camouflage” appeared in The Times for the first time 100 years ago.The concept of disguising matériel and soldiers to blend in with their surroundings originated in the 1800s and was further developed during World War I.In May 1917, a New York lawyer who visited the French battlefront wrote about it for The Times’s Magazine section.The French were among the first to use camouflage on a wide scale, with a unit made up of artists known as “camoufleurs.” In August 1917, the U.S. Army issued its own call for enlistment in a “camouflage force,” seeking “young men who are looking for special entertainment in the way of fooling Germans.”Camouflage later became common in art and fashion. A 2007 exhibit at London’s Imperial War Museum noted its links to Cubism. (Picasso exclaimed upon seeing a camouflaged cannon in Paris: “It was us who created that.”)The artist Andy Warhol also used it, substituting bright colors for earth tones, which removed the military symbolism but retained the notion of hiding.Karen Zraick contributed reporting._____This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.