https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/world/europe/q-and-a-the-migrant-crisis-in-calais.html
Q. and A.: Calais Has Become Flashpoint in Europe’s Migrant Crisis - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Human Trafficking,Channel Tunnel,Calais (France)
Aug. 5, 2015
5534
Thousands of migrants have crowded into a makeshift camp near the port city of Calais, France, close to the entrance to the tunnel underneath the English Channel.Residents of the camp have used it as a staging ground to hop onto trucks and trains bound for Britain. Migrants have used the tunnel as a transit point for years, but they are doing so in greater numbers this summer — and taking greater risks. Ten people have died trying to cross the Channel since June, according to Médecins du Monde, and the crisis has created long delays and a political uproar.Katrin Bennhold, a reporter for The New York Times based in London, recently visited Calais for an article about the crisis, and she provides answers to some of the top questions readers are asking about Calais.Where exactly is the migrant camp?The camp, nicknamed the “jungle” by residents, is next to a highway bridge about two and a half miles northwest of the center of Calais, in northern France. It is about nine miles from the perimeter of the Channel Tunnel that connects France with Britain. Migrants from the camp often walk that far twice a day in their attempts to cross the Channel.How many migrants are in Calais?Estimates differ widely. From 3,000 to 5,000 migrants are currently housed in the camp. That is a fraction of the number of immigrants and asylum seekers arriving in Britain, where last year net migration reached 318,000. It is also small compared with the number of migrants that other, poorer countries have absorbed.Where do the migrants come from?The migrants in Calais come from countries suffering conflict and other hardships in the Middle East and Africa, part of a worldwide refugee crisis. Some of the largest groups include people from Syria, Afghanistan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Sudan and Somalia.How do migrants get to Calais?Most migrants have stories that involve many months of perilous travel across hazardous seas and encounters with human traffickers. Those coming from East Africa often come via Sudan and Libya to Italy before making their way across Europe on foot and by train. Those coming from Afghanistan and the Middle East often travel through Turkey. They cross the Mediterranean by boat to Greece and then travel across the Balkans and Eastern Europe.What happens to migrants who get through?Some migrants who make it to Britain try to remain undetected and find work in the informal economy. It can be easier if they have friends or family already in Britain, which, unlike France, has no national identity cards.Those who get picked up by the border police face a criminal investigation for “clandestine entry” and could be deported. If they fear persecution in their own country, migrants can apply for asylum. While their application is processed, they are either held in a detention center or granted temporary release and can legally remain in Britain.Why are they trying to go to Britain?Some migrants in Calais want to stay in France. They have applied for asylum and have started learning French at a new school set up by a Nigerian migrant in the camp. But many want to make it to Britain — some because they speak some English and already have some family there, others because they believe job prospects are better on the other side of the Channel. A few mentioned the strong British pound, relative to the euro.Is there a solution?A long-term solution would require not just a Europe-wide immigration and asylum policy but also an ambitious European policy aimed at nurturing greater economic prosperity and political stability in the countries the migrants come from.But so far European governments have taken a short-term view, offering piecemeal measures and pointing fingers. France wants Britain to issue identity cards. Britain wants France to better police its border. Both have called on other European countries for help.Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain has promised more sniffer dogs and money for high-tech security fences around the Channel Tunnel entrance. The bishop of Dover has been among the voices demanding more generosity toward the migrants. But there is little appetite among British voters to take them in.