http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/09/world/kenneth-bae-matthew-todd-miller-released-by-north-korea.html
Kenneth Bae and Matthew Todd Miller, Released by North Korea, Are Back on U.S. Soil - The New York Times
North Korea,Bae  Kenneth,Miller  Matthew Todd,Clapper  James R Jr,United States International Relations,Political Prisoners
Nov. 8, 2014
5345
WASHINGTON — North Korea released two Americans who had been accused of trying to subvert the secretive state, after the director of national intelligence for the United States flew to the country on a secret mission and left on Saturday with the men aboard his aircraft.The plane carrying the Americans — Kenneth Bae and Matthew Todd Miller — and the national intelligence director, James R. Clapper Jr., landed at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, near Tacoma, Wash., about 9:15 p.m. Pacific time on Saturday.Mr. Bae walked off the plane and into the embrace of relatives on the tarmac. Mr. Miller, his head shaved, sprinted down the steps into the arms of his parents, who were waiting for him at the bottom.Securing the releases was an unusual role for Mr. Clapper, the nation’s most senior intelligence official, whose job is to coordinate policy and operations among the nation’s 16 spy agencies. Gruff, blunt-speaking and seen by many in the Obama administration as a throwback to the Cold War, the retired general is an unlikely diplomat but, in the words of one American official, “perfect for the North Koreans.”Mr. Bae, 46, had been held for two years after he was detained on charges of using a Christian evangelical organization, Youth with a Mission, to preach against the North Korean government and planning a “religious coup d'état.” After a brief trial, he was sentenced to 15 years of hard labor on a farm, raising concerns about his fragile health.Mr. Miller, 25, entered North Korea seven months ago and reportedly tore up his visa, and by some accounts sought asylum. He was charged with unruly behavior, and North Korean officials suspected he was trying to get inside one of the country’s feared prison camps, to write about it later.Together with the release last month of Jeffrey E. Fowle, who had been held for six months, the decision to let the two Americans go is the latest evidence that Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s unpredictable and untested young leader, is trying his first approaches to the Obama administration since taking power. Officials would not say whether Mr. Clapper traveled with a letter from President Obama — which would be a usual approach — but a senior administration official said he “was there to listen,” and to “reiterate our views.”Mr. Obama said Saturday that “we’re very grateful for their safe return,” and praised Mr. Clapper for successfully completing what he called “a challenging mission.”In fact, the specter of Mr. Clapper’s flying into the last stronghold of hard-line communist dictatorship may be the director’s best chance to revise a national image that was bruised when he was asked, in an open congressional hearing, whether intelligence officials collected data about ordinary Americans. “No sir,” he responded. “Not wittingly.”Months later the revelations by Edward J. Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor, made clear that, in the most charitable interpretation, Mr. Clapper had issued a misleading statement to protect classified programs; he later conceded in a letter that “my response was clearly erroneous.”The administration issued almost no details of the trip to North Korea, saying communications from Pyongyang were so scant that they did not immediately know what had taken place in the discussion. It was also not clear whether Mr. Clapper had spoken directly with Mr. Kim or had seen other North Korean leaders; Mr. Kim disappeared from public view this summer with what now appears to have been a painful leg ailment.Mr. Clapper rarely announces his schedule and can travel with little notice. But last week he canceled, at the last moment, a speech at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. He left shortly after that on his trip to the North.Sending high-level emissaries to the North is a long tradition; in Mr. Obama’s first term, former President Bill Clinton went to secure the release of two American journalists who had been seized on a trip along the Chinese border with the North. But Mr. Clinton’s trip led to no fundamental change in relations, which have been in a deep freeze since the North conducted a nuclear weapons test, its second, in May 2009, just months into Mr. Obama’s presidency. One of Mr. Obama’s top Asia aides, Jeffrey A. Bader, said then that the test made everyone in the White House “North Korea hawks.”Mr. Obama has not attempted the kind of broad engagement that he has pursued so vigorously with Iran, responding to the North’s provocations by pursuing a policy of freezing the country out of the international economy, in hopes the regime will eventually implode.But with the Iran nuclear negotiations approaching a major deadline, and the possibility of a new dialogue to test whether Mr. Kim’s advances are sincere, Mr. Obama has a chance to make some headway with two countries that have posed both nuclear and human rights challenges to the United States and its allies.The president leaves on Sunday for China, North Korea’s last protector. Presumably the subject of how to deal with Mr. Kim, about whom Chinese leaders have expressed suspicion and disdain, will come up in meetings with President Xi Jinping.Mr. Bae and Mr. Miller’s plane touched down Saturday night, backlit by a nearly full moon dimmed by fast-moving clouds. Mr. Bae emerged first, and was swarmed by about a dozen relatives and friends. He paused for hugs then continued inside, out of sight of the row of news cameras lined up about 100 yards away. After a few minutes, Mr. Miller came out, greeted by a smaller welcoming committee.At a news conference, Mr. Bae thanked the Obama administration, officials in North Korea and everyone who prayed for him and his family while he was detained. “I just want to say thank you all for supporting me and lifting me up at the same time that I was not forgetting the people of North Korea,” he said.Speaking of his ordeal, he said, “I learned a lot. I grew a lot. I lost a lot of weight, in a good way.” Some people in the room chuckled. “I’m standing strong because of you,” he added. Mr. Miller did not appear.Mr. Miller, of Bakersfield, Calif., had seemed a bit lost in the interviews he had been allowed to conduct for American television from the North. He went through a brief trial this fall; photos released by the North showed him with eyes downcast, and flanked by uniformed security officials.He was accused of entering North Korea with the “ambition” to deliberately violate North Korean law so he could experience life in a North Korean prison and become a firsthand witness about the human rights conditions in the North, The Associated Press and The Choson Sinbo, a South Korean paper, reported at the time of the trial.That may have touched a nerve. In recent weeks a top North Korean diplomat, Jang il-Hun, met in New York with a group of Americans to argue that a United Nations report documenting the North’s extensive prison camp system was based on fabrications.That report described “widespread, systematic and gross” violations, including enslavement, torture, rape and executions in the prison camps.The ambassador seemed concerned that Mr. Kim could face charges at the International Criminal Court for human rights violations, and he said the North had only “ordinary prisons,” like those in the United States. “In my country we don’t even know the term ‘political prisoners,' ” said Mr. Jang, a 32-year veteran of the North Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs.South Korea seized upon the release of the Americans to urge North Korea to free a South Korean missionary held there. In May, North Korea sentenced Kim Jong-uk, a Baptist missionary, to life in a labor camp for allegedly trying to build underground churches in the North.