https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/29/world/asia/north-korea-student-warmbier.html
Otto Warmbier, Detained U.S. Student, Apologizes in North Korea - The New York Times
North Korea,Warmbier  Otto Frederick (1994- ),Pyongyang (North Korea),CNN,Political Prisoners,International Relations
Feb. 29, 2016
5216
SEOUL, South Korea — An American student detained in North Korea appeared in a government-arranged news conference in Pyongyang, the capital, on Monday, apologizing for what the country called an antistate crime: trying to steal a political banner.The student, Otto F. Warmbier, an undergraduate at the University of Virginia, was detained in North Korea in January while visiting the country on a tourist visa. While announcing his arrest, the state news media reported last month that Mr. Warmbier entered the country with the intent of “bringing down the foundation of its single-minded unity.”“I made the worst mistake of my life,” said Mr. Warmbier, sobbing and pleading for his release, according to Associated Press video of the news conference, which was held at the People’s Palace of Culture in Pyongyang.Early on Jan. 1, “I committed my crime of taking out the important political slogan from the staff-only area of the Yanggakdo International Hotel,” Mr. Warmbier, 21, said at the news conference. The charges against him said he was encouraged to commit the “hostile act” by a member of an Ohio church, a secretive university organization and the C.I.A.Mr. Warmbier said he tried to take the banner as a trophy for a member of the church who offered to buy him a used car worth $10,000 if he was successful, according to the North’s state-run Korean Central News Agency. Mr. Warmbier also said that a member of the secretive Z Society at his school also encouraged his act, promising him membership if he helped to promote the group’s goal of spreading freedom and eliminating tyranny, the agency said.“I apologize to each and every one of the millions of the Korean people, and I beg that you see how I was used and manipulated,” Mr. Warmbier said, according to CNN, which covered the news conference. He added, “I was used by the United States administration like many before.”It remained unclear whether Mr. Warmbier was coerced to appear at the news conference and apologize.His news conference came as the United States was trying to win support at the United Nations Security Council for a resolution calling for tough sanctions against the country for its recent nuclear test and rocket launch.Mr. Warmbier was detained on Jan. 2 as he was about to board a plane and leave the country, according to his tour agency, Young Pioneer Tours.North Korea has held several Americans in recent years, accusing them of illegal entry, spying, spreading Christian beliefs and other antistate crimes. One American was arrested and accused of leaving a Bible behind in his hotel.