http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/us/st-louis-county-police-escalated-tensions-in-ferguson-report-finds.html
U.S. Advises Force in Missouri to Mend Ties - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,St Louis County (Mo),Brown  Michael (1996-2014),Fines (Penalties),Blacks,Police,Ferguson (Mo),Justice Department,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots
Oct. 2, 2015
7426
KANSAS CITY, Mo. —  When demonstrations broke out in Ferguson, Mo., last year after a white police officer fatally shot an unarmed black 18-year-old, the St. Louis County Police Department was ill prepared to respond, lacking an understanding of the strain between the police and the community, and taking actions that escalated tensions and infringed upon protesters’ constitutional rights, according to a federal assessment released on Friday.While the department improved its response months later when a grand jury declined to indict the officer, it still needed to strengthen its relationship with the community, the report by the Department of Justice said.The 182-page report, coming more than a year after the death of the 18-year-old, Michael Brown, was completed at the request of the county’s police chief, Jon Belmar. He made his request as concerns mounted that the Ferguson Police Department, and other municipal forces within St. Louis County, were overly aggressive in ticketing people to generate revenue, eroding trust within the community.Federal officials found that the county police needed to improve recruitment and hiring practices to get more minority representation, investigate officers’ use of force more thoroughly, emphasize implicit bias and fair and impartial policing training to guard against racial profiling in traffic stops, and improve training for handling mass demonstrations and community engagement.“While particularly proficient in the area of tactical operations, the department lacks the training, leadership and culture necessary to truly engender community policing and to build and sustain trusting relationships with the community,” the report said.There are 90 municipalities in the county, many of them with their own police departments. But the county’s department, with 855 officers, provides at least some services to 66 municipalities, as well as to the unincorporated areas in the county, according to the report. The actions of the smaller forces can have a negative impact on the county department, the report said.The assessment was done by the Police Foundation, a nonprofit based in Washington, for the Justice Department’s Office of Community Oriented Policing Services. Officials reviewed departmental documents including training manuals and policies. They interviewed more than 200 people, including members of the force and residents. And they directly observed departmental operations, including preparations for the grand jury announcement in November in the death of Mr. Brown.The police response to the grand jury announcement and other protests was hampered by inconsistent direction from leaders, deficiencies in communication within and between agencies, and the integration of assistance from other municipal forces “each with disparate missions, policies, training, equipment, and policing cultures,” the report said.In preparation for the grand jury announcement, the county police consulted with community members, including a group called Lost Voices, among the most brash and vocal critics of police practices. Tactical and protective gear were kept out of public view until they were needed, and officials required a higher level of approval before deploying tear gas. Officers were given pocket-size cards with the First, Fourth and 14th Amendments, as well as copies of their sworn oath, the report said.While those steps helped improve the police response over what it was in August 2014, immediately after Mr. Brown was killed, federal officials said there were still areas for improvement. They recommended better coordination and training for departments across the county; increased training in de-escalation; and providing adequate notice before using tear gas, including giving warnings over social media. The report also found that police supervisors should take a more active role in engaging crowds during civil disturbances.The report released on Friday was not scathing like an earlier federal report that blasted the City of Ferguson for what it called unconstitutional law enforcement practices that routinely targeted blacks in order to pad the city coffers. Ronald Davis, the director for the Office of Community Oriented Policing, said on Friday that the St. Louis County police had “a very solid foundation and started at one of the better points that we’ve seen in collaborative reform.” From 2009 to 2013, the county police used force at a lower rate than the national average, the report said.But the report did urge the St. Louis County police to more closely study traffic stops and use-of-force incidents to determine the potential for bias.The report does not bind the St. Louis County police to make any changes. But a civil rights investigation could follow if federal officials decide there are deficiencies the county police need to address.