https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/us/politics/trump-duterte-phone-transcript-philippine-drug-crackdown.html
Trump Praises Duterte for Philippine Drug Crackdown in Call Transcript - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Duterte  Rodrigo,Kim Jong-un,Trump  Donald J,Philippines,United States,North Korea
May 23, 2017
2641
WASHINGTON — President Trump praised President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines in a phone call last month for doing an “unbelievable job on the drug problem” in the island nation where the government has sanctioned gunning down suspects in the streets. Mr. Trump also boasted that the United States has “two nuclear submarines” off the coast of North Korea but said he does not want to use them.The comments were part of a Philippine transcript of the April 29 call that was circulated on Tuesday, under a “confidential” cover sheet, by the Americas division of the Philippine Department of Foreign Affairs. In Washington, a senior administration official confirmed that the transcript was an accurate representation of the call between the two iconoclastic leaders. The official was not authorized to publicly discuss the call and confirmed it on the condition of anonymity.The White House also keeps transcripts of such calls, but they are routinely kept secret. The Philippine rendering of the call offers a rare insight into how Mr. Trump talks to fellow leaders: He sounds much the way he sounds in public, casing issues in largely black-and-white terms, often praising authoritarian leaders, largely unconcerned about human rights violations and genuinely uncertain about the nature of his adversary in North Korea.Mr. Trump placed the call and began it by congratulating Mr. Duterte for the government-sanctioned attacks on drug suspects. The program has been widely condemned by human rights groups around the world because extrajudicial killings have taken thousands of lives without arrest or trial. In March, the program was criticized in the State Department’s annual human rights report, which referred to “apparent governmental disregard for human rights and due process.”Mr. Trump had no such reservations. “I just wanted to congratulate you because I am hearing of the unbelievable job on the drug problem,” he said. “Many countries have the problem, we have a problem, but what a great job you are doing and I just wanted to call and tell you that.”Mr. Duterte responded that drugs were “the scourge of my nation now, and I have to do something to preserve the Filipino nation.” Mr. Trump responded that “we had a previous president who did not understand that,” an apparent reference to President Barack Obama, “but I understand that.”But Mr. Duterte had another subject he wanted to discuss: North Korea. He told Mr. Trump that “as long as those rockets and warheads are in the hands of Kim Jong-un we will never be safe as there’s not telling what will happen next.”That led Mr. Trump to inquire whether Mr. Kim, the 33-year-old North Korean leader, is “someone who is stable or not stable.” Mr. Duterte offered up the opinion that Mr. Kim was unstable, noting that he is always seen laughing in pictures of missile and nuclear tests.Mr. Trump seemed to try to reassure Mr. Duterte. Mr. Kim, he said, “has got the powder, but he doesn’t have the delivery system — all his rockets are crashing.” The president said nothing of the American-led program to sabotage the launches, though in some tests both before and after the call, the North has conducted several successful launches.“We have a lot of firepower over there,” Mr. Trump noted. “We have two submarines — the best in the world. We have two nuclear submarines, not that we want to use them at all.”The two men talked about China’s potential influence and Mr. Duterte promised to call President Xi Jinping. Mr. Trump noted that the two men had met at his Florida resort, and he called Mr. Xi “a good guy.”The transcript was widely circulated on Tuesday, and The Washington Post and The Intercept both published articles based on the same document.The end of the conversation centered on a first meeting between the two men, perhaps when Mr. Trump is in Manila later this year. But Mr. Trump twice invited Mr. Duterte to “come to the Oval Office.”“I will love to have you in the Oval Office, anytime you want to come,” Mr. Trump said.“Take care of yourself, Rodrigo,” he concluded. “God bless you.”