https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/10/business/volkswagen-diesel-settlement.html
Volkswagen Set to Plead Guilty and to Pay U.S. $4.3 Billion in Deal - The New York Times
Volkswagen AG,Fuel Emissions (Transportation),Frauds and Swindling,Justice Department,Fines (Penalties)
Jan. 10, 2017
6136
Volkswagen is on the verge of pleading guilty to criminal charges and paying $4.3 billion in fines, in a deal that would resolve a federal criminal investigation into its cheating on vehicle emissions tests, the automaker said on Tuesday.The expected guilty plea and the recent arrest of a Volkswagen executive on conspiracy charges buck a pattern of companies essentially paying their way out of criminal accusations. While companies often face large fines for wrongdoing, it is far less common for them to admit to breaking the law.As a result of the deal, Volkswagen could be required to cooperate with investigations into individual company employees, accelerating the pace of those cases.A guilty plea would also be likely to weaken the company’s ability to defend itself against investigations by state attorneys general, and against lawsuits brought by shareholders who accuse Volkswagen of waiting too long to disclose the financial risk of its emissions cheating.According to two people briefed on the settlement, Volkswagen is expected to plead guilty to charges of conspiracy to commit wire fraud and to violate the Clean Air Act, customs violations, and obstruction of justice. The people could not talk publicly about the deal because it was not yet final. Many of the 600,000 cars in the United States equipped with the emissions-cheating software were imported from Germany or Mexico.The $4.3 billion in fines covers criminal and civil aspects of the government’s case, including environmental and customs-related penalties. The fines would bring the total cost of the scandal to Volkswagen in the United States to $20 billion, including settlements of civil suits by car owners, certainly one of the most costly corporate scandals in history.The details of the deal, which requires the approval of the company’s management and supervisory boards, were provided by Volkswagen in a financial disclosure on Tuesday. Volkswagen said in the disclosure that money it had set aside for scandal-related costs would be insufficient to cover the latest agreement. A vote on the matter could come on Wednesday.The Justice Department declined to comment.Regulators in the United States began investigating Volkswagen in early 2014 after a study by West Virginia University showed that its diesel cars polluted far more on the road than during official emissions tests.Company executives knew that the cars were programmed to recognize when they were being tested and to deliver exemplary pollution readings, according to investigators. Rather than admit wrongdoing, Volkswagen representatives provided false and misleading information for more than a year to the California Air Resources Board and the Environmental Protection Agency.A manager accused of playing a central role in that cover-up was arrested on Saturday. Oliver Schmidt, 48, Volkswagen’s former top emissions compliance manager in the United States, was taken into custody at Miami International Airport as he was about to board a flight to Germany.The case against Mr. Schmidt, who is charged with defrauding the government and violating the Clean Air Act, would probably not be affected by a settlement between the company and federal authorities. James Liang, a former Volkswagen engineer who worked for the automaker in California, pleaded guilty in September to charges that included conspiracy to defraud the federal government and violating environmental regulations.German prosecutors are conducting their own investigation which would not be affected by the settlement with the United States.Volkswagen said that the settlement would include a statement of facts that are the basis for the fines, but provided no details about what it might say. The statement could provoke further consequences if Volkswagen admits that top managers knew of the fraud sooner than they have acknowledged, or if any current top managers had knowledge of the cover-up.The fallout from the scandal has already reached the top of the company, with Martin Winterkorn resigning as chief executive in September. German prosecutors are now investigating whether Mr. Winterkorn and another executive, Hans Dieter Pötsch, violated securities laws.Shareholder lawsuits in the United States and Europe say that top managers knew of the cheating months if not years before the E.P.A. issued a news release about the illegal software in September 2015. The company violated its duty to inform shareholders of the risk, the suits say.Should Volkswagen finalize the agreement, it would be one of a number of companies to reach settlements with federal investigators in a recent flurry of activity before President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office. In December, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay $7.2 billion related to its marketing of toxic securities tied to the United States housing market.In Volkswagen’s case, the settlement may reflect eagerness on the part of Obama administration officials to strike a deal while they are still in office, and the company’s reluctance to gamble on the new leadership.Volkswagen faces separate criminal investigations by the attorneys general in 42 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.Amy Spitalnick, a spokeswoman for New York State Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman said, “Volkswagen demonstrated a total disregard for the law and for the protection of public health and the environment.” Mr. Schneiderman’s office has taken a lead in the cases brought by the states. She declined to comment further on the investigations.The criminal case against Volkswagen, and the expected guilty plea, have set it apart from other recent auto industry inquiries. In settlements with General Motors and Toyota over their handling of safety defects, the companies agreed to pay large fines, but did not plead guilty.In the financial sector, JPMorgan Chase negotiated a similar deal over accusations that it had turned a blind eye to the Ponzi scheme run by Bernard L. Madoff.Prosecutors are also mulling criminal charges against Takata, the Japanese manufacturer under criminal investigation for its defective airbags.“The idea is that it isn’t acceptable to let companies pay billions of dollars to avoid criminal liability,” said David M. Uhlmann, law professor at the University of Michigan and a former chief of the Environmental Crimes Section at the Justice Department. “And Volkswagen made a bad situation worse when it lied for so many months about its emissions cheating.”