https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/22/nyregion/a-widening-rift-between-de-blasio-and-the-police-is-savagely-ripped-open.html
For Mayor de Blasio and New York Police, a Rift Is Ripped Open - The New York Times
de Blasio  Bill,Police Department (NYC),Attacks on Police,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,New York City
Dec. 21, 2014
9498
Mayor Bill de Blasio sat in the front pew at St. Patrick’s Cathedral on Sunday, head bowed at times, with his wife on his left and the police commissioner on his right.The crowd had come, Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan said, to mourn the two officers killed in an ambush in Brooklyn on Saturday. It had come to pray for their families and their “brothers and sisters in uniform.”He went on.“We pray for our leaders as well,” the cardinal said, looking toward the mayor’s row. “You’ve done what so many New Yorkers do in times of trial. You’ve come to St. Patrick’s.”At the helm of a grieving New York, still raw from weeks of protests amid a national reckoning over law enforcement and race, Mr. de Blasio faces his biggest test yet.The mayor, who does not attend church regularly, did not speak publicly on Sunday. His administration said he hoped to convey, in subdued terms, the need for unity in the city.Yet on the heels of the police deaths, the long-simmering tensions between Mr. de Blasio and the department he has pledged to reshape have reached an extraordinary nadir. Officers, led by union leaders, turned their backs on the mayor and Commissioner William J. Bratton on Saturday night as the two walked through a hospital to address the public about the deaths.The president of the city’s largest police union, Patrick Lynch, blamed Mr. de Blasio for the tragedy. The officers’ blood “starts on the steps of City Hall,” he said, “in the office of the mayor.”The reaction encapsulated weeks of escalating tensions. Even before the shooting, union leaders had circulated a letter allowing officers to request that the mayor not attend their funerals in the event of their death in the line of duty.Since Mr. de Blasio’s crusade on the campaign trail against what he viewed as overreaching by the police in the Bloomberg administration, those close to the mayor have professed that securing the trust of officers was an essential, complicated task.And for much of the department, it seems, he has fallen far short.“This is a nightmare of the highest magnitude for everyone,” said Michael Palladino, president of the Detectives’ Endowment Association. Leaders at City Hall, he added, “need to dig down deep in their souls and understand that campaigning to be a leader is easier than being a leader.”While the mayor remained largely out of view on Sunday, his predicament attracted a national audience. Current and former Republican lawmakers, including George E. Pataki, a former governor of New York, and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, suggested Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, had set a troubling tone and contributed to a dangerous climate for officers.Protesters have filled the streets nearly every night in the more than two weeks since a grand jury declined to bring criminal charges in the police chokehold case of Eric Garner. Many of them have chafed at the mayor’s defense of “broken windows” theory of policing, the aggressive enforcement of low-level offenses, which Mr. Bratton has championed. (Officers approached Mr. Garner in July over the sale of loose cigarettes.)The protests, which have been predominantly peaceful but have overtaken bridges and city streets, inspired union accusations that Mr. de Blasio had placed too high a priority on protecting the rights of the demonstrators. (He met on Friday with one of the protest groups, Justice League NYC.)Even when trying to defend officers, the mayor has, at times, been criticized by them. After reports of an attack on two police lieutenants during protests on the Brooklyn Bridge on Dec. 13, union leaders lamented that the mayor’s statement condemning the episode included the qualifier that police were “allegedly assaulted.”In interviews, officers have noted the commissioner’s repeated defense of Mr. de Blasio — for a mayoral motorcade that apparently defied traffic laws; for counting the Rev. Al Sharpton as a confidant; and for comments he made after the Garner decision.“Our police are here to protect us, and we honor that,” the mayor said then, invoking his biracial son, Dante. “And at the same time, there’s a history we have to overcome, because for so many of our young people, there’s a fear.”Allies heard a mayor making good on a central campaign pledge: to salve the wounds of residents who had come to distrust the police.Many in the department heard something else: the most striking example yet of what has been — according to a dozen officers interviewed before the shooting — the consistent vilification of the police by the city’s leader.In fact, Mr. de Blasio has repeatedly praised the police, particularly throughout the recent sprawling protests. And many in the city have been critical of the unions’ treatment of the mayor since the shootings. (A spokesman for Mr. Lynch did not respond to questions on Sunday.)Eric Adams, the Brooklyn borough president and a former police captain, said, “We need to use the pain that all of us are experiencing and turn it into purpose.” He added that “calling for reform is not a call for harm of police officers.”Even Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican and former mayor, offered a measure of cover to Mr. de Blasio, telling Fox News that it “goes too far” to blame the mayor for the deaths. But, he added, Mr. de Blasio “did not properly police the protests” by allowing them to block city streets.In an interview on Friday, Mr. Bratton acknowledged that “morale in the department, in general, is not good.”Administration officials have attributed much of the police unrest to a contract dispute, suggesting that union leaders were not necessarily reflecting the opinions of the rank and file.Many critics, though, trace the roots of department angst to the election last year. In an interview on ABC on Sunday, Mr. Bratton’s predecessor as commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, echoed a familiar refrain of the mayor’s skeptics: that he had run an “antipolice campaign.”Mr. Bratton, in the interview on Friday, disputed this notion, arguing that Mr. de Blasio had in fact campaigned against the zealous use of stop-and-frisk tactics, not against those in the department.“He didn’t run against the Police Department,” Mr. Bratton said. “He ran against practices of the Police Department.”Once in office, during another year of decreased crime, Mr. de Blasio pushed for retraining programs for officers and a loosening of penalties for possession of small amounts of marijuana. Even ostensibly minor issues, like the use of profanity by officers, have been broached.At the same time, Mr. de Blasio said in an interview on Friday, he is mindful that keeping the peace in the city is his “foundational” obligation. After Mr. Garner’s death in July, the mayor had staff members research past episodes of police violence in the city, like the cases of Abner Louima and Amadou Diallo, to see how the city navigated the aftermath.Mr. de Blasio has also examined the 1991 riots in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in internal discussions.Yet in the interview on Friday, less than a day before the shootings, the mayor spoke hopefully of his efforts to win officers over, predicting that the “vast majority of officers” would eventually line up behind his proposed changes.“The transitional process is always tense and difficult,” the mayor said. “But I think we’re going somewhere.”