http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/world/asia/president-duterte-says-god-told-him-to-swear-off-the-curse-words.html
Philippine President, Rodrigo Duterte, Says God Told Him to Quit Cursing - The New York Times
Duterte  Rodrigo,Indecency  Obscenity and Profanity,Philippines
Oct. 28, 2016
8194
President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines, who told President Obama in October he “can go to hell” and has unleashed epithets at the pope, said on Thursday that the voice of God told him to stop cursing.He promised to obey the word of the Almighty.Mr. Duterte told reporters after a flight home from Japan on Thursday that he had heard a voice commanding him to ease up on the cuss words, or else the plane would crash.Faced with a choice between cleaning up his language and killing everyone onboard with an unplanned dive into the Philippine Sea, he said, he chose to stay alive.Mr. Duterte, who has waged a bloody and ruthless antidrug campaign that has killed about 2,000 people in his country — including the mayor of a small town and nine others on Friday — said he heard the voice as everyone else was asleep and snoring: “If you don’t stop, I will bring this plane down now.”“Who is this?” Mr. Duterte said he responded.After ascertaining that the voice came from the Lord, he said, he promised to stop swearing.“A promise to God is a promise to the Filipino people,” he declared.Will Mr. Duterte stick to his newly sworn policy? So far, so good. The Philippine leader did not unleash a single bad word in his hourlong news conference after landing in Manila.A linguistically restrained version of Mr. Duterte, who has been compared to Donald J. Trump, would be quite a change for a man who cursed Pope Francis for creating traffic delays, made light of the 1989 rape and murder of an Australian missionary and boasts of sexual conquests.He suggested that Mr. Obama take his voyage to Hades after complaining that Washington was refusing to sell weapons to his government.In September, he appeared to be addressing Mr. Obama when he used a curse in Tagalog that can be translated as “son of a bitch.” (Mr. Duterte later apologized.)“Clearly, he’s a colorful guy,” Mr. Obama responded after a meeting between the two was canceled.Mr. Duterte, who took office on June 30, has presented something of a diplomatic headache for the United States, aiming a stream of invectives at this country even as he drew closer to China and gave a two-year deadline for United States troops to pack up and leave the Philippines.The United States has been among the foreign governments to condemn the police killings, but the efforts have been popular in the Philippines, where people say they have made the streets safer.As for Mr. Duterte’s vow to stop cursing, he allowed that he might not entirely kick his habit, perhaps saving obscenities for when they are most needed.“There’s always a time for everything, a time to be foul-mouthed,” he said. “It’s all calibrated.”