https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/world/asia/pakistan-dawn-journalist-cyril-almeida.html
Reporter Who Wrote of Military-Civilian Clash Says He Can’t Leave Pakistan - The New York Times
Sharif  Nawaz,Almeida  Cyril,Pakistan,News and News Media,Espionage and Intelligence Services,Haqqani Network,Jaish-e-Muhammad,Lashkar-e-Taiba,Dawn (Pakistani Newspaper)
Oct. 11, 2016
896
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — A well-known Pakistani journalist said on Tuesday that he had been barred from leaving the country, days after he wrote that civilian officials had confronted the military over what they called a failure to act against Islamist groups.Cyril Almeida, a widely read columnist for Dawn, Pakistan’s leading daily, said on Twitter that he had been placed on the “exit control list,” a roster of people forbidden to leave the country. The news caused an uproar on social media, and other journalists denounced the move, which was confirmed by a government official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to talk to the news media.Last Thursday, Dawn published a front-page article by Mr. Almeida describing a meeting at which high-level civilian officials confronted military leaders over policies toward Islamist groups based in Pakistan that have launched attacks in India and Afghanistan.The article, attributed to unidentified officials said to have been present, said that Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had been chairman of the Oct. 3 meeting, with Lt. Gen. Rizwan Akhtar, Pakistan’s powerful spy chief, leading the military side.According to the article, civilian officials warned that Pakistan could face international isolation unless the military moved against the Islamist groups. The United States has long urged Pakistan to take action against the Haqqani network, which is active in Afghanistan, while India has demanded that Pakistan crack down on the groups Lashkar-e-Taiba, which is believed to have been behind the 2008 Mumbai attacks, and Jaish-e-Muhammad.The article said that Mr. Sharif’s younger brother, Shahbaz Sharif, the chief minister of Punjab Province, accused the spy agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence directorate, of working behind the scenes to free militants who had been arrested by the civilian authorities.The prime minister has long had a tense relationship with the military, which asserts itself on foreign affairs and defense policies, and many in Pakistan speculated that his government had leaked the Dawn story. Mr. Sharif’s last government was toppled in a bloodless coup in 1999.On Monday, Gen. Raheel Sharif, the army chief, and General Akhtar, the spy chief, met with the prime minister in Islamabad. A subsequent statement from the prime minister’s office said the Dawn story was “fabricated” and had undermined “vital state interests,” and it vowed “stern action” against those responsible.Soon after midnight, on Tuesday, Mr. Almeida said he had been put on the exit control list. “Puzzled, saddened. Had no intention of going anywhere; this is my home,” he said in another Twitter post.Zaffar Abbas, the editor of Dawn, stood by the article and criticized the travel ban in a statement published on Tuesday. “The elected government and state institutions should refrain from targeting the messenger, and scapegoating the country’s most respected newspaper in a malicious campaign,” he said.Pakistan is regarded as one of the most dangerous countries for journalists, who often face threats, intimidation and risks to their lives.