http://www.nytimes.com/1972/10/25/archives/dance-nijinsky-clown-of-god-bows-bejars-portrait-of-mad-artist-at.html
Dance: ‘Nijinsky, Clown of God’ Bows - The New York Times
DANCING
Oct. 25, 1972
3940
NIJINSKY, CLOWN OF GOD (Aineriean errmlere), Ballet realed by Maurice Bejart; music, Pierre Henry with sequences from TchalkovskY's “Palhe Nuge” Symphony); set and costume design, Joelle Rouslan and Roger Bernard; lighting, Roger Bernard assisfed by Joe Calvin; hats, Marquerlle Gouilin; heads of the grotesques, Jacques Viersel. Presented by the Ballet of the Twentieth Century in association with the National Opera Belgulm—Theatre Royal de la Monnale and Madison Square Garden prorductions, Inc. at the Felt Forum, Madison Square Garden Center.WITH: Jorge Donn, Paul mejia Ivan Marko, Daniel Lommel, jorg Lawler, Micha Van Hoecke, Suzanne Farrell, Angela Albrecht, Louha Dobrievirh, Tanta Bari, Catherine Verneull, MCIIIA Martinez, Hitoml Asakawa, Victor Dilate, Jan Nuyls, Jean. Marle Limon, Franco Romano, Robert Denvers, Pierre Dohrlevich, Dyane Gray‐Culleri, Niklas Lk, Luc Buy, Antonio Cans and the company.The artist clearly has the right to fail, but one idly wonders whether he has the right to bore. Even inadvertently. For presumably Maurice Mart, the director, choreographer and prime spirit of his oddly named Ballet of the 20th Century, did not create his dance spectacle “Nijinsky, Clown of God” to be one of the monumental bores of contemporary ballet. But in my submission, it is. Mr. Bejart's Brusselsbased company gave the work its first American performance at the Felt Forum, Madison Square Garden, last night.Mr. Bejart has grand and valid conceptions, yet often Seems unable to carry them out. “Nijinsky, Clown of God,” his most ambitious work yet, is a clear example. The idea is a considerable one. He wants to achieve two things, I presume. To offer in dance terms the biography of a remarkabie dancer and to present the dance as a symbol of life's struggle against death. Mr. Mart's choice of a subject was unerring—Vaslav Nijinsky, a child of nature, a product of ballet, and a clown of God. Simpleton, puritan and genius, artist and madman, Nijinsky is also a symbol of 20th‐century ballet. It is a great subject.I am told by people who have seen the work in Europe —which I have not—that the Felt Forum is not a particularly satisfactory arena for its spectacle. It is apparently too low and too long, and the ramp‐like entrances to the central playing area, which are essential to the work's physical concept, are, as result, too low and miss something in dramatic contrast with the rest. Possibly.Yet nothing can disguise the fact that Mr. Kart has taken a great theme, embroidered it with extraordinarily clever ideas and emerged with an inflated disaster that has not even grandeur to declare. For all its cost, it looks an oddly small disaster.The ballet, which lasts 2½ hours with an intermission, starts with a kind of rhythmic observation of dance's primal pulse. Then we are introduced to Nijinsky, an almost naked figure with a painted face of pain. We also see Diaghilev, his impresario, creator and lover—and by the side of the seemingly minuscule Diaghilev is a giant puppet Diaghilev (created in the shape of Cocteau's caricature), which hovers ponderously over the scene as a kind of papier‐maché god.Now we see Nijinsky in the heyday of his brief career. Now he is represented by five figures—the Golden Slave, the Faun, the Specter of the Rose, Petrushka, and, more elusively, his final role, Tyl Eulenspiegel. The choreography for these roles suggests — sometimes subtly, sometimes grossly—the choreography of the original ballets. Then there is Nijinsky's search for love, his quest for a woman. His marriage, his rupture from Diaghilev and his fall from grace.The second part of the ballet is concerned with his madness his ideas on love and society and his final agonized death. The text for the ballet is taken from Nijinsky's own “Journal,” although interestingly the attacks on capitalism are in French, the rest being in English. It is a moving document of a torn spirit. The background is coarse electronic music by Pierre Henry, which is interspersed with tasteless if vulgar selections from Tchaikovsky's Sixth Symphony.Music apart, there is a spe cies of grandeur here. It is a kind of ballet that no one has ever attempted before—and yet the attempt is not worth it. Simply because Mart has not got the choreographic ability to bring home his literary vision.In the long run—or even in the short hop—there is no possible substitute in ballet for choreography. Béjart strings dances together eagerly enough, step falls upon step and gesture is carved on gesture. But nothing really means anything—nothing is really expressive. Also, while in big things his ideas are fascinating, in small things his concepts are cheap. Theatrically, Mart will too often accept that the obvious is the shortest distance beween two points. It may be—it is also the most tedious.And tedium slowly ran riot at the Felt Forum. This despite the efforts of the everloyal, ever‐plucky Belgian company. Suzanne Farrell, all too briefly, in dances all too foolish, had a few punctuating moments of loveliness during the evening as Nijinsky's dream of womanly love, and Jorge Donn looked decently painted as Nijinsky, even though some one of more elusive presence might have more easily suggested this shy god of the dance. I liked also Paul Mejia as the Specter of the Rose and Daniel Lommel as the Golden Slave. Yet in totality this is a spectacle far, far more empty than it needed to have been. Perhaps it should be put on ice.