https://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/18/arts/music/in-new-york-a-show-of-solidarity-for-russian-punk-band.html
In New York, a Show of Solidarity for Russian Punk Band - The New York Times
Pussy Riot,Russia,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,New York City,Rock Music,Putin  Vladimir V,Sevigny  Chloe
Aug. 17, 2012
4207
Scant Russian was heard, but on Thursday night, a samizdat kind of crowd turned out in support of the Russian punk art group Pussy Riot. At 7:30 p.m., hundreds of people — mostly women, but some men, a few in homemade “Free Pussy Riot” T-shirts — lined up around the boutique Ace Hotel, stretching along 29th Street and down Broadway. The hotel’s subterranean Liberty Hall is normally the province of exclusive rock shows and fashion afterparties. But on this evening, a handful of performers stood before a bank of speakers there, reading heady statements related to the trial of Maria Alyokhina, Yekaterina Samutsevich and Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, the three young members of Pussy Riot who have been jailed in Moscow since March, and whose case has become a global cause célèbre.“Virgin Mary, mother of God, become a feminist, become a feminist, become a feminist,” the performance artist Karen Finley said, reading from the group’s “Punk Prayer,” as the audience cheered. Clad in brightly colored dresses and balaclavas, it was Pussy Riot’s performance of that punk prayer — a 40-second flash protest against the Russian leader, Vladimir V. Putin, staged in Moscow’s Cathedral of Christ the Savior in February — that led to their arrest. (Mr. Putin did not take it lightly, but recently said he hoped the court would reach a “reasonable decision.”)The solidarity event was organized in just a few days by the musician JD Samson and Robert Lieber, a proprietor of FreePussyRiot.org. It came on the eve of the verdicts for the trio, who are still widely expected to receive a multiyear prison term, on charges of “hooliganism motivated by religious hatred.” (On Friday in Moscow, a judge declared them guilty.) Even by Russian standards, the trial has been roundly mocked as a farce, complete with barking dogs, a judge who feigned deafness when the defense objected, and denunciations of feminism as a “mortal sin.” It inspired a wave of pro-Pussy Riot sentiment, from the likes of Madonna, who re-upped her rebel cred by speaking about the group in Moscow, where she performed in a black bra with the words “Pussy Riot” written on her back; and Paul McCartney, who posted a letter on his Web site on Thursday, advising “Nadya, Katya & Masha” to “stay strong.” Kathleen Hanna, a founder of the riot grrrl movement that inspired Pussy Riot, cheered them on, and the new owners of CBGB announced that they would sell T-shirts to raise money for their families; some were passed out to the crowd at the Ace. Amnesty International also supported the event.“When they first were jailed, I clearly felt a connection to them,” JD Samson, a longtime feminist activist and member of the indie groups Le Tigre and MEN, said. “It’s so in my world — my Facebook feed is ‘Pussy Riot,’ ‘Pussy Riot,’ ‘Pussy Riot.’ ” Her realization that she could work freely as a feminist artist while they were jailed spurred her to act, she said. She and Mr. Lieber began planning the event on Saturday, building it on freebies (the services of Ms. Samson’s publicist and an open bar from the hotel) and favors from friends like Ms. Finley, the actress Chloë Sevigny and the poet Eileen Myles. Masha Gessen, a Moscow writer who has covered the trial but who happened to be in New York on vacation, offered to participate, too. She pronounced all the Russian names easily.Ms. Sevigny, in a white eyelet dress and flats, read a letter Ms. Alyokhina wrote long before the trial began, describing being cold and tired in detention. “It seems like it really won’t get any worse,” Ms. Sevigny-as-Ms. Alyokhina said, with feeling. Ms. Myles read a letter the group wrote to Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev.“There’s a Joan of Arc-type resonance,” she said afterward, “that they’re standing up to patriarchy. It’s poetry in and of itself.”There were mentions of Foucault, Pushkin and Bible passages, and many drinks. At the end of the evening, an organizer suggested that the crowd join in a show of “civil anger” at a costumed pro-Pussy Riot march on Friday, though she warned that balaclavas were illegal in New York. (Die-hards could draw them on, she said.) In the hallway, beneath a banner proclaiming “Confront Patriarchy,” a few young men handed out lefty pamphlets.Sara Jane Stoner, Julia Heim and Ana Bozicevic, Ph.D. students at the CUNY Graduate Center nearby, were the first to line up at the hotel on Thursday. They had a spirited discussion about the impact of Pussy Riot.“It’s insane how really banal the work is — I don’t feel shocked by it, and that makes me feel like, I can imagine being thrown in jail for doing absolutely nothing,” Ms. Stoner, 33, said.“The music is so accessible but the statements these women have made — they’re extremely smart,” she added. Pussy Riot’s simple performance antics juxtaposed with their sophisticated social theory — “that to me is extremely inspiring,” she said.Up and down the line, Pussy Riot fans expressed slivers of hope, for progressive politics, for feminism and for global change, aided by social media.Kate Conroy, 49, an East Villager who described herself as a “secretary by day, arts activist by night,” said she felt that Pussy Riot resonated because of an increased international awareness of political and economic imbalances. “Everybody feels the squeeze from the government, and every kind of squeeze,” she said. Arts activism, she added, was a platform everybody could understand.“Three women standing up against Putin,” she marveled. “They are nobodies. They could be silenced tomorrow. They are sheroes, to the world.”