https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/29/us/politics/travel-ban-trump-judge-hawaii.html
Hawaii Judge Extends Order Blocking Trump’s Travel Ban - The New York Times
Executive Orders and Memorandums,Trump  Donald J,Watson  Derrick Kahala,Suits and Litigation (Civil),United States Politics and Government,Muslims and Islam
March 29, 2017
2920
HONOLULU — A federal judge in Hawaii decided Wednesday to extend his order blocking President Trump’s travel ban.The judge, Derrick Watson of Federal District Court, issued the longer-lasting hold on the ban just hours after hearing arguments.Hawaii says the policy discriminates against Muslims and hurts the state’s tourist-dependent economy. The implied message in the revised ban is like a “neon sign flashing ‘Muslim ban, Muslim ban,’” that the government didn’t bother to turn off, the state’s attorney general, Douglas Chin, told the judge.Extending the temporary order until the state’s lawsuit is resolved will ensure the constitutional rights of Muslim citizens across the U.S. are vindicated after “repeated stops and starts of the last two months,” the state has said.The government says the ban falls within the president’s power to protect national security. Hawaii has made only generalized concerns about its effect on students and tourism, a Department of Justice lawyer, Chad Readler, told the judge via telephone.The Trump administration had asked Judge Watson to narrow his ruling to cover only the part of Mr. Trump’s executive order that suspends new visas for people from six Muslim-majority countries. Mr. Readler said a freeze on the United States refugee program had no effect on Hawaii.Judge Watson rejected that argument, preventing the administration from halting the flow of refugees.Judge Watson said in court that the government only argued for that narrower interpretation after a federal judge in Maryland blocked the six-nation travel ban but said it was not clear that the refugee suspension was similarly motivated by religious bias.The judge noted that the government said 20 refugees were resettled in Hawaii since 2010.“Is this a mathematical exercise that 20 isn’t enough? ... What do I make of that?” the judge asked Mr. Readler.The government lawyer replied that 20 is simply a small number of refugees.“In whose judgment?” Judge Watson asked.Hawaii was the first state to sue over Mr. Trump’s revised ban. The imam of a Honolulu mosque joined the challenge, arguing that the ban would prevent his Syrian mother-in-law from visiting family in Hawaii.In his arguments, Mr. Chin quoted Mr. Trump’s comments that the revised travel ban is a “watered down” version of the original. “We cannot fault the president for being politically incorrect, but we do fault him for being constitutionally incorrect,” Mr. Chin said.Earlier this month, Judge Watson prevented the federal government from suspending new visas for people from Somalia, Iran, Syria, Sudan, Libya and Yemen and freezing the nation’s refugee program. His ruling came just hours before the federal government planned to start enforcing Mr. Trump’s executive order.Mr. Trump called Judge Watson’s previous ruling an example of “unprecedented judicial overreach.”Hawaii’s ruling would not be directly affected by a decision siding with the federal government in the Maryland case, legal experts said. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit set a hearing for May 8 to consider the administration’s appeal.