https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/12/business/dealbook/supreme-court-casts-doubts-on-a-potent-sec-weapon.html
Supreme Court Casts Doubts on a Potent S.E.C. Weapon - The New York Times
Securities and Commodities Violations,Supreme Court (US),Insider Trading,Decisions and Verdicts,Statutes of Limitations,Fines (Penalties),Securities and Exchange Commission,Clayton  Walter J
June 12, 2017
2068
The Securities and Exchange Commission routinely seeks an order in an enforcement action to require a defendant to repay any ill-gotten gains, a remedy called disgorgement.The notion is that a thief should not be able to keep what was stolen, but instead should be required to account for the misconduct by turning over the proceeds to the government.A recent Supreme Court decision will now require that a case seeking disgorgement be filed within five years of the violation, pushing the regulator to complete its investigation more quickly or risk losing that remedy. More ominously, although disgorgement is so well established that is it rarely challenged, the court raised a question about whether it was even available for a violation of the securities laws, which may lead to reconsideration of one of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s most potent weapons.In Kokesh v. S.E.C., the justices decided that disgorgement comes under a statute of limitations provision that requires filing a case to collect “any civil fine, penalty or forfeiture” within five years “from when the claim first accrued.” The court pointed out that the limitations period was “vital to the welfare of society” because it embodied the principle that “even wrongdoers are entitled to assume that their sins may be forgotten” — if not necessarily forgiven.The Supreme Court had dealt with a similar issue in Gabelli v. S.E.C. in 2013, when it concluded that a lawsuit seeking a civil penalty from an investment adviser was subject to the five-year limitations period.The agency argued that disgorgement was different because it is an “equitable” remedy, recognized by the federal courts as a means to prevent a defendant from enjoying the proceeds of a violation, and not a penalty. The agency is authorized to seek an injunction to prevent violations, and disgorgement has been understood as an adjunct to the court’s power to compel compliance with the law rather than anything punitive.The Supreme Court disagreed, finding that disgorgement is a penalty because it is intended to punish the violator rather than seeking to compensate those harmed by the misconduct. The goal in requiring repayment of any proceeds of a violation is deterrence — showing that crime does not pay — and not simply to restore losses to the victims.The Kokesh opinion pointed out that in insider trading cases, a tipper could be responsible for disgorgement of any gains made by tippees. For example, in S.E.C. v. Contorinis, an appeals court upheld an order requiring a defendant to disgorge $7 million made by a hedge fund that he managed, even though the gains went only to the investors.“It would make little sense to allow the insider to escape disgorgement when he gives away not the proceeds of a trade predicated on his insider knowledge, but rather the knowledge itself to others who he knows will spin the information into gold by trading on it themselves,” the court explained.In looking at how disgorgement redresses a particular harm, the Supreme Court stated that when the Securities and Exchange Commission asks for repayment of ill-gotten gains, “the violation for which the remedy is sought is committed against the United States rather than an aggrieved individual.” Thus, any recovery can go straight to the government rather than being distributed to investors harmed by the misconduct, making it more like a penalty than a compensatory remedy.The ruling will effectively require agency enforcement staff to complete investigations within a shorter time, although that message was already sent by the Gabelli decision. The agency is likely to ratchet up the use of “tolling agreements,” under which potential defendants agree to waive the statute of limitations for a period to allow the completion of an investigation. If they refuse, the Securities and Exchange Commission could be forced to file a case earlier than it might otherwise.The Kokesh decision could affect cases in which a court ordered disgorgement for conduct outside the five-year limitations period, so some earlier enforcement actions may be reopened. But settlements where a defendant agreed to disgorgement would not be affected. Those are treated like contracts in which each side gives up certain rights and usually cannot be reopened.Now that the Supreme Court has designated disgorgement as a type of penalty, that could limit the amount the Securities and Exchange Commission can seek as a civil monetary penalty on top of any money disgorged. The law authorizes three tiers of penalties depending on how egregious the conduct was, up to about $900,000 or the amount of any gain, but a disgorgement order now may limit any additional punishment that can be imposed.As sometimes happens in a Supreme Court opinion, a seeming throwaway line could have a much greater impact on the Securities and Exchange Commission than the actual decision. A footnote states that “nothing in this opinion should be interpreted as an opinion on whether courts possess authority to order disgorgement in S.E.C. enforcement proceedings or on whether courts have properly applied disgorgement principles in this context.” In other words, the justices are not saying that disgorgement itself is proper, but saying only that if it is, the five-year limitations period applies.Why would the court even raise this question whether courts can order disgorgement? The reason is that the federal securities law makes no mention of disgorgement as one of the remedies available to the agency.Disgorgement in S.E.C. cases can be traced back to the first insider trading case litigated in the federal courts, S.E.C. v. Texas Gulf Sulphur.The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan in 1971 upheld an order requiring the defendants to repay the profits made by trading on confidential information as an exercise of the equitable powers of a court to prevent wrongdoing. The appeals court explained “that the S.E.C. may seek other than injunctive relief in order to effectuate the purposes of the act, so long as such relief is remedial relief and is not a penalty assessment.”Ever since, the lower courts have consistently taken the position that disgorgement is a permissible exercise of judicial authority, and the Securities and Exchange Commission routinely seeks this remedy. But just as flowers attract bees, so will the Supreme Court’s statement trigger a stampede of defense lawyers questioning whether the regulator can even seek disgorgement from a federal court.The problem for the S.E.C. is that the rationale for disgorgement as an equitable remedy may be undermined by the Kokesh decision’s holding that it is a form of punishment.The answer to whether disgorgement in securities cases is permissible will involve figuring out whether an English chancery court in 1789, when Congress adopted the Judiciary Act that gave federal courts the power to hear lawsuits “in equity,” had the power to order that remedy. In the 1999 decision in Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo S.A. v. Alliance Bond Fund, the Supreme Court explained that it must look to the state of law at that time, rejecting an order of a federal court that limited a transfer of assets in a bankruptcy proceeding because English judges back then could not do that.If the remedy is not an exercise of a court’s inherent authority back in 1789, then it would require Congress to authorize it. That outcome would create an odd situation in which disgorgement would not be available in a case filed in a Federal District Court but is possible in an administrative proceeding.Congress could resolve the scope of the S.E.C.’s authority by specifically authorizing disgorgement as an available remedy in any enforcement action, and perhaps even exempt it from the five-year statute of limitations.The Kokesh decision, in the meantime, makes life a bit more difficult for the S.E.C., and could portend a more extensive curtailing of its power to seek disgorgement if the remedy is not available in federal courts. This may present the commission’s new chairman, Jay Clayton, with an opportunity to show how far he is willing to go to fight for a remedy the S.E.C. has long relied on to enforce the federal securities laws.