http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/23/world/europe/ahmed-al-mahdi-hague-trial.html
Extremist Pleads Guilty in Hague Court to Destroying Cultural Sites in Timbuktu - The New York Times
War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Archaeology and Anthropology,International Criminal Court,Mali,Mahdi  Ahmad al-Faqi al-,Timbuktu (Mali)
Aug. 22, 2016
8701
PARIS — An Islamic extremist pleaded guilty on Monday at the International Criminal Court to destroying shrines and damaging a mosque in the ancient city of Timbuktu, Mali, in the court’s first prosecution of the destruction of cultural heritage as a war crime.Prosecutors said that Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, a member of a jihadist group linked to Al Qaeda, took part in the smashing of a number of venerable centuries-old mud and stone buildings holding the tombs of holy men and scholars.Mr. Mahdi, a teacher who was born in or around 1975 near Timbuktu and who studied Islamic law in a Saudi-sponsored school in Libya, was also accused of leading a “morality brigade” that meted out punishments like public floggings for minor infractions.“It is with deep regret and great pain that I had to enter a guilty plea on all the charges brought against me,” Mr. Mahdi told the court on Monday. Begging for forgiveness, including from the people of Timbuktu, he said, “I would like them to look at me like a son that has lost his way, and to accept my regrets.”Mr. Mahdi added that he was “influenced by a group of deviant people from Al Qaeda and Ansar Dine,” a Qaeda offshoot in Mali, and said that he hoped his punishment would “serve as a purging of the evil spirits I got involved with.”He faces a maximum sentence of 30 years in prison, but prosecutors will request a sentence of nine to 11 years as part of a plea agreement.Fatou Bensouda, the court’s chief prosecutor, said that it was Mr. Mahdi “who identified the sites to be destroyed and who provided the means” to do so, including pickaxes and crowbars.Mr. Mahdi is suspected of committing other crimes, but legal experts said the case was narrowly focused to highlight how cultural and religious buildings are deliberately singled out for destruction to obliterate an enemy’s history and identity.“The courts have been slow to recognize this, but there is a clear link between crimes committed against people and attacks on their cultural heritage,” said Andras Riedlmayer, a scholar of Islamic art and architecture at Harvard.“The ethnic cleansers in the Balkans, like the jihadis in Iraq, Syria and Timbuktu and other places, are keenly aware of the significance of this, which is why they devote so much personnel and resources to the destruction of religious and cultural landmarks,” Mr. Riedlmayer said.If Mr. Mahdi had not pleaded guilty, his trial would probably have been a lengthy one, with witnesses brought to The Hague from Timbuktu and other West African desert cities. Instead, the court can now turn directly to sentencing, with a few days of hearings to help the judges assess the case.The case comes at a time of heightened international concern about the fate of many cultural and religious monuments in the Middle East and North Africa. Places of worship, artworks and archaeological remnants, libraries, museums and other treasured sites have been destroyed by extreme Islamist groups who call them pagan or heretical, including the giant Buddha statues at Bamiyan, Afghanistan, in 2001, and more recently  Nimrud, Palmyra and other pre-Islamic sites in Iraq and Syria.No international court currently has jurisdiction over crimes in those countries, or over the continuing cultural devastation reported in Yemen.The Mali case has its roots in 2012, when armed rebels and homegrown Islamic jihadists allied with Al Qaeda established a breakaway ministate in the northern half of the country. The jihadists imposed a harsh form of Islamic law on the population and recruited local people, including Mr. Mahdi, to help them enforce it.After a French-led military force recaptured Timbuktu the next year, some of the jihadists disappeared and others appeared to receive amnesty under a peace deal. Mr. Mahdi, who was later arrested in Niger when French troops intercepted an arms-smuggling convoy, was the only one to end up in court in The Hague.Most of the destroyed tombs in Timbuktu have been rebuilt using traditional masonry methods, financed by foreign donors. But tensions still run high in the city, and many residents who fled from the jihadists have yet to return — notably women. Human rights activists have said that women and girls were particular targets of the extremists’ abuse in Timbuktu, including rape, forced marriage and sexual slavery, and that Mr. Mahdi’s brigade was complicit in that abuse; they have requested that the court expand the charges against him accordingly.Though the case against Mr. Mahdi was a first for the International Criminal Court, another court, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has handed down war crimes convictions for cultural destruction, specifically the shelling of architectural monuments in Dubrovnik, Croatia, and Mostar, Bosnia.“The Mali case is useful because it could help persuade other nations to pursue similar charges relating to Syria and Iraq, where no international court has yet jurisdiction,” said Stephen J. Rapp, a former prosecutor and former United States ambassador at large to tribunals handling cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. “This is not about a foot soldier killing or smashing things, but about an ideologue, someone who was given authority and who gave legal advice to the local Islamic court.”At the end of his prepared statement to the court on Monday, Mr. Mahdi said, “I would like to give a piece of advice to all Muslims in the world not to get involved in the same acts I got involved with, because they will not lead to any good for humanity.”