https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/world/asia/north-korea-ri-yong-gil-reportedly-executed.html
Top North Korean General Is Said to Be Executed on Graft Charges - The New York Times
North Korea,Kim Jong-un,Ri Yong-gil,Capital Punishment,National Intelligence Service (South Korea),Workers' Party of Korea,Defense and Military Forces
Feb. 10, 2016
1603
SEOUL, South Korea —  A top general in North Korea was executed this month on corruption charges, around the time the nation’s leader, Kim Jong-un, warned the party and military elites against abuse of power and other misdeeds, a South Korean official said Wednesday.The general, Ri Yong-gil, chief of the North Korean Army’s general staff and ranked third in its hierarchy, was executed on charges of “factionalism, abuse of power and corruption” in the latest episode of Mr. Kim’s “reign of terror,” the official said.The official agreed to confirm the execution, first reported by the South Korean news media, only on the condition of anonymity because the information involved government intelligence. Although South Korea’s National Intelligence Service did not confirm it, many South Korean news outlets reported that General Ri had been executed, citing an unidentified intelligence source.Mr. Kim convened a joint meeting of the Central Committee of the Workers’ Party and the Committee of the Korean People’s Army on Feb. 2 and 3. There, he criticized “the practices of seeking privileges, misuse of authority, abuse of power and bureaucratism,” according to North Korea’s state-run Korean Central News Agency.The South Korean news media quoted the unidentified intelligence source as saying that General Ri, a career army officer, might have been targeted for purging after resisting the control the ruling Workers’ Party has reasserted over the military under Mr. Kim.General Ri was one of the most prominent generals under Mr. Kim, frequently accompanying him to important state events. But the general’s name disappeared from the North Korean news media after mid-January. He was not included in the lists of top officials who the North Korean news media said attended the party meeting this month or a large gathering in Pyongyang, the capital, on Monday to celebrate the country’s launching of a satellite a day earlier.General Ri’s reported execution could not be independently confirmed. North Korea rarely reports purges of top officials.Since taking power in 2011, Mr. Kim has frequently reshuffled the top ranks of his party and the military and has purged or executed scores of senior officials, according to the South Korean spy agency. Analysts in the South have said that Mr. Kim has ruled with a mix of terror and rewards, as did his father, Kim Jong-il, to maintain a totalitarian grip on power and remove potential challenges to his authority.The most famous victim of that tactic was Mr. Kim’s own uncle, Jang Song-thaek. Mr. Jang, long considered North Korea’s No. 2 official and Mr. Kim’s mentor, was executed in 2013 on charges of stealing state funds and plotting to overthrow his nephew. His other crimes, according to the North, included showing disrespect to Mr. Kim during a political gathering by “unwillingly standing up from his seat and halfheartedly clapping.”Mr. Kim also executed Gen. Hyon Yong-chol, the minister of the People’s Armed Forces, last April with an antiaircraft gun, the South Korean spy agency said. The 66-year-old general was branded a traitor after he dozed off during military events and second-guessed Mr. Kim’s orders, it said.After General Hyon’s execution, Secretary of State John Kerry denounced North Korea’s “grotesque, grisly, horrendous, public displays of executions on a whim and fancy by the leader against people who were close to him, sometimes on the flimsiest of excuses.”