https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/world/europe/sigmundur-david-gunnlaugsson-panama-papers.html
Sidelined by Panama Papers Scandal, Iceland Premier Says He’s Not Quitting - The New York Times
Gunnlaugsson  Sigmundur David,Mossack Fonseca & Co,Iceland,Tax Shelters,Tax Evasion,Panama Papers,Virgin Islands (Great Britain),Cameron  David,Great Britain,Palsdottir  Anna Sigurlaug
April 6, 2016
3278
LONDON — Iceland’s already fragile coalition government was thrown into further uncertainty on Wednesday after the country’s prime minister said he had not formally resigned but had stepped aside for an “unspecified” period after leaked documents linked him to an offshore company.The revelation over the weekend about politicians and business people around the world hiding their wealth in secretive shell companies and offshore tax shelters has fanned a public backlash. The details were contained in millions of documents, known as the Panama Papers, from a law firm that were made public.On Tuesday, the scandal claimed its first political casualty when Prime Minister Sigmundur David Gunnlaugsson of Iceland asked his deputy to take over, after documents showed that the prime minister and his wife, Anna Sigurlaug Palsdottir, had set up a company in the British Virgin Islands in 2007.Mr. Gunnlaugsson’s deputy, Sigurdur Ingi Johannsson, initially said the prime minister had offered to resign. In a reflection of the political turmoil and maneuvering that the Panama Papers have created, the prime minister’s office issued a statement later Tuesday night saying that he had proposed stepping down in favor of his deputy “for an unspecified amount of time” — a sort of indefinite leave of absence — and not resigning.It remains unclear whether Mr. Gunnlaugsson, who remains leader of his party, will succeed in his effort to avoid a formal resignation in the face of significant public anger in the tiny island nation of 323,000.According to the documents, Wintris, the offshore company set up by Mr. Gunnlaugsson and his partner, lost millions of dollars because of the 2008 financial crash, and is claiming about $4.2 million from three failed Icelandic banks. Some critics have suggested a conflict of interest for Mr. Gunnlaugsson because, as prime minister, he was involved in reaching a deal for the banks’ claimants.The revelations led to mass protests in Iceland, with as many as 20,000 people gathered in Reykjavik, the capital, demanding that Mr. Gunnlaugsson go. Mr. Gunnlaugsson has vehemently denied that he hid any assets or tried to avoid paying taxes.The opposition, meanwhile, has been pushing for a vote of no confidence, potentially opening a window of opportunity for the Pirate Party, an anti-establishment group that has been tapping into the widespread discontent with the status quo. The party, made up of a group including artists and computer hackers, supports a 35-hour workweek, relaxed drug regulations and the legalization of blasphemy.In Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron sought to limit the political damage caused by the revelation that his late father, Ian, was a client of the Panamanian law firm, Mossack Fonseca, and used it to set up an offshore fund. Mr. Cameron said he owned “no shares, no offshore trusts, no offshore funds, nothing like that,” and his office issued a statement adding that “the prime minister, his wife and their children do not benefit from any offshore funds.”That failed to quell the controversy, with critics arguing that the language used by Mr. Cameron kept open the possibility that he might benefit from offshore investments in the future. Forced into a further clarification, Mr. Cameron’s office said on Wednesday that “there are no offshore funds or trusts which the prime minister, Mrs. Cameron or their children will benefit from in the future.”Nevertheless, the leak of documents has been doubly embarrassing for Mr. Cameron, who portrayed himself as a leader in the international fight to close tax loopholes, because of the extent to which British overseas territories feature in the revelations.