https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/books/review/jane-austen-the-secret-radical-helena-kelly.html
A Jane Austen Fit for the Age of Brexit - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Austen  Jane,Jane Austen: The Secret Radical (Book),Kelly  Helena (Author)
July 10, 2017
7446
JANE AUSTEN The Secret Radical By Helena Kelly 318 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.95.The year 2016 belonged to Shakespeare; 2017 is Jane Austen’s, the 200th anniversary of her premature death. Her face has been chosen to appear on Britain’s 10-pound note (the same amount she was first paid by a publisher). There has been, and will be, a spate of commemorative events, festivals and, of course, books like this. We are, as the witty television series put it, “Lost in Austen.”Helena Kelly’s publisher got her kicks in early by scheduling the British release of her book last autumn. And kicks they are. “Jane Austen: The Secret Radical” sets out to raise hackles. As she asserts, almost everything we think we know about Jane Austen is wrong. There has been, according to Kelly, only one person who has ever read Jane Austen right. That would be Helena Kelly. Moreover, that unique reader is closer to “Jane” (as she chummily calls her) than anyone since Cassandra, the sister with whom Jane shared a bed. (“Was Jane Austen Gay?” asked Terry Castle in a mischievous essay on the subject of that sleeping arrangement. It too sparked ructions.)Kelly’s chapters open with biographical fantasias of Jane’s stream of consciousness at key moments. Inwardness is the essence of the book — and bossiness. Kelly ends with the schoolmistress instruction: “Read Jane’s novels. … Read them again.” Perhaps, enlightened by her, we can do something about our failing grade.Kelly’s readings are indeed eye-opening. That in “Northanger Abbey” Austen describes Catherine Morland masturbating (“Let’s not mince words here”) requires an elasticity of imagination beyond the breaking point for the pusillanimous.Of the many such far fetchings, the following can be cited — from “Mansfield Park” — when Fanny is sent back to her family in Portsmouth to mend her ways. Fanny’s father, a former marine officer fond of the bottle, is “undoubtedly” a sadist, Kelly tells us (there is no evidence in the novel). “What should we make,” Kelly continues, “of the fact that Fanny’s two sisters fight over possession of a silver knife and that one of Fanny’s first actions after arriving back in Portsmouth is to make sure they each have one? Does she suspect — does she know — that they might need to protect themselves?”From what? The (sexual?) sadism of their father in his cups? Silver knives are harmlessly blunt and never sharpened: It wastes the precious metal. Were self-protection the issue, the Price daughters would have secreted kitchen knives about their persons. The point readers have traditionally assumed is that the girls have yet to learn the moral self-control Fanny has acquired at Mansfield Park, not that they are prepared (armed by Fanny) to slit their father’s throat.Kelly sweeps the board clear of all previous critical commentary — just so much clutter, we must understand. Claire Tomalin’s acclaimed 1997 biography is dismissed in a footnote as having hopelessly missed the point of “Mansfield Park.” R. W. Chapman, the scholar who founded modern Austen studies, is a purveyor of “nonsense.” Deirdre Le Faye, who produced the authoritative edition of Austen’s letters and with whom I wrote “So You Think You Know Jane Austen,” apparently didn’t. (Nor, one assumes, did I.) Critics who would seem, on the face of it, congenial are resolutely blanked. In 1979, Warren Roberts produced a thoughtful study called “Jane Austen and the French Revolution.” The great event is never mentioned in the novels, but it is there, Roberts argues, invisibly woven into the narratives. Kelly makes the same point herself to support her “secret radical” thesis. But Roberts’s conclusions are cautious. Kelly’s are adventurous. Some work better than others.Austen relished Lyme Regis and describes the town lovingly in “Persuasion.” The seaside resort’s boutiques sold fossils for the tourists’ mantelpieces. Kelly imagines Anne Elliot picking one up — and Jane foreseeing what? Evolutionary theory. Kelly toys with the idea that Harriet Smith and Jane Fairfax are half sisters in “Emma.” If true, why would Austen not make that relationship clearer? It would seem less a case of secretiveness than obfuscation.Such things in Kelly’s book irritate me, as they will others. But, taking a deep breath, I concede that it is, stripped of its flights of fancy, an important revisionary work for 2017. The critic who has done the most to reform our understanding of Austen in the last 50 years is ostentatiously never referred to, but “Jane Austen: The Secret Radical” has clearly been written to overturn Marilyn Butler’s “Jane Austen and the War of Ideas.”Butler’s thesis, which became critical orthodoxy, rests on a wide-ranging survey of Jacobin (radical, pro-revolutionary) fiction. It concludes that Austen was not in the slightest radical and made no secret of her militant anti-Jacobinism in her novels. Austen, Butler asserted, believed wholeheartedly in an England founded on monarchy, the Anglican Church and a stable class system.Butler’s 1975 portrait of Austen was a perfect fit for Mrs. Thatcher’s assumption of the Tory leadership that same year, and for her three administrations. Butler saw Elizabeth Bennet, to take a prime example, as irrationally prejudiced at the opening of “Pride and Prejudice.” Lizzy is, however, possessed of intelligence. She is educated by trial, error and near disaster. She finally makes the rational moral choice. When did she fall in love with Darcy? Elizabeth’s sister Jane asks. “I believe,” replies Elizabeth, “I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.” It is not a joke. As do country houses elsewhere in literature — Evelyn Waugh’s Brideshead, for instance — Pemberley embodies the Tory values of old England. This is what Elizabeth is marrying into and what she will support, wholeheartedly, as Mrs. Darcy.How might Marilyn Butler’s Elizabeth Bennet have voted on June 8, 2017? The question answers itself. The fact that Theresa May is a vicar’s daughter, as was Jane Austen, would have been a plus. But Kelly’s Elizabeth is from another political galaxy. Elizabeth’s undutifulness as a daughter, her laughter, her lack of reverence for Mr. Collins, her lack of respect for Lady Catherine de Bourgh — they’re all of a piece. Elizabeth is, in short, constructed to be “a conservative’s nightmare.” Take that, Marilyn Butler.Why does Kelly’s Elizabeth marry the master of Pemberley? Because she is strong enough to radicalize him. Would Kelly’s Elizabeth have voted for Jeremy Corbyn? The answer is obvious.Kelly’s book is reckless, but she knows the novels inside out. Her views, when not designed to annoy the reader, are informative. She is astute and almost certainly right on the Austen family’s conspiracy to sweeten Jane’s image and neutralize her ideas. The speculation that the vicar’s family murdered her (call it a mercy killing) may, however, seem a trifle questionable.Kelly is amusingly corrective on the travesty of the Regency-Romanticized versions of Austen retailed by film and television. Colin Firth’s wet shirt is hung out to dry. Why was Austen secretive? Kelly points to the “totalitarian” nature of the British state, consumed as it was by hostilities, first with its rebellious colonies and then with France. “For almost all her life,” Kelly reminds us, “Britain was at war.”The most brilliant of Kelly’s arguments draws our attention to the enclosure of common land in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. (She sees Mr. Knightley, in “Emma,” as a brutal encloser.) It is equivalent, she suggests, to the contemporary privatizations that have led to the current obscene disparity of wealth and poverty in Britain.Helena Kelly provokes. But in “Jane Austen: The Secret Radical” she has given us a book for 2017, perhaps the most turmoil-filled year in Britain since 1945. So, with a patient sigh, let’s do what she tells us to and read the novels again.