http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/14/world/europe/14irish.html
London and Dublin Offer Northern Ireland a Compromise - The New York Times
Northern Ireland,Politics and Government,Great Britain,Ireland,Referendums,St Andrews,Sinn Fein,Irish Republican Army,Blair  Tony,Ahern  Bertie,Paisley  Ian Jr,Adams  Gerry,McGuinness  Martin
Oct. 14, 2006
9527
ST. ANDREWS, Scotland, Oct. 13 — After three days of closed-door negotiations, Britain and Ireland on Friday offered a compromise formula to restore Northern Ireland’s power-sharing government by next March, allowing for an election or referendum to endorse the deal.While the package was not immediately embraced by the province’s fractious political parties, it gave them until Nov. 10 to hold meetings among their followers and then give their answer to what was promptly  named the St. Andrews Agreement. But it is not certain that an agreement sponsored by London and Dublin will be enough to survive the tripwires of Northern Ireland’s fissured politics.The main parties, the Roman Catholic Sinn Fein and the Protestant Democratic Unionist Party, promised to respond by Nov. 10. If they consent, their action will begin a choreographed sequence of events to permit the power-sharing government set up under the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 to be restored. It was suspended four years ago in a dispute over alleged espionage by the Irish Republican Army.Restoration of the power-sharing government, consisting of an executive branch as well as the existing local assembly, would be an important step toward ending Northern Ireland’s anomalous political status at a time when its people have become used to relative peace and economic growth.At a news conference, Prime Ministers Tony Blair of Britain and Bertie Ahern of Ireland refrained from high-flown language to herald the end of the negotiations. “I think we have a way forward here,” Mr. Blair told reporters  in the golf resort where the talks took place.The Rev. Ian Paisley, the 80-year-old Protestant leader, said his party had made “considerable progress throughout the course of these talks.”The Democratic Unionists, who want a continued union with Britain, had been pressing for Sinn Fein, which seeks a united Ireland and is the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, to commit itself completely to respecting the province’s police force, which Sinn Fein regards as a Protestant-dominated adversary.Sinn Fein has been pressing for Mr. Paisley’s agreement to sit in a power-sharing government as first minister with a republican leader as his deputy — an idea that would once have been unthinkable. The agreement means  each side would have  to accept  the other’s demands for the deal to unfold.On Friday, at least, they seemed determined to do that. “We need to find ways to put differences behind us,” said Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader.Mr. Paisley seemed equally ready to compromise. “Today we stand at a crossroads,” he said. “We stand at a place where there is a road to democracy and there is a road to anarchy, and I trust that we will see in the coming days the vast majority of people taking to the road of democracy.”Initially, Britain threatened to shut down the Northern Ireland Assembly and resume direct rule of the troubled province if the parties did not agree to settle their differences by Nov. 24. That deadline now seems to have slipped well into next year.The St. Andrews Agreement lays out a schedule of events, beginning with a preparatory caucus for political leaders in Northern Ireland starting Tuesday. Then, if they agree to continue the settlement deal by Nov. 10, the assembly would meet on Nov. 24.On that day, the assembly would nominate a first minister and a deputy. According to a British official, those two figures — likely to be Mr. Paisley and Sinn Fein’s Martin McGuinness — would “not take up their role” on that day. But the presence of the two men technically in the same administration would offer a heady symbol of power sharing intended to breathe confidence into the agreement.The next steps would be for the so-called Independent Monitoring Commission to report in January on the status of the Irish Republican Army’s pledge to renounce violence, followed by a referendum or election in March to endorse the St. Andrews Agreement.Most participants except Mr. Paisley favored a referendum, according to a participant who asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to disclose details of the deliberations.Finally, the local executive body would be revived on March 26. But if the parties failed to set up the executive, or failed to agree “at any stage,” the assembly would be dissolved.The agreement also provides for the British government to inject unspecified financial support into the province, which is already heavily dependent on central government financing.A critical element of the agreement relates to Sinn Fein’s demand that the police in Northern Ireland be controlled by the local executive, giving Sinn Fein more influence over the force. The agreement suggests that the local government could assume control of the police by May 2008.