https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/25/us/minneapolis-shooting-protest-police-jamar-clark.html
Black Lives Matter Activists Vow Not to Cower After 5 Are Shot - The New York Times
Assaults,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Minneapolis (Minn),Clark  Jamar (d 2015),Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming
Nov. 24, 2015
7310
MINNEAPOLIS —  As the police arrested three people on Tuesday in connection with the shooting of five people during a Black Lives Matter protest outside a police precinct here, demonstrators returned to the street with renewed vigor, vowing not to cower in fear of what one organizer called “an act of terrorism.”Tensions remained high as activists urged caution among the peaceful demonstrators who have been protesting after a white Minneapolis police officer fatally shot Jamar Clark, 24, an unarmed black man, on Nov. 15.The police said that they had arrested a 23-year-old white man, and that two other white men, ages 21 and 26, turned themselves in on Tuesday afternoon. A 32-year-old Hispanic had been detained and questioned but was released when the police determined that he was not involved in the Monday night shooting, they said.Activists remained critical of the police, saying that officers did not properly respond during the shooting and that they had lost trust in the department.“Despite earlier statements from police about the impending threat from white supremacists, the police instead Maced citizen journalists and peaceful protesters” after the shooting, Miski Noor, an organizer with Black Lives Matter Minneapolis, said during a brief news conference on Tuesday. “They made disparaging comments to those at the protests instead of taking the threat seriously. We reiterate that we have zero faith in this Police Department’s desire to keep our community safe.”The shooting occurred around 10:40 p.m., Ms. Noor said, after four masked men approached an area where protesters had gathered and began filming. The men had been at previous protests, so activists had set up a safety committee to be on alert, Ms. Noor said.On Monday night, community members asked the men what they were doing and asked them to remove their masks, she said, but they refused and were then escorted away. About half a block from the Fourth Precinct, the epicenter of the protests, the masked men opened fire, she said.None of the five people who were shot had life-threatening injuries, but activists said one person hit in the stomach had to undergo surgery.Under a bright sky on Tuesday, Alexander Clark, who said he was related to Jamar Clark, addressed the crowd, giving his account of Monday night’s shooting. Four officers stood idle along a wall outside of the precinct during the shooting, Mr. Clark said.“They sat here and watched,” said Mr. Clark, 25, who is from the north side of Minneapolis. “Not one of the officers came off the wall. We all said, ‘Why aren’t you doing anything?’ ”The officers told the demonstrators not to talk to them, and said, “This is what you all wanted, right,” Mr. Clark said.Mr. Clark said he was alarmed by the heavy bulletproof vest that one of the agitators was wearing and by the precision with which he believed they operated.“They were using police tactics,” he said.John Elder, a spokesman for the Police Department, said he hoped that people would wait for the facts to emerge regarding the shooting.“No matter what, some people are going to have their own theories,” he said.A spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said it was working with the Minneapolis police to determine if federal intervention is warranted after the shooting.The shooting encouraged several people to come out to the precinct on Tuesday. Some said they wanted to show that they would not be scared by hate. Others said they wanted to provide an extra layer of protection.“I’m here to protest, somewhat,” said Marques Winslow, 36, who lives about 20 blocks north of the precinct and had not come to previous demonstrations. “But basically to keep my eyes peeled and try to add some protection that is not going to be supplied by police officers.”Hundreds of people outside the precinct marched downtown on Tuesday. They had set up tents. People passed out candy, pizza, fried chicken and other food. They also distributed hand warmers. Heavy smoke came from wood-burning fires and heat lamps set up to keep people warm.As the sun set, people started blaring festive music.Korey Dean, who has been a regular demonstrator, said he thought there were more white people among the demonstrators than in the past. The shooting, he said, might have united people.“When people come together for a common cause — race, creed, economic background — none of that matters,” he said.Some people remained on edge, however.“People are looking at new faces sideways, because it’s scary,” said Julian Condie, 27, of Minneapolis, who has come out to the vigils occasionally.The police also said they were aware of a video in which masked men are seen driving to the protest site and brandishing a pistol, while making racist comments and justifying the killing of Jamar Clark.Activists have pledged to stay until specific demands are met, including the release of video evidence in Mr. Clark’s shooting. Officials have met two of the demands, agreeing to a federal civil rights investigation into his shooting and releasing the names of the two officers involved.The officers involved in the shooting, Mark Ringgenberg and Dustin Schwarze, have worked for the Minneapolis Police Department for 13 months, though both have seven years of experience in law enforcement.The police said that Mr. Clark was a suspect in an assault and that he had interfered with paramedics trying to treat his victim. When officers arrived, the police said, he fought with them, leading to the gunfire. They have disputed witness accounts that Mr. Clark was handcuffed when he was shot.