https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/briefing/donald-trump-jr-mosul-penn-station.html
Donald Trump Jr., Mosul, Penn Station: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 10, 2017
1130
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Dirt on Clinton was offered to Trump team.President Trump’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., was promised damaging information about Hillary Clinton before meeting with a Kremlin-connected lawyer during the 2016 campaign, White House advisers say.The meeting, whose existence was reported by The Times on Saturday, was also attended by the president’s campaign chairman at the time, Paul Manafort, and his son-in-law, Jared Kushner.Mr. Trump’s son gave two different explanations for the discussion, which Reince Priebus, the White House chief of staff, described as a “big nothing burger.” But it points to the central question in federal investigations into meddling in the presidential election: whether the Trump campaign colluded with Russians.• “Time to move forward,” Trump says.President Trump said that he had “strongly pressed” President Vladimir Putin about election interference during their meeting last week, but U.S. lawmakers in both parties said he had merely appeased and empowered the Russian leader.Separately, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said Washington would not lift economic sanctions against Russia until it restored the “territorial integrity” of Ukraine.• Iraq declares victory in Mosul.The campaign to liberate the country’s second-largest city from the Islamic State lasted nearly nine months, killed thousands of people and displaced nearly a million.Although the militant group has been losing ground in Iraq and Syria, it still  motivates attackers around the world.• “Summer of hell” begins at Penn Station.After several derailments, emergency repairs are set to begin this morning at Pennsylvania Station in New York City, affecting trains from New Jersey and Long Island for eight weeks.We’re covering the morning commute live.• Back in session.Lawmakers return from a weeklong recess, and Republicans face a time crunch in their efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we discuss the meeting last year at Trump Tower involving a Russian lawyer, and the view from the newly liberated Iraqi city of Mosul.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• AT&T’s $85.4 billion bid for Time Warner is mired in uncertainty, as critics in the White House fear political interference and business leaders watch for a regulatory precedent.• A leader for President Trump’s efforts to overhaul government regulations is expected to be approved by the Senate today.• U.S. news organizations are seeking bargaining rights against Facebook and Google to fight the online companies’ dominance in advertising and distribution, our media columnist writes.• The annual technology and media conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, is among the headlines to watch this week.• U.S. stocks were up on Friday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Working out in hot weather? Try a hot bath beforehand.• Make a batch of the Ritz-Carlton’s blueberry muffins, and enjoy them in the morning with coffee.• World leaders agreed to move forward on climate change without the U.S., declaring the Paris accord “irreversible.” And European officials have stopped trying to paper over their differences with President Trump.• Ivanka Trump prompted an outcry after she briefly sat in for her father at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Germany.• Hundreds of thousands of protesters rallied in Turkey, challenging President Recep Tayyip Erdogan to institute changes or face a “revolt against injustice.”• “Spider-Man: Homecoming” earned the top spot at the North American box office, taking in about $117 million.• A carbon-neutral dream.In today’s 360 video, visit Masdar City, in the United Arab Emirates, where plans to become the first city with a net-zero carbon footprint have hit roadblocks.• Partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.Writers from across the political spectrum discuss President Trump’s visit to Europe last week.• Facing a void left by hate.Srinivas Kuchibhotla, an India-born engineer, was killed in an anti-immigrant attack at a Kansas bar in February.His wife, Sunayana Dumala, tells her story.• Quiz time!Did you keep up with last week’s news from around the world? Test yourself.• Quotation of the day.“My dad has this saying: ‘I live for the 12 centimeters of tongue in my mouth.’ ”— Radha Day, a New Yorker who has been taking part in Restaurant Week since 2007, describing her love of food. Restaurant Week, an idea that has spread around the world, started in New York 25 years ago.Like music? Then you might want to check out the Montreux Jazz Festival.It’s underway on the shores of Lake Geneva in Switzerland. Even if you can’t make it there, you can stream the concerts live.Once devoted almost entirely to European jazz, the festival has evolved into something far more inclusive. Its founder, Claude Nobs, was criticized for continuing to use the term “jazz” to describe the event after other styles of music were added.“Montreux Jazz is a brand name, and most of the people know what to expect,” Mr. Nobs, who died in 2013, said in an interview with Billboard magazine in 2006.This year, the festival’s eclectic program included sold-out concerts by the British pop stars The Pet Shop Boys and the American R&B singer Lauryn Hill. The Senegalese singer Youssou N’Dour is to perform on the final day, Saturday.The festival has also been a prolific venue for recording. The pianist Bill Evans recorded a Grammy-winning album there in 1968, the event’s second year, in a series that is now an extensive audio archive recognized by Unesco.Palko Karasz contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.