https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/world/europe/enda-kenny-prime-minister-of-ireland-will-resign.html
Enda Kenny, Prime Minister of Ireland, Will Resign - The New York Times
Fine Gael,Kenny  Enda,Ireland,Politics and Government,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Coveney  Simon,Varadkar  Leo
May 17, 2017
2285
DUBLIN — Enda Kenny, Ireland’s prime minister since 2011, said on Wednesday that he would step down, first as the leader of his party and then, once a successor is chosen, as prime minister.Mr. Kenny, 66, has been under pressure from within his party, Fine Gael, over his handling of a long-running corruption scandal involving Irish police misconduct. He hinted in March that he would step down soon, and his announcement on Wednesday made it official, effective at midnight.Fine Gael lawmakers and other party members must choose a new leader by June 2, followed by a vote in Parliament for a new prime minister (known in Ireland as the taoiseach); Mr. Kenny will stay on as caretaker until then.Mr. Kenny drew attention during a St. Patrick’s Day visit to Washington, where he seemed to reproach President Trump, raising the subject of the estimated 50,000 Irish people living in the United States illegally who would be at risk if Mr. Trump keeps his campaign promise to round up undocumented immigrants.“It would remove a burden of so many that they could now stand in the light and say, ‘Now I’m free to contribute to America as I know I can,’ ” Mr. Kenny said in March, his voice briefly choked with emotion. “That’s what people want.”Ireland’s two largest political parties, Fine Gael and Fianna Fail, are both center-right. Fine Gael currently leads a minority government under an agreement with Fianna Fail, which remains officially in opposition but effectively wields a veto.The main contenders to succeed Mr. Kenny are Leo Varadkar and Simon Coveney. Mr. Varadkar, a Dublin physician, is currently the minister for social protection; he would be the country’s first openly gay prime minister and the first of South Asian ancestry. Mr. Coveney, the minister for housing, planning, community and local government, belongs to a politically prominent family from Cork in the country’s southwest.It is possible, though, that the party will turn to someone else. After protracted discussions over who will lead the party after Mr. Kenny, some Fine Gael members are hoping that a dark-horse candidate will emerge.Mr. Kenny appeared to make his departure inevitable in February, when he contradicted himself in statements to Parliament about what he knew about some aspects of the police scandal and when he knew it. The scandal revolves around efforts by senior officers to smear a police whistle-blower.At just over six years, Mr. Kenny’s tenure as prime minister is the longest in his party’s history. Though he managed to retain power in the general election last year, his coalition lost dozens of seats and could not assemble a working majority, necessitating the “nonaggression pact” with Fianna Fail and the formation of a minority government.His departure could now lead to another election, if Fianna Fail decides not to allow his successor as party leader to also succeed him as prime minister. An opinion poll published last weekend by the newspaper The Sunday Times showed the two parties in a virtual tie; either one would need a coalition of smaller parties and independent lawmakers to govern.Mr. Kenny, a former teacher, has been praised in Europe for his role in stabilizing the Irish economy after the financial crash of 2008, when the government stepped in to absorb at least 40 billion euros (about $45 billion) in banking losses. At home, though, critics say his party’s austerity policies have worsened inequality.Among the difficult issues his successor will face are the consequences of Britain’s coming withdrawal from the European Union. Britain is Ireland’s largest trading partner, and the prospect of a “hardened” border is unpopular.