http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/07/science/for-5300-year-old-iceman-extra-autopsy-tells-the-tale.html
For 5,300-Year-Old Iceman, Extra Autopsy Tells the Tale - The New York Times
ITALY,ICEMAN,ARCHAELOGY AND ANTHROPOLOGY
Aug. 7, 2001
475
For nearly a decade doctors and archaeologists have puzzled over the death of the Iceman, a 5,300-year-old corpse found melting out of a glacier high in the Italian Alps. Forensic doctors who examined the desiccated corpse found no external injuries, and the first radiologists found nothing in X-rays and CAT scans that could explain why he died.So the announcement on July 25 that new X-rays by doctors in Italy had revealed a flint arrowhead in the man's left shoulder stunned the scientists who had studied the Copper Age man and fueled a new round of speculation on the curious circumstances of his death.According to doctors in Bolzano, Italy, the arrow struck the Iceman in the left shoulder, angling upward. It tore through the fur he wore, broke through his shoulder blade and came to rest less than an inch from his left lung, they say.''I'm convinced that this injury played an important role in his death,'' said Dr. Eduard Egarter Vigl, the chief pathologist at General Regional Hospital in Bolzano, who now oversees the conservation of the corpse and ordered the X-rays in which the arrowhead turned up. The doctors there took possession of the Iceman, who had been in Austria, three years ago.If the arrow struck an artery, the man would have bled profusely and died soon afterward, Dr. Egarter Vigl said. If it struck a vein, the bleeding would have been less severe but still fatal. Even if the man had survived the bleeding, he said, ''he couldn't have lived more than a day or two because he would have gotten a bacterial infection.''Dr. Paul Gostner, the chief radiologist at the Bolzano hospital, noticed the arrowhead on June 28, less than two months before his retirement, and immediately shared the news with Dr. Egarter Vigl, who said he had first been incredulous, then ecstatic. That evening, after the last visitor had left the museum where the Iceman and his possessions are displayed, the two doctors removed the corpse from the special freezer, examined the shoulder area and immediately discovered the shrunken entrance wound.''I had looked at this corpse a hundred times and had never noticed anything there before and then it was clear,'' Dr. Egarter Vigl said. Using the warmth of their hands, the doctors thawed the wound and inserted a probe, confirming that there was a wound that had not had time to heal. The wooden arrow shaft, which would have been attached to the arrowhead with fine sinews and birch tar, is gone, and Dr. Egarter Vigl and Dr. Gostner speculated that the man had pulled it out, doing even more internal damage. Neither man believes the Iceman could have injured himself by falling on an arrow. Dr. Egarter Vigl said he hoped to explore the wound surgically and perhaps remove the arrowhead to determine how much damage it caused.At least two previous radiological examinations done in Innsbruck, Austria, had failed to turn up the arrowhead.''It's inexcusable that we didn't see it on the CAT scans, but we never would have seen it in the X-rays,'' said Dr. Dieter zur Nedden, a radiologist at the University Clinic in Innsbruck, who led the radiological investigations of the Iceman. Dr. zur Nedden also noted that when the corpse had been stored in Innsbruck, he had not been permitted to keep the corpse outside the freezer for more than half an hour, and he had not been able to take as many X-rays as he had wanted.Dr. William A. Murphy Jr., a radiologist at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, who worked with Dr. zur Nedden on the Iceman's X-rays, said he had learned of the arrowhead from his local paper and at first thought the report was ''crazy.''  He went immediately to his office, took out his copies of the X-rays and then recognized a ''fluffy density'' that had previously not stood out among all the other anomalies in the prehistoric corpse. ''This is just absolutely astounding to me that this little thing is truly there after all the scrutinizing we've done over these images,'' Dr. Murphy said. ''We've pulled our hair out and fussed and fretted and tried to drag all these details out, and yet there's probably an arrowhead in there. It makes a person very humble.''When the Iceman was discovered in the Alpine border region between Austria and Italy in 1991, the corpse was taken to Innsbruck. Weeks later, when Italy realized that the corpse had been found 100 yards inside Italian territory, it demanded that the corpse be returned after Austrian researchers had studied it. In 1998, Austria returned the corpse to Bolzano, which built a new museum for the corpse and the artifacts. Scientists there have resumed research.In addition to revealing the arrowhead, Dr. Gostner's new X-rays turned up another discrepancy with the results of the first radiological investigation. They do not show the three broken ribs that Dr. zur Nedden and Dr. Murphy reported in the initial study. That report of broken ribs has long formed the basis for speculation that the Iceman was in some kind of trouble when he died.''The goal of our X-rays was to find the rib breaks so we could take samples from them to see when the breaks occurred, but there are no rib breaks,'' Dr. Egarter Vigl said. ''I don't see them.''Dr. zur Nedden said he could not comment on Dr. Gostner's findings until he had a chance to study the new X-ray images. Dr. Murphy said he and Dr. zur Nedden had based their diagnosis on a deformity in the ribs that was apparent in both X-ray and CAT-scan images, but he acknowledged that the fractures themselves had not been visible in the two chest X-rays they had taken.Archaeologists who have studied the case for years admit that they will never be able to answer the question of who shot the Iceman -- and when, where and why. But because the Iceman was found with an unstrung longbow and arrow shafts and antler pieces to make new arrows, Dr. Konrad Spindler of the University of Innsbruck has long suggested that he may have been trying to escape an enemy by fleeing high into the mountains and preparing to defend himself.Dr. Annaluisa Pedrotti, an archaeologist at the University of Trento, said the fact that the Iceman had been found with his copper ax indicated that he had not died in front of his enemy, who would otherwise have taken such a valuable item. But she said the man could have been shot accidentally by a hunter, who might have buried him in snow on the spot. The type of arrowhead in the Iceman's body appears to differ very little from two arrowheads found in his quiver.Even though scientists can go only so far in investigating this ancient homicide, it is tempting to speculate.''Say I have a small herd of animals -- if I attack my neighbor, then I get a bigger herd of animals,'' said Dr. Markus Egg, an archaeologist at the Roman-Germanic Central Museum in Mainz, Germany, who has studied the artifacts and believes the Iceman may have been a herdsman. ''Back then, war paid off.''