https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/06/us/immigration-raid-fear-brockton-massachusetts.html
‘Don’t Open the Door’: How Fear of an Immigration Raid Gripped a City - The New York Times
Brockton (Mass),Illegal Immigration,Social Media,Immigration and Emigration,Immigration and Customs Enforcement (US),Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government
April 6, 2017
3071
BROCKTON, Mass. — For days, it was the only topic of conversation. Immigration agents were said to be planning a raid. They could come any minute.In this fraying, blue-collar city, where a quarter of the 95,000 residents are foreign born, word whipped across social media. Children were kept home from school. Families sorted through plans for what to do in case one among them was swept up.Waves of panic have become familiar since Donald J. Trump, who has promised wide-scale deportations of illegal immigrants, became president. Federal agents have made scores of publicized arrests around the nation.As communities wrestle with the administration’s new policy, they face another challenge, too: distinguishing between verifiable reports of arrests and empty rumors driven by fear.In New York, there was talk of raids on trains headed to the Bronx and in Queens, and of checkpoints on Long Island — all later deemed false. In Kansas City, unsubstantiated word of roundups outside churches kept some people from going to Mass.“Any smidgen of information just spreads like wildfire,” said Doris Meissner, a senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group based in Washington.This is the story of one such report, and how it spread, hour by hour. It is based on interviews with local activists, officials and residents, many of whom refused to be identified because they or their family members are not here legally or they fear retribution.What was certain: a conversation overheard in a restaurant was quickly amplified and eventually sent much of this community into full-scale panic.What no one knew for sure was whether it was true.A woman from Guatemala who works in a Brockton restaurant overhears customers say that Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents are planning a raid Tuesday or Wednesday, according to Isabel Lopez, a community organizer who works in Brockton and knows the woman.The restaurant worker, who is also an advocate for immigrants, attends a community meeting at the United Methodist Church and talks about what she heard. The group discusses getting the information out via Facebook and text messages.A longtime local resident originally from Puerto Rico who had attended the meeting at the church posts on Facebook in Spanish: “Dear Friends. If you have nothing to do in the streets, don’t come out, as ICE will be having presence in Brockton on Wed.” She has since deleted the post.Word has started spreading. A naturalized Brazilian immigrant is on her way to work when she sees her mother, who is just home from an overnight shift at a Brockton bakery.“She was like, you know, everybody at work is going crazy, because they’re saying ICE is coming,” the woman says.During the day, reports of a possible raid flood her social media feeds. “Even people on Snapchat were talking about it,” she says, recalling one of the messages: “‘Guys, be careful. ICE is out in Brockton.’”Michelle DuBois, a Democratic state representative from Brockton, posts to Facebook: “ICE raid in Brockton on 3/28 and 29th.”She adds: “I got the following information from my friend in the Latin community: ‘I have a message for the immigrant community of Brockton. Please be careful on Wednesday 29. ICE will be in Brockton on that day.’”In an interview later, Ms. DuBois said she had heard about the expected raid from multiple people and saw the Spanish-language Facebook post before posting her own warning.Ms. Lopez, the community organizer, sends a text to members of the clergy saying she has heard the rumor that ICE would be in Brockton. She urges the immigrant community’s Rapid Response team, watchdogs who alert one another when they see arrests or other activities that cause them concern, to be vigilant.Carlha Toussaint, an organizer with the Coalition for Social Justice in Brockton, starts receiving phone calls from worried immigrants. She sets in motion a “Know Your Rights” campaign, with field workers making phone calls. They also go to public housing developments to drop off small red laminated cards that list immigrants’ rights, such as not having to open their doors to agents unless they have warrants.While testifying before a Congressional subcommittee on immigration, Thomas Hodgson, the sheriff of Bristol County, Mass., says that if sanctuary cities harbor undocumented immigrants who have committed crimes, their elected officials should be arrested. He also informs the panel that Ms. DuBois has sent an “all-alert message out on Facebook” telling everyone that ICE was coming and to stay out of sight. The sheriff calls Ms. DuBois’s warning of the raid “outrageous.”Ms. DuBois’s post and the reaction to it go viral, with many commenters attacking her. Her Facebook page fills with comments like “lock her up!!!!” The Boston Herald and The Brockton Enterprise pick up the story. Both say the warning is based on rumor, not fact.Shawn Neudauer, the public affairs officer for ICE in New England, receives the first of several calls from news organizations asking about the reports. In an interview later, he said there had been no “operational activity as was suggested” in Brockton. ICE, he said, does not conduct indiscriminate raids or sweeps, but rather, “targeted enforcement” in which agents look for specific people but may also arrest other undocumented people they encounter.“Routine immigration enforcement,” he adds, “happens every day.”By now, fear is saturating the neighborhoods and prompting many immigrants to stay out of public view.A 31-year-old mental health counselor from Haiti says her cousin calls to tell her to stay inside because ICE is coming. “I was terrified,” she says. She keeps her daughter, 4, home from school and leaves only to pick up her husband from work.Ms. DuBois updates her Facebook post, saying she has been inundated with “ugly and threatening posts.” She does not back down from the reports of raids — although she now calls them “rumors” — saying people in Brockton and elsewhere are “terrified.” But she insists her post was to help ICE, not to undermine it, because it would allow ICE to change the date of the raid. Her critics say she is absurdly trying to have it both ways.The Brazilian Times, based in Somerville, Mass., publishes an article about the possible raid that is quickly shared among Brazilians in Brockton.An undocumented Mexican immigrant living in Brockton checks her Facebook messages, where a friend has alerted her about a possible raid.She and her husband review the plans recommended at a training session. Among the guidelines: “Don’t open the door, say nothing.”The rumors create a dilemma for educators: How can they acknowledge the real fears of students without stoking the frenzy? The district’s 25 schools teach 17,446 students from 51 nations, with sizable populations from Cape Verde, Ecuador, Haiti and West Africa.An email from the school superintendent, Kathleen A. Smith, is sent to the principals after school is dismissed, encouraging them to watch for students who appear concerned.School officials report that attendance appears to be down.“In one kindergarten classroom, 5 out of 12 kids were out,” says Michele Morgan Bolton, the district spokeswoman. Another first-grade class is missing 8 of its 22 students, and a second-grade class is missing 7 of 25 students.Sheriff Hodgson, who has drawn cheers and jeers from around the country, appears on Fox and calls for Ms. DuBois’s resignation. Ms. DuBois begins to use the controversy to raise money. “We have seen the alt-right’s national attack campaign against Michelle and we need to help her fight back,” says her fund-raising appeal.Mr. Neudauer, the ICE spokesman, announces five arrests the previous day in Lawrence, Mass., 60 miles to the north and far from the frenzy of speculation.All week, residents share word of possible sightings of ICE agents in Brockton, but Mr. Neudauer says there have been no immigration raids or arrests here.Ms. DuBois tells The Brockton Enterprise that she did the right thing in alerting her constituents. In an interview later with The New York Times, she says it is “hard for me to say” whether a raid occurred and says her Facebook post could hardly have added to the anxiety that already permeates this immigrant city.“Nothing that a fifth-generation American can write,” she says, “is going to incite any more fear than is already in the hearts of all these people.”