https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/07/magazine/marc-maron-is-coming-around-to-being-famous.html
Marc Maron Is Coming Around to Being Famous - The New York Times
Podcasts,Comedy and Humor,Alcohol Abuse
June 7, 2017
6461
You’ve been hosting your interview podcast for eight years. How has it changed you? It has helped me become a more fully realized adult. Talking to other people so often, for such a long time, in such a relatively deep way, has taught me how to be a lot more reconnected with my empathy and not be so self-involved.Some people have pointed out that there’s a master narrative about your show, which is that it’s your own vulnerability and openness that get people to say stuff to you. There used to be a lot of interviews where it seems I’m fighting for time with my guest. As time has gone on, I’ve learned how to shut up. But I am genuinely curious about people in a weirdly emotional way. I always assumed, in my own insecurity, that other people had figured something out that was just totally elusive to me. And I’m also connecting with people that seem to have a lot of something magical.Who’s the most magical person you’ve talked to? Everyone turns out to be painfully human one way or the other. But let me think. I interviewed Anne Hathaway — granted, I’m mildly obsessed with her, and have always been a defender of her honor, but she’s amazing on screen, and you talk to her, and she’s just a person. There’s this weird mixture of relief and disappointment that happens for me a lot.You also host the podcast in your own home. Does that help people feel more comfortable? The weird coziness creates a very different environment. I can tell when someone’s in an “I’m in public” mind-set, and it’s a little easier to get them off that when we’re sitting in my garage.Has deploying vulnerability ever backfired? Have you ever done or talked about anything on the podcast that scared you? Yeah. I’ve said things that have been interpreted as slightly off, sensitivity-wise or correctness-wise. Sometimes there’s a little bit of backlash. I get comments like “You seem to talk to women different than you talk to men.” And I’m like: “Yeah, of course I do. Is that a problem?”Well, actually, could you see why that would be a problem? I guess, but I’m not in journalism. I’m just a guy with a lot of flaws. People know that. Was I gushing and flirty with Anne Hathaway? Yeah, of course I was, but why wouldn’t I be?You have a pretty prolific life outside the podcast: You’ve done stand-up for 30 years, you’ve written books, you’ve starred in a TV show, “Maron.” Are you comfortable having your podcast be the thing that people really know you for? Sure. It’s kind of a beautiful thing that all these fans who know me very well from the podcast — a lot of them have never seen me do stand-up, and they come to the shows, and they’re always stunned that I’m so good at it. It’s like: “Why, yes, I’ve been doing it all my life! What did you think was going to happen?”You’ve spoken publicly about your alcoholism. I’m an alcoholic, too, and we notoriously have trouble handling success, because we often don’t feel as if we deserve it. Has your alcoholism had an impact on how you are able to handle your career? A lot of the things that seemed important to me to get done in order to be in competition in the big game of show business have sort of fallen away. But what that leaves for me in success is realizing that I don’t know what to do with my life without that struggle. So what do I do? How do I enjoy this thing that I worked so hard for?Then why do you do it? The one thing that I never expected from doing the podcast — as a sort of self-centered person — was how much of an impact it would have on other people’s lives, and I honor that. We’re all designed to carry the burdens of others fairly easily, and it’s something we all avoid at all costs, and it’s really kind of tragic.It’s also true that it’s easier sometimes to carry the burdens of strangers than it is to carry the burdens of people who are close to you. My entire social life is based on people coming and going from my garage.