https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/world/europe/malta-same-sex-marriage-legalized.html
Malta Legalizes Same-Sex Marriage - The New York Times
Malta,Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Roman Catholic Church,Muscat  Joseph (1974- )
July 12, 2017
1089
VALLETTA, Malta — Lawmakers in Malta, a predominantly Roman Catholic country, voted to legalize same-sex marriage on Wednesday, joining much of Western Europe by replacing the traditional “you are now husband and wife” declaration in civil ceremonies with “you are now spouses.”Only one lawmaker out of 67 in the Maltese Parliament voted against the legislation, signaling its broad support on the island nation despite opposition from the Catholic Church.The lawmaker who opposed the legislation, Edwin Vassallo, cited his Catholic faith and its incompatibility with what he called a “morally unacceptable” law.“As a Christian politician I cannot leave my conscience outside the door,” Mr. Vassallo said.The Labor government had promised to introduce the bill as its first law after winning a second term last month. Both opposition parties supported it, ensuring its passage.Prime Minister Joseph Muscat hailed the vote, saying it showed that Maltese society had reached “an unprecedented level of maturity.”“We live in a society where we can all say ‘we are equal,’” Mr. Muscat said as a celebration erupted outside his office in Valletta, the capital.The law’s passage is the latest evidence of the transformation of Malta, a once-conservative nation of about 440,000 people where divorce was illegal until 2011.While abortion remains banned in Malta, adoption by same-sex couples has been legal since civil unions were introduced in 2014. Last year, the number of exclusively civil marriages eclipsed the number of church weddings for the first time.Archbishop Charles Scicluna had opposed the same-sex marriage law, reflecting the church’s longstanding view that marriage can be between only a man and woman.“I can decide that a carob and an orange should no longer be called by their name,” Archbishop Scicluna said in a homily a few days after Parliament started debating the legislation. “But a carob remains a carob and an orange remains an orange. And marriage, whatever the law says, remains an eternal union exclusive to a man and a woman.”The goal of the law, which was pushed by Equality Minister Helena Dalli, was to “modernize the institution of marriage” to extend it to all consenting adult couples.Mr. Muscat had said it would be “discriminatory” to have separate laws for mixed and same-sex couples. So the amendments to existing laws included eliminating any reference to “husband and wife.” In the term’s place is the gender-neutral “spouse” to cover all situations.The law also calls for the removal of the terms “father” and “mother,” to be substituted by “parents.” Lesbian couples are distinguished by the terms “the person who gave birth” and “the other parent.”Other changes concern heterosexual marriages: Any reference to “maiden name” is replaced with “surname at birth,” while both spouses can choose which surname to take after marriage.The coordinator of the Malta Gay Rights Movement, Gabi Calleja, said achieving equality in marriage met the aspirations of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. Most same-sex couples consider marriage to be “the institution that best expresses the commitment and love they have for each other,” Ms. Calleja said.More than a dozen European countries have legalized same-sex marriage, all in the western part of the Continent. Almost a dozen others, including Italy, have some sort of same-sex unions or civil partnerships, according to the Pew Research Center.