https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/24/upshot/trillion-here-or-there-details-arent-what-matter-in-trump-tax-plan.html
A Trillion Here or There: The Details Aren’t What Matter in Trump’s Tax Plan - The New York Times
Taxation,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Tax Credits  Deductions and Exemptions,Federal Taxes (US)
Dec. 23, 2015
6563
On Tuesday, another think tank issued another analysis of Donald Trump’s tax plan, which calls for a very large tax cut that mostly benefits the wealthiest Americans. The new report, from the Tax Policy Center, found the plan would lose $9.5 trillion in revenue over a decade.That’s $2.5 trillion less than two other think tanks estimated in the fall. In some sense, $2.5 trillion is a lot of money. But in this case, the difference between $9.5 trillion and $12 trillion doesn’t really matter — and the reason it doesn’t matter has implications for how we think about candidates’ “tax plans,” especially when they come from a candidate who invents Civil War battles and whose own book promotes the virtue of “truthful hyperbole,” a practice known to normal people as “exaggerating.”Mr. Trump’s plan is purely theoretical. Even if he is elected president, the plan will never become law in its current form, whatever that current form is. Estimates of the plan’s effects are therefore useful only as broad statements of his intentions about taxes — and a proposal for a $9.5 trillion tax cut makes essentially the same broad statement as a proposal for a $12 trillion tax cut.The Tax Policy Center, a joint project of the center-left Urban Institute and Brookings Institution think tanks, arrived at a lower estimate than either the conservative Tax Foundation or the liberal Citizens for Tax Justice did by making some different assumptions about what exactly Mr. Trump means about his tax cut.Consider, for example, the discussion on Page 26 of the Tax Policy Center report, in which the authors discuss his proposal for a $25,000 exemption from taxes. Such an exemption might work like the existing standard deduction, which you can take only if you forgo itemized deductions. Or, it could work like a zero percent tax bracket, meaning people could exclude their first $25,000 in income from tax and then take additional deductions. The latter option is much more generous, costing an extra $1.7 trillion over a decade.The plan description released by the Trump campaign specifies that it is indeed proposing a zero bracket, which is odd, because he’s talked about the need to simplify taxes and limit deductions. The Tax Foundation took the campaign at its word despite this oddness, while the Tax Policy Center assumed Mr. Trump must have meant to propose the standard deduction approach. (It didn’t help that, according to the T.P.C., the campaign ignored all its requests for clarification.)To say that one of the two think tanks was “right,” you have to assume Mr. Trump has devoted even five seconds to thinking about the details of the plan and will not change his mind about those details in the future. If either of those conditions does not hold, then none of the think tanks are right — or, arguably, they’re all correct, in the same sense that Erwin Schrödinger’s cat was both alive and dead.To some extent, this is true of any candidate: A tax plan will be mediated through the political process and changing economic circumstances, and therefore should not be taken literally. But precision and literal reading are especially silly exercises when it comes to Mr. Trump.The key story about Donald Trump’s tax plan is one you can get from any of the three think tank reports: It’s yooooge, its benefits go lopsidedly to rich people, and it would raise the deficit a lot. The rest is details, which are subject to change around Mr. Trump.