https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/16/nyregion/citibike-cyclist-death.html
Family Recalls Life of Avid Cyclist, as Questions Are Raised About His Death - The New York Times
Citi Bike,Hanegby  Dan (1980-2017),Bicycles and Bicycling,Traffic Accidents and Safety,Deaths (Fatalities)
June 16, 2017
3736
Dan Hanegby was a planner and an avid cyclist, so of course he made sure his honeymoon coincided with the Tour de France. He had already forced his wife to one of the highest, coldest stages to catch a glimpse of the famed race. Then, the next day, Mr. Hanegby himself attempted to cycle up one of the race’s most arduous sections — Mont Ventoux.He got tired along the way, said his wife, Sasha Hanegby. She almost hoped he would give up, but then he finally made it to the top.“Normally people go to vineyards, hold each other’s hand, look at each other’s eyes,” Sasha said. “It wasn’t Dan’s plan.”That was almost a decade ago, when they were young and up-and-coming bankers. After leaving Israel, they built lives in New York. Their two children were born in Brooklyn. On Monday, Mr. Hanegby, 36, was riding a Citi Bike east along 26th Street — his usual commute — when, after passing Eighth Avenue, he was struck and killed by a charter bus, becoming the first fatality in the four years of New York’s Citi Bike program.In her home in Brooklyn Heights on Thursday, Mrs. Hanegby, 36, recalled her and her husband’s New York story. He had moved to the city for the woman he loved, she said, and along the way developed passions for cycling, fresh sushi and even the foliage in Brooklyn.“We built a life here,” Mrs. Hanegby said in her bedroom on Thursday. “Outside of everything, that’s what makes it so unfair. We saw a future here.”On Monday, their daughter, Mika, 3, went off to preschool. Mr. Hanegby dropped off their son, Omri, 6, at Avenues World School in West Chelsea. He then hopped on a Citi Bike and began his six-block commute east, toward Credit Suisse, where he worked. A commute he had made each morning for a year.Mrs. Hanegby was at work, at Citigroup, when she got the call. The police said Mr. Hanegby had swerved toward the bus, fell and was caught beneath one of the rear wheels.A law enforcement official, speaking on the condition of anonymity in order to comment on an ongoing investigation, confirmed that the Manhattan district attorney’s office was determining if criminal charges were warranted, just as it does with every traffic fatality.The district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., has brought charges in several similar cases under a relatively new city statute, and the 52-year-old bus driver could face a misdemeanor charge.Mrs. Hanegby’s friends said the police report did not make sense. “Swerved” indicated Mr. Hanegby lost control of the bike, or that he was being careless.Surveillance videos from two businesses on 26th Street, which were obtained by a family friend, provide a different account.The videos depict Mr. Hanegby cycling in what appears to be a straight line down West 26th Street, which does not have a bike lane. A bus traveling in the same direction passes him on the left. Mr. Hanegby is not wearing a helmet and is wearing headphones. Before he passes a parked van, he briefly looks to his right.Mr. Hanegby’s front wheel is clipped by the bus and the back wheels of the bus run him over.Gothamist first reported that there were videos of the accident.“It is a testament to the courage of Dan’s family and community to challenge initial assumptions and the inaccuracies N.Y.P.D. was putting out,” said Caroline Samponaro, a spokeswoman for Transportation Alternatives, which promotes cycling in the city. “It shouldn’t be on the backs of grieving families to do that kind of work.”Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Friday morning on WNYC that he planned to talk to Chief Thomas M. Chan, the Police Department’s transportation chief, about the investigation. He called the Citi Bike program a “massive success” that has benefited New Yorkers.“But this death — and I must say, it’s a guy with an amazing future ahead of him and young children, devoted father. It’s horrible,” Mr. de Blasio said. “And an athlete on top of that — someone who obviously was very good at handling his bike.”For the family, the hours after Mr. Hanegby’s death were a blur. Their nanny picked Mika and Omri up from school and brought them to the hospital. The school connected Mrs. Hanegby with a children’s psychologist.“I told them the truth, in a direct way,” Mrs. Hanegby said. “Exactly how their father always talked to them.”Her son asked if “aba” — father in Hebrew — had a home in heaven.Mr. Hanegby loved New York. After graduating from Brown University he moved in with his future wife, who was also working in the financial district. They apartment-hopped across TriBeCa. They spent all of their extra money on sushi. They married in 2009 in Israel.Mr. Hanegby planned his family’s future. His wife was eight months pregnant with Omri when he initiated a move away to Columbia Street in Brooklyn Heights.He converted their storage unit into a bike room, and Mrs. Hanegby said she finally found respite from his three bikes and sweaty biking clothes. He taught Omri how to bike, and later how to ski. Mika learned to bike a few weeks ago.“It’s so hard to talk about this stuff,” Mrs. Hanegby said. “It’s nothing special, it’s just our life. We just wanted a simple, good life. Peaceful.”Mrs. Hanegby has not seen the video footage. On Friday morning, she and her children left for Israel, where Mr. Hanegby was to be buried. She does not know if she will move permanently back to New York City.“I don’t want to make any rash decisions,” she said. “I’m going for the funeral, for the mourning and all that. Then I will sit with myself and think about what’s the best for my children.”