https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/08/world/europe/swiss-identify-remains-of-japanese-climbers-missing-for-45-years.html
Swiss Identify Remains of Japanese Climbers Missing for 45 Years - The New York Times
Switzerland,Mountaineering,Kobayashi  Masayuki (1949-1970),Oikawa  Michio (1947-1970),Matterhorn (Switzerland),Japan,Missing Persons,Deaths (Fatalities)
Aug. 7, 2015
84
Two Japanese mountain climbers caught in a snowstorm and buried under nearly half a century of Alpine ice have been identified, the police in Switzerland announced this week.The remains of Masayuki Kobayashi, 21, who disappeared in a blizzard in 1970 while climbing the north face of the Matterhorn, and his trekking partner, Michio Oikawa, 22, were identified with DNA tests after a mountaineer discovered their remains at the foot of the mountain last year, the police said on Thursday.The two men had been members of the Club Alpin Français, a mountain sports organization, according to the Swiss newspaper Le Nouvelliste.They left their hut at the base camp in Hörnli in the early afternoon on Aug. 18, 1970, to climb what is considered the most difficult path up the mountain. They ascended an additional 3,000 feet from base camp to an altitude of around 13,800 feet (or 4,200 meters) up the 14,692-foot peak before a snowstorm hit and observers lost contact with the climbers. Friends had hoped that they had made it to a nearby emergency refuge in time. But six days later, a friend reported that they were missing.“They were probably surprised by a snowstorm when they disappeared,” a Swiss police spokesman, Stéphane Vouardoux, told Reuters on Friday. “The snowstorm lasted a few days which prevented the rescue teams from searching.”At the time of the climbers’ disappearance, helicopters flew over the area for several days, searching for signs of life in the fresh snow, according to Swiss news reports about the search. More than a week after Mr. Kobayashi and Mr. Oikawa were last seen on the mountain, searchers found a helmet and a backpack that reportedly belonged to Mr. Oikawa about 40 yards from the summit.Almost 45 years later, genetic material from bones found by a climber in melting glacial ice last September was matched by Swiss forensic examiners to DNA provided by the Japanese climbers’ relatives.The police attributed the discovery of the bones last year to shrinking glaciers, which, as they melt, reveal bodies, body parts and other artifacts that have long been buried.One of those discoveries in 1991 by tourists in the Ötztal Alps unearthed the remains of a man, nicknamed Ötzi by scientists, that had been preserved for more than 5,000 years under ice. More recently, a helicopter pilot found the body of a British climber named Jonathan Conville, who disappeared in 1979 while hiking up the same perilous north face of the Matterhorn.The mountain has lured adventurous climbers since before the first successful ascent of the peak 150 years ago. Last month, the authorities closed the mountain to observe the anniversary of that first ascent by a team of seven men led by the Englishman Edward Whymper.After reaching the summit on July 14, 1865, four members of Whymper’s team slipped and fell to their deaths on their way back down the mountain. Since then, the Matterhorn and its surrounding areas have become a major draw for ambitious climbers and tourists alike. As more and more climbers tried to reach the mountain’s summit, the Matterhorn became known as one of the most dangerous mountains in the world, with nearly 600 people killed trying to reach the top since the mountain was first conquered.In the last decade, about a dozen people have died each year on the mountain, down from two dozen a year in the 1990s, Benedikt Perren, head of the Zermatt Mountain Guides Association, told The New York Times last month.