https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/17/us/politics/in-likely-spending-plan-congress-readies-blows-to-obamas-health-care-law.html
In Likely Spending Plan, Congress Readies Blows to Obama’s Health Care Law - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Sales and Excise Taxes,Federal Budget (US),Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Federal Taxes (US)
Dec. 16, 2015
9176
WASHINGTON —  In a big package of tax and spending legislation that Congress is likely to approve this week, Republicans have forced President Obama to swallow three changes that undermine his signature health care law, including a two-year delay of a tax on high-cost insurance plans provided by employers to workers.Jason Furman, the chairman of Mr. Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers, has described this “Cadillac tax” as one of the law’s most significant provisions to slow the growth of health costs. So the delay, favored by a coalition of Democrats and Republicans, labor unions, employers and insurance companies, represents a blow to the health law.In anticipation of the tax, which was scheduled to take effect in 2018, some employers have begun trimming health benefits, and workers feared further cuts.“Cadillac tax” suggests high-end health benefits. But Representative Joe Courtney, a Connecticut Democrat who led a six-year crusade against the tax, said that was a misnomer. The tax, he said, would affect health plans negotiated for schoolteachers and many other middle-income workers in areas like Connecticut where health costs are high.Under the agreement on taxes and spending, the excise tax on high-cost employer-sponsored health coverage will be delayed to 2020. Mr. Courtney said he hoped the delay would lead to the permanent demise of the tax. By a vote of 90 to 10 this month, the Senate voted to fully repeal the tax.In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Obama’s first budget director, Peter R. Orszag, a leading supporter of the Cadillac tax, said, “The two-year delay is likely to be equivalent to repeal of the tax because people will expect it to be deferred again and again.”Delaying the health-related taxes will tend to increase the budget deficit. But Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said the effect on the health law would be modest — “quite meager” — compared with the ambitions of Republicans who wanted to dismantle the whole law.The Congressional Budget Office had estimated that the Cadillac tax would raise $87 billion in revenue from 2018 to 2025 and says the delay will cost the government at least $18 billion.William Samuel, the chief lobbyist for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., welcomed the delay and said that economists who loved the tax “don’t have enough experience in the real world negotiating contracts.” At the bargaining table, he said, employers are already trying to avoid the tax by reducing benefits or increasing costs for workers. The National Association of Manufacturers also praised the delay but promised to keep lobbying for “a full repeal.”The legislation will also suspend a tax on medical devices for two years. The device tax, which took effect in 2013, will be suspended through 2017. Congress also agreed to suspend for one year a tax on health insurance providers. The tax applies to insurance purchased by individuals, families and many businesses, as well as to private plans that manage care for millions of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.The Congressional Budget Office said in 2009 that the taxes on device makers and insurers would be “largely passed through to consumers in the form of higher premiums.” In October, 101 economists of divergent political views sent a letter to Congress supporting the Cadillac tax and saying Congress should not “weaken, delay or reduce” it.The problem for Mr. Obama is that workers do not see their insurance as overly generous. They see their premiums and deductibles rising while wages for many have been stagnant, and many employers have required workers to pay for a larger share of their medical expenses.Hillary Clinton, in her campaign for the White House, has called for repeal of the Cadillac tax. The Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, voted this month to repeal it. The House Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi of California, also pushed for the delay.The bill also continues stringent limits on federal payments to insurers that lose money in health insurance market places under the health law.Republicans, including Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a contender for the Republican presidential nomination, criticize these “risk corridor” payments as a bailout for insurers.But the White House sees them as a way to stabilize prices, and because of the restrictions, insurers say, premiums are more likely to go up.