http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/27/health/27baby.html
Small Fixes: Drugs to Curb Deadly Inheritance of H.I.V. - The New York Times
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,Babies and Infants,Africa,Tests (Medical),Pregnancy and Obstetrics,Medicine and Health
Sept. 26, 2011
8742
The medicines that prevent the transmission of H.I.V. from mother to child are highly effective when they are used properly — that is, taken at the right time in gestation and in the right doses by both mother and newborn. But in resource-poor countries, mothers often give birth at home and rarely visit health clinics. So the problem is getting the medicines to the mothers and babies who need them, and making sure the doses and timing are right.Several years ago, health workers in several African countries hit on an idea: The first time a pregnant woman visits a health clinic, she should be tested for H.I.V. If she is positive, give her the medicines that she and her baby will soon need, as she may never return to the clinic.Clinic workers began packaging the antiretroviral drugs — pills for H.I.V.-infected mothers and liquids for their babies — in paper bags with instructions on how to use them. The Mother-Baby Pack was born.When a pregnant woman is found to be H.I.V.-positive, there are two considerations. The first is that all infected pregnant women need prophylaxis to prevent their babies from becoming infected. The second is that independent of pregnancy, women with CD4 counts of 350 or below need H.I.V. treatment for themselves. (CD4 cells are a type of white blood cell that indicates the degree of immunosuppression caused by H.I.V.)The original packs contained nevirapine, which doctors now know does not work well for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission. So with help from Unicef and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the government of Lesotho, where more than 23 percent of the population is H.I.V.-positive, began testing new packs that come in three versions.If the mother is H.I.V.-positive but has a CD4 count above 350, her Mother-Baby Pack contains the antiretroviral AZT, to be taken beginning at 14 weeks of pregnancy, and nevirapine for the baby, to be given from birth to until he or she is 6 weeks old.For mothers with a CD4 count of 350 or below, the pack includes the same medicine and dosing schedule for the baby, along with a regimen for the mother that involves three, and sometimes four, different antiretroviral drugs. A third pack, for mothers who do not have H.I.V., contains only diet supplements.A pamphlet with instructions in Sesotho, the local language, is included in each pack, and color coding on the packages indicates which drugs to take and when. The pack also includes pictures for those who cannot read. More than 14,000 have been distributed since January.Some experts have doubts about the effectiveness of the packs, and some fear that they may cause more harm than good. For example, having seven months’ worth of medicine could make mothers less likely to return to the clinic to get the other prenatal care they need.Perhaps even more dangerous, the misuse of the medicines could lead to the emergence of resistant strains of H.I.V. that would be difficult or impossible to treat. And some mothers may be reluctant to be seen with the packs at all because of the stigma attached to H.I.V. infection.“We are about to evaluate the program and will be able to objectively respond on the impact,” said Dr. Mpolai M. Moteetee, the director general of health services in Lesotho. Then, she continued, they will know “how well the pack is received, the mothers’ capacity to use the medicines properly, and whether it is aiding in proper treatment.”Unicef, which is supplying the boxes for the Lesotho pilot program, is not yet ready to advocate its wide use. Jimmy Kolker, who retired in August as head of H.I.V. programs at Unicef, is watching and waiting. “We don’t have the results from this,” he said. “But it’s a formalized government program, and we have every reason to believe that it will work.”