http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/02/us/saturn-s-rings-are-still-a-very-strange-wonder-and-a-source-of-surprises.html
Saturn's Rings Are Still a 'Very Strange Wonder' and a Source of Surprises - The New York Times
CASSINI  JEAN-DOMINIQUE,GALILEO,HUYGENS  CHRISTIAN,SATURN (PLANET),SPACE
July 2, 2004
9393
In the 400 years that telescopes have been turned on the sky, no sight has been more evocative of nature's ability to surprise than the rings of Saturn, buttery and evanescent, delicate as a butterfly's wing, crisp as a paper cut, there against all odds, shimmering in the eyepiece like some child's toy.Galileo, the original telescopic astronomer, who discovered them in 1610, never knew what he was seeing.''I discovered another very strange wonder,'' he wrote to his patron that year. Saturn, he went on to report, was not one star but three -- a large one flanked by two smaller bodies, all in a row.It was such a strange notion that he first circulated it to his friends only in the form of an anagram. Only after he was convinced he was not seeing things did he release the key to what it said.It was a way he could stake his claim to the discovery -- science journals had not yet been invented -- without making a fool out of himself, explained Dr. Owen Gingerich, an astronomer and historian at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. If Galileo decided he was wrong, he could have just left the anagram undecoded.Two years later, Galileo was even more flabbergasted when the smaller objects vanished -- as the rings do every 15 years or so when they appear edge-on.''I do not know what to say in a case so surprising, so unlooked for and so novel,'' he wrote.Over the following years, until his death in 1642, Galileo variously described Saturn as sometimes solitary, sometimes a triple body and sometimes with handles. Another astronomer, Johannes Hevelius, sought to explain this shape-shifting by proposing that Saturn was a rotating ellipsoid, with a pair of crescents attached to its extremities.It was not until 1659 that the Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens, namesake of a probe that will fall into Saturn's moon Titan later this year, solved the puzzle. He suggested that all the observations of Saturn could be explained if the planet was encircled by a ring.''Huygens was able to connect the dots,'' Dr. Gingerich said. Huygens, he said, also initially circulated his theory in the form of an anagram.As telescopes continued to improve and grow in power and resolution beyond the crude instrument Galileo used, to the cameras on spacecraft like Voyager, the landscape of the Saturnian system also grew more complex and bewildering. In 1675 the Italian-French astronomer Jean-Dominique Cassini discovered that the rings were split into two parts by a dark band that is now known as the Cassini Division.Moreover, what was once incredible had become the norm. Uranus, Neptune and then Jupiter were found to sport narrow, faint rings.But the rings kept splitting and showing off new tricks.Voyager's cameras resolved Saturn's rings into thousands of tiny ringlets resembling the grooves on a phonograph record. There were tiny so-called shepherd moons patrolling the edges of rings, keeping them in line with gravitational tugs, dark spokelike streaks, perhaps caused by interactions with Saturn's magnetic field. And even a kinked and braided ring.But in its first few hours at Saturn, Cassini had already discovered new and dazzling features in the rings. Dr. Carolyn C. Porco, head of the imaging team, said that her mind was blown. She is only the latest in a long line. Welcome to Saturn, Dr. Porco.