https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/books/review/return-to-glory-matthew-debord-.html
How Fast Can a Ford Car Go? - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Return to Glory: The Story of Ford's Revival and Victory at the Toughest Race in the World (Book),DeBord  Matthew,Ford Motor Co,Automobiles
July 3, 2017
3801
RETURN TO GLORY The Story of Ford’s Revival and Victory at the Toughest Race in the World By Matthew DeBord Illustrated. 226 pp. Atlantic Monthly Press. $26.One day, Silicon Valley pooh-bahs may persuade the safe-space generation to completely abandon personal driving. Until that time, the car will persist as a symbol of freedom and the American automotive industry will endure as a major economic player.A decade ago, Detroit was nearly brought to its knees without the help of socially detached app-masters. The financial crisis did a fine job of that, leading to the rescues of General Motors and Chrysler via an $80 billion jolt of taxpayer-funded defibrillation. But one Detroit giant, Ford, avoided corporate welfare thanks to the prescience of its C.E.O., a former Boeing executive named Alan Mulally. Mulally, sensing the impending meltdown, refinanced the company’s debt through private lenders. His foresight and adroit management gave Ford an edge during the years leading to recovery. By the time 2016 rolled around, it was time for a little fun, as Matthew DeBord shows in “Return to Glory,” a page-turning synthesis of business book and adventure saga. For car people like DeBord, there’s no greater kick than pushing the limits of speed and endurance.American carmakers’ relationship with racing has, at times, been ambivalent. While luxury marques such as Duesenberg and Stutz always understood the value of proving their products at the track, during the early days fusty G.M. forbade its engineers and salespeople from having anything to do with a sport bluenoses viewed as borderline criminal.Priggish and reactionary as Henry Ford may have been in other regards, he understood a simple truth: Demonstrate that your cars go faster than someone else’s and consumer demand will rise. Always happy to claim credit for the accomplishments of others, he even portrayed himself as a racecar driver. DeBord points out that Ford did, in fact, win a 1901 competition when the only other car putt-putting around the oval conked out before the finish.There was nothing priggish about Henry Ford II. Known as the Deuce, the founder’s grandson was a bon vivant with a sleek Italian wife and a sleek Italian Ferrari in his collection of fast cars. In 1963, he tried to buy Enzo Ferrari’s financially strapped Scuderia (Italian for “stable”). When that deal fell through acrimoniously, he set out to humiliate Ferrari by besting the Maestro of Maranello where he’d long dominated: a stunningly hazardous test of mechanical and human endurance played out on French country roads called the 24 Hours of Le Mans.Ford’s initial attempts to win at Le Mans failed, but from 1966 to 1969, he came in first owing to a virtuoso racing team managed by Carroll Shelby and a massively powered, bespoke creation known as the GT40. Having achieved his revenge, the Deuce ceased competing; been there, done that.Half a century later, a thriving Ford Motor Company decided to tackle Le Mans again, using a new, technologically advanced offspring of the GT. “Return to Glory” provides an account of that car and the people who designed, built and drove it. Like Ford, DeBord has triumphed.The author’s years as a journalist specializing in transportation at Business Insider and other publications gave him access to major players, creating a you-are-there verisimilitude. His assured technical knowledge, supercharged by the enthusiasm of an aficionado, brings home the beautiful, brutal realities of endurance racing.“Return to Glory” is a spirited celebration of American initiative, perseverance and creativity that tells a story no less dramatic for its happy ending.