http://www.nytimes.com/2001/01/22/us/new-administration-president-first-day-bush-settles-into-refitted-oval-office.html
THE NEW ADMINISTRATION: THE PRESIDENT; On First Day, Bush Settles Into a Refitted Oval Office - The New York Times
CANADA,MEXICO,CLINTON  BILL,TRUMAN  HARRY S,BUSH  GEORGE W,ROOSEVELT  FRANKLIN DELANO,UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,PRESIDENTS AND PRESIDENCY (US),BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,WHITE HOUSE (WASHINGTON  DC)
Jan. 22, 2001
3399
In his first full day in the White House, President Bush today gave a tour of his new home to supporters, prepared to announce a trip to Mexico  and settled into an Oval Office that in less than 24 hours was redecorated to remove virtually all traces of its previous occupant.After an exhausting Saturday capped by a night of inaugural ball-hopping, Mr. Bush woke early, had coffee with his parents and spent most of the day getting accustomed to his surroundings.At moments, the 132-room mansion appeared somewhat unfamiliar to him despite his father's four-year tenure there. The new president listened carefully as a White House guide took him and supporters he had met on the campaign trail on a tour of the public rooms. Later he greeted some of the 2,200 people who had obtained tickets to the traditional first-day open house, a chance to see the Executive Mansion under new management.''I slept pretty well,'' Mr. Bush said, telling reporters that he planned to take it easy today. And then, in a reference to his brief forays on the dance floor during the inaugural balls, where he danced an average of 48 seconds at each of nine events, he laughed and said, ''I was exhausted from dancing so much.''Behind the scenes at the White House -- and amid falling plaster, fresh paint and a mass of computer cables -- Mr. Bush's top aides were planning their strategy for a week devoted to fleshing out his education proposals and taking the first legislative crack at his promise of a $1.6 trillion tax cut.His chief of staff, Andrew H. Card Jr., said Mr. Bush was considering a quick trip to Mexico in the next two months to visit the foreign leader he knows best, the new Mexican president, Vicente Fox. That would be followed by a trip to Quebec, in April, for a summit meeting of North and South American nations.Together, the two trips underscore Mr. Bush's often-stated resolve to focus on this hemisphere, which he feels was given short shrift by the Clinton administration's focus on Asia, Russia and, in the second term, Europe, particularly the Balkans.Mr. Bush's aides have made it clear that they intend to get the new president off to an active start, even if his first week is filled with more symbolism than legislative substance. His father, coming in after eight years of the Reagan administration, was criticized early on for moving too slowly.No one can say that about the new Bush administration. Within two hours of his oath-taking on Saturday, he ordered a halt to the publication of new regulations in the Federal Register until they can be reviewed, and he issued instructions to slow the implementation of already published executive orders and regulations that flooded out of the White House in  Bill Clinton's last days as president.''There will be more of that this week,'' one top Bush aide said today.Even the appearance of the West Wing is changing. Gone from the Oval Office is the dark blue carpet that dominated the room, replaced by an oval rug in off-white, with touches of melon and sage.Mr. Clinton's striped silk sofas are gone as well, and there are two cream-colored sofas in their place. The medallions and busts of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman have been moved out, and today there was a framed photograph of Mr. Bush's swearing-in on Saturday, sitting on a credenza behind the desk. He is, however, using the same desk that Mr. Clinton worked at, a desk  best known as the one at which John F. Kennedy Jr. played at his father's feet.In both the White House and the rest of Washington, the policy maneuvering had already begun.Mr. Card gathered about 20 White House aides for a meeting at 1 p.m., even as workers were painting and rewiring. He talked about observing high ethical standards and, said one aide, ''he asked us to treat the office with respect,'' paying attention to how the staff and visitors were attired. He did not lay out a specific dress code. One of the major changes after Mr. Clinton's inauguration in 1993 was a remarkable relaxation of the White House dress code. Aides frequently attended meetings in jeans and T-shirts.But much of the session today was spent on the trivia of setting up a new office. Many phones did not work, cell phones have yet to be distributed, and in a sign of the logistical disarray, the White House press office could not get its computers working to send out notices to reporters.Meanwhile, the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Senator Phil Gramm, a Republican from Mr. Bush's home state of Texas, said he would introduce a major tax cut bill in coming days, joined by a Democrat, Zell Miller of Georgia. With the Senate split 50-50 between the parties, Mr. Miller's willingness to sign on could prove important. But Mr. Bush does not plan to introduce his own complete tax proposal until a budget is put together in the next few weeks.Instead, the theme of the week will be education, a keystone of the campaign. Mr. Bush plans to unveil details of his education proposals this week; during the campaign he talked about a $47.6 billion plan that included a goal of teaching all children to read by the time they leave third grade.Mr. Card suggested today, however, that there might be some negotiating room on Mr. Bush's proposal to give vouchers worth up to $1,500 to parents who want to send their children to private schools. Democrats fear the plan would deprive the public schools of that money and vowed to block it, and Mr. Card suggested today that vouchers would be less important than other parts of Mr. Bush's plan.''Vouchers won't be the top priority of this administration,'' Mr. Card said today on ''Late Edition'' on CNN. ''But they may be a tool that is used to help educate a child who is not getting an education in the school.''Mr. Bush's lawyers are continuing to examine the flurry of last-minute announcements and regulations issued by the Clinton administration, which Mr. Card said today would not be rejected in a ''knee-jerk'' way.But Mr. Bush, in an interview last week, strongly suggested that he would try to roll back some of the most ambitious initiatives, including regulations that put nearly 60 million acres of the nation's forests off limits to development.He must also decide in coming weeks whether to use an executive order to stop the flow of American money to international organizations that provide abortions in foreign countries. That decision could come as early as this week.On Monday, he is expected to formally approve the selection of Richard Armitage, a longtime diplomat, Asia expert and friend of Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, as the deputy secretary of state. Richard N. Haass, another veteran of the previous Bush White House and now director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution, is expected to be named to run the State Department's policy planning staff, a critical job in the department.Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, began the day at the traditional Inaugural Prayer Service at Washington National Cathedral. The Bushes were joined there by Vice President Dick Cheney and his wife, Lynne, as well as family members, friends and supporters.The Rev. Franklin Graham, continuing a tradition established by his father, the Rev. Billy Graham, invoked blessings on the new government and its leaders.''I pray that God will place his great hand of protection on each and every one, and especially on you, Mr. President, and your family,'' Mr.  Graham said.By the time he came back from church, tourists and residents of metropolitan Washington were already lined up for the first-come-first-served tickets to the open house. As ticket holders stood on the snow-covered pathways outside the east fence of the White House, their hands were stamped with ultraviolet-sensitive ink to prevent ticket scalping.Those in the line were mostly well dressed (perhaps they sensed Mr. Card's impending instructions about White House attire) and well coifed.''I just want to wish him well, good luck and all that,'' said Roger Cummings, a business consultant from Kansas City. Jim Traskas, who was a county chairman for the Bush campaign in Independence, Ohio, said, ''I'm just thrilled to see the White House for the first time.''Gregory Whalen and Kevin Johnson, truck drivers from Memphis,  had larger ambitions.''I'm hoping to see how good he lives,'' said Mr. Whalen, who said he did not vote for Mr. Bush. ''I'm going to try and see if he'll give a little of it back.''As they left the White House, the visitors were ebullient, full of wonder for their experience. Gary Bennett, a businessman from Chicago, had the president's autograph on his ticket and an unrestrained smile on his face.''He was nicer than I expected, and I really got to see the White House,'' he said. ''This is something I'll always remember.''