https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/27/travel/where-to-celebrate-the-solar-eclipse-syzygy.html
Where to Celebrate the Solar Eclipse This Summer - The New York Times
Eclipses,Travel and Vacations,Space and Astronomy,Mountain Travel Sobek,Charleston (SC),Willamette Valley (Ore),Missouri,Salmon River (Idaho),Idaho
April 27, 2017
3195
From Oregon to South Carolina, the solar eclipse taking place on Aug. 21 will track southeast, inspiring travel operators along its route to celebrate the nearly two-minute syzygy — or alignment of the sun, moon and earth.In the Willamette Valley of Oregon, Brooks Winery plans to hold a Solar Eclipse Party, including an outdoor yoga class, brunch and a tasting of its new sparkling riesling in anticipation of the total eclipse passing over the vineyard around 10:30 a.m.The eclipse will peak in Perryville, Mo., about 80 miles south of St. Louis, just after 1 p.m. Buses will shuttle guests of host hotels in St. Louis, including the Renaissance St. Louis Airport Hotel (from $109), to an eclipse watch for $25 a person.As the shadow passes over Nashville, guests of the Union Station Hotel Nashville can attend a champagne viewing party on the veranda with special glasses for watching the eclipse and other amenities provided (rates from $478.21 a night with a two-night minimum stay).In Charleston, S.C., the King Charles Inn will hold a lunch lecture by an astrophysicist and a viewing party aboard a tall ship in Charleston Harbor (rates from $397 a night with a three-night minimum). The HarbourView Inn will hold a rooftop viewing party with an astronomer on hand to answer questions (rooms from $532).If hotels on the route are hard to find, or inflated, consider camping. A six-day rafting trip departing on Aug. 18 from Mountain Travel Sobek on the Middle Fork of the Salmon River in Idaho will coincide with the eclipse (rates from $1,995 a person). A seven-day rafting trip on the Main Salmon River in Idaho with OARS, departing Aug. 15, will feature a guest astronomer (rates from $2,682 a person).