http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/06/world/middleeast/yemen-attack.html
Assault on Yemeni Defense Ministry Compound Kills 52 - The New York Times
Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula,Sana (Yemen),Terrorism,Explosions,Yemen
Dec. 5, 2013
8533
SANA, Yemen —  Assailants widely suspected of being members of Al Qaeda carried out a two-pronged attack on Yemen’s heavily guarded Defense Ministry headquarters here on Thursday, blowing open an entrance to the compound with a car full of explosives and gunning down civilians at a hospital inside, witnesses said.The attack killed 52 people, including soldiers, doctors, patients and a number of foreigners. More than 160 others were wounded.The daylight assault on one of the government’s most important security facilities appeared to mark a new low in Yemen’s descent into chaos and instability since its longtime president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, was forced from power after a popular uprising in 2011.While the United Nations is trying to shepherd the country through a rocky political transition, many of the figures that have long dominated its political and economic life have much to lose if overhauls succeed in limiting their power. This has left members of the old guard, prominent military figures and tribal leaders struggling to maintain their influence. The weakening of state control has exacerbated Yemen’s perennial problems: rebel movements that want to divide the country, extreme poverty and militancy.Yemen is home to one of Al Qaeda’s most organized and threatening affiliates, whose operatives have been the targets of an American drone campaign to kill militants suspected of involvement in kidnapping for ransom and a string of deadly attacks on military targets. The Qaeda affiliate in Yemen has also tried to plant bombs on jetliners bound for the United States.Yemeni officials say that Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, as the affiliate is known, has infiltrated the country’s security services, and witnesses said that attackers on Thursday wore military uniforms.The blast on Thursday was heard across Sana. Gunfire rang out after the car exploded, sending plumes of smoke into the air. There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack, which analysts said showed the hallmarks of Al Qaeda.The attack was apparently timed to coincide with the changing of the guard at the complex, when gates are opened to allow soldiers to enter and leave. Yemeni special forces in armored vehicles surrounded the building, fighting gun battles into the night against about a dozen assailants.The attack was Yemen’s deadliest since May of last year, when a suicide bomber disguised as a soldier detonated explosives during a military parade rehearsal near the presidential palace, leaving hundreds dead or wounded.In September, militants suspected of belonging to Al Qaeda killed at least 21 government soldiers in attacks on two military targets in the south of Yemen.In the last two years, more than 150 intelligence and security officials have been killed across the country, many of them gunned down in drive-by shootings.Al Qaeda is not the only source of unrest. The government is facing secessionists in the south and Shiite rebels in the north. Since Mr. Saleh left office in 2011, an interim government has run the country ahead of elections expected next year.