https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/20/us/laquan-mcdonald-chicago-police-shooting.html
Video of Chicago Police Shooting a Teenager Is Ordered Released - The New York Times
McDonald  Laquan (d 2014),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Chicago (Ill),Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Van Dyke  Jason
Nov. 19, 2015
7306
CHICAGO —  A county judge on Thursday ordered the release of video from a police dashboard camera showing the fatal shooting of a black 17-year-old by a white Chicago police officer on a Southwest Side street a year ago.For months, the city had refused to make the video public, citing a federal investigation into the shooting. And even as Franklin Valderrama, a Cook County judge, announced Thursday that the video must be released by next week, Chicago officials indicated that they would continue to fight to block the release with an appeal. But within hours of the ruling, Mayor Rahm Emanuel announced that the city would indeed release the video within days, and for the first time issued a public condemnation of the police’s officer’s actions.“Police officers are entrusted to uphold the law, and to provide safety to our residents,” Mr. Emanuel said in a written statement. “In this case, unfortunately, it appears an officer violated that trust at every level.”Some who have seen the video say that it shows the teenager, Laquan McDonald, being struck by a barrage of bullets, some hitting him even after he had fallen to the pavement. The teenager, who the authorities say was carrying a knife, was shot 16 times, according to a report from the Cook County medical examiner’s office. Some of the bullets entered the back of his body.A lawyer for Mr. McDonald’s family, Michael D. Robbins, described the recording as deeply disturbing, and said it clearly showed that the shooting was unreasonable and illegal. “He was not threatening anyone,” Mr. Robbins said. “He was walking away.” He said Mr. McDonald’s grieving relatives had the videotape described to them but to date had chosen not to view it.Judge Valderrama’s order to release the video by next Wednesday came amid growing scrutiny of police shootings around the nation and as a series of confrontations captured on videotape in places like North Charleston, S.C., have stirred outrage.This city, too, has a long, painful history on matters of police conduct and race. In April, the Chicago City Council agreed to pay $5 million to Mr. McDonald’s family even as the criminal investigation went on. The city this year also agreed to provide $5.5 million in reparations to a group of men, most of them black, who said they had been systematically tortured and abused by a “Midnight Crew” of police officers on the city’s South Side in the 1970s and ’80s.Over the last 10 years, the city, which has about 12,700 officers, has spent more than $500 million on settlements, judgments, fees and other costs related to police misconduct, according to a 2014 investigation by the Better Government Association, a nonpartisan watchdog group.In the McDonald case, Chicago officers were summoned by a 911 call to a neighborhood on the city’s Southwest Side the night of Oct. 20, 2014, to investigate a report of a man with a knife trying to break into vehicles in a trucking yard. Officers came upon Mr. McDonald, who was holding a folding knife, and told him to drop it, Chicago officials have said. Mr. McDonald refused, the officers said, and he began walking or jogging away. Two officers followed him — one on foot, the other in a car — and called for backup, requesting that an officer carrying a Taser stun gun be sent to the area.At one point, Mr. McDonald pounded on the windshield of the squad car and punctured its front tire with the knife, city officials say. Mr. McDonald and the growing number of officers followed a path down several blocks. A police dashboard camera, captured the end of the episode: Along a multilane commercial stretch of Pulaski Road, one of the six police officers at the scene fired his weapon, striking the teenager 16 times.The officer, Jason Van Dyke, is on administrative duty pending an investigation, a spokesman for the Chicago Police Department said. Since at least April, the shooting has been under investigation by a team that includes the F.B.I., the United States attorney’s office in Chicago and the Cook County state’s attorney’s office.Dan Herbert, a lawyer for Officer Van Dyke, said the officer believed he was justified in the shooting. Mr. Herbert described him as a highly decorated officer who had been on the force for more than 15 years. “He fired because he was in fear for his safety, as well as the safety of his colleagues,” Mr. Herbert said in an email.Records show Officer Van Dyke, who is white, had been the subject of numerous complaints from residents, including allegations of using excessive force and racial slurs, but Mr. Herbert said, “As far as I know, Jason has not had a single sustained complaint, meaning all allegations were found to be without merit.”The city had long argued that the video was part of the investigation into the shooting and should not be made public until the inquiry was completed. “This is consistent with the longstanding practice of federal, state and local law enforcement authorities not to release evidence related to ongoing criminal investigations,” Bill McCaffrey, a spokesman for the city’s Department of Law, said this week.Brandon Smith, a freelance journalist, has pressed in court for release of the video under public record laws, and Judge Valderrama ruled that the Police Department could not cite an investigation as a reason to withhold the video because other law enforcement agencies — not the department itself — were conducting the inquiry.In announcing the city’s abrupt change of course, Mr. Emanuel said the city would release the video by Wednesday, which, he pointedly added, “we hope will provide prosecutors time to expeditiously bring their investigation to a conclusion so Chicago can begin to heal.”Aislinn Sol, an organizer with the Chicago chapter of Black Lives Matter, said it was important for people to see the footage of the shooting, and for changes to be made at the Chicago Police Department. “What we want is for the rampant killing to stop and for police accountability to begin to be implemented in the city of Chicago,” Ms. Sol said.