https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/us/politics/trump-medical-research-funding-nih.html
Plan to Cut Funding for Biomedical Research Hits Opposition in Congress - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Federal Budget (US),National Institutes of Health,Research
April 3, 2017
4286
WASHINGTON — A proposal by President Trump to cut federal spending for biomedical research by 18 percent — just months after Congress approved bipartisan legislation to increase such spending — has run into a buzz saw on Capitol Hill, with Republicans and Democrats calling it misguided.“I’m extremely concerned about the potential impact of the 18 percent cut,” said Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma and chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee responsible for the National Institutes of Health. “This committee and certainly me, personally, will be very hesitant” to go along with the proposal, he added.Mr. Cole said he took “considerable pride” in the fact that Congress doubled the health institutes’ budget from 1998 to 2003 and increased it again in the 21st Century Cures Act, a biomedical research bill approved last year with broad bipartisan support.Representative Nita M. Lowey of New York, the senior Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee, said the proposed cuts could have “catastrophic results” for patients and researchers.Mr. Trump is asking Congress to provide $25.9 billion for the National Institutes of Health for the fiscal year that starts on Oct. 1. That represents a cut of $5.8 billion, or 18 percent, from the agency’s current spending level of $31.7 billion. A week after making that proposal, Mr. Trump told Congress that he wanted to cut spending at the N.I.H. by $1.2 billion in the current fiscal year, mostly by reducing research grants.While the agency does some research in its own laboratories, it distributes most of its funds to scientists around the country who are investigating cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer’s, diabetes, AIDS and other illnesses, as well as basic science that has no known link to a particular disease.“Only in Washington do you literally judge the success of something by how much money you throw at the problem, not actually whether it’s solving the problem or coming up with anything,” said Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary.Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services, said the government could achieve huge savings next year without harming lifesaving research by paring back payments to universities for overhead — the “indirect costs” of research financed by the health institutes.These include the cost of utilities, internet service, data storage, the construction and upkeep of laboratories, disposal of hazardous waste and compliance with federal rules protecting human subjects of clinical research.“About 30 percent of the grant money that goes out is used for indirect expenses, which, as you know, means that that money goes for something other than the research that’s being done,” Mr. Price said.But researchers said the remark showed a fundamental misunderstanding of the way biomedical research is conducted.“Indirect costs are very real costs,” said Dr. Landon S. King, the executive vice dean of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “There is not another source to pay for them. The kinds of cuts that are being suggested would almost certainly harm our ability to conduct this research.”The health institutes distributed more than $23.5 billion last year to outside researchers, of which nearly $6.6 billion, or 27.9 percent, was for indirect costs.Johns Hopkins, one of the largest recipients of N.I.H. funds, is getting $600 million from the agency this year, of which $96 million is for indirect costs, Dr. King said. The medical school is receiving $450 million of the total, including $70 million for indirect costs.Because the grants go to every state, a small, well-connected army of researchers is mobilizing to beat back Mr. Trump’s proposal.The president’s budget also proposes “a major reorganization” of the institutes to focus on “the highest-priority research and training activities.” The White House said Mr. Trump wanted “consolidations and structural changes” at the agency, which now has 27 institutes and centers, each with its own broadly defined mission.Most of the institutes were established or authorized by Congress. More than a dozen buildings on the agency’s 310-acre campus in Bethesda, Md., are named for lawmakers, Republicans and Democrats alike, who pumped tens of billions of dollars into the agency and championed its work.Kelvin K. Droegemeier, the vice president for research at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, said the government and universities had a shared interest in research and historically shared the costs.“Indirect cost payments are not funny money or a slush fund,” he said. “They are reimbursements for money that universities have already spent. On paper, it looks as if you could save a lot of money by cutting federal reimbursements. In fact, you would just be shifting more of the costs to universities, which cannot afford it. State revenues are very problematic these days, and raising tuition is not at all palatable.”Arthur Bienenstock, an emeritus professor at Stanford and an expert on science policy, said the proposal made him worry about the future of research.“The net impact would be a significant decline in biomedical research, and its centralization in a small number of universities,” he said. “Research would shift away from public universities and less well-endowed private universities, toward well-endowed private universities like Harvard and Stanford.”Representative Andy Harris, Republican of Maryland, said that private nonprofit groups paid a much smaller share of the indirect costs for research they supported.“It’s very interesting that the private sector doesn’t hold these indirect costs to be so valuable as to pay them,” Mr. Harris said, “but when the taxpayer dollar’s involved, somehow we do.”The Government Accountability Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said in September that federal agencies needed to improve their internal controls “to help protect N.I.H. funds against fraud, waste and abuse” in the computation of indirect costs. The auditors did not cite any improper payments, but the health institutes agreed to tighten their procedures.