https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/audiobooks-summer-recommendations.html
What (Books) to Listen to This Summer - The New York Times
Audiobooks,Books and Literature
July 14, 2017
4414
Looking for a good book to... hear? Book critics for The New York Times and editors of The New York Times Book Review talk about books they’ve loved listening to in the past and what you might appreciate for a long car trip — or a regular commute — this summer.Joyce Carol Oates’s novella “Black Water” (1992), about a Chappaquiddick-like accident as related from the woman’s point of view, is among her best books. The audiobook, read by Amanda Plummer, is uncommonly gripping – it’s a dark and sensual plunge into the abyss.Andre Agassi’s memoir, “Open” (2009), written with J. R. Moehringer, reads like a rocket. The audio version is especially good; the narrator, Erik Davies, adds his own subtle topspin. Important matches are recounted with unexpected brio; the personal stories have unexpected soul. DWIGHT GARNER, critic I’ve never listened to an audiobook with my son before, but he is starting to follow longer narratives, so I’m eager to try him on a children’s classic the next time we’re in the car for a few hours. For his birthday this summer I bought “Winnie-the-Pooh” read by Stephen Fry, Judi Dench, Michael Williams, Jane Horrocks and others. If it goes well, I’m going to listen to “A Bear Called Paddington,” also read by Stephen Fry. I will of course love these, even if he falls asleep. RADHIKA JONES, editorial director, BooksEarly in my newspaper career, when I worked the overnight shift at a small-town daily, I got into the habit of listening to audiobooks for company on my commute through the empty streets. “Great Expectations,” “The Third Man,” “Humboldt’s Gift,” “Flaubert’s Parrot” — I read them all this way, if “read” is the word, pausing occasionally to rewind the tape if my mind had wandered from the story to the job’s routines: the call to the cop shop for breaking news, the trip to the presses to watch the first copies roll off. I remember those books as clearly as anything I read on paper, even if the circumstances of my listening have retroactively cast them all in the same insomniac, Edward Hopper-ish light. But by far my favorite audiobooks from that stretch were the paired novels “Mr. Bridge” and “Mrs. Bridge,” by Evan S. Connell, which take readers deep into the rich, roiling and conflicted interior lives of a husband and wife who to all outward appearances are exactly the kind of staid, respectable suburbanites who lay fast asleep in their imposing houses while I drove by. As read by George Guidall and Sally Darling, they are wry and well-meaning and hopeless and entirely alive. I drove home in a snowstorm early one morning, “Mr. Bridge” on the cassette deck, and after I reached my driveway I sat with the car running and snow gradually piling up on the windshield so I could listen to the end of a chapter. Then there was a knock on my window — a plow driver had noticed me just sitting there while the engine ran, and wanted to make sure everything was O.K. “Everything is fine,” I assured him. “I’m listening to a story.” GREGORY COWLES, staff editor, The New York Times Book ReviewMy partner and I are tentatively planning an 11-day roundtrip road trip from Manhattan to Minneapolis at the end of next month to visit with my sister’s family and sample the variety of fascinating food at the Minnesota State Fair. Google Maps estimates the drive to be around 19 hours each way — without traffic complications, pit stops and Dairy Queen breaks. Since that’s a lot of time on the National Highway System through seven states, I have three potential dashboard entertainment plans. The first: Listen to audiobooks of classic works set it some of the states we’re passing through, like Sherwood Anderson’s “Winesburg, Ohio.” Since I also want to shop local at her Birchbark Books shop once we get there, spinning up the audio version of a Louise Erdrich novel is a distinct possibility and I’m looking at “The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse” for starters.Environmental factors will ultimately affect our moods and listening choices, so that’s where the second plan comes in. Bad weather and jacked-up highways will undoubtedly call for Sarah Vowell’s “Assassination Vacation” and “The Partly Cloudy Patriot” — humorous, insightful essays about traveling through America and its history, read in part by the delightful author herself with the help of some great guest narrators (Stephen Colbert! Seth Green! Catherine Keener!) along the way.Since this trip will be a bit of an asphalt marathon, my third plan is to just pick one epic novel for the long haul. Neal Stephenson’s “Cryptonomicon” is a favorite because it involves many topics that interest us both, like World War II codebreaking, Bletchley Park, cryptography, hackers, computers and data havens. The audiobook version clocks in around 42 hours, which should get us there and back with plot to spare. J.D. BIERSDORFER, staff editor, The New York Times Book ReviewOn long summer road trips, my husband and I have discovered that mystery novels are the way to go. But after a near-miss one Sunday in Baltimore (we ran a red light, completely absorbed by the revelation of the killer) we’ve gravitated to more sedate crime stories, character-driven tales that are engaging enough to keep us awake on a long stretch of highway but not dangerously so. Which these days means Louise Penny’s charming mystery series featuring Armand Gamache of the Quebec provincial police force and his neighbors in the tiny town of Three Pines. ALIDA BECKER, staff editor, The New York Times Book ReviewMy experience with audiobooks is admittedly limited. Once, more than a decade ago, in an attempt to squeeze more reading into my day, I resolved to listen to Colm Toibin’s “The Master,” mostly while walking to the subway and running errands. The novel is based on Henry James’s life, and I loved the mesmerizing narration of all those serpentine sentences, but trying to keep track of where those sentences were going meant that I would end up in the frozen food aisle with only a trace memory of what brought me there.This summer, though, my family has a road trip planned, and in order to prevent my 7-year-old daughter from commandeering the playlist (if it were up to her, Katy Perry and Carly Rae Jepsen would play on a continuous loop), I look forward to having us listen to Bill Nye’s new book, “Everything All at Once: How to Unleash Your Inner Nerd, Tap into Radical Curiosity and Solve Any Problem.” It’s narrated by Nye himself, which is ideal, since my daughter is already fond of “Bill Nye the Science Guy” from old episodes streaming online. (Also, for anyone concerned about the threat my distractable self could pose to others, I should note that there’s little chance of us ending up in the highway equivalent of the fast food aisle, since I won’t be the one doing the driving.) JENNIFER SZALAI, staff editor, The New York Times Book ReviewThese days, I am usually subject to the whims of my backseat contingent, who have little patience for A. Scott Berg’s biography of Woodrow Wilson, which I’ve been listening to in 10-minute increments for, oh, the last two years. But there are two classic audiobooks my entire family agrees on, both read by their respective authors. First, if you have any in-house fans of Roald Dahl, I highly recommend his own reading of his collected work, “The Roald Dahl Audio Collection.” A caveat: The stories are sadly abridged in these versions. They are worth it anyway for the narrator, who reels off his gleefully nasty character descriptions and caustic dialogue in that distinctive Nordic-inflected British accent. Dahl’s renditions of “The Fantastic Mr. Fox” and “George’s Marvelous Medicine” are especially delicious. His voice lowers to a whisper on occasion; he draws out certain sentences for emphasis; and at times, gets mumbly and almost breathless as he drives through an exciting exchange of dialogue. He knows not to cross certain lines: there is no whining or screeching, and no gratuitously “funny” voices. You can also listen to a Hollywood lineup of Oscar-winning talent (Kate Winslet, Dan Stevens, etc.) reading Dahl’s stories on audiobook recordings issued a few years ago. But I prefer the author himself, and so does my backseat gang.There is no possible human resistance to E.B. White reading his own “Charlotte’s Web.” White drawls out the story in a plainspoken manner, with the kind of East Coast accent that hardly exists anymore. His telling is devoid of silliness (even when articulating various barnyard animals) or sentimentality. He is never cute or fussy or forced. Some highlights: His goose! His Templeton! And if you don’t get moist-eyed hearing his soft “goodbyes” as each baby spider takes flight near the end, then you simply have no heart. The overall effect is like listening in as the author, sitting on the porch of a house in Maine, perhaps his own, reads aloud to his grandkids. So many children’s books on audio these days incorporate music and other sound effects. It’s never necessary and it almost never enhances the story. These two audiobooks make that case loud and clear. PAMELA PAUL, editor, The New York Times Book Review