http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/09/us/adding-weight-to-suspicion-sonar-is-linked-to-whale-deaths.html
Adding Weight to Suspicion, Sonar Is Linked to Whale Deaths - The New York Times
CANARY ISLANDS,WHALES AND WHALING,SONAR,FISH AND OTHER MARINE LIFE,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Oct. 9, 2003
3209
Scientists have long suspected a link between mass whale strandings and the Navy's use of powerful sonar systems, but the evidence -- dying whales washing ashore when sonar exercises occur -- has been mostly anecdotal.Now, international researchers have identified a disorder similar to decompression sickness, or the bends, as the cause of at least some whale beachings, and they say military sonar is most likely to blame.The new findings, being reported today in Nature, are based primarily on necropsies of 10 whales that stranded themselves in the Canary Islands during a 2002 international naval exercise there that included one American ship.The incident drew worldwide attention, and this year environmentalists in California sued to stop the Navy from developing a newer, more far-reaching sonar system.All of the Canary whales examined had widespread bubble formation in tissue and blood vessels, the study says. The same thing occurs in scuba divers who surface too quickly after a deep dive.''The bubbles forming in these animals may not be immediately fatal,'' said Dr. Paul Jepson, a lead author of the study and a researcher at the Zoological Society of London. ''But it does make them distressed or causes impairment, and it's quite logical to conclude that this is what leads them to strand.''The study challenges the conventional notion that marine mammals cannot suffer from decompression sickness. But more important, says Jean-Michel Cousteau, director of the Ocean Futures Society in California, it demonstrates the toll that underwater noise pollution can have on marine life.''A lot of people know the oceans have become a dumping ground for sewage and pollution, but they aren't aware that sonar is also a major issue affecting the quality of marine life,'' Mr. Cousteau said.The United States Navy, emphasizing that it uses highly trained lookouts and other methods to protect whales, is reluctant to accept the study's conclusions.''Previous studies have not, to date, revealed evidence of decompression sickness as suggested by the article,'' Lt. Cmdr. Cappy Surette, a Navy spokesman, said in an e-mail message. ''The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Navy were not invited to participate in the studies conducted of these beaked whales, and as a result, we are unable to determine the actual cause of the strandings.''It is widely known that breathing compressed air from a scuba tank, even at the depths that recreational divers frequent, causes gases like nitrogen to dissolve and build up in the blood and tissues. If divers have been too deep, or down too long and ascend too quickly, the accumulated nitrogen can turn to bubbles as the pressure decreases.The bubbles block blood flow and cause tissue damage, which, when severe enough, can be fatal.How the bends would occur in whales and other marine mammals is not completely understood, Dr. Jepson said. What is known is that the beaked whale and the dolphin species that strand themselves most often when sonar is used nearby tend to have enormous levels of nitrogen in their tissues.One theory holds that high-decibel military sonar can lead to bubble formation by startling the animals into shooting too rapidly from deep to shallow waters. Another suggests that the acoustic signals may somehow directly set off bubble eruptions in the nitrogen-saturated tissues.