https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/08/us/communities-work-to-avoid-provocations-in-response-to-shootings.html
Communities Work to Avoid Provocations in Response to Shootings - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks,Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Castile  Philando (1983-2016),Police Executive Research Forum,Baton Rouge (La),Minnesota,Ferguson (Mo),Brown  Michael (1996-2014),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Falcon Heights (Minn)
July 7, 2016
7414
BATON ROUGE, La. — When a young black man, Michael Brown, was shot to death by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014, the outrage over the official response fused with the anger over the act itself.Officials were criticized for issuing incomplete statements, for leaving Mr. Brown’s body in the street for hours and for withholding for days the name of the police officer who shot him. The Missouri governor was castigated as being late in responding to the crisis and the police as exacerbating tensions at protests with a confrontational, militarized approach.High-profile police shootings of black men, like those this week of Alton Sterling here and Philandro Castile in Falcon Heights, Minn., continue, and so does the outrage. What has changed is the degree to which even small communities, unaccustomed to the glare of international publicity, have begun to consider, and in some cases develop, more carefully planned responses to the crises in contrast with the tight-lipped and sometimes antagonistic reactions of the past.One of the key realizations in recent years is that no action can be assumed to remain in obscurity given how fast information and rumor spread across social networks. The old rules of engagement — the “no comment,” the reluctance to release information, the waiting for the evening news — no longer work, said Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum.“What happened with Ferguson, a city with a population of 20,000, there was a recognition that this could happen in any city,” said Mr. Wexler, whose group convened almost 200 police chiefs less than two months after the shooting of Mr. Brown to discuss best practices in such crises. Among the “universal principles” chiefs have agreed on are the need to get information out quickly but emphasize that it is preliminary, to have pre-existing relationships with community leaders and to have strategies for handling large protests that aim to be unprovocative.“All of these efforts are a recognition that the standards for dealing with these kinds of situations are 20 times higher than they were even a few years ago,” he said.Still, there is no standard template. In Louisiana, the Justice Department almost immediately agreed to step in, while the state is taking the investigative lead in Minnesota. Some here in Baton Rouge welcomed the federal involvement; others worried that a federal investigation would not address potential violations of state laws, such as murder.David F. Jacobs, a spokesman for the Justice Department, emphasized that every case has its own context, but said department officials were “engaged in ongoing discussions with federal, state and local law enforcement as well as major police organizations” regarding responses to such crises.But many of the elements that played out after the shooting here — the formal news conferences with the mayor, the governor, the police chief, the district attorney; the pleas for calm; the promises of a fair, impartial and transparent investigation, often by an outside agency — seem to have come from a dismally familiar playbook.“This has happened so many times that there is a script now,” said Brad Gordon, 35, among the sea of protesters who had gathered around the Triple S Food Mart here on Wednesday night, the place where Mr. Sterling had been killed two nights earlier. But Mr. Gordon, who is African-American, said it was a script with an ending that was far from clear — and that was the problem. “The burden of proof is so high when it’s an officer-involved shooting of a black man — and that’s why everybody is on edge,” he said. “Because they’re afraid that nothing’s going to happen.”For many officials, racially fraught police shootings and the social media-fueled protests that often follow them have become something like a disaster to be feared, but also anticipated and planned for.“Most big-city chiefs understand that one incident can take you out if you mishandle it,” said Charles A. McClelland Jr., who retired in February after six years as the police chief of Houston. Yet he and others emphasized that the most important work to be done required years: diversifying the force and improving relationships with the community so that explosive events would not occur. “I just don’t know how much more the public can take seeing this over and over and over again.”A kind of protocol has also emerged among protesters and the families of the dead, with a media-savvy lawyer or legislator showing up from the start to represent the family and the victim.In the streets of Baton Rouge, the response to Mr. Sterling’s shooting was heartfelt, passionate, often angry but largely peaceful. Residents took up the well-established chants and slogans of other, similar protests. On Wednesday evening, a number of passing cars pumped the same song, by the rapper Boosie Badazz — an update on the old NWA song that infamously denounced the police in the rawest of terms.A crucial decision may have come from the police, who apparently decided to keep a low profile on the two or three blocks of North Foster Drive where the protest was most active. From 4 p.m. to 2 a.m., a reporter saw only one instance of a visible police presence: a moment when four police cruisers pulled up near the food store where Mr. Sterling was killed. The crowd quickly grew restless and angry; soon the officers were gone. From then on, no police officers were visible.LaMont Cole, a Baton Rouge City Council member, said police officers told him that they had decided to lie low, remaining on “standby” in case things got out of hand.“What we’ve learned is, after incidents like this, for the police to stay out and pretty much let us manage our own communities,” he said.The challenge, said Police Chief Edward A. Flynn of Milwaukee, is to strike a balance, avoiding complete disengagement but also heavy-handedness.“We’ve been having those conversations for the last year and a half,” Chief Flynn said, speaking of his talks with other big-city police chiefs. “When the police are the flash point, are you making it worse by putting the police in the middle of the anger and hostility? Or do you pull them back, but enough where they are protecting things?”Here, at least, the gamble appears to have paid off. Mr. Cole was proud that the Baton Rouge protests have been vigorous but peaceful so far. But there was also something that depressed him about seeing his neighbors carry out the now-familiar rituals of the Black Lives Matter movement.“We’ve seen it so much we kind of know what to do,” he said, “and it’s sad.”