https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/fashion/lanvin-bouchra-jarrar.html
Lanvin Names Bouchra Jarrar as Artistic Director of Women’s Collections - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Lanvin,Jarrar  Bouchra,Elbaz  Alber
March 11, 2016
9325
A woman is once again at the helm of the house Jeanne Lanvin built. On Friday morning, the Lanvin chief executive Michèle Huiban confirmed that Bouchra Jarrar had been named artistic director of women’s collections. She begins Monday.According to Ms. Huiban, who spoke from Paris: “Bouchra seemed a natural for our house, founded by a woman. I felt an immediate and very true connection when we met.”In a phone call, Ms. Jarrar said, “I am honored to be part of the extraordinary history of the house, and all the great creators who came before me.”Lanvin is the oldest couture house continually in existence in Paris. The appointment of Ms. Jarrar, 45, follows the controversial ouster of its long-term creative director, Alber Elbaz, in October, and a poorly received women’s wear collection created by the internal design team last week. A beloved fashion figure, Mr. Elbaz was widely seen as being almost irreplaceable.However, the choice of Ms. Jarrar, who is respected for her distinctive and disciplined point of view, as expressed most often in an inventive way with a tuxedo suit, is a canny one. She has an impeccable fashion pedigree, having started her career under Jean Paul Gaultier, and then been studio director for Nicolas Ghesquière at Balenciaga, and head of couture design for Christian Lacroix. She opened her own brand in 2010, became a part of the official couture schedule in 2013 and is one of the few independent female designers working in Paris. Though slight and soft-spoken, she is known for a steely determination and has the good will of the industry.In announcing the appointment, Ms. Huiban said: “Her timeless style is in agreement with the style and values of our house. Her talent, her rigor, her mastery of the body and materials will bring to the house of Lanvin a freshness and modernity while respecting its historic couture soul, a symbol of French elegance.”According to Ms. Huiban, Ms. Jarrar plans to close her own brand to “devote herself to Lanvin.”“It was her choice. She decided she wanted a bigger playing field.”The appointment of Ms. Jarrar heralds the understanding of Lanvin management that whatever Lanvin becomes next, its aesthetic will necessarily be different from what it was under Mr. Elbaz. Ms. Jarrar is known for her tailoring, as well as her more functional approach to couture: Though the workmanship of her clothes is never less than perfect and she has a way with the flou, she eschews complicated ball gowns for more streamlined, cooler styles; her quintessential look is a razor-sharp pair of trousers with an elaborate, feathered perfecto jacket or vest.In an internal memo seen by The New York Times, Ms. Jarrar said: “My wish is to bring to Lanvin harmony and coherence of a world for women, a world of our time. I rejoice in being part of this beautiful chapter in the life of the house with all its teams.”Restoring internal harmony will be an important part of Ms. Jarrar’s job at Lanvin, which fell into some chaos after the ouster of Mr. Elbaz, to the point that the workers’ council sued the management. The case was settled in December by the Tribunal de Grande Instance, though the mood as been described as “poor” by current employees. Also on the to-do list is restoring profits, which have been on a downward trend, with a projected loss of 2.5 million euros, or about $2.8 million, in 2015 (the first since 2007).It is a meaningful task, which is perhaps why Ms. Jarrar will not be involved in Lanvin’s men’s wear, now designed by Lucas Ossendrijver. Speaking on the phone, she reiterated her excitement at the opportunity of working with Lanvin’s ateliers, and her admiration for Mr. Elbaz.“What happened before me, happened before,” Ms. Jarrar said. “Now I am starting my own chapter.”Her first test will be the Resort 2016 precollection, to be unveiled in Paris in June.