https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/21/books/review/the-extravagant-jane-bowles-always-on-the-edge-of-something.html
The Extravagant Jane Bowles: Always on the Edge of Something - The New York Times
Bowles  Jane,Books and Literature,Writing and Writers
April 21, 2017
3995
In Tangier, amid the spiritual seekers and the French tourists, the men in long djellabas and the stoned glue-sniffing street kids, there’s a strip of concrete where the city’s faded colonial grandeur is violently interrupted by a modern high-rise. It was once home of the Parade Bar, a watering hole known for its velvety red interiors, its Orientalist paintings depicting half-nude Nubians and its illustrious clientele. Among its regulars was one Jane Auer Bowles, an extravagant woman of elfin physique who, by the end of her days, had taken to wearing a conspicuous wig. To many of the locals, she was magnouna, the crazy one. At the Parade, where she drank herself into a stupor most nights, she was said to have stripped naked on more than one occasion. Few knew she was a writer. She was rumored to have published one novel, in her 20s, and to have never produced much of anything again.Jane Bowles died in 1973 at the age of 56. The outlandish biographical details are irresistible, and yet they cast a heavy shadow over the work. In the years since her death, Bowles, who was married to Paul Bowles, the author of “The Sheltering Sky,” has been reduced to an eccentric, dipsomaniacal sideshow — a footnote to histories of the Beats, a favorite ancestor for select lesbians and the discerning absurdist. The Library of America’s publication of her collected works stands to introduce the author’s crooked, sui generis prose to a new generation of readers.“A fey sort of person who works just as hard at her lunacies as the rest of us do trying to keep on the mundane side.” This is how one of Jane Bowles’s cousins described her to Millicent Dillon, the editor of the Library of America collection. People who met Bowles inevitably came away with an indelible sense of her strangeness and charm.Alice B. Toklas said Bowles was “not surprisingly like her novel.” The novel, of course, was “Two Serious Ladies,” a tale of two bourgeois women who go seriously off-piste, seeking spiritual salvation in the lowbrow and louche. While Miss Goering trades her stately home for a gloomy shack and is delighted to be taken for a lunatic, Mrs. Copperfield ditches her husband for a young Caribbean prostitute. The heroines were a composite of Jane herself, who had been born into a respectable Long Island family but chafed at her milieu’s prohibitions.When “Two Serious Ladies” was published in 1943, readers were baffled. Bowles was heartbroken and didn’t produce all that much after; the Library of America collection includes a smattering of short stories, fragments and letters. But it does encapsulate a kooky universe featuring a cast of misfits and visionaries who are out of touch, out of style. (She once complained of Carson McCullers: “Her freaks aren’t real.”)Above all, Bowles was a dizzyingly original stylist, and the texture of her writing and her dialogue in particular — staccato, self-confidently awkward — is unmistakably her own. “You have a very special type of beauty,” a fellow tells Miss Goering in “Two Serious Ladies”; “a bad nose, but beautiful eyes and hair. It would please me in the midst of all this horror to go to bed with you.” Bowles the letter-writer is also a pleasure, a leaky faucet whose correspondence reveals her famous equivocation and her demonic wit (“I find myself staring at my writing materials from the couch as though they were ‘Nazis,’” she once wrote to a friend).In 1948, she moved to Tangier, drawn to the city’s odd-fangled customs, and in particular to Cherifa, a handsome peasant woman with “a laugh like a savage,” according to Paul Bowles. Gaining Cherifa’s affections became her central obsession — the Bowleses, though devoted, slept with others — and, not unlike one of her own questing characters, she wrote of feeling she was “on the edge of something.” She also wrote of her growing anguish over her inability to write. Tangier “was good for Paul, but not good for me,” she said. But she insisted it was where she had to be. In a short story called “East Side: North Africa,” the narrator runs her finger along a wall in an unnamed Arab town: “I remember that once I reached out to touch the beautiful and powdery face of a clown because his face had awakened some longing; it happened at a little circus but not when I was a child.”