https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/06/sports/basketball/for-lebron-james-its-home-and-its-a-job-again.html
For LeBron James, It’s Home, and It’s a Job Again - The New York Times
Basketball,James  LeBron,Blatt  David,Cleveland (Ohio),Maccabi Tel Aviv,Cleveland Cavaliers
Oct. 5, 2014
3380
CLEVELAND —  The preseason portion of LeBron James’s sequel to the first seven years of his N.B.A. career began on a gray, chilly day, far from the sun-splashed weather and white-hot atmosphere that greeted him four years ago in Miami.This, after all, is a way of bundled-up life in northeast Ohio and a fitting metaphor for its long-suffering fans.“I spent 25 years here,” James said, shrugging off the unmistakable (and some would say unflattering) contrast. “I know when it’s going to get cold and when it’s going to get hot.”After 11 N.B.A. seasons, he understands that October warm-up games have nothing to do with generating playoff-level passion. Case in point: In the bars around Quicken Loans Arena on Sunday, the only result that mattered was the Browns’ furious rally to turn a 28-3 first-half deficit into a 29-28 victory in Tennessee.And for all the hoopla about James’s return to the Cavaliers, what greets visitors as they ride the escalator down to the baggage claim at Hopkins International Airport is a blowup photo of the Browns’ home, FirstEnergy Stadium.Football may still be cultural king here, but it is not as if Cleveland isn’t excited about James, even dreamily ecstatic about the prospects of a first N.B.A. title given James’s calculatingly manufactured partnership with Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love.But as James has been saying, “It’s going to be a process.” On top of that, the preseason opener, a 107-80 rout of the Israeli power Maccabi Tel Aviv on Sunday night, was more of an occasion for the Cavs’ new coach, David Blatt, who last season led Maccabi to the Euroleague title before crashing the N.B.A. head-coaching barrier. Many of the reporters at the game were from Israel, where it was broadcast live at 1 a.m.Blatt signed on to a job others turned down before James again demonstrated his ability to reconfigure the N.B.A. universe with a single announcement. But Blatt, an Israeli-American and a Princeton man who has coached all over the world, captured the essence of the 2014-15 Cavaliers when asked if they were this season’s team to beat.“We’re a new team,” he said. “That’s not to say we’re not a strong team on paper, but you have teams out there like San Antonio, Miami, the Clippers, teams that have been together, that have continuity. We’ll see in a few months how much of a team we are to beat.”In other words, go slow with the forecasts of multiple titles while trying to outrun opponents using Love’s trademark outlet passes to Irving, James and some of the other athletic wing players.Beyond merchandising — the Cavaliers’ team store is well-stocked with T-shirts celebrating the new Big 3 — even James’s presence in and around the arena is subdued. Michael Jordan returned from a year-and-a-half retirement-turned-sabbatical in Chicago with a statue of him erected in front of United Center. But he and the Bulls already owned three titles.James, an Akron native — who played only in the first half and scored 12 points — may have won two rings with Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh in Miami. But back in home territory, he still has some legend-building to do. And he surely understands what a big organizational deal the achievement is really about.Gone are the days when the “We Are All Witnesses” homage seemed to be the Cavaliers’ entire marketing campaign, as if the owner Dan Gilbert was in joint partnership with James’s favorite shoe company. While a downtown billboard welcomed James back in July, the streets around Quicken Loans Arena on Sunday remained festooned with a slogan the team adopted months after he left — “All for One, One for All.”On opening night of the 2010-11 season, a workman in the corridor outside the locker rooms hung a small poster of James that cited the so-called Chosen One’s achievements, all personal to that point. The message, or dig, was clear: James had not delivered anything greater to the Cavs than the former franchise stars Brad Daugherty and Larry Nance, whose posters bookended and dwarfed James’s.The workmen could well get busy before the regular season opens here Oct. 30 against the Knicks. But those posters, as of Sunday, remained proportionally partial to the team’s more distant past. While not every seat was filled, the announced crowd of 20,562 made it clear that James’s departure is now officially classified as forgivable wanderlust.“It seems right that he’s back,” said Nate Linhart, a Maccabi forward who played college ball at Akron with two of James’s high school teammates and best friends, Romeo Travis and Dru Joyce III. “When I was in college, it was easy to see how much he meant to this area.”While he would not consider himself a friend of James’s, Linhart was part of many a summer scrimmage with him.“I appreciated that he always remembered my name,” he said.In the pregame introduction name game, Irving was called first, followed by the shooting guard Dion Waiters, Tristan Thompson, Love and James. Thompson, at a generously listed 6 foot 9, is an undersize center and figures to share the position with the oft-injured Brazilian Anderson Varejao and perhaps the veteran Brendan Haywood.Beyond chemistry — how will point guard Irving and James share the ball? — that is the cloud hovering over these Cavs. Do they have enough interior defense and rim protection to compete in the rugged playoffs? Blatt’s job is to figure out how to best use his wealth of offensive talent while making more committed defenders out of Love, Irving and others.Blatt might want a more original and suitable mantra than “All for One, One for All,” maybe looking instead to the message on the wine-colored Cavaliers T-shirt of a Browns fan as he cried in his beer before the second-half rally: It read: “Back Home. Back to Work.”