https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/14/business/mutfund/snapchat-ipo.html
Mutual Funds Buy Hot Stocks Like Snap Ahead of I.P.O.s - The New York Times
Stocks and Bonds,Mutual Funds,Initial Public Offerings,Social Media,Asset Allocation (Personal Finances),Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,Airbnb,BlackRock Inc,Facebook Inc,Fidelity Investments,Firsthand Technology Value Fund,JPMorgan Chase & Company,Massachusetts Financial Services,Morningstar Inc,Snap Inc,T Rowe Price Group Inc,Twitter,WeWork
April 14, 2017
4856
Snap acquired loads of new investors when it went public last month, including people who own mutual funds that bought shares. But while the stock had just been listed for trading, those new owners were not the first fund investors with a stake in the image messaging service.They were beaten to it by shareholders of about two dozen mutual funds, including several run by Fidelity and T. Rowe Price, that held pieces of Snap going back at least to last June, according to Morningstar. The practice of purchasing privately traded equities is fairly common among large fund companies, albeit usually in small amounts relative to their assets.A Morningstar study found that private-firm equity holdings accounted for just 0.13 percent of assets in stock or asset allocation funds in the middle of last year. Among funds that made such investments, the median ownership was 0.51 percent of assets, and only nine funds, out of more than 5,000, invested more than 5 percent.With positions so modest, private-firm equity purchases may hardly be worth talking about, except that the companies that funds invest in are often the sort that get talked about: buzz-worthy tech stocks with highly anticipated initial public offerings, such as Facebook in 2012, Twitter the year after that and Snap most recently.The next crop of next big things to go public may include the ride service Uber, the biggest object of private-firm equity investment cited in the Morningstar study, and the service Airbnb.Buying ahead of the crowd carries great reward potential but also significant risks, analysts and fund managers say. It’s a useful way to gain access to tomorrow’s hot stocks today, as long as it’s done in amounts that are small enough to keep participants from getting burned if something goes awry and the crowd fails to show up.“Being early to the table can benefit fund owners,” said Katie Reichart, associate director of equity strategies research at Morningstar and the study’s author. “Funds can buy into a company at a much lower valuation.” Highlighting the main drawback, she added, “It might not go public or fizzle out.”With no liquid market to continually set prices, it’s hard for funds or their shareholders to know what a private company is worth at any moment. This can result in stale pricing, or a valuation based on a stock’s last trade that occurred so long ago that it can no longer be considered an accurate gauge of its worth. At times when investors are dumping stocks across the board, there could be no one to take a privately held stock off a portfolio manager’s hands, ultimately leading to a total write-off.Even if a stock goes public eventually, owning it can create difficulties, Ms. Reichart said. If a fund must sell stocks to meet redemption requests, for example, there may be no choice but to sell publicly traded issues that the manager would rather keep, causing private-firm equity to become an undesirably large proportion of total assets.A successful public offering and further gains thereafter, on the other hand, can produce returns many times as great as a fund’s initial investment. The prospect of getting a piece of such a stock early and making a huge score explains why private companies are sometimes called unicorns.To try to strike the right risk/reward balance, funds generally invest after a company has established a history of generating solid and growing revenues. Once a position appears to be meeting a manager’s expectations, further capital is likely to be invested, before or after the hoped-for public stock sale.“We’re trying to find something we can continue to buy and make a bigger portion of our funds,” said Andy Boyd, the head of global equity capital markets at Fidelity, the largest private-firm equity investor by far, with stakes totaling roughly $5 billion across several funds, according to Morningstar.While noting that “every great investment starts small,” Mr. Boyd stressed that Fidelity will not invest in anything too small. The company will buy into private businesses “if they’re at a size and scale that makes sense for us, not two guys in a garage.” That typically means “at the very end of their private life, before they become public.”He declined to offer specific return figures, but he said that “as a group these have been highly profitable for our shareholders” and “overall we outperform the market.”The private companies in which Fidelity holds large stakes include Uber, Airbnb, Pinterest and WeWork. It had owned Facebook and Snap privately, but not Twitter.Nine Fidelity funds and 11 Price funds were among the 23 in the Morningstar study that had stakes in Snap. The other three funds were Optimum Large Cap Growth, Principal LargeCap Growth and Valic Company I Science & Technology.Private-firm equity has been conspicuously profitable for T. Rowe Price New Horizons, a fund that invests in smaller companies (it was not one of the funds that Morningstar said had owned Snap) and is one of the biggest investors in privately held stocks. Since 2009, companies representing just over 40 percent of the portfolio’s private investments have had a “liquidity event,” either a public offering or an acquisition, Henry Ellenbogen, the manager, said in the fund’s latest annual report.These investments produced annualized returns of 59.5 percent from September 2009 through 2016, Mr. Ellenbogen said. The rest of the private holdings have returned 5.1 percent a year.Owning private-firm equity can produce other, less immediately tangible rewards, advocates contend. Investing in a private company allows a firm “to know a management longer,” Mr. Boyd said. “We want to get to know companies and understand their businesses.”Ms. Reichart at Morningstar cited other advantages, including an opportunity to own companies that are not components of benchmark indexes. That gives managers a chance to beat the returns of index funds, something that has been difficult in recent years.Private companies can also protect against disruptive changes in an industry, she said. Owning the next big thing is a useful hedge if you also own the current big thing that the upstart is trying to displace.Some large portfolio managers are not persuaded by such arguments and hold little or no private-firm equity. Massachusetts Financial Services, for example, has “no explicit policy against investing privately on behalf of our funds,” said Daniel Flaherty, a company spokesman, “but we have generally avoided private investments due to their higher risk profile.”JPMorgan Chase, another of the 10 largest asset managers, does not invest in private companies, either, but a representative declined to offer reasons.Ed Sweeney, a spokesman for BlackRock, said his firm was a somewhat active owner of private companies three or four years ago, especially through its Global Allocation Fund, but lately managers have found valuations high, relative to those of public companies.“We were dabbling in this space across several funds, but over the last 18 months to two years, if not zero, it’s very scaled back,” he said.Dabbling in private-firm equity may be getting more difficult, according to one longtime practitioner. When unlisted companies sell shares, they are more likely to require the buyers not to trade them, said Kevin Landis, a Silicon Valley investment veteran and manager of the Firsthand Technology Value Fund, a closed-end vehicle for holding solely private companies.“Since the Facebook I.P.O., the game has changed,” Mr. Landis said. “Private companies have gone back to the drawing board and instituted some changes that give them a lot more control over the movement of their stock. Companies like Uber have locked down trading and changed their shareholder agreements to make it virtually impossible to buy shares. We would have loved to buy shares of Uber, Airbnb or Snap two years ago, but they just weren’t available.”Ms. Reichart reports “a slight uptick” in private-firm investment since mid-2016 but “not a major spike in the number of companies or average stakes.”The continued modest level of investment is good and bad news for shareholders. It gives them less to get excited about but less to get nervous about.If you’re shopping around for a stock fund, “it’s important to understand if a fund is doing this in terms of your risk tolerance,” Ms. Reichart said. “Are you comfortable with that idea? In most cases funds are diversified and the positions are small. It’s probably not worth panicking about, and you’re probably not going to get blockbuster returns.”