https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/movies/false-confessions-review-isabelle-huppert.html
Review: With ‘False Confessions,’ the Play’s Not Quite the Thing - The New York Times
Movies,False Confessions (Movie),Bondy  Luc,Huppert  Isabelle,Garrel  Louis
July 13, 2017
9378
It must have been something to watch Isabelle Huppert, Louis Garrel and a handful of other French actors perform the 1737 comedy “The False Confessions” onstage, although what that something would have been is unclear from a movie based on the production. Written by Pierre de Marivaux (1688-1763), the play is one of those romantic intrigues involving charming paramours, scheming servants and much bustling in and out of rooms amid conspiratorial conversations. A Marivaux contemporary said that his only subject was “the eternal surprise of love,” though it seems doubtful anyone seeing this play was ever truly startled.A happy ending seems inevitable when the lovers are a beautiful, wealthy widow, Araminte (Ms. Huppert), and a handsome, insolvent gentleman, Dorante (Mr. Garrel) — at least in carefree pre-revolutionary France (and rich-girl/poor-boy Hollywood fantasies). They’re brought together by Dubois (Yves Jacques), Araminte’s servant, who was once Dorante’s valet. One of those wily, devoted domestics who greases the gears, Dubois has conspired to secure Dorante a position in Araminte’s household. Dorante is in love with Araminte, despite never having spoken to her, while she knows nothing of his love. The idea is that proximity will light the fire, fanned by secrets and lies and a lot of arch dialogue.The production of “The False Confessions” that Ms. Huppert and Mr. Garrel starred in was mounted in Paris at the Odéon Theater in 2014 and directed by Luc Bondy. Using the same cast and the Odéon as his set, Mr. Bondy directed this movie during the play’s run, shooting before evening curtain call. This surely was convenient, but the Odéon and its backstage spaces make an awkward backdrop, at least the way Mr. Bondy uses them. He’s fond of ungainly, pointless overhead shots that suggest he was trying to make the camera work in cramped spaces or maybe convey the view from the balcony.For some breathing room, the characters occasionally meet on a large terrace overlooking the street where passers-by, storefronts and restaurant signs give the movie tiny jolts of reality, like little puffs of oxygen. Every so often, they convene and scheme on the theater’s foyer stairway, which has been scattered with women’s shoes, a conceit seemingly borrowed from the production. In an apparent attempt to literalize the play’s self-declared deceits, Mr. Bondy draws attention to the artificiality of the location — you’re always aware this takes place in a theater — a contrivance that’s matched by brittle, outsize performances that turn faces into masks of surprise, sorrow and so on.Mr. Bondy, a well-regarded theater director with a few films on his résumé, died in December 2015 and, according to the movie’s production notes, his wife, Marie-Louise Bischofberger, helped finish “False Confessions.” It’s impossible to know if this is the movie he wanted to make or not. Some online clips from the stage production suggest that it might have been pleasurable to watch Ms. Huppert and Mr. Garrel in person, and perhaps their charisma enlivened what comes across onscreen as impossibly stale. Mr. Bondy’s death lends inevitable pathos to the movie, but, alas, there is little to recommend here, even for Huppert completists who follow her anywhere.