https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/13/business/international-energy-agency-cuts-oil-demand-forecast.html
Energy Agency Cuts Oil Demand Forecast, Adding to Pressure on Prices - The New York Times
Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,Prices (Fares  Fees and Rates),Energy and Power,Production,International Energy Agency,Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
Dec. 12, 2014
5602
LONDON — The downdraft in oil prices showed no sign of abating on Friday.The main international benchmark, Brent crude, fell about 3 percent to about $61.80 barrel, a five-year low. That dip came a day after the American benchmark, West Texas Intermediate crude, fell below the psychologically significant $60 a barrel level in the United States for the first time since 2009.The International Energy Agency added to downward price pressures on Friday by cutting its forecast for global demand for crude oil in 2015.For now, analysts say, there seems to be no safety net for oil prices.“In the very short term prices can go lower; the market is weighted to very bearish sentiment,” Richard Mallinson, an analyst at Energy Aspects, a London-based research firm, said Friday.European stocks fell on Friday, posting their biggest weekly loss since mid-2011 as energy stocks were hurt by the slide in oil prices. The broad Stoxx Europe 600 index lost 5.8 percent for the week. On Wall Street, stocks were lower around midday in New York.“This is a blood bath,” said Pierre Martin, a trader at Saxo Bank. “After such a negative week, there’s not even a rebound into the close. The fact that oil can’t find a floor is spooking market players.”Analysts say a major cut in production would be needed next year to avoid an inventory buildup and to stabilize falling prices. But hopes of a supply cut were dashed late last month when OPEC declined to change its output ceilings at a meeting in Vienna.Despite the continued fall in prices since then, OPEC shows little sign of uniting to make production cuts. "Why should we cut production?” Ali Al-Naimi, Saudi Arabia’s oil minister, said Wednesday on the sidelines of a climate-change conference in Lima, Peru.A test of strength appears to be occurring among the Saudis and their equally prosperous Gulf allies, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and other producers like Venezuela and Iran, which can much less easily afford a long bout of low prices. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the U.A.E. have about $1.5 trillion in financial assets among them, which is “plenty to meet their spending needs for the next few years,” said Rachel Ziemba, an analyst at Roubini Global Economics in London.On the other hand, Venezuela, Nigeria and others are “going to have to cut back on spending,” said Ms. Ziemba. Already, Venezuela’s foreign minister and main oil policy maker has said it may be necessary to call an emergency OPEC meeting if the price rout continues.The Saudis and their allies argue that to cut production now to raise prices would be to subsidize competitors like the companies extracting oil from shale in the United States, which are responsible for recent big additions to world oil supplies. The Saudis, whose costs for producing oil are low, are betting that low prices will lead to a shakeout of higher-cost producers like the shale companies. At the least, the Saudis appear to want all of OPEC to participate in any trims, analysts say.Various forecasters have been stoking market fears by issuing forecasts of a growing glut next year. OPEC sent a shudder through the markets Wednesday when it forecast that demand for its own crude would be well below the ceiling that it recently declined to lower.On Friday, the International Energy Agency, in Paris, said in its December oil market report that demand was likely to be 230,000 barrels per day less than previously forecast. The main reasons for the lowered forecast were less oil consumption in countries that produce it like Russia and a weaker-than-expected global economy.A trim of 230,000 barrels per day is minimal in a global market of about 93 million barrels per day. But the lower forecast, the fourth by the agency in the past five months, reinforced the sentiment that supply is likely to exceed demand substantially next year.The drop in oil prices is a blessing and curse for Europe, which is struggling to break free of the economic stagnation that has dogged the region since the global financial crisis.The European Central Bank is fighting to keep inflation in positive territory, and falling fuel prices, while providing a stimulus to consumer spending, also contribute to the deflationary pressure in the region. Inflation is near zero in the eurozone, and Mario Draghi, the E.C.B. president, is under increasing pressure to enact radical monetary stimulus measures to keep prices from contracting.Olivier Jakob, an oil analyst at Petromatrix, in Zug, Switzerland, said that he had expected Brent prices to fall no lower than $60 a barrel, but that now it appeared that floor might be breached. Even if market momentum carries it below that $60 level for a time, he said, “it would be difficult to sustain,” because producers would take action, perhaps by cutting output, and some marginally profitable operations would be forced to shut down.For producing nations, the fall in oil prices is causing real pain, stressing government budgets and exacerbating internal tensions. Venezuela is the most exposed, Mr. Jakob said, as “the markets are already pricing in a default.”Russia, heavily dependent on oil revenue for government spending and weighed down by Western sanctions over Ukraine, and Nigeria, where producing areas have a long history of ethnic unrest, are also feeling the strain, he said. The ruble fell about 2 percent against the dollar on Friday, to trade at 57.58 rubles.