https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/17/us/politics/obama-hints-at-sanctions-against-china-over-cyberattacks.html
Obama Hints at Sanctions Against China Over Cyberattacks - The New York Times
Cyberwarfare and Defense,China,Obama  Barack,Xi Jinping,United States International Relations,United States
Sept. 16, 2015
2596
WASHINGTON —  President Obama warned on Wednesday that his administration was ready to take action against China over online attacks carried out by Beijing or its proxies, publicly raising the specter of sanctions a week before President Xi Jinping arrives in the United States for a state visit.“We are preparing a number of measures that will indicate to the Chinese that this is not just a matter of us being mildly upset, but is something that will put significant strains on the bilateral relationship if not resolved,” Mr. Obama said in a question-and-answer session with business leaders on economic issues. “We are prepared to take some countervailing actions in order to get their attention.”“My hope,” Mr. Obama added, “is that it gets resolved short of that.”The remarks seemed calibrated to pressure Mr. Xi to agree to address online security concerns, which Mr. Obama said would “probably be one of the biggest topics” of the talks next week.They also seemed to suggest that while sanctions are unlikely to be imposed on China before the summit meeting, it is increasingly likely that some penalties will be imposed afterward.The public threat of sanctions represented an intensifying of what has until now been a quiet, although increasingly intense, effort to warn the Chinese that the administration will not tolerate recent breaches and thefts of intellectual property, including one at the Office of Personnel Management. That breach, revealed this year, compromised tens of millions of security files of federal employees.Mr. Obama has faced a difficult problem in deciding whether and when to apply sanctions. Some administration officials are concerned about poisoning the atmosphere for Mr. Xi’s visit and some believe that the threat of such penalties could help extract concessions.“They’ve just run out of time to deal with sanctions before this top-level meeting,” said Patrick M. Cronin, the director of the Asia-Pacific Security Program at the Center for a New American Security.“The administration is, on the one hand, looking for as much cooperation as they can get from Xi Jinping and China’s leadership and, at the same time, saying: ‘Here is the stick of sanctions. We’re not going to use it right now; we’re going to wait to see what you say at the summit about good-faith progress on cyber rules of the road, but if we’re not satisfied, sanctions will follow,’ ” Mr. Cronin said.The breaches were a source of friction last month when Susan E. Rice, the national security adviser, traveled to Beijing to meet with top Chinese officials. And the White House said on Saturday that Meng Jianzhu, a Communist Party envoy, spent much of last week in Washington meeting with American security and intelligence officials on online security issues, including a session with Ms. Rice that involved a “frank and open exchange.”“U.S. and Chinese officials are engaged in candid, blunt discussions about our concerns in this policy area,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, told reporters on Wednesday. “You have heard the U.S. government make clear that we have significant concerns with Chinese behavior.”He said Mr. Obama “was intentionally nonspecific” on Wednesday over possible actions against China, although he noted that the president signed an executive order this year enabling him to issue sanctions against individuals or organizations deemed responsible for such attacks.“Among states, there has to be a framework that is analogous to what we’ve done with nuclear power, because nobody stands to gain” from the attacks, Mr. Obama said on Wednesday. He said defining such a plan “requires, I think, some tough negotiations.”“If we and the Chinese are able to coalesce around a process for negotiations, then I think we can bring a lot of other countries along,” the president said.Still, despite repeated efforts, Mr. Obama has been unable to bring about such a meeting of the minds on the issue of computer spying and theft. The president first raised the issue with Mr. Xi in 2013, when the two held their first lengthy talks at the Sunnylands estate in Rancho Mirage, Calif., but hacking has continued to bedevil the relationship between the United States and China.Last year, China dropped out of a security working group with the United States after the Justice Department indicted five Chinese military officials on charges of stealing intellectual property from American companies. But those sorts of charges may be problematic in the Office of Personnel Management case, given that the United States has distinguished between normal espionage by governments and the theft of commercial data.Online attacks are among several difficult subjects that loom over Mr. Xi’s visit. Mr. Obama is likely to confront Mr. Xi over China’s recent activities in the South China Sea, a matter that the Chinese argue is a regional one in which the United States has no business interfering.Mr. Obama acknowledged the tension on Wednesday, describing a tense relationship.“As they have matured, what we’ve said to them is, ‘With power comes responsibility, so now you’ve got to step up,’ ” Mr. Obama said. “In some cases, they still feel that when we call them on issues like their behavior in the South China Sea, or on intellectual property theft, that we are trying to contain them.”