https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/19/us/few-complaints-against-chicago-police-result-in-discipline-data-shows.html
Chicago Rarely Penalizes Officers for Complaints, Data Shows - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Chicago (Ill),Police,Police Department (Chicago  Ill),McCarthy  Garry F,McDonald  Laquan (d 2014),Corruption (Institutional),Ethics and Official Misconduct
Nov. 18, 2015
7307
In 18 years with the Chicago Police Department, the nation’s second-largest, Jerome Finnigan had never been disciplined — although 68 citizen complaints had been lodged against him, including accusations that he used excessive force and regularly conducted illegal searches.Then, in 2011, he admitted to robbing criminal suspects while serving in an elite police unit and ordering a hit on a fellow police officer he thought intended to turn him in. He was sentenced to 12 years in prison. “My bosses knew what I was doing out there, and it went on and on,” he said in court when he pleaded guilty. “And this wasn’t the exception to the rule. This was the rule.”Mr. Finnigan is one of thousands of Chicago police officers who have been the subject of citizen complaints over the years but have not been disciplined by the department, according to data released this month by the Invisible Institute, a nonprofit journalism organization, and the Mandel Legal Aid Clinic of the University of Chicago Law School. Such information is rarely made public and has come to light in Chicago only after a decade-long legal battle by the institute and the clinic.The trove of information — thousands of pages of officers’ names and brief descriptions of each civilian complaint against the Chicago police from March 2011 to September 2015 — provides a rare look into the cloistered world of internal police discipline.For example, the data for 2015 shows that in more than 99 percent of the thousands of misconduct complaints against Chicago police officers, there has been no discipline. From 2011 to 2015, 97 percent of more than 28,500 citizen complaints resulted in no officer being punished, according to the files.Although very few officers were disciplined in the years covered by the data, African-American officers were punished at twice the rate of their white colleagues for the same offenses, the data shows. And although black civilians filed a majority of the complaints, white civilians were far more likely to have their complaints upheld, according to the records.Information related to complaints and discipline taken against officers is typically tightly controlled by police departments, and in many cases is protected from public release by state or local law.“It is very unusual to have this much data — and data this rich,” said David A. Harris, a University of Pittsburgh Law School professor and an expert on police accountability. “The general rule is that this kind of stuff is not made transparent, so the public can’t see it and can’t hold people accountable in the way they want.”The release of the documents comes as police departments around the nation have been placed under intensive public scrutiny after a number of fatal shootings of unarmed African-Americans by white police officers. This has led to criticism about the lack of public availability of even rudimentary data related to police work.The records take on added resonance in Chicago because the department has a well-documented history of officers physically abusing — including torturing — African-American men, and also because of the possible release on Thursday of a police dashboard camera video showing the fatal shooting of Laquan McDonald, an African-American teenager.Mr. McDonald, 17, who had been armed with a knife, was shot 16 times in 2014 by Jason Van Dyke, a white officer. The shooting is being investigated by a team including the F.B.I. and the United States attorney’s office in Chicago.Officer Van Dyke has had 18 civilian complaints filed against him, including allegations of using excessive force and racial slurs. In each of the complaints, Officer Van Dyke denied that he had acted improperly and was not punished by either the Police Department or civilian police oversight investigators.In April, the city agreed to pay Mr. McDonald’s family a $5 million settlement. The video of the shooting, which is the subject of a court hearing on Thursday, shows Mr. McDonald lying on the ground as some of the shots are fired, according to people who have seen it.Dan Herbert, a lawyer for Officer Van Dyke, said the officer believed that he was justified in the shooting. “He fired because he was in fear for his safety, as well as the safety of his colleagues,” Mr. Herbert said in an email. Regarding Officer Van Dyke’s past disciplinary record, Mr. Herbert said, “As far as I know, Jason has not had a single sustained complaint, meaning all allegations were found to be without merit.”Criminologists say the public’s ability to see civilian complaints against officers and similar data compels police departments to be more accountable, especially when it comes to officers who receive frequent complaints.“Look, it’s not unusual for a police officer to get a complaint, but the fact is that a complaint is a significant piece of information if it is a recurring thing,” Professor Harris said. “It is the patterns we worry about.”The department said that since the 2011 appointment of Garry McCarthy, the city’s police superintendent, it had instituted reforms to eliminate wrongdoing by officers. In a statement, it said that it had “zero tolerance for any misconduct,” and that during Mr. McCarthy’s tenure the force had “become a positive national and international model for preventing police misconduct and investigating allegations.”The measures Mr. McCarthy has put in place, the department said, include increasing the number of field training officers, beefing up the internal affairs bureau and requiring new procedural justice training for all officers. The department said that one important sign of its progress was that complaints against officers had fallen by 50 percent in recent years. The department acknowledged, however, that it had “much more work to do.”In Chicago, complaints are investigated by either the internal affairs division or the city’s Independent Police Review Authority, which consider sanctions against officers accused of policy violations that range from excessive force and corruption to being drunk on duty. The final determination in nearly all disciplinary cases is made by Mr. McCarthy.Anthony Guglielmi, a spokesman for the department, questioned some of the newly released data. He said that for 2015, the department’s own records showed that it had not disciplined officers in about 90 percent of the civilian complaints it received — compared with the 99 percent figure arrived at by the University of Chicago. This is because the department did not count complaints in which a civilian had not signed a sworn affidavit to bolster an initial complaint, or in most instances in which a citizen did not know the name or the badge number of an officer. State law requires an affidavit before an inquiry can proceed.Larry L. Merritt, a spokesman for the police review authority, which is composed of civilians, said the agency’s hands were often tied because people who call to file complaints often do not follow up by coming to the office to sign an affidavit.The authority reviews the actual complaints but passes on some to the Police Department to investigate. Mr. Merritt said that of the cases the authority reviewed, if the people who do not sign affidavits were to be removed from the statistics, about 20 percent of complaints would be upheld by that agency.The department said that some 30 percent of complaints made in 2014 were found by the civilian review agency to be false, partly because officials said gang members often filed false complaints against particularly effective officers to try to discredit them.The department said it had “implemented early warning systems to help identify potential concerns with officers’ actions and arrange for the appropriate training, when applicable,” to reduce misconduct.But Craig B. Futterman, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School who founded the legal aid clinic that helped bring about the records’ release, said the department’s early intervention system had identified only 6 percent of officers who received 11 or more civilian complaints. The department did not dispute that figure.The files show that a number of officers who have been convicted of serious crimes, like Mr. Finnigan, or are being investigated for misconduct have accumulated dozens of complaints while avoiding punishment from the Police Department.Among them is Aldo Brown, convicted last month of using excessive force after a store surveillance camera showed him attacking a suspect lying on the ground. Citizens had lodged 16 complaints against Mr. Brown, including several for excessive force, but Mr. Brown denied the accusations, and the department and civilian review board failed to find enough evidence to discipline him, the records show.