https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/podcasts/the-daily/the-daily-donald-trump-jrs-russia-meeting.html
‘The Daily’: Donald Trump Jr.’s Russia Meeting - The New York Times
The Daily,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Trump  Donald J Jr,Mosul (Iraq)
July 10, 2017
996
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherA newly revealed meeting between President Trump’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr., and a Russian lawyer suggests for the first time that at least some members of the president’s inner circle were willing to accept help from Russia during the campaign.On today’s episode:• Adam Goldman, who covers the F.B.I. and national security, discusses the new revelations about a meeting at Trump Tower on June 9, 2016, where a Russian lawyer with Kremlin connections met with President Trump’s son Donald; his former campaign manager, Paul J. Manafort; and his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. It was understood at the time that the lawyer had compromising information about Hillary Clinton, White House advisers say.• After nearly nine months, Iraq has declared victory over the Islamic State in Mosul. But the view from the ground is complicated, as we hear from Rukmini Callimachi, who covers ISIS for The Times and who is currently in Mosul.Background reading:• More about the meeting in Trump Tower in June 2016.• In Mosul, the Iraqi prime minister declared victory over ISIS.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”