http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/19/world/asia/19afghan.html
Decision on Afghan Troops May Wait - The New York Times
Afghanistan War (2001- ),United States Defense and Military Forces,Obama  Barack,Afghanistan
Oct. 18, 2009
5847
WASHINGTON — The White House signaled Sunday that President Obama would postpone any decision on sending more troops to Afghanistan until the disputed election there had been settled and resulted in a government that could work with the United States.As an audit of Afghanistan’s Aug. 20 election ground toward a conclusion, American officials pressed President Hamid Karzai to accept a runoff vote or share power with his main rival, Abdullah Abdullah, a former foreign minister. Although Mr. Karzai’s support appeared likely to fall below 50 percent in the final count, together he and Mr. Abdullah received 70 percent, in theory enough to forge a unity government with national credibility.The question at the heart of the matter, said President Obama’s chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, is not “how many troops you send, but do you have a credible Afghan partner for this process that can provide the security and the type of services that the Afghan people need?” He appeared on CNN’s “State of the Union” and CBS’s “Face the Nation.”He echoed the thoughts of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a top Obama ally and the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, who said in a separate interview from Kabul, “I don’t see how President Obama can make a decision about the committing of our additional forces, or even the further fulfillment of our mission that’s here today, without an adequate government in place.” His interview was broadcast on “Face the Nation.”“It would be irresponsible,” Mr. Emanuel told CNN. Then he continued, paraphrasing the senator, that it would be reckless to decide on the troop level without first doing “a thorough analysis of whether, in fact, there’s an Afghan partner ready to fill that space that U.S. troops would create and become a true partner in governing.”The signals come as Republican critics already are complaining that the president is taking too long to decide whether to send the additional 40,000 troops requested by his commander, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal. They argue that Mr. Obama has left the impression of indecisiveness that has only emboldened the Taliban, making the task of the 68,000 American troops already there that much harder.The delay, though, reflects deep uncertainty inside the White House about the prospects of waging a successful war without a partner in Kabul with widespread legitimacy among the Afghan people. A delay could also provide some political space at home for Mr. Obama, whose efforts to pass health care legislation are reaching a climactic moment in Congress, although the White House has denied any relationship between the two issues.The election in Afghanistan was so badly marred by allegations of fraud that they helped prompt Mr. Obama to rethink the strategy he unveiled just in March, officials have said. Mr. Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., among others at the White House, had already soured on Mr. Karzai, whose government and family are accused of corruption and ties to drug dealing. The election reinforced those doubts, officials said.Mr. Emanuel’s comments amounted to a clear signal to Mr. Karzai to press for a quick and broadly acceptable solution to the political crisis roiling Afghanistan. “Whether that’s through a runoff or whether that’s through negotiations, the process will be determined by the Afghan people,” Mr. Emanuel said. He offered no timetable for a troop decision but noted that further review sessions were set for this week and next.Mr. Kerry met with Mr. Karzai in Kabul on Sunday night, the third time in three days, said an American official in Kabul, and he reiterated the American demand that the election process not be violated.Mr. Karzai has balked at accepting the impending audit findings that show he received less than 50 percent of the vote, an outcome that would trigger a runoff in two weeks. Interrupting that process would pitch the country into a constitutional crisis at a highly sensitive moment.A Republican who appeared on the same program as Mr. Kerry, Senator John Cornyn of Texas, said the administration risked looking indecisive on Afghanistan, “which then becomes a way of emboldening our enemies.” Afghan governmental legitimacy is important but “it shouldn’t be the linchpin for us deciding whether we’re going to protect our national security interests,” he said.Westerners and Afghans familiar with the process said Mr. Karzai called a meeting late Saturday night over the results of the audit. He expressed concern over the fairness of the audit to a broad cast of characters, including the United Nations and the United States, according to Afghan and Western officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not allowed to talk publicly.A spokesman for Mr. Karzai, Wahid Omar, denied that Mr. Karzai was contesting the pending results. But Western officials have given accounts that show otherwise.  “For the moment we are worried,” the French foreign minister, Bernard Kouchner, said in Kabul, according to The Associated Press. “Because it seems that not everybody is ready to accept the results.”