https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/movies/lady-macbeth-review.html
Review: ‘Lady Macbeth’ in Hoop Skirts - The New York Times
Movies,Lady Macbeth (Movie),Oldroyd  William,Pugh  Florence
July 13, 2017
9367
It takes a while to figure out who the title character in “Lady Macbeth” really is. You may think you know her, that she’s the one who sleeps with death, the one pouring evil into her husband’s ear. Certainly the invocation of Shakespeare tips that there’s something dangerous about the lady of its house, an opaque beauty called Katherine (a very fine Florence Pugh). Yet part of this movie’s ticklish nastiness is that at first it isn’t at all clear whether she will be the master of doom or its helpmate. At just 17, Katherine looks like the innocent flower, but something wicked this way comes seductively, then savagely.Set in 1865 rural England, “Lady Macbeth” opens with Katherine at the marriage altar, her head draped in a white veil that suggests virtue and slyly hints at the blood that will spill. She’s soon in the bedroom with her husband, Alexander (Paul Hilton), a scowler with angry, accusatory eyes who isn’t interested in her sexually or any other way. Their first night together, he brusquely orders her to undress, only to crawl into bed, leaving her naked, untouched and puzzled. This remains the template for a somewhat mysteriously cheerless, loveless marriage that finds Katherine more of a prisoner than a wife.Not much happens at first, beautifully. Katherine is soon bored, but the director, William Oldroyd, ensures that you aren’t, with his use of sepulchral quiet, mesmerizingly steady framing and unnerving order, in which nothing is ever out of place, especially nothing human. There seem to be no books in the house, which is maintained by beaten-down servants and overseen by Alexander’s even more unpleasant father, Boris (a good Christopher Fairbank). Everything looks superficially lovely, especially Katherine, who is brushed and cinched, primped and readied by her maid, Anna (Naomi Ackie), like a doll that no one plays with. It’s unclear if Katherine can read; at times she barely speaks.For the most part, Katherine watches, and we watch her watching, as the quiet grows louder, and the stillness grows eerier. Bidden to stay indoors — somehow the fresh air would be bad for her, or so the men of the house insist — she spends much of her time staring out a window, a familiar pastime for repressed, yearning women in fiction. Of Madame Bovary, the theorist Stephen Heath wrote: “The window is the frame of Emma’s dissatisfaction.” The same holds true for Katherine, whose window reveals the life that she’s been cut off from, even as it reminds her, day after lonely night, of the freedom on the other side of the glass.Something happens, of course, rocking Katherine, the story and the visual order. Alexander leaves — there’s trouble at the family colliery — creating a void that she rapidly fills. She starts a bold, increasingly reckless affair with a groomsman, Sebastian (Cosmo Jarvis), a rough number wildly out of his league and depth. Adultery soon begets murder, but even when Katherine is standing over a second corpse, it’s not obvious whether she’s a newly sprung prisoner of gender with a reasonable sociopolitical alibi (the patriarchy made her do it!) or just a psychopath in a fetching peacock-blue gown. Mr. Oldroyd doesn’t tip his hand, forcing you to choose.The movie is based on “Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk,” an 1865 novella by Nikolai Leskov that Dmitri Shostakovich turned into an opera and Andrzej Wajda adapted into a film. Like the novella, the movie opens up some interpretive leeway as it invites your sympathy for Katherine. She’s an unambiguous captive, trapped by sex and class, yet the viciousness that her liberation awakens — as carnal lust slips into bloodlust — precludes a facile redemptive reading. Mr. Oldroyd boxes Katherine in his attractive visuals, imprisoning her as her male relatives do. Yet his intellectual distance also turns her into a specimen, a pinned butterfly turned taxidermy beast.Written by Alice Birch, this version of “Lady Macbeth” is most successfully complicated by Anna, a sympathetic character who doesn’t exist in the novella but takes on mounting importance here. Katherine, having been radically isolated by her husband and father-in-law, has no friends. Anna is Katherine’s closest companion by default and serves as maid and occasional minder; over time, Anna also becomes a moving, horrified witness to Katherine’s crimes, emotion that warms the insistent chill. That Anna is played by a black actress, and Katherine by a white one, adds race to the thickening intrigue, making a story of female oppression and domination, power and privilege that much more harrowing and ugly.