http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/05/magazine/NBA-in-China.html
The N.B.A. Is Missing Its Shots in China - The New York Times
China,Basketball,Draft and Recruitment (Sports),Chinese Basketball Assn,National Basketball Assn
Feb. 1, 2012
5516
Wilson Chandler was about six weeks into China, and having mostly acclimated to his strange new life, he wanted a tat. But even at 6-foot-8, Chandler had little available real estate — he already had approximately 100 tattoos, including a tribute inked across his neck to his grandmother Olivia, who raised him in Michigan, which is memorialized on his forearm, not far from the gothic lettering of his nickname, Thrill, stripped across his bicep. So the Chinese tattoo artist had to search before he found a space near Chandler’s left elbow. There he slowly etched “Qian De Le,” the Mandarin rendering of Chandler’s name, into his skin. A few mildly painful minutes later, China was indelibly stamped onto Chandler.It is a souvenir from Chandler’s unlikely Chinese adventure. He has visited the Great Wall and the Forbidden City in Beijing, ridden the bullet train to Shanghai and begun his own Chinese microblog (a version of Twitter, with Chinese censors) while playing forward for the Zhejiang Lions of the Chinese Basketball Association in the eastern city of Hangzhou. Had this been a normal year, Chandler, 24, a restricted free agent and rising star with the Denver Nuggets, would have most likely spent last summer considering lucrative offers from the Nuggets and other teams in the National Basketball Association. But because of the N.B.A. lockout, and the prospect of losing an entire N.B.A. season, Chandler bolted overseas in September, among the first of several players to sign in China. Then in November, earlier than many anticipated, the lockout ended. Players who signed in Europe or elsewhere opted out of their contracts and returned, like swallows, to the familiarity and multiyear contracts of the N.B.A.Not Chandler. If the Turkish league or the Spanish league was content to rent N.B.A. players for a few months, the Chinese league most definitely was not. China had demanded its own indelible stamp from the foreign players: a signature on a binding contract that forbade them to return to the N.B.A. before the end of the Chinese season, no matter what. They were trapped.“I made a decision,” Chandler told me when I visited him in Hangzhou in the middle of December. “You make a decision, you live with it.” The C.B.A. regular season ends on Feb. 15, but because the Zhejiang Lions are likely headed to the playoffs, Chandler’s exile will probably last a few more weeks after that.If Chandler is frustrated by his predicament, Commissioner David Stern can probably sympathize. Stern and the N.B.A. are confronting their own China trap, having misjudged what, for now, is possible there. Not too long ago, the N.B.A. had visions of empire: it formed a Chinese subsidiary, N.B.A. China, and made plans for an N.B.A. league in the country, complete with state-of-the-art arenas and retail N.B.A. stores selling licensed merchandise.What made all this seem possible, even logical, was that the Chinese league was kind of a joke. I saw this firsthand when I spent the 2008-9 season following the Shanxi Brave Dragons, a team owned by an eccentric Chinese steel baron. The C.B.A. fervently wanted to emulate the N.B.A., but it was more like a crazy carnival instead. The refereeing was often shady, the coaching at best mediocre and the level of play sometimes downright awful. Even though basketball was one of China’s most popular sports, several teams struggled to attract more than a few thousand fans. The N.B.A. was far more popular, with higher television ratings and a huge fan base crazy about Kobe Bryant and other stars. The N.B.A. also had Yao Ming, the Chinese center who became an All-Star with the Houston Rockets and was so popular in China that domestic television ratings doubled and tripled for Rockets games.Those advantages are now fading. Unable to overcome injuries, Yao retired from the N.B.A. after last season and is a part of the C.B.A. as the owner and public face of its team in Shanghai. Television ratings for the Chinese league have jumped, partly because of the added star appeal of exiled N.B.A. players like Chandler, while ratings for the N.B.A. have declined since Yao’s peak years. The C.B.A. has also received a boost from its most surprising star, Stephon Marbury, who has proved unexpectedly adroit at public relations in China after his tumultuous time in the N.B.A. Perhaps the N.B.A.’s biggest challenge of all is that the C.B.A. is part of the Chinese government, under the control of the ruling Communist Party.Foreign companies doing business in China must inevitably navigate the country’s distinctive brand of “state capitalism,” in which the invisible hand of the market is often hard to free from the tentacles of the authoritarian government. The companies that do best usually exercise patience, maintain a low profile and are careful not to give the state cause to regard them as a threat. When the N.B.A. revealed its ambitious plans for China, it was pursuing the logical next step to expand its already successful business there. But the logic of the Chinese state was very different. As Arthur Kroeber, the managing director of GK Dragonomics, a business consultancy in Beijing, puts it, “Foreign companies that come in here with announced, large, grand strategies — as well as these grand statements about what they are going to achieve — rarely are going to get there.” Stern and the N.B.A. owners were able to handle the players’ union in the lockout. The People’s Republic of China is proving much, much tougher.Jiang Heping is arguably one of the most powerful figures in global sports as the head of China Central Television’s all-sports channel, known as CCTV5 and sometimes described as China’s equivalent to ESPN. Jiang’s office is inside the old CCTV building on Beijing’s bureaucratic west side. When I met him in December, it was a delicate moment. He was in a tough negotiation with the N.B.A. over the renewal of broadcast rights, with less than two weeks to go before the opening of the lockout-shortened N.B.A. season on Dec. 25.“To be frank, I haven’t found a solution,” Jiang told me, conceding that failure to reach a deal would mean a blackout of the N.B.A. on the country’s all-sports channel.Jiang, whose office is decorated with photographs of him with Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant, seemed genuinely anxious about the stalemate. The problem was advertising: CCTV was demanding changes in an arrangement that for years allowed the N.B.A. to sell a share of ad time during games for its own corporate partners. “I was instructed from above that we can’t maintain such a business model,” Jiang said, referring to the officials who run all the CCTV channels, which constitute the Communist Party’s most influential propaganda mouthpiece.The N.B.A.’s formal relationship with CCTV began in 1987 — the year Wilson Chandler was born — when David Stern visited Beijing with a demo tape in hand. Stern had no idea that China’s economy would soon remake the world — few people did — but he realized earlier than most that globalization would change sports by transforming games and players into commodities that television could deliver across borders. He made a deal to provide CCTV with videotapes of N.B.A. game footage, sent weekly from New York, in exchange for a share of advertising revenues. Since advertising barely existed in China, Stern later said he assumed he was largely giving his highlights away in exchange for exposure to the vast Chinese audience. Basketball already had a long history in China, having been brought to the country by the Young Men’s Christian Association a few years after James Naismith invented the game in 1891 in Springfield, Mass. Nearly a century later, rough highlights of N.B.A. games would begin appearing on a weekly CCTV sports program, and Chinese viewers would get their first glimpses of Magic, Bird and, most significant, Michael Jordan.By the 1990s, when Jordan’s Chicago Bulls were most dominant, CCTV was paying the N.B.A. to show its games, as were provincial and city TV stations. What’s more, advertising revenues were starting to materialize, as the games became a popular way for companies to introduce themselves to the Chinese consumer. Today a major chunk of the N.B.A.’s revenues in China come from marketing partnerships with multinational corporations and Chinese companies.The biggest boon for the N.B.A. came in 2002, when Yao was the first pick in the N.B.A. draft. CCTV5 soon began broadcasting live N.B.A. games throughout the week. Viewership soared, despite a time difference that meant N.B.A. games were on during the morning rush in China. Games between two ordinary teams might draw 10 to 15 million viewers (and perhaps three times as many if Yao was playing).The N.B.A. had already opened an office in Beijing and inaugurated a series of annual preseason games in China when, in late 2006, Stern mentioned during the Reuters Media Summit in New York that the N.B.A. was also considering having its own league in China. Privately, N.B.A. officials were exploring how to incorporate an N.B.A. subsidiary company as a separate Chinese entity. In 2007, they made presentations to prospective investors and raised $253 million from some of China’s most powerful private and state-owned companies, as well as from ESPN/Disney. Goldman Sachs said this $253 million stake represented about 11 percent of the new company, which suggested that the total value was about $2.4 billion. The new subsidiary, N.B.A. China, was announced in January 2008, and in August, the N.B.A. used the 2008 Beijing Olympics as a stage to show off its global dominance. N.B.A. stars were playing for several countries, and more than 150 million viewers watched an opening-round game pitting the American team against Yao and the Chinese team.Then last year, within a matter of days, Yao retired and the N.B.A. owners locked out the players. “The lockout was a blow to the N.B.A. brand,” Jiang told me in December.The timing of the lockout certainly was lousy for Wilson Chandler. After flourishing with the New York Knicks and being shipped to the Nuggets in the trade for Carmelo Anthony last season, Chandler entered the off-season hoping for a big payday and some professional stability. Instead, he was restless and adrift, shuttling between workouts as his agent, Chris Luchey, listened to offers from teams in Italy and then China. In the early days of the lockout, some of the N.B.A.’s biggest stars, including Bryant, Anthony and Chris Paul, contemplated deals with Chinese teams, including an unconfirmed offer to Bryant of a once-unthinkable $1.5 million per month from the steel-baron owner of the Brave Dragons. The spectacle of China’s outbidding Europe for top American talent seemed to be a portent of a new age.But the top official in the Chinese league is a creature of the old age, an old-school Communist Party bureaucrat named Xin Lancheng, who put his foot down, prohibiting Chinese teams from signing N.B.A. players who were already under contract at the time of the lockout. Only free agents would be eligible — and they would have to sign that binding contract. This was partly about pride, and arrogance, but it was also consistent with an ethos that has prevailed since China opened itself to the outside world in 1978: foreigners are not invited to China to profiteer; they are invited to make the Chinese better. Even N.B.A. players.After dozens of telephone calls, and a soul-searching getaway weekend in Miami with Luchey, Chandler chose China over Italy. The Chinese league is a hybrid in the same way China’s economy is a hybrid, with some of its 17 teams still owned by local governments or sports bureaus and other teams privately owned by Chinese millionaires willing to spend for foreign talent. The Zhejiang Lions, a privately owned team, offered Chandler more than $2 million, far more than the Italian offer. The Chinese league also played a schedule similar to that in the N.B.A., with three games a week from November to February. Chandler preferred to play more games, because he had lost past off-seasons to rehabbing injuries and wanted to hone his skills. Chandler also was eager to work with the new head coach of the Lions, the longtime Los Angeles Lakers assistant and N.B.A. lifer Jim Cleamons, who moved to China for opportunity as well.Italy did offer one distinct advantage: if the lockout ended, Chandler could return to the N.B.A. “We had 15 different conversations about what happens when the lockout ends,” Luchey says. “I told him 100 times: ‘The season is going to go. There is going to be a season.’ ” But Luchey also reminded Chandler that he would be the first N.B.A. player in his prime to sign in China. “Once you do this, you are going to be a trendsetter,” Luchey promised. And soon enough, Luchey was right. J. R. Smith, Aaron Brooks, Kenyon Martin, Patrick Mills and a few other N.B.A. players signed with Chinese teams. Martin signed the biggest contract in league history, reported to be at least $2.5 million for the season.Finally, China had one more crucial thing going for it. “You have the fan base,” Luchey says. An estimated 300 million people play basketball in China, roughly the population of the United States. Bryant, LeBron James, Steve Nash, Dwight Howard and other stars have visited China during past off-seasons, promoting sneakers or the N.B.A. or themselves. Playing in China meant exposure in a basketball market that seems certain to become the biggest in the world — even if how best to capitalize on that market remains an open question.Yao Ming now lives in Shanghai with his wife and infant daughter, near the city’s fashionable Xintiandi neighborhood. He has become involved in a California winery venture focused on the Chinese market and is a spokesman for wildlife conservation, most recently campaigning to return pandas to the wild. He is also studying at Jiao Tong University, taking classes in algebra and English as well as a survey course called Topics in Modern Chinese History. Having grown up inside China’s government-run sports system, one of his new priorities is pushing for an expansion of college sports. The C.B.A. still depends on the Soviet-style system that produced Yao, yet that system is failing — not only in training elite players but also in producing enough players.“We have to build a bridge between the C.B.A. and college basketball that doesn’t exist now,” he told me. “We need more players and good, quality players.”By “we,” Yao was obviously no longer talking about the N.B.A. Most fans in the United States and even China identify him with the N.B.A., but the Chinese league never completely let him go. When I spoke with Bai Xilin, the C.B.A.’s director of basketball operations, he described Yao as a prodigal. “He’s someone who left the C.B.A. and has come back as an owner,” Bai said, smiling. “He’s really influential.” Now owner of the Shanghai Sharks, the team he played for before moving to the N.B.A., Yao had obvious star appeal at a home game I attended in December. When he arrived midway through the first quarter, fans stopped watching the game and rushed forward to snap his photograph or just gawk.When I asked Yao about the challenges facing the N.B.A. in China, he smiled and teasingly asked, “Besides losing me?” He quickly emphasized that his retirement wasn’t a “big deal,” because other N.B.A. superstars like Bryant and James are enormously popular in China. Still, he agreed that finding another Chinese star would help. “Of course, that would be the best,” he said. The N.B.A. once hoped it had found a successor in Yi Jianlian, but Yi has never risen above mediocrity, and the most promising young players currently in the Chinese league are not ready. The C.B.A. has still not found a formula to produce world-class players.The Shanghai Sharks have struggled to sell tickets, and Yao said that Chinese fans, having watched the N.B.A. on television, are understandably impatient with the lower quality of play in the Chinese league. This is one reason why the idea of an N.B.A.-affiliated league in China made perfect sense. But that wasn’t enough to prevent it from being a political miscalculation. Stern’s comments at the Reuters Summit, delivered almost as an aside, were quickly picked up in the Chinese media and caught the attention of the man who then ran the C.B.A., Li Yuanwei. A former college professor, Li was known as a reformer who admired the N.B.A.’s business model. I spoke with Li during my season following the Shanxi Brave Dragons, and he recalled being stunned when he learned about Stern’s plans for an N.B.A. league.“He had never said this before to us,” Li said. “If he had said he wanted to cooperate with the C.B.A., then that would have been understandable. But he didn’t say a word, which meant he knew nothing about China.”Some C.B.A. officials told me that they wondered if the N.B.A. fully understood Chinese law, which made it very difficult to form a league without approval from the government, which, after all, ran the C.B.A. Stern and the N.B.A. seemed to recover fairly quickly, though, with talk of collaborating with the C.B.A. in any future league. Some sort of deal seemed possible, especially if the Olympics, as many predicted, ushered in a new wave of reform of the country’s state-dominated sports system. By the opening ceremony, expectations were rising that an announcement might be coming.It didn’t happen. Months earlier, in an unpublicized meeting, Tim Chen, then chief executive of N.B.A. China, presented a proposal to Li Yuanwei, in which both sides would equally control a new eight-team league under the N.B.A. brand. C.B.A. owners would have the first right to buy a team for $50 million. Li Yuanwei, already distracted by preparations for the Olympics, flatly rejected the plan and postponed any further discussions until after the Games. Instead, when Stern returned to Beijing for an exhibition game, a month and a half after the Olympics, he discussed the N.B.A.’s plans to help develop and manage a network of new arenas across China. “If we do get to the point where we have that cooperative league,” he said, “we’ll have the buildings already.”The N.B.A., however, has largely suspended those grand plans for the foreseeable future, while also stalling plans to build N.B.A. retail stores throughout the country. David Shoemaker, who became N.B.A. China’s chief executive in June, said the N.B.A.’s agenda now involves several collaborations with the Chinese league, including exchanges in which Chinese coaches and referees receive training in the United States, as well as a basketball academy in southern China to develop elite players. As for a league? Shoemaker called it a distant possibility, if the conditions are right, and if cooperation can be achieved with the C.B.A. “We’re taking a long-term view,” he told me, adding later that “N.B.A. basketball is clearly the most popular sports league in the country.”Shoemaker said he was now emphasizing the development of e-commerce to sell merchandise, while also expanding the league’s thriving online presence, where more and more Chinese fans are watching games streamed on the Internet. In late December, the N.B.A. did conclude a new contract with CCTV5, avoiding what would have been an embarrassing absence on state television. Shoemaker declined to discuss the deal’s specifics beyond saying it did have “an advertising component.” But given the tough line taken by CCTV officials, it seems very likely that the split in advertising is less generous than it was in the past. As a privately held entity, N.B.A. China does not issue public earnings reports, but Shoemaker said it is “a cash-flowing and fast-growing company at present.”Shoemaker did say he would love to collaborate with Yao, whose influence does seem to be growing. Last month, Yao was appointed to the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference of Shanghai, which advises the city’s government. The position is mostly ceremonial, but Yao is now part of the Chinese state, too.Kenyon Martin, the former Denver Nugget, was the first to leave China. In late December, Martin’s team, the Xinjiang Flying Tigers, allowed him to buy out his contract. His teammate, Patrick Mills, formerly of the Portland Trail Blazers, was released in early January, after the Xinjiang general manager accused him of faking a hamstring injury, a charge Mills denied. The catch for Mills and Martin is that their exile continues: Xinjiang refused to grant them the required letters of clearance, meaning neither can sign with an N.B.A. team until after the Chinese season. Everyone else seems to have gotten the message: J. R. Smith, another former Denver Nugget, opened the season by getting in a public spat with his general manager but has since mostly toed the line while putting up big numbers for his team in southeastern China.The voice of reason, the man counseling Smith and other frustrated N.B.A. players, is Marbury, the former Knicks guard whose behavior often infuriated coaches and fans in the United States. Having found that N.B.A. teams either no longer wanted him or no longer wanted to pay him what he thought he was worth, Marbury moved to China three seasons ago and is now the country’s most beloved foreign player, starring for the Beijing Ducks, professing his love for the country, riding the Beijing subway to show the common touch (and posting photographs of himself doing so on his microblog). Marbury has proved himself a good citizen and a shrewd marketer; he is now promoting his discounted line of Starbury sneakers in the Chinese market. When I mentioned Marbury’s name to Bai Xilin, the C.B.A. official, Bai jumped out of his chair and pantomimed Marbury — Ma Bu Li! — directing lay-up drills, as he has been reported doing by the Chinese press. “The other foreign players are just sitting on the bench in warm-ups and don’t take part,” Bai said. “It looks arrogant, extremely arrogant. He knows how to be part of the culture of a Chinese team and with Chinese society.”In Hangzhou, Chandler has consulted with Marbury, who told him to stay positive, though Chandler had already reached out to his Chinese teammates. A team in the Chinese league could be compared to a tenuous geopolitical coalition. Each team is usually allowed two foreign players, whose playing time is restricted, because their stated purpose is to provide better competition for domestic players without taking all the minutes. Yet it is a formula that distorts the game: because foreigners make the most money, they are expected to score the most points or grab the most rebounds, which means they often hog the ball during their time on the court, sometimes annoying their Chinese teammates. There are other demarcations too: on most teams, the Chinese players live together for much of the year in drab dormitories, while the foreigners live in nice hotels with room service and other amenities. As a season wears on, resentment can easily arise.Not long after he arrived, Chandler asked the general manager’s permission for a one-night waiver of the curfew and took the entire team, including the team interpreter, to dinner and a night of karaoke. Luchey says he probably calls Liu Hua, the team interpreter (whose English name is Bob), from 3 to 15 times a day. Need to order a steak-and-cheese sandwich for delivery from Subway? Call Bob. Need to talk to the team’s general manager? Call Bob. One evening in December, Chandler invited two teammates, Wang Fei and Wang Zirui, to dinner at a Western-style restaurant where the Chinese waiters were dressed in red Santa caps. Bob was absent, so the three players smiled, slapped hands and then barely spoke, instead whipping out their iPhones and typing into their translation apps. Chandler held the phone in his huge hands, pecking away for a few minutes, then handed it to Wang Fei, who read it for a moment and started laughing. Then he typed out a response and handed it to Chandler, who stared at the phone and started laughing.“They are pretty much regular guys,” Chandler says. “Fun to be around.” He has been startled by how often the Chinese players are required to practice, almost year round. “It seems like it is the army,” he says. “You start when you are young, in the schools, and you sleep at the gym. You are just drilled every day.” On the court, Chandler averaged more than 26 points and about 10 rebounds a game up to the holiday break for the Lunar New Year. In past seasons, some disgruntled foreigners simply did not come back after the holiday, but Chandler stayed in Hangzhou and practiced.“We’re big on commitment,” Luchey says. “When you make a commitment, you stand on it.”It hasn’t always been easy, especially when the lockout ended. “It was tough,” Chandler says. “I was like, ‘Man, it ended kind of early.’ I wanted to go back and play.” He has kept in contact with friends in the N.B.A. by Skype and says he grew mopey when players began reporting to training camps without him. Luchey predicted that Chandler would be rewarded with a good contract once he returns to the N.B.A., and the Nuggets seem eager to keep him, maintaining regular contact with him. Depending on the playoff fate of the Zhejiang Lions, Chandler could be back in the N.B.A. by March.Till then, Chandler will continue to live the relatively unpampered life of a C.B.A. basketball player. His team travels on commercial flights, economy class. Chandler tries to sit on an exit row, for leg room, but twice flight attendants have ordered him to move, on the grounds that he cannot speak Mandarin in case of an emergency. “It’s not bad if you are next to one of the guards,” he says. “But it is when you are by one of the big guys.” One thing Chandler has not lacked during his Chinese exile is public support. After a game, when he walks out of the locker room to the team bus, fans swarm around him, pressing together in a scrum, screaming and shouting. Some foreign players find these crowds unnerving, given all the pushing and shoving, but Chandler just moves forward, signing autographs as he goes.“They are really good people at heart, prideful people,” he says. “They want to be their own brand, own country. Just look at how they didn’t sell the C.B.A. to the N.B.A. They want to build their own brand.”