https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/nyregion/judge-lets-dean-skelos-and-son-remain-free-while-appealing-convictions.html
Judge Lets Dean Skelos and Son Remain Free While Appealing Convictions - The New York Times
New York State,Skelos  Adam B (1982- ),Skelos  Dean G,Bribery and Kickbacks,Justice Department,Corruption (Institutional)
Aug. 4, 2016
4079
Dean G. Skelos, the once-powerful New York state senator, and his son, Adam B. Skelos, may remain free on bail as they appeal their corruption convictions, a federal judge ruled on Thursday.Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan said in her order that the Skeloses’ lawyers raised a “substantial question” as to whether jury instructions had been “erroneous” in light of a Supreme Court ruling that overturned the corruption conviction of former Gov. Bob McDonnell, a Virginia Republican — a decision making it harder for the government to prove corruption.Lawyers for Sheldon Silver, the former State Assembly speaker, have asked a different judge for similar leniency in his case. That request is pending. Mr. Silver, a Democrat, was convicted of fraud, extortion and money laundering just weeks before the Skeloses received their convictions.Lawyers for both Skeloses argued in a court filing last month that the McDonnell ruling invalidated a key instruction to the jury in their case, taking issue with what constituted an “official act.”“The jury easily could have convicted based upon acts that were not illegal; indeed, the government invited it to do so,” they argued.In its unanimous decision, the Supreme Court narrowed the definition of what conduct could merit a corruption prosecution. Writing for the court at the time, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. voiced concern over “the government’s boundless interpretation” of federal bribery laws.“A more limited interpretation of the term ‘official act’ leaves ample room for prosecuting corruption, while comporting with the text of the statute and the precedent of this court,” he wrote.Defense lawyers, including the Skeloses’,  cited that unanimous ruling in challenging past and pending corruption cases brought by the Justice Department.A jury found both Skelos men guilty last December of all eight bribery, extortion and conspiracy charges brought against them. Dean Skelos, a Republican from Long Island and one of the most powerful men in state government until his arrest last year, had used his position as Senate majority leader to get his son $300,000 in consulting work, a job and a direct payment of $20,000.A lawyer for Dean Skelos did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment. A lawyer for the younger Skelos declined to comment. The government could not be reached.