http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/04/business/worldbusiness/04iht-indymac.1.19066482.html
Investor group to buy IndyMac Bank - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Jan. 4, 2009
6783
WASHINGTON — A seven-member investor group including affiliates of the billionaire George Soros and of Michael Dell, the founder of  Dell,  have agreed to purchase  IndyMac Bank, a failed lender and one of the largest casualties of the U.S. housing bust, for $13.9 billion.The group, which also includes  Dune Capital Management and the investment firm J.C. Flowers,  is putting up $1.3 billion in cash.The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which has run IndyMac since its failure on July 11, announced its sale to the IMB HoldCo consortium Friday.  Neither the investors nor the agency would provide details on financing for the rest of the deal, which the FDIC expects to close in late January or early February.The investor group is led by Steve Mnuchin,  the chairman of Dune Capital and a former Goldman Sachs executive; Christopher Flowers,  the billionaire manager of J.C. Flowers; and John Paulson, a hedge fund operator who gained billions of dollars betting that U.S. housing prices would fall and take mortgage-backed securities down with them.The purchase will include IndyMac's 33 branches, mostly in the Los Angeles area, with about $6.5 billion in deposits, as well as loan and securities portfolios of about $23 billion. IMB HoldCo is also buying a mortgage servicing portfolio with unpaid principal balances of more than $175 billion.Terry Laughlin, who previously headed Merrill Lynch Bank & Trust, will serve as chief executive of IndyMac."The current economic climate is challenging for selling assets, but this agreement achieves the goals that were set out by the chairman and board when the FDIC was named conservator of IndyMac in July," the FDIC's  deputy director, James Wigand, said in a statement.IndyMac had  $32 billion in assets when it was seized in July. It was the third-largest  bank failure in U.S. history until Washington Mutual's closure in September set a new record, with about $307 billion of assets. In all, 25 U.S. banks failed in 2008.IndyMac was the second-biggest publicly traded mortgage lender, after Countrywide Financial,  which was acquired last year by Bank of America.Founded in 1985 by Angelo Mozilo and David Loeb, who also founded Countrywide, IndyMac once specialized in "Alt-A" home loans, which often did not require borrowers to fully prove their income. It collapsed after loan defaults increased and tight capital markets caused losses on mortgages it could not sell.As part of the deal, the FDIC entered into a loss-sharing agreement with IMB HoldCo. IndyMac will assume the first 20 percent of losses on a portfolio of "qualifying loans," after which the FDIC will assume 80 percent on the next 10 percent of losses, and 95 percent on losses thereafter.The closing of IndyMac's loan portfolios is expected to cost the FDIC's insurance fund $8.5 billion to $9.4 billion. The amount in the fund to back deposits fell 24 percent in the third quarter of 2008 to $34.6 billion, the latest total available.The Office of Thrift Supervision said  Friday that it had given IMB HoldCo preliminary clearance to operate IndyMac as a federal savings association under OTS supervision.After its failure, the FDIC  chairman, Sheila Bair, used IndyMac for a test program aimed at showing that lenders could modify distressed home loans in a way that benefited the financial institution, as well as investors and homeowners. The new IndyMac will continue that modification program, the FDIC said.Bair has urged the U.S. Treasury to use about $24 billion in federal funds for incentives to get lenders to adopt similar loan modification plans nationwide, but has been met with resistance from officials in the administration of President George W. Bush.    The FDIC said the loan modification plan at IndyMac had provided total estimated savings of about $423 million.The FDIC said it was not the first time private equity firms had participated in acquiring failed banks."Allowing hedge funds to own a bank is a sign of the tough economic times and the need for creativity in turning the economy around," said Scott Talbott, the chief of government affairs for the Financial Services Roundtable, an industry group. "Federal banking regulators will continue to consider hedge funds as possible buyers of other failing financial institutions."The  deal is also an indication that the private equity industry is finding ways to invest capital despite the lack of leverage.The industry has been hurt by the credit crisis, which has reduced the ability of buyout firms to acquire companies through the traditional leveraged buyout structure.     But a relaxation of some rules by U.S. regulators has made it easier for private equity firms to invest in banks.