https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/05/podcasts/how-to-join-our-podcast-club.html
How to Join Our Podcast Club - The New York Times
Podcasts
April 5, 2017
3568
It’s easy to become a radio listener. You switch it on and turn the dial until you find something interesting. Done.Podcast listening can be harder to crack. There are so many shows! How do you find the ones you’ll like? And once you’ve found a show, where do you start: with the most recent episode? At the beginning? Some specific gem of an episode buried deep in the back catalog?Even longtime podcast listeners lament that there isn’t an easier way to discover and get hooked on new programs — nor is there a go-to place to analyze and geek out on great stuff once you are hooked.That’s why we’re starting the New York Times Podcast Club Facebook group.Podcast club isn’t a new concept at The New York Times. We’ve had one here, in real life, for the past year. Every Friday, a group of employees from around the company gather in a bright, couch-filled conference room for half an hour to talk about one episode of one podcast. It’s sort of like a book club, but for on-demand audio.Now we are expanding from 30 minutes a week to 24/7; from a conference room in Midtown Manhattan to the world — or at least the world of Facebook.Here’s how it’ll work. On Mondays we’ll post the episode we’re discussing that week. Chime in with your thoughts once you’ve listened, and we’ll tell you the highlights of our own IRL discussion. We’ll also have other podcast-related discussions popping up throughout the week and will seek suggestions for what to listen to and discuss next. We’ll even have producers and hosts join us periodically for Q. and A. sessions.You can follow our New York Times Podcast Club playlist on RadioPublic to get an automatic feed of that week’s episode for discussion.And to prep, you can catch up with some of what we’ve listened to so far. Here are nine episodes we’ve discussed over the last year, and a quick explanation of why we chose them.