http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/02/world/asia/02korea.html
In Koreas, Floods Carry Land Mines - The New York Times
North Korea,South Korea,Mines  Explosive,Floods
Aug. 1, 2010
1586
SEOUL, South Korea — Dozens of North Korean land mines loosened by heavy rains have washed ashore on South Korean riverbanks and beaches near the border, presenting a lethal new threat to residents already wary of surprises and nefarious motives from the North.A man in the South Korean border town of Yeoncheon, northeast of Seoul, was killed Saturday when one of two land mines he had picked up from a stream exploded, the Defense Ministry said. A friend was seriously injured and hospitalized.The scare came amid heightened vigilance against North Korea, following the March sinking of a South Korean warship in border waters that was widely thought to be caused by a North Korean torpedo attack. On Sunday, South Korea sent a message urging North Korea to prevent its land mines from washing downstream to the South, the Defense Ministry said in a statement.The authorities also distributed pamphlets, which carried photos of the North Korean mines, warning people living near the border not to touch objects that look like the land mines.In towns and islands downstream from North Korea, officials using megaphones urged villagers and vacationers to stay off the streams and beaches.Soldiers with minesweepers were searching river beds where the floods have retreated. Since Friday, they have found 35 land mines. The mines, built in wooden boxes, were designed to explode when pressed or opened.“The mines were apparently swept down from North Korea after torrential rains,” said an official from the Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing his office’s policy. He said that the safety pins of some recovered mines were not removed, indicating that they had been in storage when they were swept away.Heavy rains were reported north of the border in recent weeks. North Korea, where most mountains are denuded, is vulnerable to landslides and floods. Bodies of North Koreans are occasionally found downstream in the South after heavy rains.The two-and-a-half-mile-wide Demilitarized Zone, which divides the two Koreas, and the land immediately adjacent to it on either side are heavily seeded with land mines to guard against infiltration by soldiers from the North or South. In South Korean villages near the front line, it is not unusual to find farmers who have lost arms or legs by stepping on the mines.But few South Korean civilians have been reported killed by North Korean land mines in the post-Korean War years.After the sinking of the ship, South Koreans remain wary of the North, which has a history of unpredictability. In September last year, it astonished South Koreans by releasing water from one of its dams without notice, causing a flash flood across the border. Six South Koreans were drowned downstream.North Korea recently discharged water from dams north of a river flowing to South Korea, but it notified the South in advance, giving it time to evacuate vacationers and others downstream.