http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/27/opinion/a-saudi-ipo-buyer-beware.html
A Saudi I.P.O.? Buyer Beware - The New York Times
Editorials,Initial Public Offerings,Saudi Aramco,Women and Girls,Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline,Exxon Mobil Corp,Salman  King of Saudi Arabia,Mohammed bin Salman (1985- ),Women's Rights,Moody's Investors Service Inc,Saudi Arabia
May 27, 2016
8579
In January, when the Saudi royal family first floated the idea of selling shares in Saudi Aramco, the kingdom’s oil company, many analysts regarded the proposal as an intriguing nonstarter. They were intrigued because even a partial privatization could create a company larger than Exxon Mobil, the world’s largest publicly owned oil company. They were skeptical because initial public offerings on global exchanges require disclosure and scrutiny, as well as a record of transparent corporate governance. These are not Aramco’s strong points.The idea got another look this month, when King Salman issued several royal decrees to revamp the oil ministry and other agencies. The decrees were seen as support for “Saudi Vision 2030,” a development plan released in April by the deputy crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, to modernize the Saudi economy and society by ending its oil dependence and perhaps making other limited reforms. The crux of the plan is an I.P.O. of a stake in Aramco to help finance the kingdom’s transformation.The king’s endorsement increases the chances that an I.P.O. will occur, though the scale of the offering remains unclear. It could be relatively small and restricted to Saudi investors, thus avoiding the need for the heightened transparency normally associated with I.P.O.s. Conversely, despite the lack of transparency, a larger offering could be in the cards, promoted in part by bankers and consultants who stand to reap a fortune in fees on the transaction.Either way, an Aramco I.P.O. raises questions, and what investors don’t know about the company — the accuracy of its claimed oil and gas reserves, for instance — is only one of them. An investment in Aramco would also be an investment in a kingdom that systematically represses women, and hence, in human and social capital. None of the many officials named to new posts in the decrees were women.Though ostensibly aimed at modernization, neither the development plan nor the decrees propose changes in the kingdom’s basic political arrangements, in which religious fundamentalists uphold the legitimacy of the royal family in exchange for freedom to foster and spread extremist ideology. There is also no explanation of how even a big infusion of cash would build new industries from nothing and transform Saudi Arabia’s estimated 20 million subjects into self-supporting employers and employees.Moody’s Investors Service, the credit rating agency, alluded to all that when it downgraded Saudi Arabia a week after the decrees were issued, citing the kingdom’s reduced ability to “weather future shocks” in the face of lower growth, higher debt and dwindling financial reserves low oil prices. In Moody’s view, it is too soon to tell if the new plan will revive the credit rating or if the proposed reforms can be achieved without causing social unrest.Saudi Arabia desperately needs to modernize, and even talking about that need is a step forward. But neither the Saudis nor their global bankers should pretend that an I.P.O. of Aramco, as the company is currently configured, is a viable means to that end.