https://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/04/world/europe/04britain.html
British Leader Rejects Rush to Tighten Gun Laws After Rampage - The New York Times
Great Britain,Gun Control,Murders and Attempted Murders,Cameron  David
June 3, 2010
4632
LONDON  —  Prime Minister David Cameron said  Thursday that Britain “should not leap to knee-jerk conclusions” about the need for tougher gun laws in the wake of the shooting rampage in northwestern England on Wednesday that   left 13 people dead, including the gunman.Mr. Cameron spoke at a news conference as the police released new details about how  the gunman, Derrick Bird, 52, a  taxi driver,  left a trail of death with few precedents in Britain’s modern history through  the western edge of the Lake District, one of the country’s most celebrated scenic  spots.Mr. Cameron  said the government would do everything it could to “mend the hurt” caused by the shootings. But while laws and practices involved in gun ownership will be reviewed, he said, there is not always “an instant legislative or regulatory answer.”“Of course we should look at this issue, but we should not leap to knee-jerk conclusions on what should be done on the regulatory front,” he said. “We do have some of the toughest legislation in the world.” He added, “You can’t legislate to stop a switch flicking in someone’s head and this sort of dreadful action taking place.”Police commanders in Cumbria, the county where the killings occurred, said Thursday that they had recovered two weapons used in the shootings —  a shotgun and a .22-caliber rifle with a sniper scope —  and that Mr. Bird had valid gun licenses for both.Friends of Mr. Bird said he had owned the weapons for at least 20 years and had inherited them from his father.Although Mr. Bird had a criminal record for theft from the 1990s, the police said, it  was not considered serious enough to fall under statutory provisions that bar more serious criminal offenders from having licensed guns.For years, Britain has been keen to compare its relatively modest record of gun crime with the much higher incidence of firearms killings in United States; official figures show that guns are used in about 21,000 crimes a year here, and that, in recent years, killings with firearms each year have rarely reached 100, and often fewer than 50.Against that background, the episode on Wednesday quickly developed into a national trauma, with newspapers and broadcast airwaves filled with agonized debate about what motivated the killer and how the carnage might have been prevented.News reports that were widely circulated in Britain on Thursday, including one in The Daily Telegraph, quoted friends of Mr. Bird, a divorced father of two, as saying they thought  the killings might have been set off by a family dispute over a will, possibly that of Mr. Bird’s 90-year-old mother, Mary, with whom he had lived in recent years.On Thursday, police investigators would not comment on a motive for the killings, other than referring to  “a mixture of grudge, and random.” They said the first victims, near  Mr. Bird’s village,  Rowrah, included his twin brother, David, a mechanic; the Bird family’s lawyer, Kevin Commons, 60; and two taxi drivers he knew well in Whitehaven, the seaside town where he worked.Victims who were apparently killed at random, in towns and villages to the south and east of Whitehaven, included a middle-age woman returning from shopping to the home where she cared for a severely disabled adult daughter; a man on his way to a betting shop; a former professional rugby player working on his uncle’s farm; an elderly woman known with her twin as the bird ladies for their work to save pigeons endangered by a nearby nuclear plant; and a retired labor organizer from the plant who was out on a bicycle.Switching from main roads to country lanes as police helicopters tried to track him down, the killer drove   nearly 40 miles before crashing his car, fleeing on foot and  shooting himself in a woodland that friends said was one of his favorite places. The police said that in addition to the 12 people he killed, 11 others were wounded. Eight remained  hospitalized on Thursday.After two previous mass killings  —  one in the southern English town of Hungerford in 1987 that killed 16 people, and another in the Scottish town of Dunblane in 1996 that killed 16 children and a teacher  —  Britain’s gun laws were radically overhauled. Officials have claimed  that Britain has some of the world’s toughest legal curbs on the ownership of shotguns, rifles and handguns, with such tight  restrictions  that members of the Olympic pistol-shooting team have been barred from training in England, Scotland or Wales.Still, many shotguns and rifles remain licensed, mainly to people who can show  that they have valid sporting or work-related reasons for owning them. Current figures show that the total number of licensed firearms includes 1.3 million shotguns and 435,000 rifles and high-powered air guns. Since 1997, handguns have been almost completely banned from private ownership.Those who argue that Britain’s gun laws are already tough enough  —  many of them from the rural hunting communities  that account for a great majority of shotgun and rifle permits  —  have focused on the fact that Mr. Bird had licenses for his weapons, and had passed the police and medical checks, as well as the requirement for character references, that are needed to  obtain licenses. Their argument, with which Mr. Cameron appeared to signal some sympathy, has been that no system of gun licensing, however rigid, will stop an otherwise law-abiding person who experiences some kind of mental or nervous breakdown.