https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/us/braggadocio-in-trump-and-clinton-debate-words-that-sent-viewers-to-the-dictionary.html
‘Braggadocious?’ In Trump and Clinton Debate, Words That Sent Viewers to the Dictionary - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Dictionaries,Merriam-Webster Inc
Sept. 27, 2016
9318
As Donald J. Trump and Hillary Clinton clashed at their first debate on Monday over which one has the “stamina” and “temperament” to be president, more than a few viewers turned to the internet to understand exactly what those words meant.They turned to the website of Merriam-Webster, a dictionary founded in 1828 that now has a thoroughly modern social media presence. The dictionary is wry and sometimes outright snarky on Twitter, such as the time it told a Slate editor this month that “no one cares how you feel” (and got more than 18,000 retweets in the process.)On Monday evening, the company tweeted throughout the debate as viewers in large numbers looked up keywords and phrases used by Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton.Merriam-Webster has been tracking election-related searches throughout the campaign and noting the top performers, including the word “deplorable” after Mrs. Clinton used the word in reference to some Trump supporters and for “skittle” after Donald Trump Jr. compared Syrian refugees to skittles “that would kill you.”So what were the highest performers on Monday night?The dictionary said searches for “temperament” spiked 78 times above the normal hourly average during the debate, after Mr. Trump loudly declared: “I think my strongest asset, maybe by far, is my temperament. I have a winning temperament."• Temperament: noun. “the usual attitude, mood, or behavior of a person or animal.”The dictionary also said that searches for “stamina” jumped after the candidates disagreed over which one of them was more physically up to the job.• Stamina: noun. “great physical or mental strength that allows you to continue doing something for a long time.”But “braggadocio” was the most-searched word on the website for part of the evening, the dictionary said, after Mr. Trump said he did not mean to sound “braggadocious” when discussing his wealth and business dealings.• Braggadocio: noun. “the annoying or exaggerated talk of someone who is trying to sound very proud or brave.”In a statement, the company explained that “braggadocious” is “a dialectical word from 19th-century America” that is so seldom used in 21st-century English that it does not have its own entry in the dictionary. (It means “arrogant,” it said.)Searches for the word “cyber” also spiked after the candidates sparred over the national security implications of hacking and cyberwarfare. Mr. Trump used it as a noun, which, the dictionary says, is frowned upon.• Cyber: adjective. “of, relating to, or involving computers or computer networks.”There was one trending search that was a bit less straightforward than the others: the phrase “stop and frisk,” a policing tactic, which was stopped in New York after it was declared unconstitutional and that critics said disproportionately targeted black and Latino men. Mr. Trump has endorsed it as a crime-fighting tool.The dictionary tweeted a link to the definition while noting that a judge had ruled it to be in violation of the Constitution.• Stop and frisk statute: noun. “a state law that allows a police officer to stop any person without making an arrest based on a reasonable suspicion that the person has committed or is about to commit a crime.”Mr. Trump also seemed to resurrect a word during the debate that had previously inspired puzzlement and mirth because it seemed to be made up: bigly, meaning in a large way. “I’m going to cut taxes bigly, and you’re going to raise taxes bigly,” he seemed to say, though the Federal News Service transcript rendered it as “big league.”There was no immediate information on how “bigly” ranked in search. But for the record, it’s a legitimate adverb, according to the dictionary.