http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/02/world/asia/hong-kong-lawmakers-democracy.html
Hong Kong Government Seeks to Remove 4 More Lawmakers From Office - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Legislatures and Parliaments,China,Law Kwun-chung  Nathan,Lau Siu-lai (1976- ),Leung Kwok-hung,Yiu  Edward (1964- )
Dec. 2, 2016
3465
HONG KONG — Hong Kong’s government drastically escalated a dispute over lawmakers’ oaths of office on Friday, asking a court to disqualify four additional legislators, after an extraordinary intervention last month by Beijing led to the removal of two pro-independence politicians.The pro-Beijing government of Hong Kong filed papers in court arguing that the four lawmakers were ineligible to serve in the 70-member Legislative Council because they had failed to deliver their oaths as set out in Hong Kong law that was strictly prescribed by the National People’s Congress in China early last month, the government said in a statement.A ruling in favor of the government could decimate the ranks of pro-democracy lawmakers and would defy the will of the voters. It could also constitute a drastic breach of the principle of “one country, two systems,” which has allowed this former British colony to maintain a considerable degree of autonomy since Hong Kong was returned to China in 1997.That autonomy includes civil liberties like freedom of speech, an independent court system and a legislature in which half the seats are filled through popular elections.“This is a coup, it’s a challenge to voters’ choice,” James To, a veteran Democratic Party legislator, said at a protest outside the legislature building immediately after the announcement. “This is the greatest challenge Hong Kong has ever faced.”On Oct. 12, two recently elected politicians, Yau Wai-ching and Sixtus Leung, inserted an anti-China snub into their oaths of office, with both swearing allegiance to the “Hong Kong nation” and Ms. Yau adding an obscenity in English.Their oaths were rejected by the Hong Kong legislature, and Beijing followed on Nov. 7 with a ruling that established very narrow guidelines for how lawmakers could take their oaths.A court ruled that Ms. Yau and Mr. Leung must vacate their offices, a judgment upheld on appeal.But Friday’s move by the government seeks to disqualify four lawmakers whose oaths had been accepted, and who are now in office. Each had modified the oaths as a form of protest against Beijing, though none went as far as Ms. Yau or Mr. Leung in expressing support for independence.One, Nathan Law, 23, a leader of the 2014 pro-democracy protests and the youngest person ever to serve in the Legislative Council, prefaced his oath by saying that he would never be loyal to a “regime that murders its own people.”Another lawmaker, Lau Siu-lai, read her oath very slowly, taking more than 10 minutes, pausing after each word. Leung Kwok-hung, also known as Long Hair, opened a yellow umbrella, a symbol of the 2014 protests.The fourth legislator named in the government suit, Edward Yiu, ended his oath of office by saying that he would fight for “genuine universal suffrage” and “sustainable development.”“The government stresses that the decision to initiate legal proceedings was purely a decision based on legal and implementation consideration, without any political consideration,” the official statement said.Hong Kong’s courts, unlike those in mainland China, are known for their independence. The government’s case, filed as courts were about to close for the weekend on Friday afternoon, is by no means guaranteed to prevail.The lawmakers’ oaths were validated by the secretary of the Legislative Council weeks before Beijing’s ruling.While Friday’s request for a so-called judicial review is from the Hong Kong government, it comes after a senior mainland official said last month that the new interpretation by Beijing meant that as many as 15 Hong Kong lawmakers could be disqualified, while another detailed what kind of oaths would be considered “insincere,” the South China Morning Post reported.“It will be open to legal challenge,” Regina Ip, a prominent pro-Beijing legislator, said in a text message, adding that she thought this round of requests for judicial reviews was “likely to be the last batch.”But Michael Tien, a pro-Beijing lawmaker who is also a member of the National People’s Congress, effectively a rubber-stamp Parliament, said in a text message Friday evening that it was his understanding that Beijing wanted to remove only Ms. Yau, Sixtus Leung and Ms. Lau, who had already been named by the government as a likely target.Mr. Tien said he suspected that the move against the three lawmakers was a way for the city’s top official, Leung Chun-ying, to burnish his credentials with Beijing before next year’s selection process for chief executive, his post. Mr. Leung can seek a second five-year term.Mr. Law echoed that sentiment.“This is so nakedly C. Y. Leung’s political operation, trying to overturn the election results in September, and part of his re-election campaign to prove his loyalty to the Chinese Communist Party with his heavy-handed governance,” he told reporters at the protest on Friday evening.