http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/11/business/unilever-sues-a-start-up-over-mayonnaise-like-product.html
Hellmann’s Maker Sues Company Over Its Just Mayo Substitute Mayonnaise - The New York Times
Mayonnaise,Hampton Creek Foods,Unilever NV,Food and Drug Administration,Suits and Litigation (Civil)
Nov. 10, 2014
7516
Is mayo mayonnaise if it doesn’t contain eggs?The food giant Unilever thinks not. And it is suing Hampton Creek, a start-up company making an eggless spread that tastes like mayonnaise, accusing it of false advertising and fraud.Hampton Creek, whose investors include Bill Gates, the Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing and prominent venture capitalists, replaces eggs with yellow peas in its spread, which is called Just Mayo.In its lawsuit, Unilever contends that Just Mayo is denting sales of its popular mayonnaise products, known as Hellmann’s in the East and Best Foods west of the Rockies.Just Mayo has rapidly won distribution in giant retail and grocery chains like Target and Walmart, and Hampton recently began selling Just Cookies, an eggless, dairy-free cookie dough in four varieties.Just Mayo’s label features a white egg cracked by a pea shoot, which Unilever contends violates federal law governing trademarks and advertising claims by giving consumers the false impression that the product contains eggs.Unilever said Just Mayo lacked testing to back up the claim on its Facebook page that it beat Hellmann’s in a taste test.And Unilever said that Just Mayo failed to meet the Food and Drug Administration’s definition of mayonnaise as an emulsion of vegetable oil, an acid like vinegar or lemon juice and an ingredient containing egg yolks. Thus, Miracle Whip, made by Kraft Foods, calls itself a spread or salad dressing.Michele Simon, a lawyer who blogs about food issues and policy at eatdrinkpolitics.com, wrote that the F.D.A. standard was set in 1957 and needed updating. “It’s not Hampton Creek’s fault if its innovation is outpacing federal regulations,” Ms. Simon wrote on Sunday evening. “That’s par for the course in almost any technology-driven industry.”Unilever wants Hampton Creek, a private company that does not disclose its financial statements, to pay three times its profit in damages plus the legal fees of the plaintiff, a $60 billion company. It also is asking the court to require Hampton Creek to stop using the egg on its label; recall all products, ads and promotional materials that might confuse consumers; and stop claiming that Just Mayo is superior to Hellmann’s or Best Foods.In an interview, Josh Tetrick, Hampton Creek’s founder, said the lawsuit was symptomatic of a bigger problem in the food business. “This is about something a whole lot larger than our advertising and speaks to the change we need in food production generally,” he said. “We’ve got to figure out a way to solve the big problems like food’s impact on environment and health.”He said his company had sought legal advice before calling the product Just Mayo and noted that Boulder Brands, another up-and-coming food business, has a product on the market called Mindful Mayo that also does not contain eggs.He said he was surprised that Unilever, which is promoting a new sustainability program called Project Sunlight, was the company suing Hampton Creek. “If you look at what Paul Polman, their C.E.O., says about sustainability requiring radical transformation and entirely new business models, I do think Unilever is on the front lines of getting it,” he said.Unilever did not immediately respond Monday to requests for comment.Andrew Zimmern, a television chef who is a fan of Just Mayo, started a petition online at Change.org on Sunday, asking Unilever to “stop bullying” small companies. By Monday morning, it had more than 10,000 supporters.