https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/06/world/asia/donald-tsang-former-hong-kong-chief-executive-misconduct.html
Former Hong Kong Leader Is Charged With Misconduct - The New York Times
Tsang  Donald,Hong Kong,Corruption (Institutional),Shenzhen (China),Ethics and Official Misconduct
Oct. 5, 2015
7886
HONG KONG — Donald Tsang, a former leader of Hong Kong, has been charged with two counts of misconduct in public office, the city’s anticorruption agency announced on Monday.The prosecution of Mr. Tsang, the highest-ranking official ever to face a corruption trial in this former British colony, once again brought attention to the cozy ties between top government officials and wealthy businessmen.The charges against Mr. Tsang concern a luxury apartment he leased in the neighboring Chinese city of Shenzhen from the Chinese property developer Wong Cho-bau. Mr. Wong’s company Wave Media Limited was applying for a broadcasting license that Mr. Tsang’s government approved, according to a statement from the Justice Department.Mr. Tsang “willfully misconducted himself” by failing to declare the lease negotiations and a related payment of 800,000 renminbi, or $125,900, to a company of Mr. Wong’s, according to the first charge. The second charge says that Mr. Tsang failed to disclose that an architect he nominated for official honors had been hired to redecorate that Shenzhen apartment.Each charge carries a maximum sentence of seven years.In a brief statement, Mr. Tsang said that his “conscience is clear” and that he had “every confidence” that the court would prove his innocence. He heard the charges against him at Eastern Magistrates’ Courts on Monday afternoon and is set to return to court on Nov. 13.Mr. Tsang, who will turn 71 on Wednesday, was the second chief executive of Hong Kong since it returned to Chinese rule, serving from 2005 to 2012. Local news outlets have reported that Mr. Tsang received favors from business tycoons, including lavish overseas trips on a private jet. In a statement, the Justice Department said that “there is no sufficient evidence” to justify criminal prosecution over these allegations, without specifying them.In December, Rafael Hui, Mr. Tsang’s deputy, was convicted of corruption, in a blow to the city’s reputation for clean government. Mr. Hui, who served from 2005 to 2007 as the No. 2 official in Mr. Tsang’s government, was found guilty of accepting millions of dollars in bribes from the billionaire property tycoon Thomas Kwok, co-chairman of Sun Hung Kai Properties.Mr. Tsang’s successor, the current chief executive Leung Chun-ying, was accused by political opponents last October of conflicts of interest for accepting payments of $6.4 million from an Australian engineering company while in office. Mr. Leung’s office said that the payments, as part of “a standard non-poach, noncompete arrangement,” were agreed on before his election and has denied wrongdoing.