https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/31/us/charleston-dylann-roof-walter-scott.html
A Somber Charleston Reflects on Race as 2 Murder Trials Begin - The New York Times
Charleston  SC  Shooting (2015),Race and Ethnicity,Roof  Dylann Storm,Slager  Michael T (1981- ),Charleston (SC),South Carolina,Haley  Nikki R,Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Blacks,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,North Charleston (SC)
Oct. 30, 2016
7348
CHARLESTON, S.C. — Seventy-four days separated the fatal bursts of gunfire: the eight rounds a white police officer fired at Walter L. Scott, a black man in North Charleston, and then the shots that killed nine black churchgoers at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church here.And now, seven days will separate the trials of the officer, Michael T. Slager, and of Dylann S. Roof, the white supremacist accused of carrying out the church killings.Jury selection in the state trial of Mr. Slager, who was fired after the shooting, will begin on Monday; one week later, the same process is scheduled to begin in the federal case of Mr. Roof. Prosecutors, who are seeking the death penalty for Mr. Roof, rebuffed his offer to plead guilty.The proceedings — unusual in a country where, for different reasons, few police officers or mass killers stand trial — will draw renewed attention to, and more reflection within, the Charleston area, where many residents still struggle with killings that rattled the nation.In separate interviews, five South Carolinians reflected on the looming trials; how the killings reshaped this region, its policies and its views on race; and the decision to remove the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the South Carolina State House.The interviews have been condensed and edited.Presiding elder, Beaufort District of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and first vice president, Charleston branch of the N.A.A.C.P.I think people are waiting to see what happens with the trials. On the one hand, you’ve got two very cut-and-dry things that happened. There should be very little question of how these trials are going to come out. Then you look at Eric Garner. You look at Tamir Rice. You look at George Zimmerman and Trayvon Martin.Guilty verdicts will mean that justice will be done. I don’t minimize the impact of a white police officer being found guilty for killing a black man, but it doesn’t mean that’s suddenly going to happen in all cases.I don’t think anybody’s expecting that the bells will ring and the angels will sing and suddenly the walls of race will fall. For some idiots, the walls will get a little bit stronger.The jury’s still out on whether there’s been any substantive change or whether we’ve just had one protracted Kumbaya party. The longer it goes, the more it looks like a long, protracted Kumbaya party.There was almost a collective sigh of white relief when those families went to court and said, ‘I forgive you,’ not understanding that for black folks in the antebellum South and beyond, forgiveness is a coping mechanism because you can’t do what you’d like to do. They don’t understand that forgiveness does not do away with culpability.There have been acts of good will, but there’s been no dealing with the core issues that led to either of those tragedies.Governor of South CarolinaThere was a time where those tragedies haunted me, and I think they always will to a point. But more what I take away from those is how the people of South Carolina responded and, more important, how the families responded.During the time was hard. The anniversaries were hard, and now going through the trials will once again be hard. It’s going to be difficult to hear it again and to get the details out again and all of that.I was chatting with Felicia Sanders — she was the mother of Tywanza Sanders, who died at Emanuel — the other night. I hate that she’s got to look at those pictures. I hate that she’s got to relive something that she lived through. She was in that room. I mean, she watched her son get shot where he said to him [Mr. Roof]: ‘We mean no harm to you. You don’t have to do this.’And she lay on her granddaughter and told her to play dead, all while she watched her son defend her Aunt Susie, and both were killed. You look at just that one person going through all of that and then having to relive it again. That’s the painful part.But I think people will once again be reminded of the love and grace that was shown by all of the families in all of those cases. That, I think, was the defining moment for so much of what happened.I refuse to believe that the country didn’t take anything away from it. We felt it, and it was the entire country that watched it. And I think that the reason that people are frustrated about everything that’s going on now is because they saw that goodness, and they saw that if it can happen in South Carolina, it can happen everywhere.Lawyer and Civil War re-enactorThe police officer thought he was doing his duty and doing his job. Did it right, did it wrong, the jury will decide. That’s a distinction: You’ve got Roof, who sits in a church, a place of peace, a place of tranquillity, with a number of people wanting to do good, and he gets up and shoots them.He’s in a category by himself. I don’t think there’s anybody else other than Hitler that might be in that same category.This was such a horrendous act, but the battle flag didn’t cause a demented mind like that to do it. He would have done it anyway.The flag, to me, represents the Army of Northern Virginia, and that was their battle flag. It represents, to me, the soldiers who made the sacrifice on this side, and I think that deserves to be honored.The flag coming down was just spontaneous, and I disagree with it. I disagreed with it then. There will be other symbols that somebody else will probably use to try to kill a bunch of people, but I don’t think that’s an answer. I don’t think that stops this kind of a mind.I’ll be interested to see how they resolve whether Roof’s going to be executed or not. I just don’t think he needs to be on this earth. He needs to go to where he’s supposed to be. I feel that way, and I never have felt that way quite so much in any situation where there’s a trial and there’s a question of execution. I’ll be glad, and I think everyone else will be glad, when it’s over.Defense lawyer for Mr. Slager, and lawyer for the Emanuel survivors and many family membersA crisis creates recognition of problems that we don’t necessarily want to talk about. Racial issues, whether we admit it or not, dominate our lives wherever we live in this country, and not just in times of crisis.The South, particularly the middle- and upper-middle-class South, has always prided itself on politeness. So it’s unpleasant to speak about racial divides, because it’s much easier not to face the reality of how race relations embed themselves in almost every decision we make every day.It came home in two very violent episodes in 2015. In many ways, I’m happy about it. Not that 10 people had to die to have these trials happen, but I’m grateful that there was a motivation for everybody to get out from under the bed and to face the reality. Not that somebody’s threatened next week in church, not that somebody in the minority community is going to be shot next week, but to say: ‘Hey, what about our prisons that are full of minorities? What about the educational system that doesn’t accommodate all sectors of the community?’We can’t pat ourselves on the back that taking down the flag is more than being symbolic. It’s almost like having a black president and patting yourself on the back and saying, ‘Oh boy, aren’t we a wonderful country?’ We don’t want this reaction to these horrible events to be symbolic and not have real meaning and change for everything.Maybe this is just one little prick for the community that stimulates long-term, material change, and not just window-dressing.Brother of Walter ScottIt’s going to be a tough time for Charleston, and we must remain calm and let justice play itself out.It’s not like I think about what happened April 4 every day. But I do think about Walter almost on a daily basis, and I try to not reflect so much on the fact of how he died, but, you know, missing him, missing his presence.When I think about him and what has actually happened, then the pain comes, and I think about justice for him. I think that I just can’t let this rest.We were making great progress. It was being seen. It was being heard. And now that we have Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton battling the way they are, it has been drowned out. It’s not something that we can drown away. It’s not something that we can hide away.The biggest test will not be Roof’s trial, but Slager’s, because they’re trying to get him off. I definitely think hate was involved in both, and coming from both of those individuals. I think that we will see, based on these trials, exactly the character of the people of Charleston, S.C.We’re ready to go. I know it’s going to be long. I know it’s going to be draining — physically, mentally, all of that. But we’re ready for it. We’re ready to face it.