http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/09/world/middleeast/saudi-activists-call-for-the-release-of-women-detained-for-driving.html
Saudi Activists Call for the Release of Women Detained for Driving - The New York Times
Saudi Arabia,Women's Rights,Drivers Licenses,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,United Arab Emirates,Social Media
Dec. 8, 2014
8293
Saudi activists appealed to their country’s ruler on Monday to free two women who were detained last week after taking part in an ongoing campaign to challenge the conservative kingdom’s ban on “driving while female.”In their open letter to the 90-year-old King Abdullah, the activists behind the Oct. 26 Driving campaign said that Loujain al-Hathloul and Maysaa al-Amoudi, who both have valid driver’s licenses from the United Arab Emirates, were arrested on Dec. 1 at a border crossing between Saudi Arabia and U.A.E. after they were tricked by the authorities. Relatives said that their detentions were extended by at least 25 more days on Sunday.Ms. Hathloul was arrested after she drove from U.A.E. to the Saudi border to highlight what activists call the absurdity of a Saudi woman not being allowed to drive her own car into her native land.On her journey, Ms. Hathloul recorded video of herself behind the wheel that has drawn nearly 1 million views since it was posted on YouTube.When she arrived at the border, she asked the border guard to be allowed into Saudi Arabia. The guards confiscated Ms. Hathloul’s passport and forced her to wait overnight in her car.After she chronicled her ordeal on Facebook, and told readers of her Twitter feed that she was cold and hungry, another Saudi national living in the U.A.E., Ms. Amoudi, drove to the border to bring supplies to Ms. Hathloul.According to the activists behind the driving campaign, after some time, “both Loujain and Maysaa were ordered to drive their cars through into Saudi soil,” on the understanding that they would have to make U-turns and return to the Emirates. As soon as they crossed the border into Saudi Arabia, however, “they found officers and prison guards waiting to arrest them.”Following the detention of the two women, activists uploaded video clips to YouTube of more female drivers on the roads of the kingdom and defiant calls to lift the driving ban on Saudi women.In the face of continued civil disobedience, the Saudi king’s advisory council recommended last month that the government lift the ban on female drivers, The Associated Press reported, “but only for women over 30, who must be off the road by 8 p.m., cannot wear makeup behind the wheel and require a male relative’s permission.”As the Saudi journalist Ahmed Al Omran noted, however, local news outlets disputed the notion that relaxing the ban was even up for discussion.