https://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/14/fashion/skin-deep-can-a-fragrance-attract-romance.html
Skin Deep: Can a Fragrance Attract Romance? - The New York Times
Perfumes and Fragrances,Smells and Odors,Smell (Olfaction),Genetics and Heredity
July 13, 2011
3988
IS it the olfactory equivalent of a little red dress?Eau Flirt, an electric-green elixir that sells for $12 to $98, is billed by its manufacturer, the company Harvey Prince, as “the world’s first perfume clinically proven to make men flirt with women.”Inspired by an independent study conducted by the Smell and Taste Treatment and Research Foundation in Chicago that found that men became sexually aroused when sniffing a combination of pumpkin pie and lavender, Eau Flirt is but one player in a longstanding category of fragrances marketed specifically as romantic attractants. Some are all natural; others say they contain pheromones. All of them claim to make the wearer irresistible.Are we being doused with science or marketing hype? Perhaps both.“There’s really nothing that you can spray on and the opposite sex will fall for you,” said Dr. Johan Lundstrom, an assistant member of the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia. “It’s completely a placebo effect.”That doesn’t mean fragrances can’t be bewitching. At Barneys New York last week, Dr. Leslie B. Vosshall, a professor and head of the laboratory of neurogenetics and behavior at Rockefeller University, introduced a reporter to an array of provocative perfumes to underscore that smell can “put us in the mood like no other sense.”There are a number of variables. One man’s love potion is another man’s mood killer, since smell is closely tied to memory and emotion. So your reaction to a fragrance is mediated by your experience with it: the perfume of your first love, the aroma of your mother’s apple pie, the smell of the meat that gave you food poisoning.Also, fragrances unfold differently on different people. Where they are applied, the temperature of your skin (which then interacts with your body’s bacteria) and your biology (including eating habits) all affect the smell.Genetics play a role, too; some people are simply born with a less powerful sense of smell. At the World Science Festival in New York last month, Dr. Vosshall and colleagues asked the audience to sniff galaxolide (a synthetic musk put into many laundry products) and to shout out what it smelled like. Nearly everyone yelled “laundry!” But about 10 percent of the audience was unable to smell anything.In general, fragrances considered sexy are based on musk, an odor taken from a sac beneath the abdominal skin of the male musk deer or, more often, created synthetically. “Musk ends up being a really good proxy for sex because everyone agrees it has an animal undertone,” said Dr. Vosshall, who is also an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in New York.Eau Flirt doesn’t contain synthetics, but it uses ingredients like pumpkin, lavender and licorice, shown to increase penile blood flow. Researchers at the Chicago foundation asked men attached to a plethysmograph, a device measuring changes in volume in various parts of the body, to sniff 30 odors. All of the smells aroused them, with the combination of lavender and pumpkin pie having the greatest effect (increasing blood flow 40 percent), followed by doughnuts and black licorice (a 31.5 percent blood-flow increase).The researchers did note in their findings that there could be many explanations for the men’s arousal. The odors might have reminded them of a favorite food. Or a steamy sexual partner. Or perhaps the odors simply made them feel relaxed.“It may seem like a leap to make, that a scent can evoke a romantic response,” said Shaan K. Hathiramani, a founder with his brother, Raj K. Hathiramani, of Harvey Prince. “It’s all in good humor.”Indeed, scientists say that the fragrance most likely to make you feel sexy (and to make other people think you’re sexy) is one that puts you in a good mood.It might not even be marketed to your gender. “If we were having this conversation 300 years ago, I don’t think we’d have the same rules about what’s male and what’s female,” Dr. Vosshall said. “It’s totally arbitrary, totally cultural.” And plenty of consumers don’t abide by it. “There’s a lot of covert cross-dressing in perfume wearing,” she said.Another trend in perfume-making is bottling so-called pheromones, chemical substances that some animals secrete to send information to and produce responses in one another. When a male moth gets a whiff of a female moth’s pheromones, he flies through the dark to mate with her.But “in humans there’s nothing like this,” said Dr. Catherine Dulac, chairwoman of the department of molecular and cellular biology at Harvard and an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. “All we can say is there might be chemicals that somehow modulate behavior.”Research by the Swiss biologist Claus Wedekind and other scholars suggest that humans have an unconscious mechanism to select a suitable genetic mate. Women who sniffed men’s sweaty T-shirts were more attracted to the smell of men whose immune-system genes were most dissimilar from their own and, thereby, increasing their chances of producing offspring with strong immune systems. “Women have to be sharpshooters,” said Dr. Lundstrom, also an adjunct assistant professor in the department of clinical neuroscience at Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm as well as in the department of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania. “In almost all species, it’s the female who is picking her partner.”Fragrances that say they contain pheromones usually include androstenone and androstadienone — sex steroid-derived odor produced in sweat and urine. Dr. Lundstrom said half the population could not smell them, while the rest likened the smell to mold or cat urine. So even if the chemicals are effective (which is debatable), fragrance companies can’t put much of them into a product. “I would say you have a fairly good chance of getting rejected” when wearing these scents, Dr. Lundstrom said.Dr. Dulac of Harvard thinks that what people really love about the idea of animal pheromones is the mystery, a “je ne sais quoi that one cannot detect.”While humans appear to be drawn to this animal ability, animals are in turn drawn to some human innovations. For the last few years Dr. Patrick Thomas, general curator of the Wildlife Conservation Society Bronx Zoo, said that he and his colleagues had kept big cats intrigued by spraying musk-based perfumes in their exhibits. The favorite scent of lions and tigers? Calvin Klein Obsession for Men.