https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/15/nyregion/peter-liang-former-new-york-officer-akai-gurley-killing-in-brooklyn.html
Ruling Juror Didn’t Lie, Judge Upholds Ex-Officer’s Conviction in Stairwell Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Gurley  Akai,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Jury System,Vargas  Michael,Chun  Danny K,Brooklyn (NYC),Decisions and Verdicts,New York City
April 14, 2016
7377
Finding that a juror had not lied to get himself impaneled at the trial, a judge denied a motion on Thursday to overturn the conviction of Peter Liang, the former New York City police officer found guilty in February of fatally shooting Akai Gurley in a housing project stairwell.The ruling from the bench by Justice Danny K. Chun drew to a close a bizarre interlude that threatened to upend the prominent police misconduct case on the eve of Mr. Liang’s sentencing, now scheduled for Tuesday.After a two-day hearing during which the juror, Michael Vargas, was questioned about his antipolice beliefs and whether he had hidden his father’s criminal past in order to be placed on Mr. Liang’s jury, Justice Chun decided that Mr. Vargas had not acted improperly by offering confusing statements about his father and that, at any rate, none of what he said had affected the guilty verdict.After the ruling, the Brooklyn district attorney’s office issued a brief statement saying that it agreed with Justice Chun’s decision. Paul Shechtman, Mr. Liang’s lawyer, declined to comment.In a typical criminal trial, the role of jurors like Mr. Vargas, a 62-year-old retired carpenter, is to stand in judgment of defendants. But at a hearing in this case, which from the start has been anything but typical, Mr. Vargas was himself a kind of defendant.For several hours on Wednesday and Thursday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, he was grilled by Mr. Shechtman at what amounted to a miniature post-trial trial. This minitrial itself was caused by a newspaper article.Last month, the district attorney, Ken Thompson, recommended that Mr. Liang, a rookie officer, should face probation, not time in prison, for his conviction on manslaughter and official misconduct charges. After that decision, The Daily News published an article quoting Mr. Vargas as saying that the punishment — or lack of it — was “a slap on the wrist” and that his father, Norberto Vargas Sr., had once served seven years in prison for an accidental shooting, a crime oddly similar to Mr. Liang’s.Those quotes did not neatly fit with the fact that during jury selection Mr. Vargas told Justice Chun that none of his close relatives had ever been accused of a crime. Adding to the confusion, Mr. Vargas that same day told a different judge who was interviewing him as a juror that a member of his family had indeed once been arrested — which is to say, his father.In a manner that even Justice Chun called “rambling,” Mr. Vargas explained his shifting statements at the hearing by suggesting that he had answered the questions literally: someone in his “family” had been arrested, but no “close relatives” had suffered the same fate. Despite their biological closeness, he went on, he had never been emotionally close to his father, having been raised in a series of church-run orphanages and boys’ homes.It was both remarkable and in keeping with the twisting, turning trial that for two days, there remained the possibility that one of the biggest police shooting cases in recent city history could have been thrown out because of the definition of the word “close.”Though Justice Chun formally precluded that from happening, Mr. Shechtman did not help his own case by drifting away from the central issue — whether Mr. Vargas had in fact lied his way onto the panel as a so-called stealth juror — into a sustained attack on several antipolice messages that the juror had posted onto Facebook. On Thursday, after the ninth or 10th example of these posts, Justice Chun lost his patience.“Mr. Shechtman,” he said with obvious irritation, “is it on the basis of the juror’s Facebook posts that you want this court to set aside the verdict? That’s all you have? Move on!”So Mr. Shechtman did, ceding the floor to Joseph Alexis, an assistant district attorney, who defended Mr. Vargas by noting that he had also posted on Facebook several photographs in support of the police. As for Mr. Vargas’s nuanced descriptions of his father’s criminal history, those were not lies, Mr. Alexis said, but statements that showed “the complex emotions and complexities of this case.”In all of the complexity, however, one thing on Thursday was certain. The name Akai Gurley, the victim in the case, was never once mentioned in court.