http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/22/world/asia/china-bosss-fall-puts-focus-on-business-ally.html
China Boss’s Fall Puts Focus on a Business Ally - The New York Times
China,Communist Party of China,Bo Xilai,Xu Ming,Wen Jiabao,Wu Yi,Corruption (Institutional)
Aug. 21, 2013
7569
SHANGHAI — For years, Xu Ming, once a little-known entrepreneur from northeastern China, worked his way into the good graces of the families of China’s political elite.He cared for the parents and children of the powerful, accompanied officials on foreign trips and enriched their relatives — as well as himself — through early investments in businesses that eventually went public.Mr. Xu, however, is now in custody, and one of his most important relationships has become a central piece of evidence in the much-anticipated trial of the former Politburo member Bo Xilai, which began Thursday morning, according to a microblog post by the court.Mr. Xu, who is 42, funneled millions of dollars in bribes to Mr. Bo and his family, including paying for trips and perhaps even giving the family a $3.5 million villa on the French Riviera, according to people briefed on the indictment against Mr. Bo that was read by the prosecution when the trial got under way.Those charges — along with accusations that Mr. Bo abused power by obstructing a murder investigation — could result in a lengthy prison term for Mr. Bo, the son of a Communist revolutionary and once a top Chinese leader whose fall from power last year shook the political establishment.But the Communist Party’s decision to rely on evidence linked to the businessman could also be risky, analysts say, because Mr. Bo was by no means Mr. Xu’s only political patron.Although the trial itself was closed to the public and its proceedings expected to be released only selectively by the state news media, judicial scrutiny of how broad political connections can greatly enrich an otherwise obscure businessman could prove delicate to more than one member of the Chinese leadership — and raise questions about whether Mr. Xu’s ties to other leaders should receive legal scrutiny.There have been no publicly announced charges against Mr. Xu, and there is no evidence that his links to other prominent political clans included the kind of direct payments he was alleged to have made to Mr. Bo. But according to public records obtained by The New York Times, Mr. Xu had close business and personal ties to family members of several senior Chinese officials, including the former prime minister, Wen Jiabao, who was one of Mr. Bo’s chief political rivals.Mr. Xu had unusual access to the homes of Beijing leaders, offered to care for some of their parents and even traveled with some of them on official visits abroad, according to longtime business partners of Mr. Xu’s and government travel records.In 2002, for instance, he accompanied Wu Yi, then state councilor, on a trip to the Middle East. Back home, visitors to his company, Dalian Shide, included the then-Politburo members Huang Ju and Li Changchun.And beginning in the late 1990s, Mr. Xu co-invested in a series of private companies with the relatives of Mr. Wen, who retired last March. Mr. Xu for a time even dated Mr. Wen’s only daughter, Wen Ruchun, according to close associates.“He was a public relations genius,” said Larry Cheng, one of Mr. Xu’s longtime business partners. “He was helping everyone in the leadership. He knew just who to get close to and how to do it.”Mr. Xu and members of the Wen family could not be reached for comment. But Mr. Xu’s ability to curry favor with China’s ruling elite shines a light on how some business gets done in this country’s tightly regulated economy.To get access to land, licenses and capital, Chinese entrepreneurs say they are expected to cater to the needs of Communist Party officials and their families. That can mean paying school tuition, entertaining spouses and giving corporate shares to the relatives of public officials.But it also makes them vulnerable when an official they are close to gets forced out in a power struggle and is accused of corruption.“To be a successful businessman in China you need to play the game, and even corrupt an official, which makes you very vulnerable,” said Chen Zhiwu, a professor of finance at Yale University. “If you don’t cooperate with them, you won’t succeed. Those are the choices you have in a system where government power is unchecked.”Mr. Xu, a paunchy, soft-spoken billionaire, was detained last spring, shortly after the authorities removed Bo Xilai from his post as party chief in the central Chinese city of Chongqing.“He was a very nice guy when I met him in 2000,” said Hu Kun, a former insurance executive. “He was just about 30 years old, but he was clearly in charge. And when approval was needed for a license, he just picked up the phone and called the Shanghai party secretary’s office. Then he said, ‘It’s done!’ And we ate dinner.”Xu Ming grew up in a village in Liaoning Province in northeast China and studied at a small aerospace college before finding work near Dalian, for a company that exported shrimp to Japan, according to China’s state-run media.Soon after, in the early 1990s, he formed Dalian Shide and won local government contracts to beautify the city under Mr. Bo, who served as mayor between 1992 and 2000.By the age of 28, Mr. Xu was a multimillionaire and controlled a company that was expanding into plastics, chemicals, home appliances and real estate.In Dalian, his connection to Mr. Bo was unmistakable. One of his top executives at Dalian Shide had worked as a close aide to Mr. Bo when he later served as Liaoning’s governor. Mr. Xu also had indirect business ties to the family after he formed a consulting firm with Mr. Cheng, the businessman. At the same time, Mr. Cheng was serving as a business partner to Mr. Bo’s wife, Gu Kailai, a lawyer.And when Ms. Gu and her young son, Bo Guagua, traveled to Britain to search for a school for the son to attend, Mr. Xu covered all the expenses, according to one of Mr. Xu’s former business partners.Later, as his ambition grew, Mr. Xu began networking with other powerful political figures in Beijing, according to people who worked with him. None of those relationships has come under legal scrutiny, at least publicly. Associates of Mr. Xu, however, say he generally sought to develop deep personal and financial ties with close relatives of senior leaders, the way he did with Mr. Bo.In the late 1990s, for instance, he grew friendly with Zhang Beili, a diamond expert and the wife of Wen Jiabao, who was then vice premier. They worked on the same floor in Beijing’s Ping An Insurance building, according to corporate records and interviews with his former business partners.“Half the office in that Ping An building was Xu Ming, and half was used by Zhang Beili,” one of his former business partners said.While Mr. Xu was dating Wen Ruchun, Mr. Wen’s daughter, he treated Mr. Wen’s only son, Wen Yunsong, like a close friend, his former business associates said.His relations with the Wen family also extended into business.In about 1999, Mr. Xu’s company began making deals with Sino-diamond, a Chinese diamond company that was partly controlled by Mr. Wen’s relatives. Around the same time, Mr. Xu invested in a Dalian diamond mine and in Jiaxing Carbon Fiber, another company partly controlled by Mr. Wen’s relatives, according to shareholder records. (Mr. Xu also served on the Jiaxing’s board of directors with Wen Yunsong.)Mr. Xu also moved into finance. In 2000, he helped found Sino-Life Insurance with a group of companies partly owned by Mr. Wen’s brother-in-law and his mother. Sino-Life later hired Wen Yunsong’s company as its information technology supplier, according to interviews with people familiar with the deal.Insurance investments, including a large stake he acquired in China Pacific Insurance, became the cornerstone of Mr. Xu’s fortune. Forbes estimated that he was China’s eighth wealthiest businessman in 2005.Early on, however, he came under pressure to explain his ties to the Wen family. In 2002, the Far Eastern Economic Review published an article saying that Mr. Xu was the son-in-law of Wen Jiabao.He responded with a terse letter to the editor of the publication, saying: “I am not Vice Premier Wen’s son-in-law. I have no personal relationship with Wen or his family.”The letter was not accurate, but it reflected the delicacy of political and business relationships even in the early days of China’s economic boom.Mr. Xu and Ms. Wen eventually broke off their relationship, people familiar with the couple say. And by most accounts, Mr. Xu began drifting closer to Bo Xilai, his longtime patron from Dalian, who had moved to Beijing as commerce minister, before being named party boss of Chongqing in 2007.When Mr. Bo was detained in March of last year, it was only a matter of time before Xu Ming was also facing detention, given his extensive ties. “Xu Ming’s case made some people nervous,” said Professor Chen at Yale. “But it wasn’t a watershed. Xu Ming was too tied to Bo Xilai, and many businessmen didn’t like Bo Xilai.”