http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/06/world/americas/a-brazilian-campaign-strategist-expands-his-winning-streak.html
A Brazilian Campaign Strategist Expands His Winning Streak - The New York Times
Santana  Joao,Elections,Latin America,Da Silva  Luiz Inacio Lula,Brazil,Chavez  Hugo,Venezuela
April 5, 2013
5661
SÃO PAULO, BrazilFOR decades, presidential elections in Latin America have often involved that well-known fixture in the cable news landscape of the United States: the American political consultant.Back in the 1970s, David Sawyer, a pioneer in the field, worked for the Venezuelan candidate Lorenzo Fernández. (He was trounced.) James Carville, the former Clinton adviser and now media celebrity, worked with Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s successful 1994 campaign for president in Brazil, and Tad Devine, Al Gore’s strategist, helped Manuel Zelaya win Honduras’s presidential election in 2005.But in a development reflecting the waning clout of one powerful nation in the hemisphere and the rising influence of another, Brazilian political consultants have begun to compete handily with their American counterparts, orchestrating campaigns throughout Latin America and beyond. No one exemplifies this shift in the region’s political winds quite like João Santana.In the past year, Mr. Santana, a hypercompetitive 60-year-old former lyricist for an avant-garde rock band who refers to elections as “almost bloody combat,” accomplished the uncommon feat of simultaneously running winning campaigns for three presidents: Danilo Medina, in the Dominican Republic; Hugo Chávez, in Venezuela; and José Eduardo dos Santos, in Angola.Like the American strategists who came before them, Mr. Santana and other Brazilian political consultants also know how to attract controversy. While he was shuttling across the Atlantic to manage campaigns in Latin America and Africa, Mr. Santana was also consolidating his role as one of the most influential behind-the-scenes advisers to Brazil’s ruling Workers Party. His role as a gray eminence has been described by the newsmagazine Veja as “capable of mapping out the weaknesses of adversaries with an acupuncturist’s precision.”Those skills also came into focus in Venezuela, where both Mr. Chávez, who died of cancer last month, and his opponent, Henrique Capriles Radonski, hired Brazilian consultants last year. Some critics of Mr. Chávez contended that it was an unfair race given the state propaganda apparatus at the incumbent’s disposal.One prominent Venezuelan political blog, Caracas Chronicles, went so far as to call Mr. Santana a “Svengali,” recognizing his sway in such races. “It’s airbrush politics at its finest,” said Juan Nagel, an economist and a contributor to the blog, pointing to Mr. Santana’s skill in softening the image of leaders like Mr. Chávez, whose democratic credentials had been challenged.“The Brazilian recipe, never mind that he’s helping elect horrible people, is all about winning,” Mr. Nagel said.In a rare interview here, Mr. Santana hit back at the criticism about his work for Mr. Chávez, saying, “The impact our campaign had among Venezuelan voters speaks for itself.”MORE recently in Venezuela, he said, he is “indirectly assisting” this month’s election bid of Nicolás Maduro, Mr. Chávez’s handpicked heir, without assembling a team in Caracas, the capital. One example of this work is a music video he conceived called “He Will Be Born Again,” portraying Mr. Chávez as a force permeating Venezuelan society.Reflecting his acceptance of clients from across the political spectrum, Mr. Santana said he had also agreed to run the 2014 campaign for the candidate of Panama’s Democratic Change, a center-right party, in addition to establishing a venture in Italy to start managing campaigns in Europe.He described politics as an activity involving theater, music and even religious rites since “primordial” times, and, with a dash of humor, said about his field, “Just as psychoanalysts help people to have sex without guilt, we help people to like politics without remorse.”Before he entered the theater of politics, Mr. Santana viewed such challenges from other angles.Seated at a table reserved for him in Parigi, a restaurant frequented by São Paulo’s elite, he described an unusual trajectory. Born in the interior of Bahia, a state in northeast Brazil, he studied at Jesuit schools. He made an incursion into the world of music as a founder of the cutting-edge rock band Bendegó, before finding his way into journalism.Around that time, Brazil’s long stretch of military rule, from 1964 to 1985, had given way to a boisterous democratic transition. In 1992, as a reporter for the magazine Isto É, Mr. Santana helped secure a landmark scoop: an interview with a Brasília chauffeur who described a corruption scheme that contributed to the impeachment of the president, Fernando Collor de Mello.He left journalism for Brazilian politics as a new field was coalescing for “marqueteiros,” as political marketers, or consultants, are known in Portuguese. Laws forced television networks to cede prime-time space for political advertising, and candidates scrambled to repackage campaign themes into tightly produced commercials in a nation where voting is mandatory.After years of toiling for an array of campaigns, Mr. Santana received his big break in 2005 when Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, tapped him to run his re-election campaign. It was a crucial moment for Mr. da Silva: the approval rating of his government, battered by a vote-buying scandal, had fallen below 30 percent.Mr. Santana helped to reverse that decline, recasting Mr. da Silva as a leader under siege by Brazil’s elites while going on the offensive by claiming that his opponent would revive a program of privatizing state companies. With a boost from an improved economy, Mr. da Silva won in a landslide.Paid well into the millions of dollars for some of his campaigns, Mr. Santana often relies on intense polling of voters, while assembling large teams that include camera operators, film editors and musicians. As Brazil began flexing its soft power under Mr. da Silva, Mr. Santana and other Brazilian consultants found themselves in greater demand.In Peru, Ollanta Humala, a nationalist military figure who lost a 2006 presidential bid when he had to fight off comparisons to Mr. Chávez, hired Brazilian consultants for his 2011 campaign. He won after repositioning himself as a business-friendly moderate, repeatedly pointing to Mr. da Silva as a source of inspiration.STILL, the rise of Brazil’s marqueteiros may involve factors beyond the appeal of Brazil’s governing model, which has come under criticism as President Dilma Rousseff has struggled with an economic slowdown. (Mr. Santana also ran Ms. Rousseff’s 2010 campaign, helping her — a cabinet minister who had never run for office — evolve into a nimble communicator on television.)Taylor C. Boas, a political scientist at Boston University who specializes in Latin American election campaigns, noted that Brazil is a large federal republic with an array of municipal, state and national elections. It shares features, he said, with the United States and Russia, two other nations where political consultants have used domestic campaigns as a springboard for foreign work.“In Latin America, the Brazilians have the advantage of cultural proximity and languages that are not too dissimilar,” Mr. Boas said, referring to Spanish and Portuguese. “And as João Santana has shown repeatedly, they know how to manage sophisticated campaigns, and they know how to win.”Beyond Latin America, Mr. Santana came under scrutiny last year in Angola, the oil-rich nation where Mr. dos Santos, already in power for more than 33 years, spent heavily on his effort to obtain a victory that few doubted. For Mr. Santana, it was an opportunity to establish a foothold in a region shaping up to be a frontier for political consulting as some African economies expand.He said Brazilians held resilient ties to Africa, pointing to studies showing that about 70 percent of the people in Bahia, his home state, have African ancestry, largely from the region that is now Benin. “I am proud to be one of them,” he said. “Our biological and cultural DNA supports our work in Africa.”