https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/15/sports/us-blanks-nicaragua-for-top-spot-in-group.html
U.S. Shuts Out Nicaragua and Takes First Place in Group - The New York Times
United States,Nicaragua,Soccer,International Federation of Association Football (FIFA),World Cup (Soccer),Qatar,Bicycles and Bicycling,Tour de France (Bicycle Race),Automobile Racing,Hamilton  Lewis,Golf,Poulter  Ian,Baseball,Los Angeles Dodgers,Hockey  Ice,New Jersey Devils
July 15, 2017
3725
Matt Miazga scored on a close-range header from Graham Zusi’s free kick in the 88th minute, giving the United States first place in its Concacaf Gold Cup group with a 3-0 victory over Nicaragua on Saturday night in Cleveland.After Panama’s 3-0 win over Martinique, the United States needed a three-goal win to move back over Panama into first place. Joe Corona scored his first international goal in four years in the 37th minute, and Kelyn Rowe doubled the lead in the 56th with his first international goal. The Americans squandered opportunities in the second half when Dom Dwyer and Corona took poor penalty kicks that were easily saved by Justo Lorente.When Zusi took his free kick, the United States had a two-man advantage because Luis Copete had been ejected in the 86th minute for a second yellow card and Luis Galeano was being treated for an injury. Miazga, a Chelsea defender playing in his first international match since May 2016, had an open header near a post and scored his first goal in three national team appearances.The Americans are scheduled to play a quarterfinal match Wednesday in Philadelphia against a third-place team from another group, most likely Honduras, El Salvador or Jamaica.FIFA IS ASKED TO STRIP WORLD CUP FROM QATAR The six Arab countries that cut ties with Qatar last month have asked FIFA, world soccer’s governing body, to strip Qatar of the 2022 World Cup because they consider the country a “base of terrorism.”The Local, a Swiss website, reported that Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Mauritania, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt had collectively written to FIFA asking it to remove Qatar as host under Article 85 of the FIFA Code, which allows for such action in the case of emergency.(REUTERS)MONACO SENDS MIDFIELDER TO CHELSEA Monaco sold the rights to another member of the young squad that thrilled European soccer last season as the French midfielder Tiemoue Bakayoko joined Chelsea, champion of the Premier League. Chelsea did not disclose the fee for Bakayoko, a 22-year-old who has signed a five-year deal.EIGHT KILLED IN STAMPEDE AFTER MATCH Eight people were killed during Senegal’s soccer league final in Dakar in a stampede that broke out after clashes at the end of the match, the official APS news agency said.(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)Fabio Aru fell back in the last 500 meters of Stage 14 of the Tour de France and surrendered the leader’s yellow jersey to Chris Froome.Aru lost touch with the stage leaders in the short, sharp final ascent of the Côte de St.-Pierre in the town Rodez and crossed the line 25 seconds behind Michael Matthews, the stage winner.Froome, who trailed Aru by six seconds at the start of the 112.8-mile stage in Blagnac, was well positioned early and tackled the final climb with ease. He finished close behind Matthews and leads Aru by 18 seconds over all.The Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton took the pole position for the fifth time at the British Grand Prix, ahead of his Ferrari rivals Kimi Raikkonen and Sebastian Vettel.Hamilton sped around the course in Silverstone, England, in 1 minute 26.6 seconds in front of his home fans.FRENCH DRIVER HAS POLE IN TORONTO The French driver Simon Pagenaud took the pole for the IndyCar race Sunday in Toronto. Pagenaud had a track-record lap of 58.9124 seconds at an average speed of 109.138 miles per hour on the 1.786-mile street course for his first pole of the season.BUSCH WINS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE Kyle Busch dominated yet again to win a Nascar Xfinity Series race at New Hampshire Motor Speedway in Loudon.Busch won for the third time this season and the 89th time in his career in the second-tier series. Ryan Preece was second.Ian Poulter controlled his swing, ball and temperament in what he described as “brutally tough conditions” to move in sight of his first worldwide title in four and a half years at the Scottish Open in Irvine.Poulter made three birdies in his first seven holes before battling the worst weather of the week on his back nine, shooting a one-under-par 71. He was tied at nine under over all with his playing partner and fellow Englishman Callum Shinkwin and the Australian Andrew Dodt. SENIOR PLAYERS CHAMPIONSHIP Bernhard Langer shot a bogey-free six-under 66 to take a one-shot lead into the final round in Owings Mills, Md. Langer trailed after 15 holes but made up three strokes over the next two holes to take the lead of a major tournament he has won the last three years. Brandt Jobe shot a 65 to finish the day in second place.JOHN DEERE CLASSIC Patrick Rodgers shot a three-under 68 to maintain a two-stroke lead in Silvis, Ill. Rodgers, a former Stanford star, is trying to become the third player in five years to win the event for his first PGA Tour title.Cody Bellinger became the first Dodgers rookie to hit for the cycle, and Alex Wood became the first Dodgers pitcher in more than a century to win his first 11 decisions in a season, helping Los Angeles beat the host Miami Marlins, 7-1, for an eighth straight victory.Bellinger singled in the first inning, hit a two-run homer in the third and added a run-scoring double in the fourth. His triple barely cleared the glove of right fielder Giancarlo Stanton, who tried to make a running backhanded catch, and Bellinger reached third standing up.RENDON’S SLAM LIFTS NATIONALS Anthony Rendon hit his second career grand slam and added a two-run homer, and the Washington Nationals overcame Scooter Gennett’s four R.B.I. in a 10-7 victory over the Reds in Cincinnati.AROUND THE MAJORS Michael Fulmer (10-6) pitched eight strong innings, winning his fourth straight start, and J. D. Martinez drove in five runs as the Detroit Tigers earned an 11-1 victory at home over the Toronto Blue Jays.  Lance Lynn (8-6) worked six and a third innings and added a rare run-scoring double at the plate as the St. Louis Cardinals cooled off the Pirates, 4-0, in Pittsburgh.  Making his first appearance at Camden Yards since he was traded by Baltimore four years ago, Jake Arrieta (9-7) settled down after a wild start to hold the Orioles to four hits over six and two-thirds innings and lead the Chicago Cubs to a 10-3 win.ASTROS’ KEUCHEL TO BEGIN REHAB STINT Dallas Keuchel, the Houston Astros’ injured ace, is scheduled to begin a rehabilitation assignment with Class AA Corpus Christi on Monday.The Devils signed Nico Hischier, the No. 1 overall draft pick, to the maximum three-year, entry-level contract for salary and performance bonuses. The Devils said that Hischier, an 18-year-old Swiss forward, would have an average salary of $925,000.