http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/01/world/asia/hong-kong-university-votes-against-promoting-johannes-chan.html
Vote at Hong Kong University Stirs Concern Over Beijing’s Influence - The New York Times
Chan  Johannes M M,University of Hong Kong,Appointments and Executive Changes,Communist Party of China,Academic Freedom,Xi Jinping,Hong Kong
Sept. 30, 2015
7802
HONG KONG — According to a well-known adage, academic politics are the most vicious of all because the stakes are so low. But here, a bitter battle over an appointment at the city’s most prestigious university has become the biggest story in town, the subject of passionate debate, candlelight vigils and front-page headlines.Late on Tuesday, the governing council of the University of Hong Kong, in a 12-to-8 vote, rejected a search committee’s proposal to appoint a professor and former dean of the university’s law school, Johannes Chan, to a higher post. In another city, such news might have never left the confines of the campus newspaper.But supporters of Mr. Chan say the vote is the latest sign of the growing influence of mainland China’s authoritarian politics in the vibrant civic life of Hong Kong, where many fear that the semiautonomous city’s cherished freedoms are being eroded. They say Mr. Chan was rejected because of pressure from Beijing.The issue has stirred memories of the monthslong sit-in protests — over a China-approved plan for Hong Kong’s elections — that shut down major thoroughfares in the city last year. One of the leaders of those demonstrations, which began a year ago this week, was Benny Tai, a pro-democracy advocate who was a professor under Mr. Chan at the law school.Mr. Chan, who specializes in human rights and constitutional law, is also a member of a pro-democracy group, Hong Kong 2020. He has been strongly criticized by pro-China news outlets here since he became a likely candidate for promotion, to a post called pro-vice chancellor.In January, two Chinese government-owned newspapers criticized the academic record and performance of Mr. Chan’s department as being below international standards, charges that Mr. Chan rebutted. The newspapers, Ta Kung Pao and Wen Wei Po, used unpublished, leaked documents to support their case.Mr. Chan’s promotion was in the hands of a 22-member committee on which university employees and students are outnumbered by members from outside the university. Six of its members are appointed by Hong Kong’s top official and its chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, an active supporter of Beijing’s policies toward the city. At least five members are delegates to the National People’s Congress in Beijing or its advisory panel, and as such are obligated to support the Communist Party line at the risk of expulsion.The possibility that Communist orthodoxy had swayed the decision was not lost on scholars of Chinese politics. Jerome A. Cohen, a professor at New York University, said the committee’s decision, which was made behind closed doors, employed the Mao-era political tactic of zhengzhi guashuai, or ‘‘politics in command,’’ which places the political imperative — in this case, preventing the promotion of a pro-democracy university official — above all else.“This is very sad news for Hong Kong’s autonomy and freedom,” Mr. Cohen said in a statement.Under a formula called “one country, two systems,” Hong Kong has been allowed to run its own internal affairs and retain its culture of civil liberties — including press freedom, academic freedom, freedom of assembly and rule of law — since its return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997 after more than 150 years as a British colony.But under President Xi Jinping, who came to power in 2012, the Chinese government has been taking a more heavy-handed approach to Hong Kong, emphasizing the “one country” part of that formula. Mr. Xi has sought to stamp out ideas that he sees as a threat to the Communist Party’s more-than-six-decade monopoly of power on the mainland, including the influence of values embraced in Hong Kong.“Xi Jinping is determined to eradicate from China what might be called the ‘seven deadly sins’ of Western values,” Roderick MacFarquhar, a professor at Harvard University who focuses on Chinese history and politics and is currently in Hong Kong, wrote in an e-mail. “Hong Kong is a poster child for those values, and the rejection of an H.K.U. committee’s choice for pro-vice chancellor because the nominee was politically incorrect by Beijing standards is an example of the ongoing battle to whittle away those ‘sins’ where they are most flagrant.”Fears in Hong Kong over the mainland’s growing influence came to a head last year, after the Communist Party-controlled National People’s Congress set down rules for electing the city’s top official that all but ensured that only candidates approved by Beijing could appear on the ballot. That decision prompted the demonstrations that turned parts of the city into protest camps for months.Supporters of Mr. Chan held a candlelight vigil at the university on Tuesday night after the vote against his promotion was announced, and the news dominated local coverage the next day. A Hong Kong lawmaker, Ip Kin-yuen, a member of one of the university’s alumni associations, said in a video posted on his Facebook page that it was “the saddest day for Hong Kong University in the past 100 years.”The council’s deliberations on Tuesday night were confidential, but Billy Fung, one of its two student representatives, released a summary of the meeting on the Internet within hours of the decision. According to Mr. Fung, committee members strongly criticized Mr. Chan, saying he was not qualified for the post because he did not have a Ph.D. or sufficient academic publications, lacked integrity and had only advanced as far as he had professionally because he was a “nice guy.”The council’s chairman, Leong Che-hung, said on Wednesday that the panel might take action against Mr. Fung for his breach of confidentiality. Speaking with reporters on Wednesday, Mr. Chan said that the reasons given by the council members who voted against him, such as his lack of a doctoral degree, went against the judgment of academics on the committee and made “a mockery of the search process.”