https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/28/world/middleeast/taliban-afghanistan-attack-police.html
In Taliban Attacks, a Reminder That Winter Offers Afghans No Mercy - The New York Times
Attacks on Police,Taliban,Afghanistan,Afghan National Security Forces
Feb. 28, 2017
1298
KABUL, Afghanistan — After 16 years, Afghanistan’s long war shows no sign of taking a day off, even in midwinter.On Tuesday, 11 police officers were killed in a Taliban attack in the south, but that was only one in a long and not unusual series of assaults against Afghan security forces. In recent weeks, there have been several episodes in which two or three Afghan police officers were killed.Last year, 10 police officers were killed in one attack, a few days after 17 were killed. On Jan. 31, the Taliban tunneled under an army post in Sangin district and blew it up, killing as many as 20 soldiers.On the face of it, no single attack was that significant in the context of Afghanistan’s long and drawn-out conflict. But the steady accumulation of attacks is a relentless reminder of what it is to be a country torn by war.Winter is no longer the total respite from fighting that it once was. Huge numbers of people are affected. Just during January, 22,000 Afghans were displaced by conflict throughout the country, according to United Nations figures. In all of 2016, that figure was 600,000.The killings of the police officers on Tuesday took place in the southern province of Helmand, which has for the last year been the most violent place in Afghanistan. The Taliban control most of the province, with the government holding on to the provincial capital and crucial strong points, often with the help of heavy American airstrikes.In the attack, according to Gulai Khan, the police security chief for the province, the Taliban overran a police guard post on the outskirts of the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, after a heavy firefight, killing the 11 officers there. They blew up the post and took the victims’ weapons, he said.Not far away, on Highway 1, which links Helmand to Kandahar, the second-largest city in Afghanistan, a police convoy on Tuesday struck a hidden roadside bomb that killed one policeman and wounded three others, according to Omar Zwak, the spokesman for the Helmand governor.Highway 1 is a 1,400-mile-long ring road that circles Afghanistan and connects most of its major cities. Built by Western donors at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars, it is a vital commercial and strategic artery but one that has rarely been free of attacks along large stretches of its route.Five hundred miles farther north along the ring road, an Afghan National Army convoy was ambushed on Monday, between Ghormach in Badghis Province and Maimana in Faryab, with heavy fighting reportedly continuing on Tuesday. The deputy spokesman for the Defense Ministry, Gen. Mohammad Radmanish, said officials responded quickly and prevented any loss of life.The fighting in the north this week illustrates how the war in recent years has shifted from its previous focus, in the south and east, to new fronts in most northern provinces.In the district of Doshi in Baghlan Province, where Highway 1 turns south toward Kabul and the solidly pro-government Shomali Plain, 150 Taliban fighters captured 12 small villages near the highway, according to Maulavi Rahimullah, the head of the Doshi community council. He said they had bested a smaller Afghan local police contingent, which fled the villages.The district governor, Faiz Mohammad, said that security forces had beaten back two Taliban assaults on Tuesday, but that fighting was continuing.Farther north, in restive Kunduz Province, where the Taliban have twice overrun the capital city in the last year and a half, the government had some welcome news for a change. On several previous occasions, officials reported the death of the Taliban’s shadow governor for the province, Mullah Abdul Salam, and they made that claim again on Monday, saying he was killed with eight other militants during an American airstrike in Dashte Archi district.The report gained added credibility when the Taliban also confirmed the leader’s death.A day later, on Tuesday, the American military posted a news release also confirming that its strike had killed the Taliban official.“Mullah Salam and the Taliban fighters under him murdered and terrorized the people of Kunduz for too long,” Gen. John W. Nicholson, the American commander in Afghanistan, was quoted as saying in the release.It was the first American military news release on the Afghan mission’s website since Feb. 7, as the NATO mission here keeps a much lower profile than in years past, confining itself mostly to air support, training and logistics work, and clandestine special operations missions.General Radmanish, the Defense Ministry spokesman, said the Afghan military had been very active this winter. On Tuesday, it began nine operations, after eight on Monday, he said, part of the more than 600 operations conducted since winter began.He did not give recent casualty figures, but Afghan officials have said that last year 6,287 members of the military and police died and 12,354 were wounded, with more than 500 members of the security forces taken prisoner. A United Nations report issued in February tallied a 3 percent increase in civilian casualties last year, more than 11,000 in all, the fourth year in a row of increases.