https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/world/africa/cecil-lion-hunt-guide.html
Zimbabwe Court Postpones Trial of Guide in Killing of Cecil the Lion - The New York Times
Zimbabwe,Lions,Poaching (Wildlife),Hunting and Trapping,Bronkhorst  Theo,Palmer  Walter J,Safaris,Hwange National Park (Zimbabwe),United States
Aug. 5, 2015
8926
The trial in Zimbabwe of Theo Bronkhorst, the professional hunter accused of failing to prevent the killing of Cecil, a 13-year-old lion, was postponed on Wednesday until Sept. 28, after a request from his lawyer.Mr. Bronkhorst, who runs a safari company, has steadfastly denied that he did anything wrong when he led an American dentist, Dr. Walter J. Palmer, on an expedition that resulted in the killing of the lion, a beloved tourist attraction and the subject of research by academics from Oxford University.The killing provoked a global backlash that forced Dr. Palmer, 55, into hiding.Mr. Bronkhorst appeared at the court in the town of Hwange on Wednesday. His lawyer had asked for the postponement, saying he needed more time to prepare for the case. If convicted, Mr. Bronkhorst would face up to 15 years behind bars.Zimbabwe has been seeking the extradition of Dr. Palmer from the United States. Officials in Zimbabwe say he broke the country’s hunting rules when he used a crossbow and arrow to shoot the lion before eventually killing the animal with a gun. The lion is thought to have been lured out of his protected habitat in Hwange National Park, and his head was taken as a trophy for the hunter.Mr. Bronkhorst told Sky News that the charges against him were “crazy.” Hunting is “an integral part of our country, and it’s got to continue,” he said.“If we do not use wildlife sustainably, there will be no wildlife,” he said.Mr. Bronkhorst said he felt sorry for Dr. Palmer. “He is a good man. He did nothing wrong,” Mr. Bronkhorst said as he left the court, according to Sky News.Dr. Palmer has been targeted by vandals, who wrote “Lion Killer!” on the garage of his vacation home this week in Florida and left pigs’ feet on his drive.A conservation group, the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force, told the BBC that Cecil’s head had been found in Mr. Bronkhorst’s home.Mr. Bronkhorst told the BBC that there had been plans to send the lion’s head to the United States, where Dr. Palmer could have claimed it, but that it was confiscated by the police on July 7 as evidence. He said he wanted the authorities to release the head so it could be mounted in Hwange National Park as a memorial.Cecil’s death has spawned an outpouring of emotion on social media, and reactions to the killing have even spilled into popular culture. Aaron Blaise, an animator who worked on Disney’s “The Lion King,” has created a painting in tribute to the lion.“Look at the stars,” a quotation with the painting says. “The great kings of the past look down upon us from those stars.”