https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/new-novels-depict-valiant-women-of-old-america.html
New Novels Depict Valiant Women of Old America - The New York Times
Books and Literature
July 14, 2017
4421
THE WIDOW NASH By Jamie Harrison 375 pp. Counterpoint, $26.This novel from the daughter of Jim Harrison features a character set loose to wander the American West at the turn of the 20th century, a woman whose early experiences seem drawn from the worldly peregrinations of the era of Henry James. Sweeping and richly hued, “The Widow Nash” follows the adventures of Walton Remfrey, genius engineer, Shakespeare-quoting inventor and mine investor, and his daughter, Leda Cordelia Dulcinea, known throughout as Dulcy, who has served as his traveling companion since she was 15.Father and daughter track earthquakes around the world, his obsession. But Dad has another earthshaking passion — chasing every skirt he sees. Suffering from tertiary syphilis, he nevertheless becomes a male Typhoid Mary of the disease, infecting multitudes, leaving little spirochetes of death in his wake. Dulcy comes to dread the “suctioning sound of bodies on bad mattresses” that emanates from her patriarch’s next-door hotel room. She forgives him; she loves him. “He’d opened the wide world for her,” Harrison writes, “but sluiced away her joy.”The plot is constructed as a treasure tale. In 1904, as the novel begins, Dulcy’s bacillus-addled father leaps out of a Seattle hotel window, leaving behind a mystery as to the whereabouts of a large, recently won fortune. It is up to his 24-year-old daughter to deduce the truth, combing for clues through her father’s mysterious silk-covered notebooks: “The Red Book of Disaster,” “The Deep Yellow Book of Cures” and so on. Soon, though, she’s on the run from a brutal ex-fiancé, Walton’s business partner, Victor Maslingen, who thinks she may have tucked away the millions in question.As the father was distinguished by his adventurousness, so too is his daughter. In flight from Victor, she adopts a new persona, the widow Nash. Press reports declare that Dulcy is dead, a suicide like her father. In fact, she flourishes, making her base the Elite Hotel in Livingston, Mont. There Dulcy joins the genteel Sacajawea Club, takes a writer-lover with “chocolaty hair,” plants an ambitious garden and reinvents herself in the familiarly modern way. Harrison has rendered her imagined world anachronistically, but Henry James might still have approved.THE HALF WIVES By Stacia Pelletier 327 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $26.The old joke: four quarter horses constitute a whole horse. But two half wives don’t make a whole mare. Instead, they yield a very unhappy, very frangible ménage. Pelletier’s novel offers two leading ladies inhabiting San Francisco in the final decade of the 19th century, both in love with the same man. May 22, 1897, is this author’s Bloomsday, with a chapter dedicated to each half-hour up to 3 p.m.Henry and Marilyn Plageman lost a child 14 years earlier when their baby “choked to death in its crib. And with both parents home.” Guilt gnaws at Marilyn’s core. Every year the aggrieved husband and wife throw themselves a pity party, tidying up around the tiny grave and planting exotic flowers they know won’t survive in the cemetery dirt. For this couple, all roads lead to the boneyard.But another child lives and thrives. The 8-year-old’s name is Blue, and she’s the offspring of Henry and his mistress, Lucy Christensen, 17 years his junior. Lucy waits patiently for her beloved in a cottage he bought her, where he visits punctually once a week.At the center of both women’s affections stands the flawed, inexplicable Henry, a lapsed Lutheran pastor who never seems worthy of either of them. Yes, he’s “an overgrown stalk of a man, weighted with intelligence.” Yes, he knows his way around a billet-doux. He’s gruff but gentle, tenderly kissing the hands of his rambunctious, delightful daughter. But Henry is essentially a grumpy old geezer, egoistic, abhorrent, difficult to stomach.How do the two “half wives” fare? Marilyn carries herself like a martyr, working for an orphanage and dreading her husband’s touch. Lucy has a bit more pop: Her youthful energy and even her job as a taxidermist’s assistant make her enthralling to spend time with. The developing San Francisco of the 1890s becomes a rich background for these three as they play out their messy, somber, intertwined fates.THE UNDERGROUND RIVER By Martha Conway 340 pp. Touchstone, $26.99.May Bedloe, Conway’s 22-year-old protagonist, demonstrates a gravitas beyond her years. She will never cheat or tell a lie. She takes everything around her oh so seriously. A smile is almost out of the question. She lives in a troubled time in a morally fraught region of America, two decades before the Civil War in the borderlands between free Ohio and slaveholding Kentucky.May’s existence isn’t made any easier when the steamboat she’s traveling on explodes, leaving bodies strewn across the Ohio River. “My voice seemed to come from my ears,” May says, recalling the catastrophe, “and everything looked like it was outlined in black.” She is rendered destitute along with her cousin, the beauteous actress Comfort Vertue, who is going on 30 and losing a bit of her former luster. Comfort has a tendency to treat May as an indentured servant rather than a traveling companion, loading her down with costumes to freshen and mend. She abandons May altogether when she finds employment as an inspirational speaker with a high-toned abolitionist.Hugo and Helena’s Floating Theatre, a flatboat full of quirky drama queens, takes needy May in, no questions asked. Enter deep-voiced Hugo Cushing, who is equally comfortable as captain and leading man. “Hugo steered the boat with a short front sweep called a gouger. Occasionally he called out names of the sandbars coming up — ‘Petticoat Ripple! Owl Hollow Run!’ — in his thunderous English accent.”An expert seamstress, May comes on board as a stage couturier. “Pushing a needle in and out of a small space always soothes me,” May tells us artlessly. But soon she stumbles into other, more demanding work, ferrying infants born into bondage from one side of the Ohio River to the other in the flimsiest of rowboats. Her rigorous approach to life pays off in this new, terrifying venture. Slave catchers haunt the underground river, but May is clever and staunch, even heroic.Creating a perfectly straight seam finds echoes throughout the book in plot devices and metaphors, even in saving souls, and it may come as a surprise how lively and sustaining this lost art can be. Twain had his “Life on the Mississippi.” Conway’s life on the Ohio makes you see the place, through May’s eyes, in all its muddy glory.