https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/19/world/middleeast/iran-election-president-hassan-rouhani.html
In Iran, Heavy Voter Turnout Seen as a Plus for President Rouhani - The New York Times
Voting and Voters,Elections,Rouhani  Hassan,Raisi  Ebrahim,Iran
May 19, 2017
2688
TEHRAN — Iranians lined up at polling places in such numbers on Friday that Iranian election officials extended the voting three separate times, first by two hours, then four hours and finally five hours.Analysts said the heavy turnout was a good sign for the incumbent, President Hassan Rouhani, a professed moderate who has pursued better relations with the West, against Ebrahim Raisi, a hard-line judge who campaigned as a corruption fighter and called on Iran to solve its own economic problems without help from foreigners.The election is also being interpreted in the West as a gauge of support for the 2015 accord that Iran reached with six world powers, including the United States, to limit its nuclear program. For Iranians, though, the economy and freedom of expression seemed to be bigger issues.In Tehran, the capital, voters in more affluent northern neighborhoods appeared to be showing up in even larger numbers than in 2013, when urban middle-class Iranians across the country helped elect Mr. Rouhani. Voters in those neighborhoods said in interviews that they were attracted to his promises of greater freedom and wanted to block Mr. Raisi.To be victorious, Mr. Raisi would need a strong turnout from voters who live in less-affluent areas and who emphasize piety and ideology. In the city’s poorer southern neighborhoods, there seemed to be less enthusiasm on Friday morning.As the voting took place on Friday, those themes seemed to be borne out.At work in a south Tehran car shop, Hamed Seyedi, 37, said he did not bother to vote. A former member of the basij, the voluntary paramilitary group that supports the hard-liners, he said life had become so hard, he saw no point in voting.“Those people uptown, at least they gain something if Rouhani wins. Some freedoms,” he said. “But for us down here it doesn’t matter who wins. Our lives won’t change.”Mr. Raisi has been trying to attract the votes of these Iranians, the have-nots who feel alienated by Mr. Rouhani and sometimes disappointed by the establishment. He emerged in the campaign as something of a populist, promising cash handouts and solutions to economic problems that seem near magical, his opponents say.But most polling stations in south Tehran were far from busy. At times, there seemed to be more officials than voters.A group of burly former wrestlers came by on their way to vote for Mr. Raisi. One of them, an Instagram star who goes by the nickname “Ali Koochooloo,” or “Small Ali,” was actually a massive man, wearing black sunglasses and sporting a pointy beard.“Mr. Rouhani has achieved nothing,” he growled. “We will vote him out.”State television showed long lines in cities cross the country, with smiling presenters lauding “the brave Iranian nation” that had come out “to show its enemies how strong it is.”The campaign had ended on a bitter note, with the two candidates trading fierce accusations in three live televised debates.The rivalry was evident on the streets of many cities, where people honked car horns and waved the posters of their preferred candidates. Supporters of Mr. Rouhani also broke a taboo during campaign rallies by chanting for the release of opposition leaders under house arrest since the 2009 uprising.Mr. Rouhani has promised economic growth and greater freedom of speech and of the press.Mr. Raisi, a former prosecutor who leads one of the wealthiest religious foundations in the Middle East, has vowed to fix the ailing economy, to give cash assistance to the poor, and to fight corruption. He has also criticized the nuclear deal, though he has pledged to retain it.The election emphasizes a split between those favoring overhauls and those who want to stick to the ideological precepts of the Islamic Revolution of 1979. Mr. Rouhani is seen as more outward-looking, favoring improved relations with other countries and opening up the largely state-run economy. Mr. Raisi favors a more populist, insular approach.“I am voting for Raisi because he is a ‘sayyid,’ ” said Fazlolah Bahriye, using the honorific given to those believed to be descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. Mr. Bahriye, who said he thought he was in his early 70s (many in Iran are unsure of their birth date), then offered a diatribe against politicians, saying that they promised many things but never delivered.Other voters, especially younger ones, said they favored Mr. Rouhani. “I want more freedom, a relaxation of the strict rules,” said Muhammad Badijan, 19. He was wearing bright blue contact lenses that matched his shirt. “I just want to live a normal life,” he added.About 70 percent of Iran’s population of 80 million lives in or near urban centers, a huge change compared with 40 years ago, when a majority lived in rural areas. Along with urbanization, the political preferences of many Iranians have shifted from a hard-line revolutionary agenda to more middle-class aspirations, such as a decent education, and transparency and accountability in governance. Nowadays, even many rural regions no longer necessarily support hard-line politicians.“I called to friends across the country, in provincial cities, everywhere I’m hearing the same thing: There are many more Rouhani supporters everywhere,” said Nader Karimi Joni, a reformist journalist. “The trend is toward change,” he added.The prospect of a hard-line president has energized many in the middle class to vote. Many middle-class Iranians want to prevent the election of a hard-line candidate like former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who was not only disliked in the West but also back home, especially after the economy ran aground during his two terms.In the affluent neighborhood of Shahrak-e Gharb, in the west of Tehran, there were long lines of people waiting to cast their ballots. Almost everybody spoke of voting for Mr. Rouhani.“I didn’t vote four years ago, as I am not attracted to politics here, but I want to be sure that Mr. Raisi will not win,” said Fariba Maleki, 65. She was sitting under a tree in the shade, waiting for her daughter — who was standing in line — to call her to come over and vote. “In the end, voting is better, as we have some influence in deciding the destiny of our country,” she said.Three young men holding folding chairs said they had waited nearly three hours to cast votes. They gave their chairs to older voters who had also been waiting.“In Iran, we have an imaginary figure that children are afraid of,” said one of the men, Ali Qazvini, 25. “For us, that is Mr. Raisi. So we are here to vote for Mr. Rouhani.”