https://www.nytimes.com/2000/01/02/magazine/the-lives-they-lived-fred-c-trump-b-1905-the-fred.html
The Lives They Lived: Fred C. Trump, b. 1905; The Fred - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,TRUMP  DONALD,TRUMP  FRED C,HOUSING,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,APARTMENT HOUSES
Jan. 2, 2000
8997
Donald Trump remembers exactly when he realized his father was beginning to fade. About six years ago, they were driving down Fifth Avenue when he gave his father big news: he had just bought the land beneath the Empire State Building. ''That's a tall building, isn't it?'' Fred C. Trump replied. ''How many apartments are in that building?'' At first, Donald thought he was kidding. But his father, 87, was developing Alzheimer's.Fred Trump died last June in Queens, at 93. Donald had visited him in the hospital that night and got the call later when he was by himself, high up in Trump Tower. He cried. It was the saddest day of his life, he says.The son, now considering a run for the presidency, likes to present himself as a self-made man. But how much of him did his father make? Long before young Trump was putting up glass-and-bronze curtain walls on Fifth Avenue and selling apartments for $38 million, his father was putting bird cages in lobbies to dress up Queens apartment houses -- and releasing balloons on Coney Island at the height of summer with coupons inside for $50 off on a $4,990 Trump home.Fred Trump was a builder who loved his work. You can still see his achievement throughout Brooklyn today: hundreds of houses and apartment buildings, all of them dapper but not fancy -- like him -- and made of solid materials. Trump's properties were maintained to a fare-thee-well. Brick was repointed; ironwork repainted. Signs over perfect lawns speak in Fred's stentorian tone: ''Positively No Ball Playing Allowed.''''Freddy was always very neat, a Beau Brummell,'' says his contemporary, Sam LeFrak. ''He had a mustache, and that mustache was always right, perfect.'' He would ask his bricklayers to vary the balustrades on the terraces from one attached house to the next one, in order to create different patterns in the brick: squares, open crosses. Or he would add white shutters to brick apartment buildings to add a touch of class. Trump liked ornamentation, but not the glitzy kind. ''He didn't have frivolous taste,'' says his youngest son, Robert. ''There was not a frivolous bone in his body.''The story the family tells about Fred Trump is that he was a Horatio Alger, a man who built himself up from nothing during the Depression. In fact, his own father, Fred Trump Sr., was a builder who left a sizable estate, some $30,000. Still, young Fred worked as if he had nothing. He taught his children to work hard too. On Saturdays, Fred Trump took them around as he inspected boiler rooms and spiffed up lobbies. His daughter Maryanne Trump Barry, now a federal judge in Newark, recalls how her father reacted when she took a day off after weeks of work: ''But what will the other judges say?''A tall, vigorous and imposing man with a square chest and prominent cheekbones, Fred Trump was intensely competitive; he scoffed when a rival used the wrong colored brick to patch a wall. ''He didn't like wimps,'' says John Walter, his nephew. ''He thought competition made you sharper.''Trump's eldest son, Freddy Jr., did not meet his tough standards. Handsome and fun-loving, Freddy wanted to fly airplanes and deep-sea fish. He wasn't interested in the family business, and he and his father quarreled. Freddy drank himself to death at 43. Donald drank in the lesson of his brother's life and never touched a drop of liquor. Never smoked, never touched coffee.In Donald, the father found a spirit as large as his own, albeit more devilish. The two thrived on one another. Donald worked for a time with his father in the humble Trump Organization offices on Avenue Z in Coney Island and observed his father's careful business habits. Fred Trump would ask his contractors to get their bills to him by the 20th so he could pay them by the 30th, so they would have the cash to pay their own bills by the 10th of the following month in order to get the 2 percent discount from suppliers.When Fred built Trump Village on the water, three blocks from his office, he put up a shanty on the job site as an interim office, so that he could always see what was going on rather than have to come three blocks. One day, Donald came into his father's office to find him fiddling around with what looked like a broken push broom. It turned out you could get it cheaper in two sections. ''I learned by osmosis,'' Donald says.Donald helped his father on deals for a piece of Starrett City and to get into Forest Hills. The fancier parts of Queens were a big psychological leap for Fred Trump, and when his son declared in the early 1970's that he was going into Manhattan, it frightened him. ''New York -- who can work in New York? -- that's impossible,''' his daughter Elizabeth Trump Grau remembers him saying. ''Donald had to prove himself to my father. And in that regard, Donald proved him wrong.''In a sense, Donald was just doing what his father had done. Fred Trump always had an eye for distressed gems that people were not managing well. He would go to the owner and say, You're obviously having problems here. The challenge of making it right fulfilled him. When Donald Trump started driving around Manhattan, the whole city was distressed. Even the Chrysler Building was going begging. His father helped to capitalize him in these early projects -- though Donald plays down the help. ''The money he would give me was very little, very little,'' Donald says. Certainly his dad's connections helped him out. Once when a cement contractor had given Fred Trump a $900,000 bill, he cut a $1 million check, just for the pleasure of handling such a sum, and hand-delivered it to the contractor. That same cement contractor later poured the Trump Tower in Manhattan.Like his father too, Donald had a keen sense of people's aspirations. Fred Trump had built homes for working people who wanted to become middle class, people who wanted a little more quality than the stick bungalows they could buy that needed painting all the time. Fred Trump had given his houses brick-veneer construction, Tudor facades and mansard roofs; he built them so well that the ones near the water are worth $300,000 today. He gave his apartment houses English names: Wexford Hall, Sussex Hall, Edgerton. Donald took that understanding to another level, in catering to the desires of the rich.The wild son has qualities Fred lacked -- daring and imagination. ''Dad was a careful man,'' Maryanne says. ''I don't think he ever took a flyer in his life.'' And Fred Trump never promoted himself; he did not like to put his name on things. Once, he called a supermarket Trump Market, but when King Kullen bought it from him the name came down, and the lesson stuck: they can always take your name off. Employees had to urge the patriarch to paint the small words ''Trump Village'' on the glass lobby of the huge apartment complex he built in the early 60's in Brighton Beach. There may have been ethnic fear in Fred Trump's shyness. He was of German background; indeed, with his piercing eyes and heavy eyebrows, he looked like a Wagnerian hero. But you didn't want to look German in sales in New York around the war years. Indeed, a certain mystification developed about Trump's background. People thought he was Swedish or Dutch.Donald Trump was the shadow of his father in that respect. He learned early to put his name and face on his product. And his domestic arrangements were different. Fred Trump was married to his wife, Mary, for 63 years. He put his arm around her on the couch and said there was no place he would rather be. ''It was a much simpler life, and perhaps a better life,'' Donald says. ''I wouldn't want to swap it. But there was a beautiful simplicity to it.''The Trump children say that their father was proud of his son Donald for all he did. ''Look,'' Donald says, ''I had friends whose fathers were very successful, and the fathers were jealous of the sons' success and tried to hurt them, keep them down, because they wanted to be the king. My father was the exact opposite. He used to carry around articles.''Maybe. But Donald is not a very sensitive person. And how many fathers have unmixed feelings about their sons' achievements? The old man's office in Brooklyn is left just the way it was when he had to stop working last spring. There's humble shag carpet and industrial-grade steel trim, and the walls are crowded with emblems of 80 years of building: faded pictures of the Highlander and Edgerton, a photograph of Fred meeting Ronald Reagan, three of his beloved cigar store Indians.But there's only one picture of Donald, a framed 1986 cover of Fortune. That was just before ''The Art of the Deal,'' just before Donald became a household name. Just before it became clear that Donald had eclipsed his father's noble achievement forever. They say that when pictures were taken of father and son, Fred would rise just a little on his toes -- so he would look taller.