https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/world/asia/south-korea-park-geun-hye-choi-soon-sil.html
Choi Soon-sil, at Center of Political Scandal in South Korea, Is Jailed - The New York Times
Choi Soon-sil,Park Geun-hye,South Korea,Politics and Government,Extortion and Blackmail
Oct. 31, 2016
1539
SEOUL, South Korea — The woman at the center of President Park Geun-hye’s worst leadership crisis was jailed on Tuesday, as prosecutors grilled her overnight over allegations that she had manipulated important government affairs from the shadows.Choi Soon-sil, 60, a friend of Ms. Park’s for 40 years and widely seen here as the president’s secret adviser, though she had no official government title, was also accused of using her influence to extort $69 million from big businesses in the form of donations to two foundations she controlled.On Sunday, Ms. Park fired eight aides, including her chief of staff, in an effort to regain public trust. That was a day after thousands of South Koreans took to the streets to call for her removal from office.And on Monday, after weeks of evading the news media and public scrutiny, Ms. Choi presented herself to prosecutors. She tearfully apologized before a phalanx of television cameras, while angry citizens demanded her arrest. One person was detained while attempting to hurl a tub of excrement at her and the prosecutors’ office, claiming that the investigation was rigged to protect Ms. Park.On Tuesday, a man was detained after he drove his excavator through the gate of the prosecutors’ office. He later told the police that he came from a rural South Korean town to kill Ms. Choi.After hours of questioning, prosecutors said they had decided to “urgently detain” Ms. Choi and locked her away early Tuesday in a Seoul jail. Prosecutors take such a measure when they believe that they have enough evidence for criminal charges.The scandal involving Ms. Choi was particularly inflammatory in South Korea, partly because of her background.She is the daughter of a religious leader named Choi Tae-min who is said to have befriended Ms. Park in the mid-1970s with a claim that he could help her contact her dead mother, who was killed by an assassin in 1974. Ms. Park’s father, Park Chung-hee, was a military dictator who ruled South Korea from 1961 until he was assassinated in 1979.Mr. Choi, a shadowy figure with several pseudonyms, was believed by many to have exercised a Rasputin-like power over Ms. Park and to have used it to collect bribes. He died in 1994.After Ms. Park took office as president in early 2013, rumors persisted that Ms. Choi exerted an undue influence on Ms. Park, who had few relatives or friends she could trust, to meddle in government affairs, installing her associates in the government and helping them win large government contracts.Some of those suspicions seemed to be vindicated last week, when Ms. Park acknowledged that she had let Ms. Choi edit some of her most important speeches. Ms. Park’s approval ratings have plummeted to record lows in the past couple of weeks.