http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/08/fashion/paris-fashion-week-spring-2016-louis-vuitton-valentino.html
A Statement Ending at Louis Vuitton and Valentino - The New York Times
Paris Fashion Week,Balenciaga (Fashion Label),Gvasalia  Demna,Louis Vuitton,van Herpen  Iris (1984- ),Valentino Fashion Group SpA,Miu Miu (Fashion Label),Moncler (Fashion Label),Ghesquiere  Nicolas,September Fashion Week (2015)
Oct. 7, 2015
9309
PARIS — One of the defining characteristics of these nine days of Paris Fashion Week has been a heightened security presence at every show: bag checks, metal detectors, scanned invitations. The justifications varied: Some said it was the result of the Charlie Hebdo attack; others blamed President François Hollande’s decision to launch airstrikes against ISIS.Whatever the reason, in the end, the incendiary news came from within. On Wednesday morning, just as the closing collections of the week kicked off with Louis Vuitton, Kering announced it had appointed Demna Gvasalia, founder of the in-your-face anti-fashion brand Vetements, as artistic director of Balenciaga.The barbarian had been ushered into the ivory tower. Cue shock, horror (despite the fact it had been rumored all week, and my guess is that Mr. Gvasalia, who did a stint at Vuitton, is less aggressively “street” than the Vetements clothes might suggest) and an inability to focus on the shows at hand.As fashion playground politics goes, it doesn’t get much more sand-in-the-face than that.Louis Vuitton, after all, is now designed by Nicolas Ghesquière, who previously spent 15 years as artistic director of Balenciaga, and who was pretty much single-handedly responsible for the brand’s revival — not to mention the fact that Balenciaga eventually caught the eye of the Gucci Group, which bought it in 2001 for what is now Kering. In 2012, Mr. Ghesquière left Balenciaga and a public dispute ensued, in which Kering sued him after an interview he gave to System magazine accusing his former employers, essentially, of lacking culture.Though a spokesperson for Kering said the timing was merely a coincidence, it is a suspicious one. And one that could not have escaped Kering’s notice.What? There were clothes on the runway? Oh yeah.And here’s the thing: They were fantastic.In his best collection yet for Louis Vuitton, and one of the best collections of the season, Mr. Ghesquière took the brand’s focus on travel into the 22nd century. His subject was space, cyber and actual, as has been the case with many of his peers, but instead of catering to the digital age, he absorbed it and made it his own.Pleated kilts scarified with flowering silver staples were paired with leather motorcycle jackets; fluid sleeveless washed-silk dresses in petal pink were topped by woven leather tank tops and sprinkled with sparkling barbed bouquets; and easy jumpsuits came printed with space shuttle imagery. A finale of holographic dresses made from tulle covered in celluloid sequins, hand-painted in oily stripes and then scrunched into sine waves, combined the artistry of the atelier with the attitude of the tough and unconfined.That they were initially overshadowed by another announcement was irrelevant by the end, though it was representative of what has been a generally unfocused season.Trends ranged from lingerie to shirt-dresses to track suits. Shoes were generally big and clumpy, and the It bag was a backpack. The most popular decoration was a strap or a ribbon or a fringe — some sort of weird stringy, binding thing. Tom Ford decided to skip showing altogether and produce a collection in the form of a quasi-music video, which was supposed to hit editors’ inboxes early Friday but ended up in the spam folders of quite a few; they had to watch it with the masses on his website. It was easy to get distracted.Even faced with the freshness of Moncler Gamme Rouge, where the designer Giambattista Valli brought the brand far beyond its puffa jacket roots into a daisy and lilac romp of organza and eyelet-appliqued PVC, lightness and lace, all on a field of wildflowers.Even faced with the curdled lingerie-and-houndstooth haute bourgeois looks of Miu Miu, its flower-power boots, bobbing foxtails and jolie madame bags. Not to mention the dramatics of three alien-like robots weaving a silver root system/3-D garment over the prone body of actress Gwendoline Christie (otherwise known as Brienne of Tarth on “Game of Thrones”) at Iris van Herpen’s show.The performance piece turned out to be another expression of Ms. van Herpen’s interest in analyzing the biological structure of the human form, otherwise reflected in an exploration of all kinds of lace: traditional, from Calais, and laser-cut in leather and synthetics; shaped into little bodycon dresses, long shimmering skirts of mesh and one slithering snakeskin of a halter-necked black gown. Plus a great simple nude lace shirtdress.It was a neat reminder that in the end, cool as a concept might be, it comes down to the clothes.Just as, amid all the hoopla and navel-gazing of fashion rivalries and oneupmanship, the Valentino collection proved a valuable reminder of the opportunity that comes from being open to, and respectful of, the other.The designers Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli were, they said backstage before the show, thinking about Africa and cross-cultural pollination, and the need to, as Ms. Chiuri said, “understand other cultures, not to colonize them, but to learn what they can teach you about how to move forward with a different perspective.”The obvious reference was to the masses of Senegalese immigrants flowing into Italy, where Ms. Chiuri and Mr. Piccioli are based. But beyond politics, the designers were also thinking about Picasso and Braque, and the way a focus on Africa allowed those artists to “create a new idea of beauty,” Ms. Chiuri said.In other words, the collection wasn’t about literal appropriation, but a melding of one aesthetic (Valentino’s extraordinarily worked romance and formal austerity) with another (tribal colors and techniques and patterns). Some slightly obvious jungle prints and cringe-inducing braided hairdos aside, it was effective.It could be as subtle as an earthen shade of brown on a long caftan-like dress, less tent-like than flowing, caught at the neck with a circlet of brass, or a two-tier miniskirt dripping fringes of graphic tribal beading paired with a black peasant blouse. It could be the pottery patterning and feathered cuffs of a simple silk chiffon dress in a classic Valentino silhouette — waist slightly raised, neck rounded, bodice smocked — or the leather fringes on the hem of a gold-studded black cape and skirt. It could be a pastel-toned raffia-tiered red carpet gown.But what it never seemed was overly calculated or contrived. Outreach is not a bad way to end. Save that thought.