https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/us/california-today-yimby-movement.html
California Today: A Spreading ‘Yimby’ Movement - The New York Times
California Today
July 14, 2017
7541
Good morning.(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Today’s introduction comes from Conor Dougherty, who reports on economics from the Bay Area. It’s like Woodstock, but for housing activists.Over the past two years the rising cost of housing in the San Francisco Bay Area and elsewhere has created a budding movement of pro-development “Yimby” (yes in my backyard) groups that advocate for building more housing in hopes of easing exploding rents and home prices. On Friday a group of 200 or so activists from around the country, as well as Britain and Canada, will convene in Oakland for the “Yimbytown” conference.“The goal is to get people together on how to build housing and bring those ideas back to those people’s cities,” said Kieryn Darkwater, an organizer with East Bay Forward, a pro-development group whose members are regulars at City Council meetings in Oakland, Berkeley and other east-of-San Francisco cities.The conference is another sign of momentum for the Yimby movement, which has  clashed with the Bay Area’s liberal establishment. A year ago most Yimby groups were tiny ragtag operations, but today they are pushing bills in Sacramento and have attracted enough money from Silicon Valley and elsewhere that many activists have been able to quit their day jobs to do politics full time. Scott Wiener, the state senator from San Francisco who is pushing a bill that aims to force California cities to ramp up housing production, is scheduled to speak at the conference on Saturday.This is actually the second Yimby meeting. The first such gathering was last year in Boulder, Colo., and was organized by a group that included Will Toor, Boulder’s former mayor.“It is great to see a second national Yimby conference bringing together activists from this burgeoning movement,” Mr. Toor said. “It is clearer than ever that if we really care about solving big national issues like inequality and climate change, tackling the lack of housing in thriving urban areas, caused largely by local zoning restrictions, is key.”(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)• In Google’s hometown, the working poor are increasingly choosing to live in recreational vehicles. [The Mercury News]• “This isn’t about me. I’m going to be dead.” Gov. Jerry Brown made a dire plea on the state’s cap-and-trade proposal. [The Associated Press]• A hundred years after Los Angeles took its water, the Owens Valley is fighting back. [Los Angeles Times]• Two top female scientists have sued La Jolla’s Salk Institute, accusing it of being an “old boys club.” [San Diego Union-Tribune]• An Airbnb host refused a guest, telling her, “One word says it all. Asian.” Now the host is being fined. [The Associated Press]• Who would want the Uber C.E.O. job? Quite a few people, as it turns out. [The New York Times]• California has a reputation for having one of the most difficult bar exams. Now, it will make it easier to pass. [The New York Times]• “Saturday Night Live” and “Westworld” led the pack with 22 Emmy nominations each. [The New York Times]• “How can someone watch ‘The Leftovers’ and ‘House of Cards’ and think, ‘Hm, I prefer ‘House of Cards.’” [Opinion | The New York Times]• Our critic on a scene in “War for the Planet of the Apes”: It’s “as vivid and haunting as anything I’ve seen in a Hollywood blockbuster in ages.” [The New York Times]• The best-selling author Don Winslow left a “Cali-fascist” gated community in Orange County for a ranch with cattle and horses. [The New York Times]• “This could be the worst baseball season ever in the Bay Area.” [East Bay Times]Fifty or so stark white crosses dot the desolate road leading to a military training facility in the Mojave Desert.Each one marks the site of a fatal vehicle crash and is stenciled in black with the date it happened.Fort Irwin Road stretches just 31 miles between the Barstow area and Fort Irwin National Training Center, where Army soldiers are sent to get combat ready.Since the military post’s opening in the early 1980s, dozens of soldiers and civilians have died on the two-lane road in accidents linked to speed, fatigue, carelessness — and the design of the road itself.Paved in the 1940s, it had no shoulders, with its edges flush to the desert floor on either side.If a vehicle drifted even slightly off the pavement, a wheel was apt to catch in the sand, said Ken Drylie, a spokesman for the training center.“You put one tire in the dirt and you’re upside down,” he said. “It was going to be a rollover.”The placement of crosses by Fort Irwin officials was initially intended as a warning to motorists, and then grew over time into a ritual.Thankfully, it has become more infrequent since safety upgrades were made about 12 years ago, including passing lanes, shoulders and rumble strips that warn drivers as they drift.Frank Foster, a photographer based in Victor Valley, captured a series of images along Fort Irwin Road.He encountered a few crosses with children’s toys placed on them. “There is one set of crosses where it looks like an entire family was wiped out in a crash” he said. “It was chilling to say the least.”Mr. Foster shared some of his images with us:Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos. California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.