https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/01/world/asia/kim-jong-nam-assassination-north-korea-visa-malaysia.html
Kim Jong-nam Died of Heart Failure, North Korea Suggests - The New York Times
Kim Jong-nam,Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations,Visas,North Korea,Malaysia
March 1, 2017
5061
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia — A North Korean diplomat suggested on Thursday that Kim Jong-nam, the estranged half brother of the country’s leader, died of heart failure despite Malaysia’s finding that he was killed by a banned nerve agent.The diplomat, Ri Tong-il, who is leading a delegation to Malaysia, made the surprising assertion in Kuala Lumpur, the capital, during a visit aimed at repairing a diplomatic breach over the death. He said Mr. Kim had a history of heart disease and high blood pressure for which he needed medication.But while asserting the cause of Mr. Kim’s death, without providing any evidence, he stood by his country’s refusal to acknowledge that the victim was the half brother of Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, instead calling him by the name Kim Chol, which South Korean officials have said is an alias.He also called on Malaysia to provide samples of the VX nerve agent that the police say they found on the body to the international organization charged with carrying out the global treaty that bans the use of chemical weapons.“If it is true that it was used,” he told reporters, “then the samples should be sent to the office” of the group, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, for examination.The Malaysian government said it has indeed reported the use of VX to the organization, which must now decide whether to bring the matter before the United Nations Security Council.“The ministry is in close contact with the O.P.C.W. regarding the recent incident and the latter has provided the Malaysian authority with some technical materials that have been requested to assist in its investigation,” the Foreign Ministry said in a statement on Friday.But the organization has declined to say whether Malaysia had provided it with samples for independent testing. Malaysian officials have also declined to comment on that question.South Korea has accused the North of orchestrating the killing, and the Malaysian police have identified seven North Korean men they would like to question. North Korea has refused to allow the police to interview two of the suspects, who are said to have taken refuge at the embassy where Mr. Ri addressed reporters.Four others are believed to have returned to North Korea, and the location of the last one is unknown. An eighth, the only North Korean citizen in Malaysian custody, is expected to be released for lack of evidence and deported, according to news reports.Malaysia has not allowed North Korean officials to conduct their own examination of the body, despite their repeated demands that it be turned over to them.In a statement on Wednesday, North Korea argued that any conclusion on the use of chemical weapons should be made “only on the basis of the identical results of analysis made by at least two specialist laboratories,” warning that “if some countries try to use it for other political purposes, the consequences will be beyond imagination.”The latest assertions came as Malaysia moved on Thursday to punish North Korea for the airport assassination of Mr. Kim, saying that it would require visitors from that country to obtain visas, the government said.Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, the deputy prime minister, imposed the restrictions effective this coming Monday, citing national security concerns. Until now, North Koreans have been able to enter Malaysia without a visa — one of the few places in the world that allowed such easy access for citizens of a country that is widely viewed as a pariah.About 1,000 North Koreans live and work in Malaysia, where they have been able to establish international companies and have access to the global banking system. But relations between the two nations have rapidly deteriorated since the killing of Mr. Kim and accusations that North Korea was behind it.It was unclear whether the visa order would affect North Koreans who are already in Malaysia.Mr. Kim was poisoned on Feb. 13 as he prepared to board a plane at Kuala Lumpur International Airport, the police say. Two women, one from Indonesia and one from Vietnam, were charged with murder in the case on Wednesday. The police say they smeared the poison on Mr. Kim’s face using their bare hands. The women have said they thought they were taking part in a harmless prank. They could receive the death penalty.Vietnam’s Foreign Ministry said on Thursday that it had been helping to provide legal support to the Vietnamese suspect, Doan Thi Huong, 28, whom Malaysian officials have described as an “entertainment outlet employee” recruited, trained and equipped by North Korean plotters.It was Vietnam’s most detailed statement about the suspect, who received a surge of domestic sympathy after she was shown in television news clips on Wednesday leaving a Malaysian court wearing a bulletproof vest.Vietnam was relatively slow to even acknowledge the nationality of Ms. Doan after she had been arrested. By contrast, her Indonesian co-defendant, Siti Aisyah, 25, received early and strong support from Indonesian officials.