https://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/26/world/europe/26iht-letter26.html
A Real Copy of Austria in China - The New York Times
China,Guangdong Province (China),Austria,Architecture
July 25, 2012
2383
HALLSTATT, AUSTRIA — “Ni hao!” bellowed a burly Turkish man selling roast chickens from a mobile food stall in Hallstatt, a Gothic and Baroque jewel of a town perched between the deep Hallstätter See and the soaring mountains of Austria’s northern Alps.His friendly “hello!” in Chinese was directed at an ethnic Korean member of our party, yet the mistake was understandable. Chinese visitors fill this small town, drawn by a fascination for its intact architecture, rich culture and stunning natural setting.In today’s turbo-driven China such qualities are elusive, yet so desirable that a major property developer has built “Hallstatt 2,” as Alexander Scheutz, the Austrian town’s mayor dubs it, a meticulous near-replica of Hallstatt’s market square and major landmarks in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong.“To me it’s like a huge aspiration,” said Linda Kim-Davies, my Korean-American companion, a photographer and gallerist who has lived in Austria for 17 years and is a close observer of Asian and European culture.“The fact that there are so many Chinese here now visiting and just looking around is perhaps a sign of yearning for culture and nature,” said Ms. Kim-Davies, who has lived in China. The visitors could become “a driving force spiritually” to protect their own land, she said.“If they learned how to protect its nature and ecology and history and culture, China would be an amazing place,” she said. “It has so much to learn from a country like Austria, where people do that.”In China, nature and culture have been bulldozed for decades in the service, first, of communist ideals, which entailed attacking traditions, then of fast-paced industrialization and capitalist-style economic growth, which are sweeping away whatever remains. Environmental protection laws are weak and poorly enforced, with new, proposed laws recently watered down to help local governments push economic growth faster, The Economic Observer, a leading Chinese newspaper, reported.But does some spark of longing for a more beautiful, intact world survive? In interviews, several Chinese visitors to Hallstatt indicated “yes.”“It’s really so beautiful,” said Tang Jia, 25, a technician at an engineering laboratory at a university in Shanghai. She seemed lost for words as her gaze took in the cobbled streets, the church spires, the marketplace with its Baroque fountain and Holy Trinity sculpture and the half-timber houses. Hallstatt grew rich off the ancient salt trade and signs of settled wealth are everywhere.“So much in China has been destroyed,” Ms. Tang said. “This is very different.”“It’s very special,” said her travel companion, Han Jianjie, 30, also a laboratory assistant. “I will definitely be telling my friends to come.”Where some see beauty, others see the chance to make money.On the other side of the world, the developer, Minmetals Land, describes Hallstatt 2 as a “commercial street,” and it may be more of a selling point for the surrounding pricey villa complex than a conscious cultural ideal, though the developer does emphasize land conservation and “green living.”Inside one Austrian-style house in the development in Boluo County, in the factory belt of southern China, is a glitzy white piano. Others boast a “red wine/cigar bar” and a private theater. The copied Christuskirche is not a functioning church, but it is decorated in “princely” style, said Mr. Scheutz, who has seen it and was taken aback by its opulence. Total investment in the market square and the villas was 6 billion renminbi, or $940 million, according to Minmetals.Controversially, the Chinese copy was made without notifying, let alone asking permission of, anyone in Hallstatt.When the project was revealed last year — inadvertently, by a Chinese visitor who was involved in it, Mr. Scheutz said — some Hallstatt residents were upset.“They should have told us,” the mayor said in an interview in his office. “I wasn’t outraged, but I was surprised.”Early last year, five Chinese architects walked around incognito, photographing the town, then returned to Boluo where it was copied at high speed, said Mr. Scheutz, spreading on his desk a thick portfolio of plans secretly drawn up by the Chinese, and then downloaded and copied by a Hallstatt hotel owner, he said. Both sides, in effect, spied on each other.Yet Mr. Scheutz has only positive things to say about “Hallstatt 2.” Invited by Minmetals, he visited in June for an official viewing and friendship ceremony, bringing along a five-man brass band. They had fun, he said, playing Austrian music on a cruise on the Pearl River in Guangzhou and even in the South China Sea, where photographs show five well-built Austrians, clad only in bathing shorts, playing trumpets and tubas in the surf. Chinese holiday makers laughed and applauded, the spontaneous concerts another sign of the vital culture for which this mountain region is known.Of Hallstatt 2, Mr. Scheutz said: “It’s not another Hallstatt, to me. Hallstatt grew over hundreds of years, thousands of years. Seven thousand years ago the Celts and the Illyrians lived here. There’s so much history here that you cannot copy it.”