https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-the-pull-up.html
Letter of Recommendation: The Pull-Up - The New York Times
Exercise,Muscles,Prospect Park (Brooklyn  NY)
June 29, 2017
6440
Pull-up failure runs in my family. It happened to my grandfather in 1935. He was 11 — bookish, gawky, one of the few Jews in his Munich public school. His gym teacher, a sadist who had long had it out for him, ordered the boys to do pull-ups. When my grandfather’s turn came, he gripped the bar, writhed and reddened. ‘‘Look at Felsen!’’ the gym teacher growled. ‘‘Hanging there like a blutwurst. I knew he couldn’t do it.’’ Blutwurst — blood sausage. His classmates erupted in laughter. For the next year or so, until he and the other Jews were expelled from school under the Nuremberg Laws, he was Blutwurst.A half-century later, I dangled at the bar. It was 1990. George H. W. Bush wanted the youth of the world’s only remaining superpower to be strapping and sturdy, so he tapped Arnold Schwarzenegger to be the face of a program called the President’s Physical Fitness Challenge. If you could do something like 10 situps, 10 push-ups and three pull-ups, you won a certificate fake-signed by both the president and the Terminator. On the day of the challenge, I managed to bang out the situps and push-ups. Then came the dreaded pull-ups. I flailed my legs in a futile attempt to gain momentum. No dice. I hung there, a link off the old sausage chain. Total pull-ups: zero.For the next 20-plus years, I didn’t so much as try another one. Then, in my mid-30s, I took stock of my waistline, which was a snug 38 inches. It was time to make some changes, so I bought some gadgets and downloaded some apps. After months of record-smashing walks, I was maybe a 37. Eventually I joined a gym and spent untold thousands on personal trainers. Soon enough, I was even doing sets of pull-ups. I had fi­nally slimmed down, but all I talked about was squats and smoothies. I had become loathsome, the very species I’d spent most of my life mocking: a gym rat.One unseasonably warm day last winter, I decided to exercise outside. I jogged over to one of those rusty pull-up bar stations in Prospect Park. Two other people — young, shirtless guys with Caribbean accents — were there, doing incredibly acrobatic moves on the bars. I took a turn and railed off a respectable half-dozen pull-ups. The guys smiled and shook their heads.‘‘Doesn’t count like that,’’ one of them said. ‘‘You gotta turn your hands around.’’I’d been holding the bar under­handed — a grip I later learned was for the much-derided chin-up. I tried the proper grip, palms facing forward, and could barely do two.‘‘You’ll get there,’’ the other guy said. ‘‘Just keep working at it.’’I returned to the park the next day. I did a few pull-ups, and a ropy, gray-haired Latino guy gently informed me that I was doing them wrong.‘‘All the way down,’’ he said, demonstrating on the bar. ‘‘You’re going halfway down. It doesn’t count unless you lock your elbows.’’Later that spring, I happened to be walking past another pull-up bar station. I started in on a set and a giant, tattooed Eastern European man approached me. He asked if he could show me something, I said sure, and then he placed his hands beneath my armpits. As I pulled myself up, he steadied my back.‘‘You’re flinging yourself over that bar,’’ he said. ‘‘You want to keep your back straight as a line. Legs too.’’I’d never experienced anything like this at the gym. I was used to benching alone. There was something about these public pull-up bars — a culture of good will, a genuine concern for the newbie. I watched the tatted man execute 10 pristine pull-ups: wide, palms-forward grip, body as stiff as a surfboard. It was beautiful, like watching an elevator rise and descend.Novices, I was coming to learn, rely too much on their biceps. A proper pull-up is a yogic feat of concentration and grace. It is possible only when multiple muscle groups are working in tandem: the biceps, the latissimus dorsi, legs, abs and lower back to keep the body straight. ‘‘Calisthenics’’ comes from the Greek words kallos, which means beauty, and sthenos — strength. The pull-up is the apotheosis of beauty-strength, a motion that unites virtually every muscle group — and one that is surprisingly hard to perfect.Spring came, and I canceled my gym membership. I had no desire to lift a weight ever again. I just wanted to do a proper pull-up. I found bars under the Brooklyn Bridge, beneath the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and on the riverfront in Long Island City, where I practiced my pull-ups before a sunset-pink Manhattan skyline. Once, I ventured to Coney Island, where I did sets facing the Atlantic, surrounded by sea gulls. Sometimes I was alone, but more often than not, I was joined by a stranger.None of the pull-up fiends I’ve met care about the maximum number of pull-ups you can do in a row. Nobody seems too impressed with muscle tone. What matters is form. The other day in Prospect Park, I watched a guy with slick sunglasses and biceps like lobster claws grip the bar. He did about 15 chin-ups; on every single one of them, his elbows never went below a 90-degree angle. Then I got on the bar and did five pull-ups. On each one, I did my best to go all the way down, until my elbows locked, and strained every fiber of my core to keep my legs straight as I went back up.When I was finished, a pull-up guru I’ve long looked up to, a sinewy Rastafarian with a short, scraggly beard, sidled up to me and whispered, ‘‘Now that’s a pull-up.’’