http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/05/business/energy-environment/nevada-a-winner-in-teslas-battery-contest.html
Nevada a Winner in Tesla’s Battery Contest - The New York Times
Tesla Motors Inc,Nevada,Batteries,Electric and Hybrid Vehicles,Musk  Elon,Factories and Manufacturing,Lithium (Metal),Labor and Jobs
Sept. 4, 2014
7676
After pitting five potential host states against one another in a quest for hundreds of millions of dollars in incentives, Tesla Motors said Thursday that it had struck a deal with Nevada for construction of its sprawling factory to build batteries for electric cars and the power grid.The vision drawn by Tesla’s chief executive, Elon Musk, is sweeping — to catalyze the entry of the electric car into the heart of the American automobile market and, in the process, provide as many as 6,500 manufacturing jobs.To secure the deal, Nevada paid dearly. The package of tax breaks, which requires approval of the State Legislature, totals about $1.25 billion over 20 years. In a news conference late Thursday, Gov. Brian Sandoval acknowledged that there were concerns over the deal’s cost, but said that the agreement would “change Nevada forever” and that he expected the enormous tax breaks to pay dividends down the road.It is an audacious move, and it promises to double the global capacity to make lithium-ion batteries, the power plant behind Tesla’s innovative all-electric cars. In fact, Tesla’s so-called Gigafactory would be 20 times as large as the biggest battery factory now in production, which Mr. Musk says is one reason it could achieve its goal of reducing the cost of batteries by 30 percent.Whether it will work that way is not clear, analysts say. But the prospect of having such a large plant nevertheless set off “the mother of all factory chases,” according to Sam Jaffe, a battery expert at Navigant Research. State governments wax ecstatic about factories that bring in one-tenth as many jobs.Mr. Musk continues to hedge his bets; the company says it may prepare sites elsewhere, too, to ensure that it has a suitable spot when it is needed. The other candidates include California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas.In the months leading to Thursday’s announcement, the states were in something of a feeding frenzy to land the factory.In June, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas drove a Tesla Model S to Sacramento and told reporters that Mr. Musk should build in Texas because of “overtaxation, overregulation and overlitigation” in California.An adviser to Gov. Jerry Brown of California countered that it was not possible to buy a Tesla vehicle in Texas, because state law requires that cars must be sold by dealers, and Tesla sells them direct. Even after Thursday’s announcement, California said it would continue to work with Tesla.By any measure, Nevada is joining Tesla in a risk. At the Economic Development Authority of Western Nevada, headquartered in Reno, Michael Kazmierski, the chief executive, acknowledged that the gamble was large and uncertain. He observed that most of the subsidies were tax reductions or reductions in the requirements for permits.“The more you put upfront, the more you’re rolling the dice,” he said. And he added that the Nevada state constitution barred direct transfer of state money to a private company.The deal goes beyond tax breaks. According to figures released by the Nevada governor’s office, the deal means Tesla would pay no sales tax for 20 years, no property tax and payroll tax for 10 years, and it would receive other tax credits tied to job creation and development. Nevada will also grant Tesla discount electricity rates for eight years and make millions of dollars in road improvements around the factory site.But analysts are questioning whether the plant’s vast size will result in the huge price cut, an essential element of making the factory useful. At the heart of the strategy is to build a kind of battery that resembles the ones used for years in laptops and hand-held electronics. But it would pack slightly more energy per pound.The result would be a lighter, cheaper car that required fewer batteries. It would allow Tesla to sell a sedan for $35,000 rather than the current sticker price of $71,000 and up. With a cost for electricity of under 3.5 cents a mile — the equivalent of gasoline at about a dollar a gallon in a car that gets 30 miles per gallon — the car would cost less to own and run than a gasoline model.“I would call it their Camry-killer, a mass-market sedan rather than luxury vehicle,” said Mr. Jaffe, of Navigant. The batteries would also be cheap enough to use on power grids to smooth out the production of solar cells and wind farms.Tesla compares its proposed $35,000 model to a low-end BMW, but some experts, like Michael E. Webber, deputy director of the Energy Institute at the University of Texas at Austin, say it could be more economical than a conventional midmarket sedan. “It outperforms all of them on many factors: comfort, quietness and noise, sexiness,” he said. But today, “It underperforms on range and upfront cost.”With a better battery, it could compete, he said. So selling 300,000 Teslas a year depends on cutting the price of batteries, which depends, according to Mr. Musk, on building more of them.“When you get to the kind of scale we’re talking about, you really get to design custom equipment that’s much better at processing each step,” he told analysts in a telephone conference call on July 31. “Everything about it is going to get a whole lot better.”Tomohide Kazama, a senior consultant at the Nomura Research Institute and an expert on auto and battery manufacturing, added another factor. “A lot hangs on whether Tesla is able to sell as many electric vehicles as it plans to,” he said in an email. If Tesla cannot sell enough vehicles, the factory would not generate the savings from its enormous scale, he said.Another element of the anticipated cost reduction is moving the fabrication of various components to a single spot, making the factory more of a campus than a single operation. Today, bringing the main components of the battery together is expensive, Mr. Musk said.He described the current system as “being put in a box, and then on a truck and then on a boat, and going through customs and stuff like that.”Mr. Jaffe said he suspected another element of the anticipated cost savings was cutting the profit margins of the various component manufacturers, which would nonetheless see higher profits as sales rose.At Princeton University, Daniel A. Steingart, an assistant professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering and an expert in materials science, said the challenge extended beyond making the cells, to putting them together into battery packs, at a cost that he said was “opaque.” And, he added, even at the lower estimate for the factory, “spending $4 billion anywhere is fantastic.”“The big question is, if this makes sense, why hasn’t LG done it?” he said. “Why hasn’t Panasonic done it?”The battery Mr. Musk is starting with is the 18650, a type as common in the electronics industry as an AA or a C cell is to consumers. Notably, Mr. Musk is not seeking a better mousetrap; he is seeking a standard mousetrap at a better price.Eventually, the mousetrap will be obsolete. Lithium-ion chemistry, which has largely replaced the earlier nickel metal hydride, which itself replaced nickel cadmium, is almost certain to be supplanted by something else. The timing is uncertain, but that could make the factory’s output as useful as carbon paper or floppy disks.Despite the doubts, some experts say Mr. Musk is focused in the right place.“The science of electrochemical storage moves so slowly; the problems are more around manufacturing and the supply chain,” said Mr. Webber. “I think the holdup in batteries is not the scientists, it’s the engineers, the manufacturing.”In the end, Mr. Musk is making a big bet, not only with his company’s money but with a lot of other people’s, too. He said Tesla would provide 40 to 50 percent of the investment; Panasonic, its battery manufacturer, 30 or 40 percent, and other industrial partners 15 or 20 percent. (Panasonic recently committed $1 billion.) He said he wants 10 percent from the state.At the San Francisco office of the Natural Resources Defense Council, Max Baumhefner, a lawyer who is an expert on clean vehicles and fuels, said popularizing electric cars would be essential to meeting the state’s clean air and energy laws.So far, Mr. Musk has already defied skeptics by surviving in an electric-car industry littered with failures.Mr. Baumhefner added, “I give him credit for being a master at generating intrigue.”