https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/02/business/trump-pentagon-budget.html
Military Expects More Shopping Money, if Not All Trump Seeks - The New York Times
Federal Budget (US),United States Politics and Government,United States Defense and Military Forces,Trump  Donald J,Newport News (Va)
March 2, 2017
4964
Over the next two weeks, the military services will be scrambling to get their wish lists in front of top defense officials, hoping their requests for more troops, planes, ships and missiles will be stuffed into President Trump’s proposed $54 billion increase in the Pentagon budget.Never mind that Congress is unlikely to approve the full amount. Or that it is not clear if the Pentagon, which views Russia as the biggest threat, and the new president, who is mainly focused on defeating the Islamic State, agree on the priorities.The services are betting that Mr. Trump will eventually win a large enough chunk of the money so that they can do a bit of everything, like reversing recent declines in the number of soldiers and Marines and breaking logjams over how many high-tech jets and ships they can afford to build.But there are no guarantees, and the battle over next year’s federal budget will be ferocious. Democrats have vowed to block the president’s proposal to strip the $54 billion from domestic programs and shift it to the military. Nearly everyone expects the fight to drag on for months.On Thursday, Mr. Trump helped set the stage, traveling to a shipyard in Newport News, Va., for an action-movie-like backdrop to tout his plans to build the armed forces. Speaking in the hangar bay of the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Gerald R. Ford, which this year will become the nation’s largest and most powerful floating fortress, Mr. Trump said the Navy — and other military services — must grow and modernize. The 100,000-ton vessel, the first of a new, more technologically advanced carrier class, cost about $13 billion after cost overruns and years of delay.“We will make it easier for the Navy to plan for the future and thus to control costs and get the best deals for the taxpayer,” the president said. “The same boat for less money, the same ship for less money, the same airplanes for less money.”Mr. Trump has complained about the cost estimates for new Air Force One planes to be built by Boeing, and he has pressed executives at Lockheed Martin to lower the cost of the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. Whether that personal negotiating strategy can be applied across the breadth of the military’s shopping is untested.The president’s aides have told the services to turn in their wish lists by March 16, and Defense Department and White House officials will plug in the final breakdown before submitting a budget to Congress, probably in May.In a speech last September, Mr. Trump complained that President Barack Obama had cut the number of soldiers and Marines too sharply as the Pentagon shifted to special operations troops and armed drones to hunt terrorists. He also lamented that the Navy had fewer than half the ships it had under President Reagan.He said then that the Army should hire 50,000 soldiers to get back to 540,000, and he supports a Navy plan to increase its fleet to 355 ships from 276. That plan calls for the Navy to buy more destroyers and start building three nuclear-powered attack submarines a year instead of two.But Mr. Trump has also called for a more isolationist foreign policy and has said that American allies should pick up more of the bill for defending themselves. And even central tenets of military strategy are in question. At the same time Mr. Trump has been criticized by lawmakers from both parties for cozying up to Russia, his defense secretary, James Mattis, a retired Marine general, has described that country as America’s “principal threat.”As a result, independent analysts said, it is hard to square the president’s foreign and defense policies or know what his final priorities would be if Congress only approved part of the money he is seeking.“It is not clear to me why we would need 355 ships if our foreign policy says we are going to reduce our commitments around the world and let allies do more for their own defense,” said Todd Harrison, a military budget expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a bipartisan Washington research group.“And if you want to build a military more suited to deter Russia and China than to deter terrorists, it is a very different capability that you want to buy,” Mr. Harrison said. “That is something that the Trump administration has not really rationalized yet.”Mr. Obama approved a series of sophisticated new weapons projects, including a new long-range bomber for the Air Force and massive ballistic missile submarines for the Navy. So the debate within the Pentagon now is not so much about pitting the services against one another to see whose pet project will survive as it is about determining how much money is needed to keep all the big projects going.The Air Force, for instance, has been trying to expand production of the F-35 while also building new aerial-refueling tankers, modernizing nuclear missile systems and building the new stealth bombers.Mr. Obama’s last budget plan had forecast a $35 billion increase in Pentagon spending in the 2018 fiscal year to pay for all these programs. Mr. Trump’s proposal, which would increase the defense budget to $603 billion, is $19 billion, or about 3 percent, higher than Mr. Obama’s.Other Republicans, such as Senator John McCain of Arizona, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, contend that even more is needed to maintain a technological edge over Russia and China. He recently released a report calling for a broader “high/low” mix in weapons capabilities and greater spending on research into space, cyber and artificial intelligence technologies.But analysts say that the ultimate figure will be decided less by the Pentagon’s support for particular programs than in overall budget negotiations between Congress and Mr. Trump, who is trying to change the kind of deals that have been struck since a deficit-reduction law required cuts in federal spending.Under the law, the Budget Control Act of 2011, the cuts had to be divided evenly between defense and nondefense programs. Mr. Obama and Congress agreed several times after that on annual budgets that exceeded the caps and split the increases 50-50 between defense and domestic programs.But Mr. Trump’s proposal on Monday to increase military spending by $54 billion and cut nonmilitary programs by the same amount would shatter that truce. It also would require changes in the budget law, and that would give Senate Democrats, who want to protect domestic programs, leverage to force Mr. Trump to compromise. They could filibuster any bill attempting to change that 50-50 split, and the Republicans would have difficulty assembling the 60 votes needed to stop the filibuster.Given those dynamics, political analysts say the president will have to accept a smaller increase in military spending and provide more money than he wants for domestic programs.Gordon Adams, who oversaw military budgets in the Clinton White House, said that while Mr. Trump would not get as much as he was asking for, he might still be able to tilt the spending balance toward the military.“In the end, I think the budget caps will be adjusted upward again,” he said, “and we might get an uneven deal where the caps are higher for defense than for the domestic programs.”