https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/t-magazine/rosita-missoni-garden-home.html
At Home (and in the Garden) With Rosita Missoni - The New York Times
Flowers and Plants,Vegetables,Gardens and Gardening,Fashion and Apparel,Missoni,Italy
July 11, 2017
1106
Rosita Missoni, the hardworking 85-year-old matriarch and co-founder of one of today’s great luxury fashion brands, is crouched in the mud of her vegetable garden, showing me her summer crops. “It’s a little support for our kitchen,” she says of the garden, surveying the growth of her vegetable supply. We are exploring the grounds of her home in Sumirago, in the forested hills north of Milan. The Missoni factory is just beyond a row of dogwood bushes and pine trees.Inside the wooden gates of a small tract of vegetables, Missoni indicates rows of garlic shoots, underripe tomatoes, clusters of cucumbers, blooming heads of cabbage, and a queue of sharp-scented yellow marigolds keeping pests at bay. She leads on through a vast jade meadow lined with oak and ash trees, where two thoroughly inert dogs languish on the grass. “Our guardians,” Missoni says affectionately, her braided ducktail falling over one shoulder. Tied with a Missoni ribbon, the braid is an eccentric flourish to her pragmatic short hair — not altogether surprising from the woman who figured out how to turn knits into a kaleidoscopic whir of zigzags, stipples and stripes.Rosita and Ottavio Missoni married in 1953, founding their knitwear company the same year; five years later the couple filled the windows of Milan’s La Rinascente department store with the first dresses to bear their last name. (At Milan’s Palazzo Reale, a current exhibition of the store’s 100th anniversary recreates that same installation.) In the ‘60s, Rosita invented the warped, woodgrain-like weave of their now signature fiammato pattern, using a cutting-edge knitting machine and old skeins of fringe from her grandparents’ shawl factory. “That opened up a world for us,” she says. “From there, my husband started his design experiments with patterns.” Those patterns became as singularly recognizable as any logo, establishing Missoni as a luxury powerhouse, and helping Italy (and Milan in particular) to dominate the emerging ready-to-wear market. The brand, still family-owned, has been led by their daughter Angela since 1997; Rosita, after a few months of “trying to live like a grandmother,” returned to work, this time as the creative director of Missoni Home.Missoni has always been a fanatic for colors, and in the garden she disappears into a thicket of high-stemmed blue hydrangeas to pick a particularly purple bloom for her bouquet. Dropping it into her wicker basket, she heads to her second vegetable plot, this one full of chicory, mint, San Marzano tomatoes and long-fingered zucchini plants — their sunny blossoms in full glory after the earlier morning rain. Missoni squats in the wet earth and snips off a few for the day’s lunch, depositing the harvest in her wicker basket before cutting a handful of rosemary branches and waving their piney perfume under my nose. “For our little pizzas,” she says. “A house specialty.”As a child, Missoni was scrawny and sickly. Her parents sent her to a school “with a marvelous garden” on the Ligurian coast where she grew robust on the sea air and a diet of fish. The experience seems to have worked — she is as energetic and spry as one could hope to be at any age. Missoni brags about scuba diving for shellfish (“It’s my passion,” she says. “That’s why I have such good lungs and can climb mountains at 85.”) and is tireless in our two-hour tour of the sprawling garden. But her delicate childhood also intimately acquainted her with fashion — kept inside in her youngest days, Missoni passed the time at her grandparents’ factory by making paper dolls from the atelier’s international style magazines. “There among the fabric and the patterns, I learned all about ‘30s fashion, cutting it out in silhouettes,” she says. It was the beginning of a lifelong calling.Missoni deposits her vegetables, herbs and flowers in the kitchen as the cook begins to prepare risotto and church bells chime the noon hour. Still buzzing around, arranging flowers, carrying chairs from one room to another, and pulling out books to show me designs from the past, Missoni proffers some thoughts on her vitality. “It’s luck, undoubtedly,” she says. “I’ve been passionately dedicated to my career, so it’s never worn me out. I live in the kind of beautiful place where my husband and I wanted to spend our weekends. I have my children close by, and friends that come visit on Sundays.”It’s a simple recipe for a happy life — and an enduring one. “I’ve been able to overcome even terrible times,” she says, her voice softening as she recounts a year of tragedy. In 2013, a plane carrying her eldest son and his wife disappeared in Venezuela. Ottavio passed away just a few months later. “At least, I’m rarely alone at the table here,” she says, coming back to life.At lunch, Missoni fills glasses with white wine and takes the head of the table. After rounds of chicory salad, poached eggs, rosemary-topped pizzas, and zucchini risotto, she insists on taking me to the factory next door, where she will spend the rest of the day at work, as she has for over six decades. “We had a lovely morning in the garden, didn’t we?” she says, leading me out by the shoulder. “But my real place is in the office.”This risotto eschews the white wine of a traditional recipe to leave the flavor of the fresh vegetables intact. Though best when eaten right after cooking, it makes a great leftover dish as well: risotto saltato, which can be made by pan frying a thin pancake of the risotto with olive oil in a covered, nonstick pan, flipping it when a well-crisped skin develops. “The favorite version of children,” Missoni laughs.4-5 tablespoons butter1 small white onion, finely chopped1 pound Carnaroli riceMeat or vegetable broth6 small zucchinisA handful of fresh basil and parsley5 tablespoons freshly grated Parmesan cheeseExtra virgin olive oilSalt and pepper to taste1. Bring a pot of broth to a simmer and keep it warm on another burner as you cook.2. Place a chunk of butter (around 2-3 tablespoons) in a pot with enough depth to cook the rice. Melt over medium heat.3. Add chopped onions and cook lightly, then add the rice and allow it to toast in the butter for a few minutes.4. Add four ladles of broth to the rice, then add chopped zucchini.5. Continue ladling in broth to the rice, stirring all the while, and cook until the texture of the rice is just cooked through (usually around 20-25 minutes).6. Add the herbs when the heat is off.7. Stir in the cheese, then add a knob of butter and a dash of oil.8. Stir to combine and then allow the risotto to sit for a couple of minutes before serving.