https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/us/bucks-county-killings-pennsylvania.html
After Grisly Killings in Pennsylvania, a Quick Deal to Spare Execution - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,DiNardo  Cosmo,Bucks County (Pa),Capital Punishment,Pennsylvania
July 17, 2017
2963
The police had been investigating the disappearance of four men in Pennsylvania for only a week when prosecutors sprang a deal on their chief suspect: Confess to murder and help the investigation, and avoid the death penalty.Cosmo DiNardo, 20, a college dropout and scion of an affluent family in Bucks County, Pa., quickly said yes to the bargain. He and an accomplice were charged on Friday with multiple counts of criminal homicide.In so swiftly wrapping up the case, which transfixed the Philadelphia region, the district attorney of Bucks County, Matthew D. Weintraub, faced questions about whether he had made the right call in taking the most severe punishment for horrible crimes off the table. Experts in death penalty law said the agreement was especially notable for its speed. But the father of one of the young men found dead said on Monday that family members of all of the victims supported it.Mark Potash, whose son Mark Sturgis, 22, was killed, said Mr. Weintraub came to the family members, who for days had stood vigil while investigators, aided by cadaver-sniffing dogs, excavated a burial pit at a farm in Solebury Township. At the time, the bodies of Mr. Sturgis and two other victims, Dean Finocchiaro, 19, and Thomas Meo, 21, had been found, but one victim was unaccounted for. The prosecutor said he needed Mr. DiNardo’s cooperation.“Without the confession, we would have wound up leaving a boy missing,” Mr. Potash said. “It took about half a second for all of us to agree.”“When you spend that much time with each other, you’re not only fearing and scared and holding vigil for your own child, you start doing the same for each person’s child,” he added.Mr. Weintraub said last week that without Mr. DiNardo’s cooperation, Jimi Taro Patrick, 19, who was buried a half-mile from the others on a wooded mountaintop, would not have been easily found. He said Mr. DiNardo also gave information that led to charges against Sean M. Kratz, 20, who is accused of being Mr. DiNardo’s accomplice.Although there are no reliable national statistics available on plea bargains in capital cases, it is not unprecedented, or especially uncommon, for prosecutors and defense lawyers to strike deals in exchange for information about past crimes or potential threats.But death penalty experts said they knew of no other case that had been settled with such haste.“The case clearly had exigent circumstances, and there was a lot of pressure to find the kid, and I think that that is why it happened so fast,” said Robert Dunham, who led the Pennsylvania Capital Case Resource Center for part of the 1990s. “The speed was because they had the opportunity to find the victim’s body.”Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania, a Democrat, placed a moratorium on executions in 2015 shortly after his election, pending delivery of a long overdue report on the cost and effectiveness of capital punishment. There are 161 inmates on death row in Pennsylvania; the last execution in the state took place in 1999.Richard W. Long, the executive director of the Pennsylvania District Attorneys Association, which opposes the governor’s moratorium, said there is “no hard-and-fast rule” on the timing of when to pursue a capital case in the state, which has one of the nation’s broadest death penalty statutes.A former longtime district attorney of Philadelphia, Lynne M. Abraham, who was called one of America’s “deadliest prosecutors” by a criminal justice policy group, agreed with Mr. Weintraub’s decision.“People who say he shouldn’t have done it this early in an investigation are not really tuned in in this case,” she said, adding that a quick resolution spares Pennsylvania from fighting decades of appeals, and family members from delaying the grieving process.Mr. Dunham predicted that the Bucks County agreement was more likely to revive debate about use of the death penalty than it was to offer a template for other prosecutors.“The criticism that you hear after deals like this are not that the prosecutor shouldn’t do it, but that it highlights how arbitrary the death penalty is,” said Mr. Dunham, who is now the executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center, a research group that has expressed concerns about the application of capital punishment.“It’s clearly arbitrary that a quadruple murderer is spared capital prosecution because he was successfully able to hide the victim’s body, and the death penalty gets pursued against an accomplice in a robbery gone bad.”A Franklin & Marshall poll of Pennsylvanians in 2015 showed that 61 percent favor the death penalty, and 30 percent are opposed.For Mr. Potash, the father of one of the dead men, there is no question. “I believe death is too good for these two,” he said. “At their young age, they’ll have a really, really, really long stay in prison, and that’s what they deserve.”