https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/30/fashion/hilary-duff-beauty-regimen.html
Hilary Duff Is Still a Shimmering Star - The New York Times
Duff  Hilary,Cosmetics and Toiletries,Shampoos and Hair Products,Skin,Exercise
May 30, 2017
3990
Hilary Duff may have come up as a bubbly Disney star, but these days she plays a complex, career-focused editor on TV Land’s comedy “Younger,” back this month for Season 4. When she is not on set in New York, Ms. Duff, 29, who lives in Los Angeles and is the mother to a 5-year-old son, Luca Cruz Comrie, might be trying out yoga classes and dabbling in makeup. Peruse her favorites, below.I exfoliate with Dr. Lancer’s Polish. You do it dry, so it’s kind of abrasive, but I find it really makes a difference if you do it every day. Harold Lancer has been my dermatologist for probably six years. He does the best microdermabrasion. My favorite serum is by 3Lab. It’s super-expensive, but I don’t use it all the time. Then I use La Mer cream. I want a thick layer on my face. And I use this Tata Harper eye cream — the Restorative one.Right now, I’m using a Glossier gel kind of sunscreen. And I do masks all the time. I did the GlamGlow SuperMud one last week. I also like the 24K Gold one by Peter Thomas Roth. And then there’s m-61; I love the resurfacing pads.I also use eyelash and eyebrow serums. I like Dr. Lancer’s lash serum best. Then I use this brow serum I get from Amazon called Neubrow. It helps because I don’t have a lot of brow hair, and I’m always penciling in. Actually, I go to the Streicher Sisters, and one of them, Kristie, does brows. She’s getting her license in microblading, but she won’t do anyone yet. She’s like, “I still don’t like the way it looks totally.” And I keep saying: “I’ll be on your guinea pig! Do it now! I’ll go cheating on you if you don’t!”Also for my skin, I’ve been drinking rosewater, which is supposed to be really hydrating, but it tastes nasty.I like Laura Mercier tinted moisturizer. And I like a lot of Kevyn Aucoin products, especially for contour and highlighting. I like to have a bit of a shaded face — that’s my go-to look. I carve a little cheekbone with a contour. Then I usually dust a light bronzer everywhere and do a little contour around my eyes and down my nose. I pencil in my brows, curl my lashes and I’m done. (I’m big on curling my eyelashes.) I use a Smashbox mascara called Full Exposure. It doesn’t drop, and it has a fatter brush that I like.I also love anything shimmery. Recently I got all these glitter eyeliners from Urban Decay. It’s chunky glitter. I went over to my friend’s house, and she said to me, “I’m digging your eighth-grade liner, girl.”I really love the Chanel Vitalumière Aqua foundation for a nighttime dinner or something. And if I’m doing a lip, I’m really into all of the Tom Ford matte colors. They’re all named after boys, which is really funny. I like Bradley, I like Evan, and this one I have on is Cristiano.My favorite lip balm is a cocoa butter stick from the drugstore, the fat one that looks like a glue stick. Also, there’s this line I’m obsessed with at Sephora called Bum Bum Cream. It smells so good! And now they have a lip balm, and I can’t stop. My son smelled it the other day, and he goes, “Mom that smells like Hawaii.” I was like, “I know, let’s go!”Remember the days when people were offended if you asked if they colored their hair? Even though it was in stripes? The salon I go to is Nine Zero One in L.A. Nikki and Riawna, they do my color and cut. Cynthia Vanis, who does my hair for the show, also cuts it. Two seasons ago, I was so tired of having long extensions. The day we wrapped, we headed to the trailer and she cut my hair to my chin. It was so fun.Right now I’m using a R&Co color shampoo and conditioner. I also use this purple conditioner for blondes called Fabuloso by Evo — it comes in a big funny tube. That’s like a once-a-week thing. I recently did a campaign for Joico for a new shampoo and conditioner for blondes that I love. The shampoo does a creamy thing instead of a lather thing.For styling, I love the new R&Co Sail Soft Wave spray and the Mannequin Paste. It smells like fig. I also use the BlowPro hair spray — it’s my favorite because it’s really light and smells like Christmas cookies.I have two all-time favorites. One is Gaiac by Le Labo. The other is Inflorescence by Byredo. It’s very floral, but it’s also lemony and citrusy.I just got nail extensions because I was feeling a little wild. I basically went with fake lash extensions and fake nails in one weekend. I had to do something because my son was away for the weekend.The skinny now is so unattainable. There are so many delicious foods in New York. Do people just deprive themselves? I struggle with it just like everybody else. Sometimes I’m really on track and not eating sugar or gluten, and I’ll feel really good. Then there are times — like this past weekend at a kid’s birthday — when I see a cupcake and eat it. I won’t beat myself up over it.I hike a lot in L.A., and I do this class called Training Mate. It’s a little like Barry’s Bootcamp but without the treadmill. I do another running class in L.A. with my mom friends. We drop off the kids at school and then go to Pulse.In New York, I live above a SoulCycle, so I’ve been spinning a lot. Or I’ll go running up and down the West Side Highway. I haven’t found a yoga class in New York that I like. Some classes here will walk you through the flow twice and then abandon you to do it on our own. After I’ve worked all day, the last thing I want is to have to remember the flow. I would like to find a class, but I want someone to hold my hand through the whole process.