https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/business/using-robotics-to-teach-computer-programming.html
Using Robotics to Teach Computer Programming - The New York Times
Children and Childhood,Computers and the Internet,Robots and Robotics,Gupta  Saurabh,Wonder Workshop (Play-i Inc),Gupta  Vikas,Greaves  Mikal
Sept. 27, 2014
6954
Dash is a small blue robot that can be programmed to play the xylophone, kick a ball, act like a dog and deliver messages — for instance, a prerecorded rendition of the “Happy Birthday” song. Its head, which spins around, has a single, Cyclops-like eye. Sometimes Dash emits a cheerful chime — a sign that it approves of its programmer’s actions.Saurabh Gupta, one of Dash’s creators, says these anthropomorphic qualities make the robot “more like a friend or a companion” than an object — and therefore more likely to appeal to its programmers, meant to be children as young as 5.Mr. Gupta is a co-founder and the chief technology officer of Wonder Workshop, one of a small but growing number of companies seeking to teach computer programming to children through robotics. Mr. Gupta formerly oversaw the iPod software teams for Apple; the other founders are Vikas Gupta, who rebuilt the payment infrastructure of Amazon when he worked there; and Mikal Greaves, who formerly worked at the consulting firm Frog Design.Like one of its competitors, KinderLab Robotics, Wonder Workshop was founded by parents who were frustrated by a lack of opportunities for their children to learn programming.This fall, Wonder Workshop, based in San Mateo, Calif., will begin delivering its robots to customers who participated in a crowdsourced fund-raising campaign on its website. So far, the company has received a total of 25,000 preorders for Dash and for a smaller, simpler robot named Dot. The preorder price for Dash is $169, and for Dot, $59. The company also sells accessories, including the xylophone. (The company recently changed its name and renamed its robots; it was called Play-i and they were Bo and Yana.)Vikas Gupta, who is not related to Saurabh Gupta, came up with the idea for an educational technology company in 2012 after he read an article about children in Estonia who were learning computer coding as part of the country’s first-grade curriculum. He was curious how the United States stacked up against other countries in teaching computer science and coding, partly because he had an infant daughter. He was dismayed to find that a majority of American high schools didn’t even offer computer science as an elective.In his subsequent reading, he discovered research from Tufts University showing that children as young as 5 could learn to code if given tools appropriate for their age. That research, as it turns out, was conducted by someone who had come up with her own robot: Marina Umaschi Bers, director of the DevTech Research Group at Tufts and professor in its Eliot-Pearson Department of Child Study and Human Development. Ms. Bers has been studying learning through technology since 1994 and has written two books on the subject.Ms. Bers geared her robot to teach 4- to 7-year-olds. “In programming,” she says, “it’s an age that really has been ignored.” And yet programming teaches skills that are an important educational foundation, she says. “If you want children to be able to learn how to read and do math, they need to understand order, sequencing and problem solving in a systematic way.”Last year, Ms. Bers founded KinderLab Robotics with Mitch Rosenberg, a tech industry executive she met at a birthday party that their children attended. The company, based in Arlington, Mass., is now making the robot that Ms. Bers developed. Next month, it will begin shipping the robot, called Kibo, to customers. It sells several kits, which differ by accessories, priced at $220 to $400.Ms. Bers says that learning this type of programming isn’t just for children who may be Silicon Valley-bound someday. “When we teach children how to read and write, we don’t expect everyone to become a journalist or a novelist,” she says. “But we believe they’ll be able to think in new ways because it opens the doors to thinking. We believe the same thing for the skills of programming and engineering.”In the past year and a half, the organization Code.org has led a campaign emphasizing the importance of educating American children in computer programming and science. Its public service announcements have featured tech celebrities like Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg, and Chris Bosh of the Miami Heat.Two important differences between the robots made by KinderLab Robotics and Wonder Workshop are in the method and interface used to program the devices. Kibo, the KinderLab robot, is modular and relies on wooden blocks that its young programmers arrange in sequences. They scan the blocks using a grocery store-style scanner in the robot, which then performs actions — like dancing, moving side to side and flashing a light — that correlate to the patterns the children have arranged.With the Wonder Workshop products, Dash and Dot, children program the robots by using tablets or smartphones with a Bluetooth Smart connection that works with applications on those devices.The Wonder Workshop robots also have more complex capabilities for older children, teenagers and even adults who want to learn coding language or program their own apps for the robot.The company’s use of digital technology raises the question of how much time young children should spend in front of screens. “Technology is both good and bad,” says Dr. Dimitri A. Christakis, director of the Center for Child Health, Behavior and Development at Seattle Children’s Hospital. “Too much time spent with technology is going to come at the expense of interacting with other children and adults, and with reading and physical activity.”As it is, Dr. Christakis says, the typical 5-year-old already spends about four to five hours a day with screen media of some kind, typically video games or movies. But a tablet- or smartphone-driven robot like Dash, which is interactive and instructional, is “not only harmless,” Dr. Christakis says. “It’s probably beneficial.”