https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/sports/tennis/roger-federer-rafael-nadal-rivalry.html
8 Grand Slam Finals That Pitted Rafael Nadal Against Roger Federer - The New York Times
Federer  Roger,Nadal  Rafael,Tennis,Australian Open (Tennis),Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,French Open (Tennis)
Jan. 27, 2017
4825
Nadal-Federer, Federer-Nadal.To the delight of tennis fans, the Australian Open final on Sunday will match two of the sport’s eternal greats, 35-year-old Roger Federer and 30-year-old Rafael Nadal (broadcast live at 3:30 a.m. Eastern on ESPN and repeated at 9 a.m. on ESPN2).It is their first meeting in a Grand Slam final in more than five years. The excitement has been amplified by the unexpectedness of the matchup. Both players are coming off long layoffs because of injuries, and they have fallen in the rankings. Nadal is seeded ninth in Melbourne, and Federer 17th.The titans of the sport for more than a decade, Nadal and Federer have met 34 times since 2004 (Nadal leads, 23-11). Eight of those matches came on the highest stage: a Grand Slam final. Here are those matches (Nadal leads, 6-2), soon to increase by one.Nadal, still only 20, was the defending champion and had established himself as the best in the world on clay, winning 59 in a row on the surface. Federer, 24, was the game’s best player, with a 7-0 record in Slam finals, including the previous three. But Nadal had won his last four matches against Federer, and he took this first Slam final matchup, 1-6, 6-1, 6-4, 7-6 (4), after missing the Australian Open with a broken foot.The winner said: “To beat the No. 1 player and doing it after the injury I had, I’d say the emotions were a bit more powerful.”The New York Times said: “It was short on rhythm, short on spectacular rallies and, ultimately, short on suspense.”Nadal was 4-0 against Federer on the year. But back on his favored surface, grass, Federer won his fourth consecutive Wimbledon title, 6-0, 7-6 (5), 6-7 (2), 6-3.The winner said: “It was important for me to win a final against him for a change and beat him for a change. At Wimbledon, I knew it was going to be the place for me to do it the easiest way.”The Times said: Federer was “looking slightly more relieved than overjoyed as he walked, heavy-legged, to the net to share a handshake and a pat on the stomach with the young Spaniard.”Federer again came in having won three consecutive Grand Slam titles. A week before the French Open began, he finally beat Nadal on clay for the first time. But Nadal again foiled him in Paris, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4. Federer had 59 unforced errors to Nadal’s 27.The winner said: “Roger sometimes plays very, very aggressive, especially with the forehand. But anyway, for me, he has the best forehand of the tour, no? But yes, the truth is, he had some mistakes today, more than usual.”The Times said: “Nadal’s forehands found the court’s white lines as if they were magnets, as he repeatedly hit winners. He dripped with sweat, but seemed to be gaining energy, while Federer looked exhausted.”Federer gained a fifth consecutive Wimbledon title, 7-6 (7), 4-6, 7-6 (3), 2-6, 6-2, joining Bjorn Borg as the only players to do that in a century. It was the first five-set Slam major between Federer and Nadal, who between them had now won the last 10 Grand Slam events. (The streak ended at 11 when Novak Djokovic won the Australian Open the next year.)Federer won the match with his serve: He had 24 aces to Nadal’s one.The winner said: “It’s a good rivalry, I think. We’ve been at the top for over 100 weeks together. It is building up to one of, maybe, the great rivalries.”The Times said: “Nadal is moving closer, but he cannot seem to beat Federer off the clay.”Nadal was at his absolute peak in this tournament, not losing a set on the way to a fourth straight title at Roland Garros. His 6-1, 6-3, 6-0 victory was the most lopsided result in a men’s Grand Slam final since 1984, and it was the only final between the rivals to be decided in straight sets.The winner said: “I think I played an almost perfect match, and Roger made more mistakes than usual.”The Times said: “In a final that only rarely resembled anything other than one-way traffic, Nadal was at his suffocating finest.”Nadal had won four straight French Opens, and Federer five straight Wimbledons. The pattern finally ended with this breakthrough victory for Nadal, generally cited as the greatest match between them.Nadal won the first two sets before Federer fought back to win the next two in tiebreakers. The final set went all the way to 9-7; Nadal finally won when Federer hit a short forehand into the net after 4 hours 48 minutes. The final score was 6–4, 6–4, 6–7 (5), 6–7 (8), 9–7. It was the longest singles final in Wimbledon’s 131-year history and finished in near darkness.The winner said: “It’s one of the most powerful feelings I’ve had in my life.”The Times said: “Last year’s emotional tussle immediately took its place among the best Wimbledon finals, but this five-set classic — played on a rainy, gusty day — was better yet.”For the first time, the men met in a Grand Slam final somewhere besides Paris or London. And for the first time, it was Nadal who was seeded first, with Federer second.In another five-setter, Nadal won again, 7-5, 3-6, 7-6 (3), 3-6, 6-2, preventing Federer from equaling Pete Sampras’s record of 14 Grand Slam titles. Federer struggled with his serve, putting only 52 percent of his first serves in play, by far his lowest percentage of the tournament.A devastated Federer broke down in tears during his postmatch interview, saying, “God, it’s killing me.”The winner said (to Federer): “Well, first of all, sorry for today. I really know how you feel right now. It’s really tough. Remember, you’re a great champion. You’re one of the best in history.”The Times said: “The roar heard at Rod Laver Arena when Federer held serve to even the match at two sets apiece was soon replaced by the groans and awkward silences that accompany an anticlimax.”Before 2017, this was the only final in which Nadal and Federer were not seeded Nos. 1 and 2 (Nadal was No. 1, but Federer was No. 3, behind Djokovic). Nadal matched Borg with a sixth French title, 7-5, 7-6 (3), 5-7, 6-1.The winner said: “There is a lot of emotion, but the real satisfaction comes from all the work you do before you get there.”The Times said: “Their rivalry is one of the greatest in tennis history, yet it has been decidedly short on suspense here.”Since that match, Federer has been back to a Grand Slam final four times, winning his seventh Wimbledon in 2012. Nadal has been to eight major finals, with a 4-4 record. Last year was the first since 2002 in which neither appeared in a Grand Slam final. Their rivalry seemed to be waning as Djokovic and Andy Murray took their places at the top of tennis.But here are Federer and Nadal again, improbably, for one more big final.