https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/opinion/my-lesson-from-white-america.html
My Lesson From White America - The New York Times
Eugene (Ore),Economic Conditions and Trends,Poverty,University of Oregon,Oregon,United States
Oct. 10, 2016
9667
EUGENE, Ore. — It’s a cliché about the classroom that your students teach you as much, if not more, than you teach them.“Where I come from, the girls have only three choices,” one of my students, in her early 20s, told me of her hometown in Eastern Oregon. “You get married, you go to beauty school, or you join the Army.” She was herself a veteran of Afghanistan.Compared with other places I’ve lived (Los Angeles, Mexico City), Oregon is very “white.” (It’s a term so loaded, I feel I should use quotation marks at least once.) Listening to my journalism students at the University of Oregon and reading their assignments have given me many insights into the hurt, confusion and fortitude of people who could be called “white.”I thought I knew about white people already. In the 1960s and ’70s, I grew up as a Latino (a term we didn’t use then) in the multiethnic Hollywood neighborhood of Los Angeles. My grade-school friends included an Armenian kid, an Eastern European émigré and a guy from Arkansas, all of whom were white. In class and on TV, I was fed a steady diet of stories featuring people with skin paler than mine: the Pilgrims, Abraham Lincoln, “The Great Gatsby,” “The Grapes of Wrath,” “The Godfather,” “Patton” and so forth.Since then, the study of white identity has become an intellectual vogue resulting in some important work. The book “White Trash: The 400-Year Untold Story of Class in America” is a New York Times best seller. As was the 2010 book by the African-American historian Nell Irvin Painter, “The History of White People.”Now, with the presidential election just weeks away, every other news report tells me it’s “white people” and their anger that will determine the outcome between two candidates of Anglo-Saxon and German heritage.Eugene is 82 percent “white alone, not Hispanic or Latino,” as the Census Bureau puts it. I commute to Eugene by bus from neighboring Springfield, a blue-collar town sometimes disparagingly referred to as “Springtucky.” It’s a nickname tinged with racism toward the “rednecks” who supposedly live there.As relatively affluent students get off at the university stops, I look at the people who stay on, almost all of them white, and I think, “There’s not much ‘white privilege’ left on this bus now.” A white author friend with whom I shared this observation disagreed.“It’s the right to carry a gun in your car and not get shot,” he said. “And you can screw up your life more often as a white person.”I tell my students that stereotypes and generalizations are the enemy of good writing. And mostly, their tales of central Oregon are nuanced and complex. They report about old lumber towns, county fairs, homeless people, students grappling with rising tuition costs, and irascible old hippies determined to hold on to their independence.Running through this reporting, there is often an unspoken theme. The notion of class struggle lost currency in America decades ago. Every once in a while, though, I feel compelled to name this taboo subject — perhaps because class underpins my sense of Latino identity. When I say, “I am the son of Latino immigrants,” it’s a shorthand for the experience of people who have fought their way out of poverty and who remained linked, through ties of blood and cultural affinity, to others who still live with deprivation.“This is a story that’s really about social class,” I’ll say. But that sense of community seems no longer available to my white students. As one explained in response: “You’re supposed to be able to make yourself rich, and if you can’t, it’s your own fault.”These days, economic forces are conspiring to make the stories of many of my white Oregon students more similar to those of my Latino students. Both tell tales of small towns and overworked parents, about feeling like outsiders and battling class discrimination. I’ve found the same themes in other student writing from Central California, upstate New York and rural Wisconsin.If social mobility isn’t what it used to be, it may be a reality that Latino people have adapted to more readily. In my humble, nonwhite opinion, white America has not yet found a constructive language to talk about this shared experience of the 21st century. I find hope, however, in the young people in my classes who roundly reject the idea that nonwhite people are to blame for their struggles.With these students, I share the ideas that have kept me centered as an American-born son of Latino immigrants: Be proud of your roots, understand the history that has shaped your community and respect the history of others. Do these things, I tell them, and you will be better writers — and good citizens, too.