http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/15/us/baltimore-freddie-gray-police-trial.html
Baltimore Trial Leaves Unanswered Question: What Happened to Freddie Gray? - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Blacks,Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Porter  William G (1989- ),Baltimore (Md)
Dec. 14, 2015
7294
BALTIMORE — When a young black man named Freddie Gray died of a spinal cord injury in April, after a widely circulated cellphone video showing him being dragged screaming into a police transport van, a theory emerged: He was brutalized by officers, who gave him an intentional “rough ride” that left him with a broken neck.Now a jury is considering the fate of William G. Porter, the first of six Baltimore officers charged in Mr. Gray’s death. On Monday, lawyers delivered closing arguments; a prosecutor, dangling a bloodstained seatbelt, called the van a “casket on wheels,” while a defense lawyer urged jurors to put “cold hard facts” before emotion.It is Baltimore’s highest-profile trial in years, playing out against the backdrop of an intense national debate over race and policing. But the Gray case is murkier than those in Chicago and South Carolina where video showed a white officer shooting an unarmed black man. While prosecution and defense lawyers agree that Mr. Gray suffered a debilitating injury inside the van, there is no recording showing what happened. And the fact that six officers have been charged — and are being tried separately — has complicated matters because not all the evidence is coming out at once.So after two weeks of testimony and roughly two dozen witnesses, with the city on edge and preparing for unrest, a huge unanswered question remains: What really happened to Mr. Gray?“We’ve gotten two conflicting narrations to that question,” said Lawrence Grandpre, research director of the advocacy group Leaders of Beautiful Struggle, who has attended the trial each day, jotting color-coded notes. African-Americans, he said, “want to know what happened to one of their own.”As the city awaits a verdict, there is unease and fear of a repeat of the riots that erupted in April on the day of Mr. Gray’s funeral. Students left a high school en masse that day in response to a call on social media for a “purge,” a reference to a horror film in which laws are suspended for one day a year.On Monday, the chief executive officer of Baltimore City Public Schools sent a note to parents, warning of consequences for any who engage in “student walkouts, vandalism, civil disorder and any form of violence.” The city’s police commissioner, who has canceled leave this week for all officers, on Monday issued a letter urging them to “fervently resist the low expectations” some have of the department.The trial has played out in the courtroom of Judge Barry G. Williams under tight security; the judge has barred lawyers and defendants in all six cases from talking about them. A local activist group, Baltimore Bloc, is planning to demonstrate when jurors reach a verdict. It is advertising the protest on Twitter: “If Porter Walks, Shut it Down, No Business as Usual.”Officer Porter, who is also black and who testified in his own defense, has pleaded not guilty to manslaughter, assault, reckless endangerment and misconduct in office; the manslaughter charge carries a maximum of 10 years in prison. Legal experts watching the trial say the dueling narratives could help him; on Monday, his lawyer Joseph Murtha tried to sow doubt over conflicting medical testimony during his closing argument to jurors.“It’s astonishing, and it’s scary,” he said, pointing to Officer Porter, in a gray suit, seated at the defense table. “This man’s life actually is in the hands of myself — and soon to be your hands — and the state is asking you to make a judgment and decision based on speculation.”But a prosecutor, Janice Bledsoe, insisted that Mr. Gray, who was 25, was healthy when he entered the van and came out near death. In an impassioned appeal to the predominantly African-American jury of seven women and five men, she said Mr. Gray might be alive today if Officer Porter had called for a medic, or buckled him into the van.“The very thing that could have helped save Mr. Gray’s life,” she declared, holding up a seatbelt that had been cut from the van as evidence after Mr. Gray’s death. “It’s got Freddie Gray’s blood on it.”The stakes are especially high for Marilyn Mosby, the state’s attorney for the City of Baltimore, who charged the six officers — an act that some say spared the city from further violence, but that defenders of the police characterized as the work of an overzealous prosecutor. On Monday, dressed in a pink coat, Ms. Mosby sat in the courtroom as Mr. Murtha took aim at her, though not by name.“This case was premised on fear and a rush to judgment,” Mr. Murtha said.The case turns on what happened as a police transport van carried Mr. Gray through West Baltimore, making six stops. At the fourth stop, Officer Porter placed Mr. Gray on a bench inside the van without belting him in. When Officer Porter asked Mr. Gray if he needed a medic, Mr. Gray said yes, but Officer Porter did not call for one.When “that van door closed on Freddie Gray, that wagon became his casket on wheels,” Ms. Bledsoe told jurors, her voice rising at times and at times falling into a whisper. After ticking off all the times the officer could have helped Mr. Gray, she said, “That is disregard for human life! That is manslaughter!”Ms. Bledsoe sought to cast a shadow over Officer Porter’s credibility, using his own words against him as she pointed out inconsistencies between his statements to internal affairs investigators and on the witness stand.Officer Porter was not involved in the initial arrest of Mr. Gray, and in this trial at least (his five fellow officers are scheduled to be tried, consecutively, early next year) the initial assumptions of the public have not been borne out. Neither the prosecution nor the defense has asserted that Mr. Gray was injured during the initial arrest. The term “rough ride” has not come up.Both sides agree that the injury happened in the van. But they disagree sharply about precisely when the injury occurred, and how quickly Mr. Gray deteriorated.Dr. Carol Allan, the forensic pathologist who conducted Mr. Gray’s autopsy, said that Mr. Gray’s spine was “functionally cut through” sometime between the second and fourth stops, which likely caused him to suffocate, and that prompt medical care could have improved his prognosis.But Dr. Matthew Ammerman, a neurosurgeon who testified for the defense, said Mr. Gray suffered a “catastrophic spinal cord injury” sometime after the fifth stop — and that he was instantly paralyzed, meaning Officer Porter could have done nothing to help him.Legal analysts say more, or different, information, may come out in future trials; Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., the van driver, who faces charges of murder, is to be tried next. But David Jaros, a law professor at the University of Baltimore who has been following the Porter case closely, said it was unlikely that the state’s account of how Mr. Gray was fatally injured would change much.“We may have somewhat of a Rashomon experience,” he said, referring to the 1950 Japanese film that shows contradictory interpretations of the same event by different people. “But the state is likely to use many of the same experts when it comes to the medical evidence.”The medical evidence inside the courtroom has done little to change perceptions outside, said the Rev. C. D. Witherspoon, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s Baltimore chapter, who lives in Mr. Gray’s neighborhood.“I know it to be true that at least some of the injuries took place before he was put in the paddy wagon,” said Mr. Witherspoon, adding that his group hired an investigator to talk to people who witnessed Mr. Gray’s arrest — many of whom, he said, did not want to come forward. “There were people who heard him screeching and squealing and crying out loud for help.”Mr. Grandpre, a former college debate coach and son of a former Baltimore police officer, said the absence of “video of the death,” and the fact that there are six trials — not one — has also produced confusion. “There’s no one bad guy, or bad gal, that people can pin all their frustration on,” he said. “It’s kind of this cloud.”