https://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/12/garden/furnishing-a-tiny-apartment.html
Furnishing a Tiny Apartment - The New York Times
Bloomberg  Michael R,Interior Design and Furnishings,Kitchens,Tables,Bathrooms and Toilets,Real Estate and Housing (Residential)
July 11, 2012
7880
SO you’ve finally made it to the Big City, and all you can afford is a mini-apartment. Such is the situation outlined this week by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg when he announced a competition to design a building of so-called “micro-units,” no bigger than 300 square feet, presumably tailor-made for single adults, childless couples or really, really good friends.Building such a micro-pad is only half the battle, of course. After the paint dries, you still have to furnish it. But despair not: while you may be living in an area smaller than your average motel room, some experts say outfitting such tiny surroundings can actually be good for your soul.“What people have noticed is that it’s stressful to deal with a lot of things,” said Janel Laban, the executive editor of Apartment Therapy, the home-design Web site. “Living more simply, as you’re forced to do in a small space, you can find that life is less stressful.” After all, who needs the pressure of having a closet? (Mr. Bloomberg’s planned apartments might not include such luxuries.)Beyond psychological encouragement, Ms. Laban also offered a series of practical tips: emphasizing natural light, for instance, and using high-gloss paint and glossy surfaces to reflect it. Wall-hung bookshelves are good; bookcases are not. Also, just as at a newspaper, editing is crucial, if sometimes painful. That means keeping two wineglasses around, not a dozen. Ditto for plates, vases and clothes hangers.“You’re going to need less of everything,” Ms. Laban said. “And while you might have people over, you’re not going to be having many sit-down dinner parties.”Seth Herzog, a downtown comedian who long lived in a 115-square-foot room (and that is not a misprint) on West 29th Street, also emphasized the positive side of puny apartments. “Everything you need is within arm’s reach,” he said in an e-mail, while acknowledging that you also need to lower your expectations.“I used to say to folks before they came over, ‘I live in a small space, it’s very compact,’ ” he said. “ ‘Now, whatever you’re imagining as small, halve it. Now, halve it again. One more time. Now, you’re close.’ ”That said, Mr. Herzog, whose pad had no kitchen or bathroom but a sink, also recognized the challenges of such surroundings, and admitted to sometimes using his sink as a urinal.“It’s not a big deal,” he said. “Get over it.”Um, ew. Mr. Bloomberg’s plan won’t call for such deprivations (the micro-apartment will include a bathroom), but it will call for some creative downsizing. To help, we have compiled a short list of small solutions.THE KITCHEN A mock-up unveiled on Monday by the mayor showed the micro-manse as having three distinct parts: kitchen, bathroom and a living-and-bedding-down area where Manhattanites can revisit their college years by sleeping on a pull-out couch. Of these, the kitchen seems to be the most amply apportioned, with several countertops, space for a fridge and stove, and a sink. (Don’t get any ideas, Mr. Herzog.) Still, there are always ways to save space, starting with the most conventional of kitchenware: the toaster. Chomp is a nifty three-in-one gadget that can make a sandwich, toast bread, grill a small steak and fit in your average purse. (After you buy it, of course; it is still a prototype.)Speaking of movable feasts, the inventor of the mini-microwave iWave Cube ($99), Phil Davis, decided to put a handle on it just in case people wanted to carry it around. “People have, for the first time, a chance to decide when and wherever and however they want to use microwave technology,” Mr. Davis says in a promotional video on the company’s Web site. “And that’s the game changer.”That may be a wee overstatement, but the iWave Cube is definitely compact, small enough to fit in your average freezer. Unless, of course, you have a mini-kitchen by Boffi ($35,000), a rolling multilevel contraption that includes a small refrigerator, several drawers and a wooden chopping block (a cooktop is extra), and would fit snugly alongside a countertop. Originally designed in 1963, the mini-kitchen has only recently gone into production, a sure sign that good ideas never die and that all of our living spaces are slowly shrinking.Snug is also the word for so-called “nesting spoons” by the redundantly named designer Joseph Joseph ($24.99). Blazingly colored, the five-piece set is magnetically charged to stick together, with the largest utensil — the ladle — doing double duty as the holder. Or you could just stick them on the side of your mini-fridge.THE BATHROOM Mr. Bloomberg’s model commode allowed for a bathtub, which seems almost extravagant considering there may not be room for a real bed. (Unless, of course, you want to sleep in the tub.) Still, there are other ways to keep things tiny: consider, if you will, the Rolly chewable toothbrush ($1.31 each at bluebanana.com). The what? Hailing from Britain (often painted as a dentally challenged nation), the Rolly is a small, spiky edible with 276 bristles that promises to “remove food debris and plaque from the most hard to reach areas.”No toothpaste or water is needed, according to the company’s Web site, though you may need therapy to remove the indelible image of chewing on a sea urchin. It “works like a traditional toothbrush,” the packaging promises, “but more discreetly.” How very British.Another space-saving oddity is the Shower Station ($70), a multiarmed shower caddy that vaguely resembles the love child of an octopus and a Transformer. Roughly two feet tall and a foot wide, it may be the biggest thing in your tiny bathroom, but it promises to hold multiple bottles of shampoo, conditioner and other beauty products. (Which you’ll need if you end up sleeping in the tub.)Finally, for those wanting to add a little — emphasis on little — greenery to the bathroom, there’s always a bonsai tree. Bonsai Boy offers all kinds of miniature trees, from flowering to artificial, none of which eat up much space, cost much (prices start at about $25) or offer much shade.THE LIVING ROOM-SLASH-BEDROOM It’s difficult to imagine any small space being complete without a trip to Ikea. For all of Ikea’s spirit-deadening vastness, the company makes some dandy functional furniture (and not a bad meatball). One example is the PS Havet, which comes in sofa ($449) and even smaller chair size ($279). Both Havets curiously come with wheels, which are apparently meant to allow for easy cleaning underneath, but would also make it easy for you to roll them out on the sidewalk when you buy something more expensive. The company also has all manner of other studio-friendly apartment gear, including underbed storage.Putting together Ikea furniture requires a good tool kit, and Trademark Tools makes a 22-piece set (about $8), complete with essentials like a wrench, pliers and a tape measure.Less-handy (i.e., literary) types may prefer not to assemble their own furniture. They will also need a desk. The Uruguayan designer Claudio Sibille has a sneakily cool version that looks like a simple wood caddy, but hides a table top, drawers and a full-size chair (it is still in prototype, but will soon be available to buy, the company says).The rounded low-slung tables ($1,500 for a set of three) designed by the architect Eugene Stoltzfus also tuck away nicely, one inside the other, or between your legs when sitting on your sofa bed.Ms. Laban, of Apartment Therapy, also recommends using the height of a small room to your advantage. “Think tall,” she said. To that end, there is the single-stack Sapien  bookshelf ($298), which can hold dozens of books and takes up only about a square foot of floor space. (An e-reader would take up even less, but that’s another story.)THE FIRE ESCAPE (A K A THE TERRACE) While it is not clear if Bloomberg Manor will have fire escapes, we’re allowed to dream. One nice idea for outside (or in) is wall planters, which don’t require big clunky flowerpots, but merely a little wall space. The San Francisco garden guru Flora Grubb — yes, that’s her real name — sells 20-inch-square trays for beginners ($79), though the actual plants are not included.Those who want both a garden and a grill need look no further than the Black + Blum Hot Pot BBQ ($124), a seemingly ordinary flower pot with a small grill inside, advertised as a “BBQ and herb-garden in one.” (Again, plants not included.)Other outdoorsy passions — which a small apartment can certainly inspire — can be pursued on a folding bike, which allows you the thrill of riding without the hassle of stowing your ungainly 10-speed in your micro-hallway. There are many models, including several made by Citizen Bike, all of which collapse in on themselves when you want to store them.Of course, having put so much work into making your itsy-bitsy apartment a real home, you will probably want to share it with someone. For that, there is nothing like an itsy-bitsy pet — a puppy, for example, like Beyonce, who made headlines this year after being born tiny enough to fit in a spoon. The mutt survived and has since become a spokesdog for rescue pets nationwide. And while she may not be available for adoption, all kinds of other little ones can be found at shelters.And hey, after being in a cage, your new pet will think your 300-square-foot space is a palace.