http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/01/world/middleeast/with-security-tight-iraqis-cast-votes-in-unaccustomed-peace.html
With Security Tight, Iraqis Cast Votes in Unaccustomed Peace - The New York Times
Elections,Terrorism,Islamic State of Iraq and Syria,Maliki  Nuri Kamal al-,Iraq,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
April 30, 2014
8646
BAGHDAD —  Millions of Iraqis voted for a new Parliament on Wednesday, defying threats from Islamist extremists, in an election that was carried out, by Iraq’s brutal standards, in remarkable peace.After a surge in violence leading up to the vote, and threats by a Sunni extremist group, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, to strike polling sites, no attacks were reported in Baghdad, and none with any large numbers of casualties were reported elsewhere in the country.The election, the first nationwide vote since the departure of American troops more than two years ago, was seen as a referendum on Nuri Kamal al-Maliki’s eight years as prime minister as he seeks a third term amid a growing Sunni insurgency that has brought the country to the edge of a new civil war. But with results pending, the story on Wednesday was simply that the election was held at all, and that so few people were killed.Iraqis voted amid extraordinary security procedures. Last weekend, the government announced a weeklong national holiday to ensure that most people stayed home from work, allowing the security forces to prepare in the streets. As Election Day approached, the authorities announced a curfew in Baghdad, which went into effect on Tuesday night and prohibited most traffic, forcing Iraqis to walk to polling centers. Even the airport was closed for a few days.Despite the threats, the turnout for the vote was 60 percent, according to Iraq’s electoral commission, just below the percentage of eligible voters who participated in the last national election, in 2010.“We have the power to make change, inshallah,” said a voter, Emad Ibrahim, using a common Arabic expression that means “God willing.”Paralyzed from a bombing five years ago, he arrived to vote in a wheelchair. “Iraq needs construction,” he said. “Every day people die in Iraq, and it is time to stop this.”Noting his war injuries, he said, “Now I will take my revenge over the terrorists by having the chance to vote for a better Iraq.”Some attacks were carried out north of Baghdad. In one, in a town near Tikrit, Saddam Hussein’s hometown, a police officer pounced on a suicide bomber as he approached a polling center. The officer was killed, and two civilians also died, but his action saved the lives of many others. In the same area, a roadside bomb exploded near a polling center, killing two police officers. And in Diyala Province, northeast of Baghdad, two civilians were killed by a roadside bomb.All in all, Election Day or otherwise, that amounted to a quiet day in Iraq.In a statement, Secretary of State John Kerry praised the police officer who impeded the suicide bomber and said, “Iraqi voters sent a powerful rebuke to the violent extremists who have tried to thwart democratic progress and sow discord in Iraq and throughout the region.”In Anbar Province, which is dominated by the Sunni minority and where insurgents from ISIS control large amounts of territory, including Falluja, voting was severely restricted. In the polling centers near the provincial capital, Ramadi — where a mortar attack killed two civilians — turnout appeared low, and it seemed that more women were voting then men.One man who did vote there, Muhammad al-Rawi, 34, said: “I came here today to stand against ISIS. I am voting to defeat those terrorists so Anbar will return to the way it was. We need buildings and flowers. We don’t want guns and war anymore.”In the early morning, Mr. Maliki voted at the Rashid Hotel in the Green Zone, the secure section in the city’s center where many government buildings are situated, and lauded Iraq’s ability to carry out the election with the absence of American forces. “We are having great success, and there is not one single foreign soldier on the ground,” he said.Final results from the Independent High Election Commission should be announced within a couple of weeks, although partial results, accurate or not, will probably trickle out before then through political parties.Each of Iraq’s elections has been held under difficult circumstances, but this one had new challenges. Tens of thousands of American troops were not on standby. There were fewer international election monitors, because of the lack of security, and allegations of fraud, particularly from losing parties, are probably inevitable. And the hurdles to voting in Anbar Province raised questions about the legitimacy of the vote for Sunnis.Mr. Maliki, if he does not win a significant plurality that would indicate a smooth path to a new term, is likely to use his influence over Iraq’s institutions to influence the process, such as challenging the results through the judiciary, over which he wields enormous influence, experts said.On Wednesday, Mr. Maliki said that his victory was “certain,” and, dramatizing the role of the strongman that he sought to portray during the campaign, he also promised victory against the insurgents.“Soon, there will be a solution in Falluja,” he said. “There is no backing down from destroying ISIS and those who support them.”While the effort by Iraq’s political factions to form a governing coalition could take a long time, as it has in the past, an ominous question that is often raised privately within Iraq’s political class will hover over the process: If Mr. Maliki loses, will he relinquish power peacefully?“It’s a big question,” said Ahmed Ali, an Iraq analyst at the Institute for the Study of War who has closely followed the election. “If we know anything about Prime Minister Maliki, it’s that he doesn’t retreat easily.”