https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/26/us/politics/administration-lobbyists-ethics-waivers.html
White House Backs Down on Keeping Ethics Waivers Secret - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Ethics and Official Misconduct,Office of Government Ethics,Shaub  Walter M Jr
May 26, 2017
3724
WASHINGTON — The White House unexpectedly backed down Friday in a confrontation with the government’s top ethics officer, announcing it will publicly disclose waivers that have been quietly handed out since January to let certain former lobbyists work in the administration.The reversal came after the White House wrote last week to the Office of Government Ethics and asked its director to suspend his request for copies of the waivers. Such waivers are needed when officials want to work on policies or other government issues that they were directly involved in recently as private-sector lobbyists or industry lawyers.The debate over the waivers — which were routinely made public during the Obama administration — has drawn heightened attention as the Trump administration has hired dozens of former lobbyists and lawyers, and is frequently placing them into jobs that overlap with the work they did for paying clients.Both the Trump and Obama administrations have had ethics policies, signed by each president, that prohibit newly hired government officials from handing particular matters they worked on in the private sector for two years. If the new government hires were formerly lobbyists, they were prohibited from working on the same issue for two years.Waivers — which are issued by each federal government agency, and by the White House case by case — allow political appointees to ignore those ethics policies.This already appears to be the case with Michael Catanzaro, who until early this year worked as a lobbyist for a coal-burning electric utility and an oil and gas company, among other clients. He is now the top White House policy official overseeing the rollback of the same environmental protection rules he had lobbied against. So far this year, the Trump administration has not said if Mr. Catanzaro was given a waiver, as it was keeping them confidential.Lindsay Walters, a White House spokeswoman, called the new position a clarification and not a reversal of its earlier stand, adding that the White House itself had about a dozen waivers that would be made public within the next week.“The White House is going to post these waivers,” Ms. Walters said Friday evening.Walter M. Shaub Jr., the head of the Office of Government Ethics, said Friday evening that he was glad that the White House had changed its position, as it will allow his agency, and the public at large, to better evaluate if Trump administration officials are complying with the ethics rules.But he also made clear that there should not have been a need for a confrontation before these waivers were made public.“This really is routine stuff, and I am glad we are back on track again,” said Mr. Shaub, who is in the final year of a five-year appointment overseeing the agency, which does not have subpoena power.It is impossible to know how many of these waivers have been issued across the federal government, which has about 4,000 political appointees who would be subject to ethics rules issued by President Trump, although many of these jobs have not yet been filled.One White House official said the public was going to be surprised at the relatively small number of these waivers.But ethics lawyers said that what matters is that any such waivers be made public, so that the limits on what topics a federal government employee can or cannot take up are not secret.The revised stand by the White House came in a letter sent Friday to Mr. Shaub by Mick Mulvaney, the head of the White House Office of Management and Budget.“O.M.B. shares the belief that the Executive Branch must uphold the highest ethical standards in accordance with the law,” the letter said, before adding that “contrary to your assertions, O.M.B. has never sought to impede O.G.E. nor to prevent others, including agencies, from acting as required by law,” referring to the Office of Government Ethics.Ms. Walters said the White House — through the letter, which is also being sent to agency heads across the federal government — was making clear that each agency was authorized to answer Mr. Shaub’s question and provide copies of any ethics waivers it might have issued.Norman Eisen, who served as the White House ethics adviser at the start of the Obama administration, said this represented a clear reversal of the earlier position, which he said had clearly implied to federal agency heads that they should hold off from complying.Mr. Eisen and other ethics lawyers said they believed that the Trump administration — even after promising to “drain the swamp” — had instead looked for ways to place former lobbyists and industry lawyers into jobs from which they could help former clients get special favors, be it in the energy industry or on Wall Street.“It’s a victory for checks and balances, the rule of law and the independent oversight of the Office of Government Ethics, and the news media,” Mr. Eisen said. ”With any bully, when you punch them in the nose, they back down.”Mr. Shaub had been concerned that if the White House essentially discouraged federal agencies from complying with his request for these waivers, it would have largely curtailed the effectiveness of his relatively small office. His office does not have enforcement powers, but instead collects data on ethics compliance and then can ask the White House, if it finds a violation, to intervene and order corrective action by a federal employee or agency.Former senior officials with the Office of Government Ethics said that in the 39-year history of the agency, which was created in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, they could not remember an instance in which the White House had similarly tried to block, or even to discourage, an effort to collect ethics compliance data.