https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/05/world/europe/john-kerry-calls-on-russia-to-honor-syria-airstrike-resolution.html
Syria Aid Pledges From Rich Countries Reach $10 Billion - The New York Times
Syria,Humanitarian Aid,United Nations,Russia,Kerry  John,International Relations,Refugees and Displaced Persons,United States International Relations,Ban Ki-moon,Cameron  David,Germany,Kuwait,Norway,Merkel  Angela,Great Britain
Feb. 4, 2016
2873
LONDON —  With no end in sight to Syria’s five-year-old civil war, rich nations pledged more than $10 billion on Thursday to help the millions of people who have been displaced by the conflict and to prepare for new waves of refugees expected this year.The pledges of aid at a donor conference in London slightly exceeded the meeting’s goal, avoiding the failure of a similar conference last year, when cutbacks in aid helped spur mass migration of refugees to Europe.Still, it was unclear whether the new aid pledged on Thursday would be sufficient to meet the need, which seems likely to grow substantially as more Syrians flee to Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan and as more asylum seekers attempt the perilous trip to Europe with the coming of warmer weather.Just one day before the conference, United Nations-led talks in Geneva aimed at achieving a cease-fire in Syria were abruptly suspended. The conflict has claimed more than 250,000 lives and displaced 11 million Syrians from their homes, including four million who have fled the country.“Our message to the people of Syria and the region is clear,” Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain said at the conference. “We will stand with you, and we still support you for as long as it takes to secure peace in Syria, to restore stability to the region, and to give Syrian refugees a chance to go back and rebuild their homes and their country.”Mr. Cameron was one of the hosts of the conference, along with the leaders of Germany, Kuwait and Norway and the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon. Mr. Ban called the meeting a “great success” and said, “Never has the international community raised so much money on a single day for a single crisis.”Almost $6 billion of the new pledges was for this year, while $5 billion was committed for 2017 through 2020. The United States, represented at the conference by Secretary of State John Kerry, pledged about $600 million in new aid. In all, the United States has now committed $5.1 billion in aid since 2011, the most of any nation.The suffering of Syria’s people “should tear at the conscience of all civilized people, and we all have a responsibility to respond to it,” Mr. Kerry said.Britain pledged an additional $1.8 billion over the next four years, doubling its contributions so far, while Germany promised $2.6 billion by 2018, including $1.2 billion this year.There was broad agreement at the conference, though, that the only enduring way to address the humanitarian crisis was to end the fighting in Syria between the forces of President Bashar al-Assad and a fragmented array of opposition groups, some of whom are also fighting one another.Last year’s aid conference aimed for $7 billion but managed to raise only half that amount, prompting United Nations organizations to slash the food rations for Syrian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, which took in one million refugees last year, said those cutbacks were a major reason so many desperate Syrians left refugee camps and headed for Europe.The participants at this year’s conference were determined not to repeat that failure.Last year’s surge of migrants was “a huge, loud, wake-up call for the people in Europe and beyond Europe,” said Werner Hoyer, the president of the European Investment Bank and a former deputy foreign minister of Germany. Providing aid now, he said, “is much more economic than to wait until everybody has reached Amsterdam or Copenhagen and needs health care and schooling there.”The difficulties of finding a long-term solution to the conflict hung over the conference. Mr. Ban endorsed the decision by the United Nations mediator, Staffan de Mistura, to suspend the Geneva talks on Wednesday, only two days after they formally started. “We should not have talks only for the sake of talks,” Mr. Ban said. “The coming days should be used to get back to the table, not to secure more gains on the battlefield.”Though Syrian government forces, supported by Russian airstrikes, are conducting a major military offensive, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported on Thursday that aid convoys had managed to reach Moadhamiyeh, one of 18 Syrian towns besieged by the government or by rebel forces. The Red Cross said the convoys delivered enough aid to feed more than 12,000 people for about three weeks.“Unconditional aid must be allowed to reach people in all the besieged and hard-to-reach areas in Syria,” Marianne Gasser, the Red Cross chief in Syria, said in a statement.In London, the Red Cross president, Peter Maurer, offered a long list of ways that international law had been broken in Syria. “Use of illegal weapons, and the illegal use of weapons, an epidemic of sieges, urban warfare destroying electricity and water infrastructure, deliberate attacks on schools and hospitals have accumulated into full system failure, forcing more than half of the Syrian population from their homes,” Mr. Maurer said. “Bombing civilians is a standard practice of warfare in Syria today, but that does not make it acceptable.”Mr. Ban spoke of the “prolonged, horrendous suffering” of the Syrians, and said that at least half of the new aid pledged on Thursday would go to immediate, lifesaving activities. Other money, he said, would help enroll children in school, give refugees gainful employment and eventually rebuild devastated infrastructure.Under pressure from the West — and with the promise of financial incentives — the neighboring countries that have shouldered most of the refugee crisis agreed on Thursday to make it easier for displaced Syrians to find temporary jobs. Mr. Ban called the agreement “a breakthrough” and thanked Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey “for choosing solidarity over fear.”Those countries have also agreed to expand access to school for 1.7 million Syrian refugee children inside their borders. The United States pledged $325 million in development funding — including $290 million in new money — for school aid and repairs in Jordan and Lebanon.