https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/10/us/politics/hillary-clinton-james-comey-fired.html
How Does Comey’s Fall Play in Hillaryland? No One’s Celebrating - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Comey  James B,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Presidential Election of 2016,Russia
May 10, 2017
2293
WASHINGTON — For Hillary Clinton, the sudden fall of James B. Comey is wrapped in multiple layers of irony.Mrs. Clinton blames Mr. Comey for tilting the presidential election against her in the closing days of last year’s campaign by announcing that the F.B.I. might reopen its investigation of her email practices while she was at the State Department.Yet her satisfaction at seeing him lose his job, friends said, is offset by worries that it could derail the F.B.I.’s investigation of ties between the Trump campaign and Russian officials.Mrs. Clinton, these people said, puts no stock in President Trump’s stated rationale for dismissing Mr. Comey as the F.B.I. director — that he mishandled the bureau’s investigation of her email case — even though she fundamentally agrees with that damning assessment.One person who spoke with Mrs. Clinton after the White House’s announcement said she has a “mixed mind” about his firing. While Mrs. Clinton believes that Mr. Comey interfered with the election, this person said, “taking him out of his job at this point only reinforces the point that he was on to something.”Mrs. Clinton has said nothing publicly about the F.B.I. director’s dismissal. In her most recent Twitter post, on May 7, she celebrated the victory of Emmanuel Macron in France’s presidential election, which she said was a “defeat to those interfering w/democracy.”Top officials from her campaign said there was no joy in Hillaryland at Mr. Trump’s startling decision. They worry that the president will nominate a more pliable figure than Mr. Comey to run the F.B.I.; that Mr. Trump will be able to muscle that person through a Republican-controlled Senate, which needs only 51 votes to confirm the nominee; and that the new F.B.I. director may not pursue the evidence in the Russian investigation as aggressively as Mr. Comey did.“There is no one I have encountered in Clintonworld who views this as a positive development,” said Jennifer Palmieri, the campaign’s former communications director. “When I heard the news, my first thought was, ‘They must be getting close.’”One potential benefit, she said, is that the furor surrounding Mr. Comey’s ouster may put a greater spotlight on Russia’s meddling in the election. The Clinton campaign struggled before the election to generate interest in Russia’s role beyond core Democrats, Ms. Palmieri said.How big a role Mr. Comey played in Mrs. Clinton’s defeat is a subject of debate, even within her inner circle. In the immediate aftermath of the vote, she told donors, “Our analysis is that Comey’s letter raising doubts that were groundless, baseless, proven to be, stopped our momentum.” She has continued to emphasize the F.B.I.’s role. Her friends say she believes that but for Mr. Comey and the Russians, she would be president.In a recent interview, Mrs. Clinton was asked how she felt when watching Mr. Comey tell Congress he believed it was inappropriate before the election to disclose the F.B.I.’s investigation of the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia, which began in July. She responded, dryly, “That was one of the high points of the last weeks.”Other officials, however, said the F.B.I. intervention was one of a torrent of negative developments for the Democratic campaign, including the release of campaign emails by WikiLeaks, that sapped its momentum in the weeks after the third debate between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump. “We had a lot coming at us, and it was one too many things,” Ms. Palmieri said.In recent conversations, Democratic officials have faulted the Clinton campaign’s message and her use of a private email server as secretary of state. They have also cited structural impediments, like gender bias and Mrs. Clinton’s identity as an establishment figure in a “change election.”Whatever the other factors, Mr. Comey has become a singularly baleful figure to people who worked on her campaign.When Mr. Comey testified last week that he felt “mildly nauseous” at the idea that he might have swayed the election, John D. Podesta, who was the campaign’s chairman, wrote on Twitter, “The American public is getting mildly nauseous listening to Jim Comey.”Jake Sullivan, who was Mrs. Clinton’s senior policy adviser, said he was still assessing the implications of Mr. Comey’s dismissal. “Most see it as a transparent abuse of power,” he said. “I’m not sure what to make of it or what its implications will be.”As news of Mr. Comey’s dismissal spread, other veterans of the campaign reacted on social media with a mix of lingering bitterness about the email case and foreboding about the future.“Twilight zone,” Robby Mook, the former campaign manager, said on Twitter. “I was as disappointed and frustrated as anyone at how the email investigation was handled. But this terrifies me.”Brian Fallon, a campaign spokesman, wrote on Twitter early Wednesday: “The descent into authoritarianism does not announce itself with the blaring of trumpets. It happens via events like today.”