https://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/30/sports/othersports/30racing.html
A Sheik’s Thoroughbred Kingdom in Kentucky - The New York Times
Horse Racing,Breeders' Cup World Thoroughbred Championships,Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum,Kentucky,United Arab Emirates
Oct. 30, 2006
1445
LEXINGTON, Ky. — Every hardboot here who makes a living breeding and selling horses knows that Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum is the ruler of Dubai, a desert kingdom on the Persian Gulf, which he has transformed into a tourist and business capital.Most of them, however, know him as Sheik Mo, a horseman who for nearly 25 years has arrived each year at Blue Grass Airport by private jumbo jet and has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on horses.Although the sheik and the company his family controls encountered security concerns and had to abandon an attempt to run six United States port operations in March, he is treated like a fellow horseman here in Lexington, home of his thriving racing and breeding business.In a relatively short time, Sheik Mohammed and members of his royal family have joined the ranks of the blue-blooded Phipps family and the more commercially driven Overbrook Farm as fabled names in horse racing in the United States.On Saturday at the Breeders’ Cup in Louisville, Ky., the Maktoums are expected to send out eight horses, all contenders, in four races. They are led by the 3-year-old sensation Bernardini, who has won six races in a row, including the Preakness Stakes at Pimlico and the Travers Stakes at Saratoga Springs, N.Y.They are as impressive a collection of horses as any owner has taken to the Breeders’ Cup in its 22-year history, and could help the Maktoums capture as many as five Eclipse Awards, the Oscars of horse racing. Sheik Mohammed is in the running for his first Eclipse as the country’s top horse owner.Out of equal parts self-interest and self-regard, quite a few denizens of central Kentucky will be rooting the sheik’s horses home. Not only has he been the leading buyer at the September yearlings sales over the past eight years, spending $245.6 million, but he has also built a commercial breeding and racing business here that is poised to rule the sport the way the legendary Calumet Farm did in the 1940s and 1950s.“If one September that big old plane wasn’t at the airport, you would have a whole lot of hearts sinking around here,” said Arthur Hancock III, who owns Stone Farm in Paris, Ky. He is a fourth-generation thoroughbred breeder from one of the Bluegrass’s most famous families.“Beyond that, he has proven over the years that he is a passionate and knowledgeable horseman,” Hancock said. “When the sheik comes here for the sales, he’s out in the barns examining horses and unlike a lot of owners, he actually knows what he’s looking at.”He moves among horsemen in jeans and a white T-shirt or windbreaker in the royal blue colors of his family’s stable.“I tried to win the Kentucky Derby buying European-type horses, and it did not work,” Sheik Mohammed told reporters last month at the Keeneland sales, after spending $60 million on yearlings. “So now we are doing it the right way. I am looking for the right horses. I see what American racing is about. So we learn, we learn every day.”In thoroughbred racing, Sheik Mohammed, 57, has combined one of his great interests with his burning ambition to turn Dubai into the Singapore of the Middle East, generating fascination and some criticism along the way.In an episode last year closest to his interest in racing, the State Department rebuked the United Arab Emirates, which includes Dubai, for allowing young children to be held in captivity and used as jockeys in camel races. In June, the State Department cited improvements but said it was still keeping watch.The sheik has had much success in his business and racing endeavors. Since 1995, he or his brothers — Sheik Hamdan and the late Sheik Maktoum — have been at or near the top of the owners’ standings in England with Godolphin stables. Godolphin is a sort of all-star team of horses owned by the Maktoum brothers.By acknowledging that Dubai could not prosper on a diminishing oil reserve, the Maktoums set out more than 20 years ago to diversify the economy and become the financial capital of the United Arab Emirates, a federation of seven sheikdoms that won independence from Britain in 1971.“Horses and Dubai are his two loves,” said John Ferguson, the sheik’s bloodstock manager. “He spends 98 percent of his time on Dubai, however, and 2 percent on horses. Godolphin has been the culmination of those two forces.”Godolphin, created in 1992, is based in Dubai to take advantage of a temperate winter climate and a state-of-the-art training center in preparing to compete in the most prestigious races around the world.This strategy has worked in Europe and Asia, but has met with mixed results in the United States, most notably in Sheik Mohammed’s unsuccessful quest to win the Kentucky Derby.So the sheik took a deeper interest in Kentucky breeding and racing in the United States. In 2001, he bought Jonabell Farm and, after the death of his older brother Maktoum in January, incorporated Gainsborough Farm into what is now called Darley America.Sheik Mohammed has 160 employees — virtually all of them homegrown Kentuckians — and 11 stallions, including Holy Bull, the 1994 Horse of the Year. By November, he will have 160 mares, and soon after their foals, gamboling on a sprawling 4,000 manicured acres of bluegrass.With Bernardini, the sheik’s new focus on the United States paid off immediately. Bernardini was bred in Kentucky; was entrusted to an American trainer, Tom Albertrani; and will be the favorite in the marquee race of the Breeders’ Cup, the $5 million Classic.Bernardini, however, will have to dispatch Invasor, a colt that has won eight of his nine races. Invasor is owned by Sheik Hamdan, who is also a big-money spender at the sales and who has had a farm here since 1985.Bernardini’s victories in this year’s most lucrative races are the primary reason Darley is atop the American owners standings with nearly $5 million in purse winnings. Still, the Darley stable is deep and developing, having won 54 races and finishing in the money 56 percent of the time with 247 starters.In the $2 million Sprint, Henny Hughes is favored to win to conclude a perfect year and capture the Eclipse Award as champion sprinter. He is owned by Sheik Rashid, the 25-year-old son of Sheik Mohammed.With commercial breeding operations and thousands of acres of land in seven countries from Europe to Australia to Japan, Sheik Mohammed’s extraordinarily deep pockets have been taxed by his investment in horses. His associates argue, however, that it is money well spent when put in the context of the sheik’s global vision for Dubai.Among horsemen here, there is an adage: “Be happy with the money, not with the horse.”In the sheik’s case, however, the horsemen are happy with his horses.“We’ve had a huge drain on our bloodlines between our great sires dying and being shipped overseas,” said Rob Whitely, who breeds under the name Liberation Farm. “He is bringing back some of that quality blood to America and we need it. We also need horses like Bernardini to stay here, and that is what looks like is going to happen.”