http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/19/us/19insure.html
AARP Orders Investigation Concerning Its Marketing - The New York Times
AARP,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Advertising and Marketing,Medicine and Health,UnitedHealth Group
Nov. 18, 2008
9192
WASHINGTON — After a Senate inquiry found evidence of deceptive marketing, AARP, the lobby for older Americans, has hired an outside investigator to look into sales of some of its popular health insurance products.AARP and UnitedHealth Group, one of the nation’s largest insurers, have voluntarily suspended sales of the policies, which pay fixed cash benefits — often much less than consumers had expected — for selected services.The investigation will be conducted by Elizabeth Rowe Costle, who was the insurance commissioner of Vermont from 1992 to 2003, when Howard Dean was governor.At issue are insurance plans that were sold by UnitedHealth and carry the AARP brand. More than a million people have bought the policies, which have names like AARP Medical Advantage, Essential Plus and Hospital Indemnity Plan.The senior Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, said marketing of the products was often misleading because it suggested that they offered comprehensive coverage.“In fact,” Mr. Grassley said, “there’s no basic protection against high medical costs. The products may leave consumers seriously in debt if they need intensive medical care.”The criticism is potentially embarrassing to AARP because the organization has long taken pride in its role as a champion of its members and consumers in general. It has criticized “hard-sell tactics” of private insurers and has accused the Bush administration of overstating the value of private health plans offered to Medicare beneficiaries.William D. Novelli, the chief executive of AARP, said he was eager to address Senator Grassley’s concerns. “Ensuring the protection and keeping the trust of our members drives all that we do at AARP,” Mr. Novelli said.Bonnie Burns, an insurance counselor at California Health Advocates, an education and advocacy group, said: “These limited-benefit policies have been a problem for many years. Uninsured people buy them thinking they are equivalent to major medical coverage, but they are not.”For example, one of AARP’s Medical Advantage plans pays a maximum of $5,000 for surgical procedures that may cost two or three times that amount. The marketing materials highlight coverage for relatively low-cost procedures.A consumer guide to AARP’s Medical Advantage plans says they “can be a real lifesaver for early retirees, part-time workers or people who just need to supplement their current health insurance.”Though known in Washington as a potent lobby, AARP is also a huge business that offers travel services, life and homeowner’s insurance, mutual funds and credit cards. Its operating revenue last year was $1.2 billion, more than 40 percent of which came from royalties, according to its 2007 financial statement.Senator Grassley said he wanted AARP to disclose the profits it had made from sales of its limited-benefit insurance products, which are managed by a taxable subsidiary of AARP Inc., the parent organization.At a hearing in June, a Texas woman, Lisa Kelly, told the Senate Finance Committee that she discovered the limits of her AARP policy when she went to the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston for treatment of leukemia. The hospital demanded a check for $45,000 up front, Ms. Kelly testified.Martha Jones, a spokeswoman for UnitedHealth, said the company was cooperating with the investigation being performed for AARP.The investigation does not concern the marketing of prescription drug plans or Medicare Advantage plans offered by UnitedHealth and endorsed by AARP.