http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/08/world/asia/with-us-eyes-on-iran-north-koreas-nuclear-arsenal-expanded.html
With U.S. Eyes on Iran, North Korea’s Nuclear Arsenal Expanded - The New York Times
Nuclear Weapons,North Korea,Iran,Israel,Terrorism,South Korea,United States International Relations,United States
May 7, 2015
1596
SEOUL, South Korea —  While the Obama administration spent the past two years getting within striking distance of a deal to delay Iran’s race for a nuclear bomb, North Korea went on an atomic spending spree: an expansion officials here fear Washington has little hope of stopping.Satellite photographs of the North’s main nuclear facility at Yongbyon, released in 2013, have shown a doubling in size of the nuclear enrichment plant there, which the United States did not know about until 2010, and American officials strongly suspect there is a second one. A consensus is emerging that the North most likely possesses a dozen or so nuclear weapons and could be on the way to an arsenal of as many as 20 by the end of 2016.“In my view, 20 is a hell of a lot of bombs,” Siegfried S. Hecker, a former director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory and a professor at Stanford, said in an interview. But Mr. Hecker, who was the first American invited to see the enrichment plant and has made some of the best unclassified estimates of its future capabilities, said he was doubtful of recent claims by American military officials that the North was on the verge of shrinking a nuclear weapon to fit on a long-range missile capable of hitting the western United States.The apparent buildup in nuclear bombs, after 20 years of failed efforts by the United States to keep North Korea from reaching this point, has become a rallying call for both sides debating the agreement with Iran. Republicans and Israeli officials, led by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, cite the trail of broken agreements with the North as a warning of what they say will become of the Iran deal. President Obama’s allies turn that argument on its head: The lesson, they say, is that an enforceable, verifiable deal is the only way to keep Iran from doing in the next decade what North Korea has done in the past few years.Both sides are, of course, selectively plucking arguments to support their case. The reality is that the Iranian and North Korean programs, while often referred to in the same breath by politicians, are so different that all the analogies are flawed.For starters, no agreement with North Korea was ever as specific as the proposed Iran accord, which Congress is moving to review after a bill cleared the Senate on Thursday. The Agreed Framework between the United States and North Korea in 1994 was a few pages long, compared with the hundreds of pages and annexes in the Iran deal.In addition, Iran says it will abide by the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, which provides a legal underpinning for the final deal that is supposed to be sealed by June 30. In contrast, North Korea boasts that its atomic arsenal is enshrined in its Constitution, and it withdrew from the treaty long ago. (The club of nuclear nations that have not signed the treaty is a small one: India, Israel and Pakistan. All are believed to have 100 to 200 weapons, and many suspect that range is the ultimate goal of North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un.)Inspectors have regular access to Iran’s major nuclear sites, although they have been stonewalled on some details of alleged work on past weapons designs. The deal includes provisions for monitoring equipment in every known facility and requirements that Iran dilute its stockpiles of weapons-grade fuel or ship them out of the country. In contrast, there have been no inspectors in North Korea for years.Not least, Iran’s leadership is under domestic political pressure to end sanctions and normalize relations with the West, but North Korea sees near-total isolation as the key to its survival.American strategy has also gone in opposite directions. Mr. Obama made overtures to North Korea during his first months in office, but his view quickly changed when the country responded by conducting a nuclear test. He and his advisers decided that Iran was the far better strategic bet: With luck, it could be stopped from building weapons.North Korea’s arsenal, one of Mr. Obama’s top Asia aides said, “is already in the rearview mirror.” The administration began discussing “strategic patience,” which essentially meant continuing pressure through sanctions and other levers until North Korea decided to negotiate.But the North says the prospect of disarmament is long past. It wants what amounts to arms control negotiations that acknowledge it as a nuclear power — which the Obama administration, like the Bush administration, says it will never accept.Behind the scenes, Sydney A. Seiler, the State Department’s coordinator for eliminating North Korea’s nuclear program, and his counterparts from China, Japan, Russia and South Korea have been putting together a package of proposals to show to the North that would find a basis for resuming negotiations. Several officials involved described a package that sounds, in broad strokes, a lot like the secret diplomacy that preceded the negotiations with Iran: a freeze on all current production so that the North’s arsenal would not be expanding as negotiations resumed.But in interviews in Seoul, senior South Korean officials said they were concerned that the events of the past two years, while the United States was focused on Iran, had left them with a far more complex situation. “Some in my government feel that we may now face the point of no return on the North’s nuclear technology and their missile capability,” one official said. “The point of no return” is a phrase the Israelis used to use about Iran, fearing that its program was too large to ever contain.The concern about the North’s nuclear expansion is not that it would launch a pre-emptive strike on South Korea or Japan, because North Korean officials know their government would be decimated in minutes or hours. But South Korean and American strategists are worried that a stockpile of 20 weapons, and perhaps 50 or more by 2020, could give the country enough extra supply to sell highly enriched uranium, much as it has sold missile and other technology to Iran, Pakistan and Syria.“It would be an enormously risky thing for them to do,” one senior American military official here said. “But we’ve seen them take other very risky actions in the past,” including building a reactor in Syria, which Israel destroyed in an airstrike in 2007.Apart from the destruction of the reactor itself, the North suffered little for that action, and the sanctions placed on it in January in retaliation for the cyberattack on Sony Pictures, for which Mr. Obama said North Korea was responsible, have been viewed as largely ineffective.Some American officials say they have one last hope: If the deal with Iran works and sanctions are lifted, North Korean officials, who are following the negotiations closely, might conclude that their nuclear program could be traded for economic integration. Other senior American officials say that is a pipe dream.“For Iran, some degree of integration is part of how you build national power,” one of those officials said. But for North Korea, he added, “it’s the pathway to disintegration.”