http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/08/world/europe/viktor-orban-wins-a-second-term-in-hungary.html
Viktor Orban Wins a Second Term in Hungary - The New York Times
Elections,Fidesz Party,Jobbik (Hungary),Orban  Viktor,Hungary
April 7, 2014
4617
BUDAPEST — Voters in Hungary have re-elected Viktor Orban and his conservative political alliance in parliamentary elections, according to preliminary election results released on Monday.The early vote count showed that Mr. Orban’s Fidesz party and a small conservative ally would keep a two-thirds majority, with 133 seats in the country’s 199-member Parliament.A leftist alliance led by the socialist Attila Mesterhazy is expected to control 38 seats.The vote, held Sunday, showed increasing support for the radical right Jobbik party, which won just more than 20 percent of the vote on national party lists, 4 percentage points higher than in 2010, and was expected to have 23 seats in Parliament.With more than 98 percent of the votes counted, there was little room for change on Monday, although final results were expected later in the week.The vote came after a campaign dominated by the governing party, which touted its economic record. The leftist alliance struggled to gain support, and the Jobbik party tried to widen its camp by catering to more moderate voters.Turnout was lower than in 2010, when voters gave Mr. Orban a supermajority in the country’s legislature, allowing his alliance to enact broad changes to Hungary’s political institutions.Mr. Orban said that the voters had ratified his program in the face of critics both at home and abroad.“We received a clear and unquestionable mandate to continue what we started,” Mr. Orban said Monday at a news conference. But he offered no details on what the next government’s agenda would be.“We want to give confidence to the government,” said Krisztina Kurti, 43, who works in human relations, cheering at Fidesz’s results as they showed up on a large screen. “We want them to continue what they started,” she added.Like many in the crowd of Fidesz supporters, Ms. Kurti dismissed critics of the government who said democratic values had been suppressed during the last four years. “We are not afraid. Only those who have something to worry about are afraid,” she said referring to what she described as corrupt politicians in the opposition.Mr. Mesterhazy, the Socialist Party candidate, acknowledged the result but contended that the elections were unfair. Repeating a charge he made often during the campaign, he said that the new electoral system gave an unfair advantage to the Fidesz party.On Monday, a statement from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe echoed worries some observers had expressed about the election, saying that the new electoral rules gave Mr. Orban’s party an advantage and citing what it called “biased” media coverage and “the blurring of the separation between a ruling political party and the state.”Asked about the observers’ criticism on Monday, Mr. Orban said that “voters had they say about these points of view.”Experts said the results showed the maturation of the radical-right Jobbik party, known for its paramilitary arm and openly anti-Semitic and anti-Roma views.“Jobbik’s improved electoral turnout shows not only a strengthening of the party but also a mainstreaming of the party,” said Erin Saltman, an expert on Hungarian politics based in London. “More Hungarians are seeing Jobbik as a legitimate party option.”Peter Kreko, an analyst at Political Capital, an independent research institute in Budapest, said Jobbik’s improved result was worrisome for Hungary, because it showed a successful strategy of appealing to the center of the political spectrum.He said that Jobbik might be able to strengthen its standing in the European elections in May.