http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/09/world/asia/protesters-and-police-clash-at-lunar-new-year-festivities-in-hong-kong.html
Protesters and Police Clash at Lunar New Year Festivities in Hong Kong  - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Lunar New Year,Food,Attacks on Police,China
Feb. 8, 2016
9507
HONG KONG — The police and protesters clashed in Hong Kong early on Tuesday, leaving several people injured and a district on lockdown.Police officers used batons and pepper spray to disperse protesters. The police also fired at least two warning shots, the local broadcaster RTHK reported. On Tuesday morning, officers and protesters continued to face off in the Mong Kok district, a dense, busy shopping and residential area. A fire burned in a street cordoned off by the police.People gathered in the district late Monday to visit food stalls on the first day of the Lunar New Year, a holiday tradition. The confrontations began after officers tried to shut down unlicensed food vendors.A police spokeswoman said that 48 police officers had been hurt, many hit by glass bottles and other objects. Forty-seven men and seven women, ranging in age from 17 to 70, were arrested on charges that included assaulting the police, resisting arrest and other related crimes.The Hong Kong government “strongly condemned” the protesters, saying that the group had set fires and thrown bricks at the police, including injured officers on the ground.“The mobs would be apprehended and brought to justice,” a government spokesman said in a statement.Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, said: “If a similar incident happened in any city, the society, not just the government, would designate it a riot.”In 2014, demonstrators occupied several roads in key Hong Kong districts, including Mong Kok, to protest proposed changes to the system for electing Hong Kong’s chief executive, the city’s leader.The authorities in Beijing had earlier ruled out a proposal for open nominations, deciding that voters could select from among only two or three candidates approved by a nominating committee.Mong Kok was also the setting of a violent outburst during the pro-democracy demonstrations in 2014 when thugs attacked protesters in an effort to break up a camp they had established.After those demonstrations, a so-called localist movement became increasingly active. Localist groups have protested against traders from the Chinese mainland who cross into Hong Kong to buy goods in bulk. Localist groups also protest acts that they see as impinging on Hong Kong culture, like the shutting down of unlicensed street vendors at traditional markets.“I believe that the food stalls should be kept; it’s the Lunar New Year and a holiday,” said Emily Tse, 20, a student at the Mong Kok protest. “These food stalls are part of our local culture and should be protected.”