https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/01/world/asia/01philippines-mar-roxas-aquino.html
Philippines’ President Endorses Mar Roxas as Successor - The New York Times
Philippines,Aquino  Benigno S III,Roxas  Manuel Araneta II (1957- ),Endorsements,Elections,Binay  Jejomar C (1942- )
July 31, 2015
8180
MANILA — President Benigno S. Aquino III of the Philippines on Friday endorsed his interior secretary, Mar Roxas, as the presidential candidate most likely to carry on his anticorruption efforts, which have been credited for half a decade of high economic growth.“I know in Mar Roxas, the job will be in good hands,” Mr. Aquino told a packed room at the Club Filipino social hall here. Mr. Aquino is limited to one six-year term, which will end after presidential elections are held in May 2016.Under Mr. Aquino, the Philippines has enjoyed some of the highest economic growth rates in Asia and one of the longest periods of political stability. Foreign investors, international organizations and ratings agencies have said it is critical for voters to elect a successor who carries on his agenda if progress is to be maintained.Mr. Roxas, a graduate of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, worked as an investment banker for Allen & Company in New York before returning to the Philippines in 1993, where he has since served as trade secretary, senator and congressman. He is the grandson of the first president of the independent Philippines, Manuel Roxas.Though he has the endorsement of Mr. Aquino, Mr. Roxas is trailing in the polls because he is seen as a member of political royalty without a connection to the poor and lower middle class, who make up more than 90 percent of voters in the country, according to Ramon C. Casiple, executive director of the Institute for Political and Electoral Reform, based in Manila.“People know him as a very rich person related to a very rich family, part of the political elite,” Mr. Casiple said. “The poor cannot identify with him. When he tries to do things in a symbolic way to relate to the poor, like carrying a sack of rice, people make fun of him.”Mr. Roxas will square off against Vice President Jejomar C. Binay, who is leading in the polls and heads an opposition coalition. Mr. Binay has faced a series of corruption investigations related to his time as mayor of metropolitan Manila’s business district, Makati. He denies the allegations, saying they were engineered by his political opponents, and in July, he filed a lawsuit for more than $4 million against government investigators.“He comes from the lower middle class,” Mr. Casiple said of Mr. Binay. “He has no need to explain why he wants to help the poor. He gives away scholarships to young people, free movies passes and cakes to the elderly. The poor love him.”A third potential candidate, Senator Grace Poe, is also popular among poor voters and is high in the polls. She is the daughter of one of the country’s most famous movie stars, Fernando Poe Jr., who died in 2004. She has not yet declared her candidacy and is seen by some as a political neophyte, having first been elected to office in 2013.Others who are polling high but who have not declared their candidacy include Rodrigo Duterte, the mayor of the southern city of Davao, a “law and order” politician who has openly expressed support for extrajudicial executions of drug dealers operating in his city. Former President Joseph Estrada, who was jailed on corruption charges before receiving a pardon and who is now the mayor of Manila, also ranks high in surveys.Mr. Aquino ran on the promise of returning the Philippines to the “straight path” of fighting corruption. He has said repeatedly that voters should elect a president who will carry on that agenda. During his state of the nation address on Monday, he singled out Mr. Roxas for his accomplishments and thanked dozens of others, but did not mention Mr. Binay, his political opponent, who was seated in front of him.