https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/19/world/europe/european-union-turkey-migrants.html
What’s in the E.U. Deal With Turkey? Controls, Concessions and Swaps - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Refugees and Displaced Persons,European Union,Turkey
March 18, 2016
5457
Leaders of the European Union reached a deal with Turkey to secure its help in resolving the migrant crisis, the largest displacement of people on the Continent since World War II. Under the terms of the agreement, what will happen to the migrants, and what will Turkey gain for its cooperation? Below are the main provisions of the deal.All migrants who travel to Greece from Turkey using irregular means after an agreement is reached will be returned to Turkey, in what the agreement calls “a temporary and extraordinary measure, which is necessary to end the human suffering and restore public order.”Human rights groups have heavily criticized this provision, saying that the European authorities have a legal and moral obligation to assess asylum claims wherever migrants land.To address this concern, the agreement calls for migrants arriving in the Greek islands to be “duly registered” and for the Greek authorities to process individual applications for asylum. Anyone not applying for asylum, “or whose application has been found unfounded or inadmissible,” will be returned promptly.Turkey will station officials on the Greek islands to facilitate the return. The European Union will bear the costs.Human rights groups immediately objected, arguing that the provision will result in the hasty return of people with legitimate claims to asylum.“The E.U. can say fast-track collective expulsions are legal,” Human Rights Watch wrote on Twitter on Friday. “They’re not.”For each Syrian migrant returned to Turkey, the European Union will directly resettle another Syrian from Turkey, with priority given to Syrians who have not previously entered, or tried to enter, the European Union, up to a total of 72,000.If that number is reached — as it almost certainly will be — a new round of negotiations will be held.The agreement provides for a “voluntary humanitarian admission scheme” to be developed, once illegal migration is brought under control.Countries like Hungary and Slovakia have fiercely resisted proposals by Germany to require European Union member states to take in asylum seekers. In any case, it is likely that the bulk of new asylum seekers will continue to try to reach Germany, where they want asylum. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany has steadfastly refused to cap the number of legitimate asylum seekers who can enter.Turkey will take “all necessary measures” to prevent migrants from opening new sea or land routes to the European Union from Turkey in a measure aimed at assuaging concerns in Bulgaria that migrants will stream into the country. The European Union will help Turkey improve humanitarian conditions for the estimated 2.7 million Syrian migrants in Turkey, with a focus on areas near the Turkish-Syrian border.The European Union will speed up the disbursement of €3 billion, or $3.4 billion, it pledged in November to aid organizations in Turkey, and will provide another €3 billion by the end of 2018, once Turkey meets its commitments.The European Union will waive most visa requirements for Turkish citizens by the end of June, provided that Turkey meets certain requirements.The European Union will also consider “the opening of new chapters in the accession negotiations as soon as possible.” In plain English, that means it will consider reviving talks over Turkey’s long-dormant application to join the European Union — a move that is adamantly opposed by Cyprus until Turkey makes progress in areas like opening its ports to Cypriot ships.