https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/04/nyregion/de-blasio-reacts-as-mayor-and-a-father-to-chokehold-case-decision.html
De Blasio Reacts as Mayor and a Father - The New York Times
Garner  Eric,de Blasio  Bill,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,New York City,de Blasio  Dante,Minorities,Blacks,Race and Ethnicity
Dec. 3, 2014
7289
Protests had already broken out across New York City when Mayor Bill de Blasio stepped behind a lectern on Staten Island on Wednesday, prepared to give his first public remarks on a grand jury decision that was testing the central tenets of his mayoralty.With the announcement that no criminal charges would be brought against a white police officer in the death of Eric Garner, a black Staten Island man, Mr. de Blasio was confronting the dismay of New Yorkers upset about racial injustice — and the promise that had propelled him into City Hall, that he could heal the strained relations between minorities and the police.The mayor responded with a strikingly personal speech that, in sober tones, encompassed his dual role: the keeper of law and order in the nation’s largest city, and a parent to children of color who had experienced firsthand the perception of police officers as both violators and protectors.“This is profoundly personal for me,” Mr. de Blasio said, in the halting cadence of a pained father. Speaking with Mr. Garner’s family, the mayor recalled: “I couldn’t help but immediately think what it would mean to me to lose Dante. Life could never be the same thereafter.”It is not unusual for Mr. de Blasio, whose biracial family is an indelible part of his public image, to invoke his teenage son.But the mayor, who shied away from describing family conversations after the grand jury decision in Ferguson, Mo., volunteered on Wednesday that he and his wife, Chirlane McCray, had instructed Dante “on how to take special care” in encounters with police officers, and described a private worry of whether his son was safe at night.Unlike peers in city and state government who also spoke on Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio did not explicitly denounce the grand jury’s decision in the Garner case. And he did not demand a federal investigation of the case, saying only that “there are more chapters ahead.”But he cited the rallying cry of protesters across the country — “Black lives matter” — in a manner that signaled his tacit support. “They said it because it has to be said,” he said. “It’s a phrase that should never have to be said. It should be self-evident, but our history sadly requires us to say it.”Mr. de Blasio’s rhetorical strength is an ability to project empathy, and as he spoke for 20 minutes on Wednesday, flanked by clergy leaders and elected officials, he seemed to be trying to preside over the day’s events, rather than to steer them.He acknowledged there would be protests, and urged New Yorkers to avoid violence. He praised William J. Bratton, his police commissioner, as an agent of change, but — aware that some liberals are skeptical of Mr. Bratton’s approach — also said that Mr. Bratton would not abide brutality or racism on the force.Mr. de Blasio began preparing his speech over the weekend, dictating general ideas and specific phrases to senior staff members, aides said. He chose to focus on his son because it was consistent with the personal approach to law enforcement he had taken in the campaign last year.Mr. de Blasio had planned to hold a news conference, perhaps at City Hall, regardless of the grand jury’s decision. Absent an indictment, the mayor wanted to be on Staten Island “at the moment of impact,” an administration official said.The mayor had asked aides to research past episodes of police violence in New York over the last 20 years, like the cases of Abner Louima and Amadou Diallo, to see how long the investigations lasted and how the city had negotiated the fractious responses. In the past, Mr. de Blasio, who was an aide to former Mayor David N. Dinkins, has also invoked the 1991 riots in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in internal discussions.Mr. de Blasio also seemed aware that violent protests could undermine his political capital. After learning the Garner decision was imminent, Mr. de Blasio told aides to move up events intended to showcase the reduced crime rate and a pilot program in which police officers are to wear body cameras.The events had originally been planned for later in the month.