https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/us/recruits-death-leads-to-wider-investigation-of-abuse-in-marines.html
Recruit’s Death Leads to Wider Investigation of Abuse in Marines - The New York Times
United States Defense and Military Forces,Hazing,Siddiqui  Raheel,Falls,United States Marine Corps,Naval Criminal Investigative Service,Michigan,South Carolina
June 30, 2016
6467
TAYLOR, Mich. — Raheel Siddiqui was well on his way to becoming an American success story.A son of immigrants, he had been a top student in high school and was studying robotics and engineering at the University of Michigan’s Dearborn campus. That is where the Marines recruited him, his family says.He wanted to be a jet mechanic in the Marines, and eventually an F.B.I. agent, saving money and helping his close-knit Muslim family to a better life.“He liked challenges and didn’t want something easy,” said his sister, Sidra, recalling why he chose the Marines over other services. “He liked the respect that the Marines got.”In early March, Raheel, 20, arrived at the Marines’ fabled recruit training depot on Parris Island, S.C.Eleven days later, he was dead.The official story the family was told was that Raheel had become faint and sought medical attention in his third-floor barracks. Then, a witness said, he ran out of the room and jumped off an external stairwell or balcony, falling 40 feet to his death.No way, his family said. “My brother wasn’t a quitter,” Sidra said. “I know he wouldn’t have done that.”More than three months later, after protests by his family and demands from their congresswoman, the investigation into the death has widened significantly, and appears to be at risk of metastasizing into a scandal for the Marine Corps. Fifteen drill instructors and other Marine leaders — all from the same battalion — are under investigation for allegations that include physical abuse, assault and hazing dating to late last year.“Once the investigations are complete, we will take necessary administrative and judicial action as warranted to ensure proper accountability,” Maj. Gen. James W. Lukeman, the commander of Marine training, said in a statement regarding the wider investigation, which was first reported by The Wall Street Journal.Mr. Siddiqui’s mother, Ghazala, is still in shock. Sitting in their modest apartment here, she and her daughter said investigators told them that Raheel might not have received medical attention he needed. But the family is pleased that people are facing consequences.On April 4, the Siddiquis’ congresswoman, Debbie Dingell, wrote a letter to the Marine Corps commandant demanding answers, including whether hazing had been a factor in Mr. Siddiqui’s death.Two months later, another Marine general wrote her back, Brig. Gen. David J. Furness, promising that “any indication of hazing will be carefully investigated” as part of inquiries.He added that the colonel in charge of Mr. Siddiqui’s training regiment had been removed from command because the Marines lost confidence in him after learning that “policies and procedures were not followed.” The colonel, the general wrote, had been removed from command June 6 — the day the general wrote back to Ms. Dingell.Ten days after Mr. Siddiqui’s death, Ed Buice, a spokesman for the Naval Criminal Investigative Service told The Island Packet, a newspaper near Parris Island, that there were “no apparent signs of foul play in his death.” On Thursday, the spokesman said, “The N.C.I.S. death investigation is still active.”Some news media reports have indicated that shortly after arriving on Parris Island, Mr. Siddiqui told a drill instructor that he wanted to quit and threatened suicide — only to quickly reverse himself by explaining that he made the threat because he knew it was the only way he would be allowed to quit, and that he now was “110 percent” ready to continue.The Siddiqui family’s lawyer, Nabih Ayad, discounts that account. No one who knew Mr. Siddiqui, the lawyer said, would think he could take his own life.Based on his understanding of the investigation, Mr. Ayad said, witnesses said Mr. Siddiqui asked a drill instructor several times to allow him to be treated for a swollen throat, and then fainted. He was roused by a drill instructor “violently smacking him,” Mr. Ayad said.“What transpired next is a mystery,” he said. “The question is, who pushed him, or how did he fall?”Mr. Ayad said the fact that the regimental training commander and two other senior Marines in the regiment had recently been relieved of command validated the family’s fears that Mr. Siddiqui had been hazed or abused, or worse.“There’s a bigger, systemic problem here,” he said.