https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/fashion/lanvin-bouchra-jarrar-paris-fashion-week.html
At Lanvin, Bouchra Jarrar’s New Dawn - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Lanvin,Jarrar  Bouchra,Paris Fashion Week
Sept. 27, 2016
9324
Bouchra Jarrar’s decision to show her first spring/summer collection for Lanvin at midday on Wednesday in a light-filled salon of the Hôtel de Ville in Paris is worth considering, for a number of reasons.Not just because Lanvin’s former creative director, Alber Elbaz, always showed in the evening, or because his deeply romantic aesthetic for the house turned on the axis of tender is the night.But because the time indicates an entirely new focus for the brand — daywear is to be Lanvin’s plat du jour — and reflects the overall shift wrought by Ms. Jarrar, the 45-year-old French designer. Gone is the cocooning, all-black office of Mr. Elbaz’ tenure: Ms. Jarrar had it painted white. White voile drapes hang from the full-length windows, and there are green plants perched on high wooden tables; a ceramic tortoise peeks out from under one.“For me, Lanvin is femininity,” she said a few weeks before the show. “I want there to be lightness, to be pleasure, because we all need pleasure in our lives. And sensuality — a drape in the back of a dress say — but always with a twist, so there is self-assurance and there is modernity.”At the moment, she needs all the self-assurance she can get. There is a lot riding on her petite shoulders.Not only is she one of two female designers suddenly elevated to the highest creative echelons of heritage couture houses for the first time in decades (Maria Grazia Chiuri at Dior is the other), but Ms. Jarrar takes the helm at Lanvin’s women’s wear after a period of particularly bitter internal strife that played out in the public domain. Last October Mr. Elbaz was fired after 14 years spent breathing new life and luster into what is the oldest Parisian couture house in continuous existence.Staff members revolted, a testament to the extraordinary affection in which Mr. Elbaz was held — “God and father,” is how one Lanvin employee described it — and the relationship between management and the 330 employees went into free fall, hitting rock bottom in December 2015 when Lanvin took its works’ council to court to try to silence the insurgency.Then came a washout fall ready-to-wear collection, produced by an internal team. Sales are down, estimated at 200 million euros ($225 million) last year versus the house peak of 250 million euros in 2012, and a person in the company, who requested anonymity, estimates they will drop to 170 million euros this year.Ms. Jarrar showed her first resort collection for Lanvin in June to critical approval. But some stores found the new direction too minimalist for the spirit of the brand, and chose either to reduce their buying or not to buy at all. Neiman Marcus, for example, cut 29 points of sale for Lanvin ready-to-wear. Although such fluctuations are inevitable after a change in aesthetic direction, it is significant for a brand that is dependent on wholesale, which accounts for some 70 percent of its sales, with only 30 percent of sales coming from Lanvin’s own stores.And although Michèle Huiban, Lanvin’s chief executive, said that “the turbulence ended some time ago, and the house is united in this new adventure with Bouchra,” there is still a palpable feeling of insecurity in the corridors of Lanvin.This is a house that has had three chief executives in the last 10 years, where office doors are reportedly locked, and where external public relations teams are airdropped in just two weeks before shows. Recent significant staff losses include a design team reduced to three people from 11; the director of ready-to-wear fired; the head of accessories leaving for Marc Jacobs; and the head of ateliers resigning after several years service.In Paris, rumors persist that Lanvin’s minority shareholder, the German-born Ralph Bartel, is getting ready to increase his 25 percent investment to a majority stake. Ms. Huiban said, “I have no knowledge of that,” and Mr. Bartel declined to comment.And the departure of Mr. Elbaz remains a hot topic. A recent issue of the French economics weekly Challenges reported that he was claiming 40 million euros in damages from the brand.In other words, Ms. Jarrar’s responsibilities go far beyond simply defining a new aesthetic. She also has to repair a damaged company.It is a momentous challenge, but Ms. Jarrar exuded a quiet and steely determination in her office on the Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré in the days before the spring show. Dark-eyed, dark-haired, focused and precise in beige cashmere, black pants, and black boots with gold chains, she said: “I am fully conscious of my responsibility. I look at things calmly. I weigh up the situation. I create to sell.”Amid the unrest, she is getting on with implementing her design vision for the house. The open-plan studio where Mr. Elbaz worked in an exuberant free-for-all of international stylists, patisseries and noise, has been divided into two rooms. Now there is what Ms. Jarrar calls “a space for sharing,” to which a small and select number of stylists are invited for creative meetings, and Ms. Jarrar’s private design space: a large, light room inhabited by only Ms. Jarrar and her design assistant.“I need to be with my team, but I also need to be by myself to create,” she explained of her need for considered isolation. “I need to be alone with my cutting and my fabric. I am very centered in my work. I have to generate and create for others to work, for the house to operate on every level.”Floriane de Saint-Pierre, founder of the fashion and luxury executive search firm that carries her name, said the hiring of Ms. Jarrar and Ms. Chiuri marked the return of the strong female designer and businesswoman to the Paris couture scene. “Bouchra is a great talent and very much a woman entrepreneur-designer,’’ Ms. de Saint-Pierre said. “When you are a woman who has run your own company, then you are automatically plugged in and aligned with everyday life.”It is true that Ms. Jarrar has a résumé that denotes both talent and resilience. She had her own couture house for six years, spent three seasons as an assistant to Christian Lacroix, and before that was the studio director at Balenciaga for 10 years under Nicolas Ghesquière. There, she said, “I learned the chain of production, every stage of the creative process. It was a colossal responsibility. I trained myself. There was no one to hold my hand.”Mr. Lacroix remembered Ms. Bouchra as “more than a perfectionist in technique, cut and final results. She was very demanding in terms of craftsmanship and very focused on her future.”Like the founder of Lanvin, Ms. Jarrar comes from a large family. While Jeanne Lanvin was the eldest of 11 children, Ms. Jarrar is the sixth of seven. Her parents were Moroccan and moved to Cannes before Ms. Jarrar was born. Her father was an artisan plasterer, creating arches, domes and decorative niches in Provençal villas, while her mother stayed home to look after the children.“As a child, Bouchra always had this remarkable ability to concentrate, to isolate herself from the noise of the household,” her sister, Ida Jarrar, recalled. “Even if the television was on or someone was listening to music, she was able to be in her own world. She has intense concentration and a huge capacity for work.”She also had an early love of fabrics. Ms. Bouchra’s most vivid childhood memories are trips with her mother to the local fabric store at age 6 or 7, running up and down the aisles, touching the rolls of fabric and picking up snippets to take home.At age 13, while still in school, she started making clothes to sell. “I didn’t want to work as a waitress, so I started making dresses for my friends and for my friends’ mothers, proposing tops and skirts, different fabrics,’’ Ms. Jarrar said with a smile. “And as it turned out, it paid much better.”Crucially for a fashion house that has been identified for so long with the aesthetic of one designer, Ms. Jarrar brings to Lanvin her own defined and recognizable style, honed over six years at her small, successful Paris couture house: A smart fusion of urban modernity with a quiet yet tangible luxury.“Her clothes have a kind of tension to them, an elegance that is extremely feminine but never girlish,” said Pascale Cayla, a contemporary art consultant who has long been a client. “You are never overdressed. Her fashion communicates that you’re a woman of your time, that you have understood.”Ikram Goldman, who has sold both Ms. Jarrar’s collections and Lanvin at her Chicago fashion boutique, said: “Her understanding of a woman’s body means she makes clothes that are really very chic, that make you feel current but with the kind of ease you get from wearing vintage. She drapes a dress beautifully, and no one cuts a short sleeve that covers the upper arm better.”The way Ms. Jarrar herself puts it is: “I know how to optimize a woman’s silhouette, no matter what her size. I look at all women: the baker, the mother, the actress, my friends. I am interested in, and curious about, every type of woman.”As Paris Fashion Week begins, everyone is curious right back.