https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/opinion/trump-comey-obstruction-justice.html
Did Mr. Trump Obstruct Justice? - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Comey  James B,Trump  Donald J,Flynn  Michael T,Russia
May 16, 2017
9723
“I hope you can let this go.”Those are President Trump’s words, according to the former F.B.I. director, James Comey, and they should resound as an alarm to Congress and anyone concerned about protecting the Constitution. The president of the United States may have a lot of power, as Mr. Trump likes to remind us, but that power does not extend to obstructing a federal investigation.That is precisely what Mr. Trump was trying to do, Mr. Comey feared. As was Mr. Comey’s standard practice, he recounted the remarks in a memo he wrote shortly after a private Oval Office meeting with Mr. Trump in February. He believed that the president was attempting to stifle the bureau’s investigation into Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser, who had resigned the day before amid public reports that he had lied to Vice President Mike Pence about his communications with the Russian ambassador.The White House — whose credibility at this point is, like the president’s, in tatters — denied the allegations in Mr. Comey’s memo. But the memo’s existence, which was first reported Tuesday by The New York Times, is very bad news for an administration already suffocating itself in scandal.Representative Jason Chaffetz, chairman of the House oversight committee, was right Tuesday night to immediately demand all documents related to conversations between Mr. Comey and the president, including any  recordings Mr. Trump may have secretly made. But other Republicans were once again struggling to look the other way. Richard Burr, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said the burden was on The Times to produce the memo. Perhaps he forgot his own committee’s authority to subpoena Mr. Comey’s memo, and his testimony.Mr. Comey certainly has the free time to testify. Mr. Trump fired him last week, just as the bureau’s investigation into ties between the Trump campaign and the Russian government’s attempts to influence the outcome was heating up. After the White House tried to produce a coherent rationale for the president’s action that would distance it from the Russia investigation, the president himself made the connection explicit. In a television interview days later, Mr. Trump said his decision was based at least in part on his belief that “this Russia thing” was a “made-up story.”Taken together with the news of Mr. Comey’s memo and reports that Mr. Trump had tried to  extract a loyalty pledge from him after learning about the Flynn investigation, it is hard not to see the outlines of an attempt by Mr. Trump to quash a criminal investigation that could reach into the highest levels of his campaign and administration.This growing crisis now raises urgent questions of abuse of executive power and demands an immediate and thorough response. The White House cannot police itself, of course, and Americans can’t have an ounce of faith in the Justice Department, which is run by an attorney general, Jeff Sessions, who was Mr. Trump’s top cheerleader in the Senate. Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, who alone has the power to appoint a special counsel, has not given any indication that he plans to do so.When will Republicans in Congress decide that enough is enough? Do they need Mr. Trump’s approval ratings to dip below 30 percent? Do they need first to ram through their deeply unpopular agenda? Or it is possible they might at last consult their consciences, and recall that they took an oath to uphold the Constitution?