https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/25/movies/joshua-teenager-vs-superpower-review.html
Review: ‘Joshua: Teenager vs. Superpower,’ a War That Isn’t Fiction - The New York Times
Joshua: Teenager vs. Superpower (Movie),Documentary Films and Programs,Wong  Joshua (1996- ),Piscatella  Joe,Hong Kong,China,Scholarism (Hong Kong)
May 25, 2017
7812
“Joshua: Teenager vs. Superpower” has the three things any action movie needs: a valiant hero, a mighty enemy and a catchy title. That it’s a documentary only makes the story more involving — and more worrisome — than most fictions.The real-life lead here is Joshua Wong, who, as a 14-year-old in Hong Kong, made a breathtakingly brave stand against the Chinese government, which in 2012 began to institute a pro-Communist education program in that territory. China had taken control of Hong Kong in 1997 and had promised it autonomy, a vow that had weakened over time and would be violated further by the school proposal.Mr. Wong and the organization he founded, Scholarism, recruited supporters (“If you want to defeat Darth Vader, then you have to train some Jedi,” one early member says), distributed leaflets and then occupied the square outside the Hong Kong government headquarters to protest the Chinese plan.At first, the ragtag group numbered 10 or 20. “There seems to be no hope,” Mr. Wong recalled feeling. “But a miracle happened.” Within days, the crowd grew to over 100,000, many inspired by Mr. Wong’s speaking skills.To put this skinny young man onstage is to see him turn instantly captivating: Mr. Wong is energetic but composed, determined yet realistic. Scenes in which he questions Hong Kong’s leader are bold on their own. When you consider that Mr. Wong was only a teenager at the time, they are astonishing. It’s as if he had been “doing this for, like, 20 years,” one interviewee says. That’s an understatement.Joe Piscatella, the director, dives in immediately to set a speedy pace. He also provides a quick summary of Hong Kong’s recent history, and looks to the future. After the education controversy ends — no spoilers for those unfamiliar with the outcome — Scholarism joins a protest over Beijing’s intervention in elections, then prepares to run candidates of its own.Through it all, we see Mr. Wong and his group come of age. As their battles intensify, things grow complicated, and threats are always present: Some activists confronting China have found themselves on trial or have just “disappeared.”“Teenager vs. Superpower,” which won an audience award at the Sundance Film Festival, ends the way most action movies don’t — with hero and villain still battling. Yet amid the fight, there’s a sense of hope as we watch one tough kid turning into one tough man. With luck, that will lead to a sequel.