https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/07/world/europe/uk-brexit-house-of-lords.html
In Latest ‘Brexit’ Vote, House of Lords Calls for Parliament to Have More Say - The New York Times
House of Lords (Great Britain),Legislatures and Parliaments,Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),May  Theresa M
March 7, 2017
4751
LONDON — Theresa May, who became Britain’s prime minister last year, has resisted any and all efforts to constrain her freedom to steer the country on its unpredictable journey out of the European Union.But on Tuesday, Mrs. May encountered a significant new obstacle, when the House of Lords voted 366 to 268 to approve an amendment giving Parliament a much greater say over the outcome of talks on exiting the bloc.The vote sets the stage for a tense battle next week in the House of Commons, which has the ultimate authority to set aside the actions of the House of Lords, an unelected and largely appointed body.Michael Heseltine, a former deputy prime minister, supported the amendment in the Lords, calling Parliament the “custodian of our national sovereignty.”But David Davis, the cabinet minister responsible for Britain’s withdrawal, known as “Brexit,” said it was “clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate” the negotiation process and said the government would not let that happen.Mrs. May will probably get her way in the Commons, because it has already approved her plans to start negotiations on leaving the bloc without imposing any conditions on her. But British politics have been volatile since the referendum last year, when voters opted by 52 percent to 48 percent to quit the European Union, and little can be considered certain.Hard-line supporters of Britain’s exit have called for retribution against the House of Lords, or even its abolition, if it thwarts their efforts, and there has been talk of a constitutional crisis over the issue.One former leader of Mrs. May’s Conservative Party, William Hague, suggested that she call a snap general election to secure a strong mandate.At stake in the Lords was whether, once Mrs. May has completed negotiations on Britain’s future relationship with the bloc, Parliament should have a “meaningful say” on the outcome.Mrs. May has offered lawmakers only an up-or-down vote on whatever deal she negotiates. Because a rejection of the deal at that late stage could precipitate a disorderly and economically damaging “cliff edge” exit from the bloc, Mrs. May’s opponents argue that Parliament would be left with no real choice at all.Instead, Mrs. May’s critics want Parliament to have the right to send her back to the negotiating table if it is dissatisfied with the agreement.Mrs. May has said that would undermine her negotiating position and would encourage European Union negotiators to offer Britain a poor deal, on the assumption that Parliament would reject it, effectively blocking Britain’s exit.Tuesday’s vote was not the first setback for Mrs. May over exiting the bloc. Members of the Lords have already voted to guarantee that European Union citizens who are residents of Britain would have the right to remain. Mrs. May wants to overturn that amendment, too, arguing that Britain should not offer such a guarantee until its citizens living in Continental Europe receive the same protection.“We will now aim to overturn these amendments in the House of Commons,” Mr. Davis, the minister overseeing the withdrawal, said in a statement on Tuesday.In another vote earlier in the day, the House of Lords decided against calling for a second referendum to approve the terms of a deal.Mrs. May’s critics noted that her reluctance to consult British lawmakers about the deal seemed to cut against one of the main arguments made in favor of leaving the European Union — that doing so would restore Parliament’s sovereignty.With the opposition Labour Party, led by Jeremy Corbyn, divided and trailing in opinion polls, the controversy has fueled renewed speculation about an early general election, something that Mrs. May had appeared to rule out.A parliamentary act fixed the House of Commons’s current term at five years, ending in 2020. But Mr. Hague, the former Conservative leader, suggested repealing the act and returning to the earlier system, in which the government was free to call elections at times of its choosing. A snap election, Mr. Hague wrote in The Telegraph, could yield a “large and decisive Conservative majority,” which would give Mrs. May a stronger hand in negotiations with the European Union.Mr. Hague also warned that “trouble is coming” for the government in the form of a series of difficult challenges, including negotiations on leaving the bloc.“Any deal is bound to be full of compromises which one group or another in Parliament finds difficult to stomach,” he wrote, adding that this “could also lead to a situation where the prime minister faces a standoff with Parliament over a deal that will have taken two years to negotiate and is nearly impossible to change.”