http://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/14/world/constitutional-court-reinstates-south-korea-s-impeached-president.html
Constitutional Court Reinstates South Korea's Impeached President - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,ROH MOO HYUN,GOH KUN,IMPEACHMENT,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,ELECTIONS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS,DECISIONS AND VERDICTS
May 14, 2004
1500
South Korea's nine-member Constitutional Court ruled Friday to dismiss the impeachment case against President Roh Moo Hyun, restoring full powers to the president, in a case that had tested the nation's fledgling democracy.The ruling ended a crisis for South Korea, a major American ally and one of Asia's most dynamic economies, that began March 12, when the National Assembly unexpectedly approved a bill to impeach Mr. Roh on minor election law violations. A month later, voters punished conservative parliamentary candidates and tripled the seats of the Uri Party, a new liberal coalition that backs Mr. Roh, giving it a slim majority in the one-chamber National Assembly.During Mr. Roh's two months of political limbo, presidential powers were exercised by the prime minister, Goh Kun. Mr. Roh resumed power immediately after the ruling.This new political lease of life, coupled with control of the National Assembly, is expected to allow Mr. Roh to pursue a more activist agenda: to move the capital from Seoul to the nation's center, to soften the National Security Law which brands North Korea as ''the enemy,'' to strengthen antitrust laws against the chaebols, or conglomerates, and to place more distance in the close relationship with the United States.In a turn of the generational wheel, last month's vote elected a younger, more liberal National Assembly, where few have personal memories of the Korean War. In polls, majorities of Uri Party legislators have identified themselves as ''progressives,'' and have said South Korea's relations with China are more important than ties with the United States.Now, Mr. Roh must decide what to do about his promise to send 3,200 more troops to Iraq this summer, which would make the South Korean contingent the third largest, after the American and British.''The No.1 issue for Roh Moo Hyun is Iraq,'' Richard C. Holbrooke, chairman of the Asia Society, said Thursday after meetings here with Mr. Roh's aides. ''They don't want Roh's rebirth screwed up by Iraq.''South Korea already has 450 military medics and engineers in Iraq. Last February, over angry public protests, the National Assembly voted to approve the deployment. Now, some Uri Party legislators are calling for a new authorizing vote.On Tuesday, Uri Party members elected Chun Jung Bae, a former human rights lawyer, as their floor leader. Mr. Chun has floated the idea of sending money instead of troops.Further to the left, the Democratic Labor Party, now the third force in the National Assembly, is trying to organize legislators to block the troop dispatch. It wants the United States to withdraw its 37,000 troops from South Korea, and wants to abolish the National Security Law, which penalizes Communist activities here.The impeachment ended the legislative careers of four conservative leaders of the drive, and reduced the main pro-impeachment party, the Millennium Democrats, to fourth place. But the Grand National Party, a bulwark of traditional conservatism, still controls 40 percent of the seats, enough to block legislation on national security issues.''The principle of the nation's plan to dispatch troops to Iraq, once approved by the National Assembly, must be kept,'' Park Geun Hye, the party's leader, said Monday.Many South Koreans say they hope Mr. Roh will work more smoothly with the National Assembly to address economic worries. In recent days, South Korea's stock market was buffeted by the news that China, the country's largest trading partner, is trying to curb its growth, that the United States may raise interest rates and that oil prices have hit $40 a barrel.