http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/19/us/university-of-cincinnati-to-pay-4-85-million-to-family-of-man-killed-by-officer.html
University of Cincinnati to Pay $4.85 Million to Family of Man Killed by Officer - The New York Times
Colleges and Universities,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Tensing  Ray (1989- ),Blacks,Cincinnati (Ohio),University of Cincinnati
Jan. 18, 2016
2344
WASHINGTON —  The University of Cincinnati has agreed to pay $4.85 million to the family of an unarmed black man who was shot to death in July by one of its police officers, a settlement that also requires the college to provide an undergraduate education to his 12 children, create a memorial to him on campus and include his family in discussions on police reform.The family of Samuel DuBose, who was killed by a white officer during a routine traffic stop in what a prosecutor called a “senseless, asinine shooting,” reached the settlement after two days of mediation, the university said Monday in announcing the deal. It estimated the total cost to the university, which is publicly funded, to be $5.3 million.The agreement, which does not require the university to admit liability, includes a promise that the university president, Santa J. Ono, will apologize to the DuBose family. In an interview, Dr. Ono said the university felt a “civic responsibility” to go beyond the kind of cash settlement customary in police-involved deaths.“I wanted to take care of the family and the next generation of the family,” Dr. Ono said. “And I wanted it to be absolutely clear that the University of Cincinnati cares not only about this family, but also about peace within the city of Cincinnati.”One of Mr. DuBose’s daughters, Raegan Brooks, 18, who served as the family’s representative in the talks, said she was “very comfortable” with the settlement. Still, she added, “At times I wanted to walk out because I felt like they were putting a price on my father’s life.”Ms. Brooks, a student at Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, said she had been registered to attend the University of Cincinnati when her father was killed, but decided “it felt kind of unloyal for me to go there.” She intends to finish her two years at the community college and transfer to the university.Mr. DuBose, 43, was shot and killed on July 19 by Officer Ray Tensing, who pulled him over in a Cincinnati neighborhood adjacent to the campus because his car lacked a front license plate. The shooting was captured on a body camera, and Officer Tensing, who was fired from the department, faces trial on a charge of murder.The death, amid an intense national debate over race and policing, raised questions about whether the university’s police force had the experience and training required to enforce laws in complex urban neighborhoods.The university has since created a community advisory council, led by a prominent African-American judge, and the settlement calls for a DuBose family member to participate in the panel. Mr. DuBose’s sister, Terina DuBose Allen, an educational consultant in Columbus, said the provision “brings us peace with the fact that they are going to make some reforms.”The deal, mediated by Billy Martin, a Washington lawyer whose clients have included basketball stars and other prominent figures, appears in line with other recent settlements of cases involving police officers. The City of Baltimore agreed in September to pay $6.4 million to the family of Freddie Gray, an unarmed black man who suffered a fatal spinal injury in police custody.The estate of Eric Garner, who died in New York after an officer used a chokehold, a banned maneuver, to restrain him, settled with the city for $5.9 million. In Cleveland, a jury awarded $5.5 million to the estate of Kenneth Smith, a hip-hop artist who was fatally shot by an off-duty officer.Mr. DuBose is not the first black man to die as a result of an encounter with the University of Cincinnati police, and he will not be the first to have a memorial on campus. Kelly Brinson, 45, a psychiatric patient, and Everette Howard, 18, a student, died in 2010 and 2011 after campus officers fired stun guns at them, according to lawsuits filed by their families.The settlement with the Howard family led the university to erect a bench and a plaque near the spot where he died, said Al Gerhardstein, a civil rights lawyer in Cincinnati who represented that family and also represents the DuBoses. Mr. Gerhardstein has made what he calls “more comprehensive” settlements a signature of his work.Monday’s announcement was timed to coincide with the holiday commemorating the birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Mr. Gerhardstein said. He called the deal a product of “the type of collaborative, peaceful work” that Dr. King stood for.