https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/04/science/for-african-broadbills-seduction-to-the-sound-of-feathers.html
For African Broadbills, Seduction to the Sound of Feathers - The New York Times
Birds,Feathers,Reproduction (Biological),Journal of Experimental Biology,Uganda,Clark  Christopher J,Prum  Richard O
April 4, 2016
8981
It’s called wing song. And it is not new age harp music or the latest calming aromatherapy. It is, oddly enough, a song that a bird makes with its wings.Although most birds make calls to advertise themselves or defend their territory, with their voices, some use their wings or tail feathers.One of the wing singers is the male African broadbill, as Christopher J. Clark, Richard O. Prum and colleagues reported in an article in Journal of Experimental Biology. They traveled to Uganda to record and analyze just how the bird produces what the study calls a “loud brreeeet” while making a quick, circular flight from its perch.Dr. Clark, now a biologist at the University of California, Riverside, was a researcher at Yale in the laboratory of Dr. Prum, an ornithologist and evolutionary biologist, when they went to Africa recently for research. But Dr. Prum’s interest goes way back.“I first heard a tape of this bird in the mid-80s,” Dr. Prum said, “and I’ve been obsessed with them going on 30 years.”He had studied the wing songs of manakins, but the broadbills were still on his mind when Dr. Clark, who had been researching the sounds hummingbirds make with their tails, arrived at Yale.Their flight videos, with synchronized sound, showed that the male birds — the ones who sing — made the breeeeet on downstrokes of the wings. The researchers went on to test a broadbill wing and individual feathers in a wind tunnel.Two of the outer primary feathers on the wing responded to wind and produced the loudest sound with a kind of movement called aeroelastic flutter. This is the mechanism found in hummingbird tail feathers, and it is one of several ways that feathers can make bird calls.The many species of birds that have evolved male nonvocal calls present a puzzle to Dr. Prum: “Why the hell would anyone evolve a totally new way to make sound?” They had voice boxes first and developed wing and tail sounds later.“I don’t think we have an answer,” he said. “It’s not just about information communication. It’s not just about the right frequency.”.What it might be about, he said, is “aesthetic innovation.” Novelty itself might be a factor in the evolution of sexual displays by these male birds.“What is important is the sensory delight of the females,” he added. “What do they like?”The male broadbills have found one answer.