https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/opinion/michael-flynn-an-alarming-pick-for-national-security-adviser.html
Michael Flynn: An Alarming Pick for National Security Adviser - The New York Times
Flynn  Michael T,Trump  Donald J,United States International Relations,United States Defense and Military Forces,United States Politics and Government,Conflicts of Interest,Muslims and Islam,Editorials,Appointments and Executive Changes
Nov. 18, 2016
6822
Of all the disturbing scenes in the presidential campaign, the Republican Convention speech by retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn stood out. During a fiery address in which he lamented the decline of American exceptionalism and lambasted the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, General  Flynn joined the crowd in chants of “lock her up!” Smiling slyly, he shouted: “Yeah, that’s right, lock her up!”It was grotesque, but not entirely surprising for a military intelligence veteran who has earned a reputation for hotheadedness and poor judgment. Americans of all political backgrounds should be alarmed that General Flynn will be President-elect Donald Trump’s national security adviser. It’s likely, given his record, that he will encourage Mr. Trump’s worst impulses, fuel suspicions of Muslims and bring to the job conflicts of interest from his international consulting work.The role of national security adviser has grown in power and influence in recent years, with the Bush and Obama administrations vesting the office with great authority on matters including military operations, nuclear proliferation, diplomacy, foreign aid and responses to global pandemics. The job demands a knack for consensus building, the ability to make sense of vast amounts of information and the rigor to present the president with well-thought-out options to respond to complex challenges.General Flynn played pivotal roles in military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan. While his skills served him well in those environments, when he was tapped to lead the Defense Intelligence Agency, his shortcomings as a manager and strategic thinker soon became glaring. His grasp on the truth was so flimsy at times that colleagues began mockingly referring to “Flynn facts.”General Flynn did not leave quietly after being fired by the Obama administration in 2014. He has since created a self-serving narrative, maintaining that he was dismissed for raising alarms about the threat posed by Islamist extremist groups, which he contends the Obama administration “coddles.”He has been extraordinarily incendiary in his characterizations of Islam. In February, he posted  a link to a video on Twitter warning about the threat of Islam: “Fear of Muslims is RATIONAL.” In August, he told The Washington Post that he agreed with some of Mr. Trump’s views about Muslims; he called Islam an ideology and compared it to a cancer that has metastasized.General Flynn’s fearmongering “only plays into Al Qaeda’s narrative that there is a clash of civilizations,” Representative Adam Schiff, the ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee, said, “What he has expressed is dangerous and harmful to us.”In recent months, even while he advised Mr. Trump, General Flynn took on questionable consulting work, including speaking at a forum hosted by the state broadcaster Russia Today, which is infamous for its propaganda and serves as a mouthpiece for President Vladimir Putin. He also runs a consulting firm that has lobbied  for a company  with connections to Turkey’s authoritarian president. Just last week, he wrote an article urging the extradition of a Turkish cleric whom the Turkish government said was the mastermind of the attempted coup in July.A core theme of Mr. Trump’s campaign was making America safer. With this appointment, he is doing the opposite.