https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/opinion/outrage-over-the-trump-cnn-video.html
Outrage Over the Trump-CNN Video - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,United States Politics and Government,News and News Media,CNN
July 3, 2017
4917
To the Editor:Re “Trump, in Latest Bout With Media, Conjures Physical Fight With a Foe” (news article, July 3):This video of President Trump wrestling and punching a figure whose head has been replaced with the letters “CNN” reminds us of two trends that are particularly frightening: implied violence and demonization of the press.A new National Rifle Association ad threatens those who oppose the president with the “clenched fist of truth.” Given the nature of this president, truth is unlikely. But the threat of violence under the banner of doublespeak was unmistakable.There is nothing new about implied violence, demonizing the press or demagogues who lie. Taken together they remind us, as they should, of the darkest eras in human history.ROBERT ORNDORFF, SEATTLETo the Editor:If Donald Trump were a real president, he’d behave with a dignity and seriousness becoming the office. He wouldn’t waste his time writing puerile tweets, insulting his critics, making baseless accusations, lying left and right, waging war against the “mainstream” news media and generally making a fool of himself.Instead, he’d devote his time to mastering the office, studying the issues, learning the intricacies of government, cooperating with our true allies and making a conscientious effort to lead this large and diverse nation of ours.But he isn’t a real president. He’s a fake president, utterly unfit in every way for the position and an embarrassment to the country. After not even six months in office, he’s well on his way to becoming by far the worst president in American history.STAN AUGARTEN, PARISThe writer is an American citizen who lives in Paris.To the Editor:The problem with the video is not the small probability that it will encourage violence against journalists. Instead, it is that it is part of President Trump’s continued insistence, not just in this video but also in many tweets and speeches, that our mainstream media purveys fake news. The result is that a substantial portion of society is fast losing respect for the role of a free press. That loss poses a much greater danger to our democracy than Russian meddling in our electoral processes.JAMES GREENE, MARQUETTE, MICH.To the Editor:Regarding President Trump’s tweet of a video of him wrestling “CNN” to the ground, for anyone who does not consider this a threat, consider what the reaction would have been had the roles been reversed, and “CNN” were wrestling Mr. Trump to the ground.Would anyone have considered that just a genuine news organization expressing itself “genuinely,” as Mr. Trump’s homeland security adviser, Thomas Bossert, said in his defense? No doubt the Secret Service would have the individuals behind the video in for some serious questioning. No doubt many people, both Democrats and Republicans, would consider this a very serious situation. Indeed it is.ANDREW POTTER, HUNTSVILLE, ALA.To the Editor:Re “The Hijacked American Presidency” (column, July 3):There is nothing overstated in Charles M. Blow’s observations about President Trump’s vulgarity, malignant narcissism and unfiltered tweets. Imagining a 10-year-old viewing the video of the president beating up a symbolic CNN reporter boggles the mind.What is deeply troubling is how inured this country has become to all of the antics and actions of this president. The bar has become so low that it may become necessary to dig a hole for it. Where else can all this go?JULIE FRAZIERCLEVELAND HEIGHTS, OHIO