https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/24/opinion/the-saga-of-park-geun-hye.html
The Saga of Park Geun-hye - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Nov. 24, 2016
1504
The accounts of Park Geun-hye’s rise and fall have drawn on “Game of Thrones,” Rasputin, classical Greek tragedy and a variety of other allusions to capture the extraordinary drama now being played out in South Korea. The daughter of a military strongman, Park Chung-hee, who led South Korea for 18 years; the first woman to be elected president of a country ranked near the bottom for gender equality; and enormously popular early in her term, Ms. Park now faces huge demonstrations demanding her resignation over reports that she has been under the influence of a shadowy and corrupt confidante, Choi Soon-sil.Ms. Choi, now under arrest, is the daughter of a minor cult leader who once exercised considerable influence over the young Ms. Park. According to South Korean prosecutors, Ms. Choi not only meddled in official affairs but also used her connections to extort millions of dollars from businesses. On Sunday, prosecutors identified Ms. Park as an accomplice, raising even louder demands for her resignation. She has apologized for letting Ms. Choi get too close, while denying all criminal charges.To many Koreans, Ms. Park represented a modern, democratic version of her father, revered by older Koreans for leading South Korea out of poverty. Elected president in 2012, she was seen as a leader who had her father’s political skills but who was free of corruption and would put the people ahead of personal interests.Both of her parents were assassinated — her mother was killed first, in 1974, in an assassination attempt on her father, who was killed five years later. That is what apparently enabled Ms. Choi’s father, now also dead, to gain the influence over the young Ms. Park that Ms. Choi inherited.The protests have hampered political processes and raised questions about whether it is possible for her to complete the year left in her term. Yet an abrupt resignation would set off a potentially bitter succession struggle among the major political parties.However the crisis unfolds, Ms. Park will have to improve on her apology if she hopes to restore some of the public’s early faith in her selflessness and integrity. That must involve a full acknowledgment of Ms. Choi’s misdeeds as well as accepting full political responsibility for them.