https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/27/world/asia/hong-kong-umbrella-democracy-charges.html
Hong Kong Democracy Advocates Face Charges in 2014 Protests - The New York Times
Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Hong Kong Federation of Students,Occupy Central,Lam  Carrie (1957- ),Tai Yiu-ting  Benny,Wong  Joshua (1996- ),Hong Kong
March 27, 2017
7819
HONG KONG — The Hong Kong police brought criminal charges on Monday against nine organizers of the 2014 pro-democracy protests, one day after a mostly pro-Beijing committee chose a new leader for the semiautonomous Chinese territory.The move raised concerns of a broader crackdown more than two years after the demonstrations for freer elections that became known as Occupy Central or the Umbrella Movement.The authorities charged the three founders of the 2014 protest movement and six other participants, according to the protesters, who were arrested Monday night at a police station as a crowd of supporters gathered outside.“We are not afraid,” chanted the protesters, including current and former legislators and two student leaders. “We demand genuine universal suffrage.”Benny Tai, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong and a founder of the protest group Occupy Central With Love and Peace, told reporters that each of the three founders faces one charge of conspiracy to commit public nuisance and two incitement charges. The six other protesters face one to two counts of those charges.The nuisance charge carries a maximum jail sentence of seven years.“The charges send a strong message that the authorities are going to create more conflict in the community, that they will continue a hard-line approach,” Chan Kin-man, a sociology professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and a founder of Occupy Central With Love and Peace, said in a telephone interview before his arrest.It was unclear why the police waited this long to bring charges, but Mr. Chan said that the current Hong Kong government, led by the unpopular chief executive Leung Chun-ying, had waited until Beijing’s preferred candidate, Carrie  Lam, was selected on Sunday to succeed him.Bringing charges earlier might have hurt her campaign, he said, because she was a loyal deputy to Mr. Leung. In 2014, Mrs. Lam had tried but failed to defuse the protests in a televised debate with student representatives.More than 900 people were arrested during the protests in 2014, which paralyzed parts of the city for nearly three months. Among them, 81 have been convicted of various offenses as of the end of January, according to the Hong Kong Department of Justice.“This is clearly an act of political revenge,” said Raphael Wong, vice chairman of a pro-democracy party, the League of Social Democrats, who faces two charges related to incitement. “We’re not afraid, and we will fight on for a genuine universal suffrage.”The Hong Kong Department of Justice cautioned against reading anything into the timing of the charges, saying in a statement that “prosecution matters should not be politicized, including that one should not speculate on the timing of the prosecution of people involved in the ‘Occupy Movement’ from the political angle.”Mrs. Lam, who vowed on Sunday to mend the divisions in Hong Kong society, said on Monday that she did not know about, and was not responsible for, the prosecutions. But she added, “Mending social rifts doesn’t mean compromising on rule of law.”In 2014 and 2015, Mrs. Lam led a task force to push through a Beijing-backed proposal to enable the direct popular election of the city’s leader, but with strict limitations on the choice of candidates. Protesters argued that such a system would only bolster Beijing’s grip on the former British colony by giving the chief executive undeserved legitimacy.The charges would be the first against the three founders of the Occupy Central campaign, which later joined forces with student protesters who were engaged in a weeklong boycott of classes. The three Occupy leaders, Mr. Chan, Mr. Tai and Chu Yiu-ming, turned themselves in to the police two months into the protests but were not charged with any crime until Monday.The charges have been celebrated by pro-Beijing groups as overdue justice, but they risk raising tensions in a city where young political leaders are planning another large demonstration. The protests will be timed to the expected visit of President Xi Jinping of China on July 1, the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to Chinese rule, according to Joshua Wong, the secretary general of the political party Demosisto, as part of a response to Mrs. Lam’s selection.“Lam’s victory, despite her lack of representation and popular support, reflects the Chinese Communist Party’s complete control over Hong Kong’s electoral process and its serious intrusion of Hong Kong’s autonomy,” the party said in a statement on Sunday. “It is our hope that those who have previously fought, and continue to fight, for fair political representation in Hong Kong will not lose momentum over the next half-decade as a consequence.”Mr. Wong and two other student protest leaders, Nathan Law and Alex Chow, were previously found guilty of unlawful assembly or inciting people to take part in an unlawful assembly preceding the 79 days of street occupation in 2014.