http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/27/arts/design/ec-comics-vilified-in-the-1950s-thrive-60-years-later.html
EC Comics, Vilified in the 1950s, Thrive 60 Years Later - The New York Times
Comic Books and Strips,EC Comics
Oct. 24, 2013
1147
This is a chilling and improbable tale of the living dead: Even though they were savaged by the politeness police and left lifeless some 60 years ago, EC comic books, which spawned notorious titles like Tales From the Crypt, Shock SuspenStories and Mad, have become the comics that refused to die.Just last month, Fantagraphics released two more albums in its EC Comics Library, started last year, and will soon publish its first volume of illustrator interviews in “The EC Artists.” Dark Horse Comics has revived the EC Archives, and will continue the series with “Tales From the Crypt: Volume 4,” next month. IDW Publishing is producing stunning, portfolio-size Artist’s Editions, with work by EC all-stars like Wally Wood, Jack Davis and Harvey Kurtzman (who created Mad magazine) and others. IDW also put out biographies this year of Wood and EC’s indispensable editor-writer-artist, Al Feldstein.So why, decades after its death, is EC still alive — and even thriving?Gary Groth, Fantagraphics president and editor of its EC Library, thinks he knows. “The EC line represents a high-water mark in the history of commercial comics,” he wrote in an e-mail. “They were arguably the best commercial comics company in the history of the medium, and their list of artists and writers between 1950 and 1955 represents a Who’s Who of the most accomplished craftsmen working in comics at that time.”And in an essay  this year,  he wrote: “EC came as close as a mainstream comics publisher could to being the comics equivalent of Barney Rosset’s Grove Press. What other comics publisher would even think of adapting stories from The Saturday Evening Post, use stories by Guy de Maupassant or steal from the best — Ray Bradbury?”The best-selling horror novelist Joe Hill, who also writes the comics series Locke & Key, has a slightly different take. “Tales From the Crypt was the most famous of the horror and crime comics that were destroyed by the 1950s-era show trial put on by Congressman Estes Kefauver,” Mr. Hill wrote in an e-mail. “And I think that in the very act of making a thing forbidden, you make it seductive. Congressmen and respected psychologists didn’t want you to have it ... therefore it had to be great.”EC’s pulpy cultural DNA, which pulses in comics like Crypt and Weird Science, has proved hardier than anyone could have imagined. Those gruesome, fantastical and slapstick chromosomes course through the films of Joe Dante and George Lucas, of Steven Spielberg and Quentin Tarantino, and in the novels of Stephen King and Mr. Hill, Mr. King’s son. And don’t forget that Mad was born as a 10-cent EC comic in 1952 before becoming a 25-cent magazine with its 24th issue. (The first 24 issues of Mad can be read in DC Comics’ “Mad Archives,” Volumes 1 to 4.)“You start with Mad and wind up mainlining Vonnegut and calling yourself a conscientious objector,” wrote Mr. Hill, whose latest novel is “NOS4A2.” “Mad magazine has had its finger up the nose of pop culture since 1952 and has never stopped unearthing fresh glistening gems. Their sense of humor informed National Lampoon, ‘Saturday Night Live,’ ‘Jackass,’ Eminem’s music, one out of every seven tweets on Twitter, and every gross joke in every comic ever.”EC’s glory (and gory) years were 1950-1955, when it mutated from Educational Comics to Entertaining Comics, stopped printing tame titles like Saddle Romances and Tiny Tot and shifted to Two-Fisted Tales and The Vault of Horror. In this new, skewed world, axes were rarely used to chop wood, and meat grinders weren’t for shredding beef. Buxom bombshells lounged on distant planets, cannibalism was a hobby, and the dead just didn’t know how to stay dead.Mr. Hill savored those over-the-top moments and said you can find them in his own work: “Whenever I do a gross-out reveal (and a lot of times I’m aiming to gross out and get a laugh at the same time), I’m tossing a Tales From the Crypt special.”The cover of the 1953 Tales of Terror annual, drawn by Al Feldstein — shown in IDW’s “Best of EC” — is essential macabre anarchy: As some poor sap is rubber-banded on a rack, sundry demons grin and caper, as the Old Witch, an EC mascot, tickles the guy’s left foot while the Crypt-Keeper, another mascot, looks on. It wasn’t only Mad, as its covers claimed, that specialized in “Humor in a jugular vein.”That stew of night-sweats terror and twitchy laughter (spiced with a pinch of sex) captivated EC’s audience. Russ Cochran, who created the EC Archives, was 14 in 1951, when he read The Haunt of Fear No. 8, and got hooked. “These ECs were so important to me,” he writes in an essay in “Tales From the Crypt: Volume 4,” “that I built a wooden box with a padlock on it, to keep them safe.”Mr. Hill recalls a similar addiction — and his father owned hardcover editions. “Sometimes people will say, ‘I pored over that book for hours!’ “ he wrote. “In my case, it was more like I poured myself into those books.” He added, “I remember staring into them in the trancelike way people will stare into a fire.”Those very elements that seduced Mr. Cochran and Mr. Hill, though, led to EC’s demise. Teachers, librarians, psychologists and opportunistic politicians, like Kefauver, jerry-built a rickety link between juvenile delinquency and crime and horror comics, which stoked frenzied local and federal inquisitions — complete with comic-book bonfires. EC couldn’t weather its demonization and killed off its comic line by early 1956, except for Mad. EC’s attackers thought they had driven a fatal stake through the Crypt-Keeper’s heart.But as in any good horror story, the tale had one last ghastly twist. Most folks don’t remember the 1950s bonfires of the funny books, but EC fans couldn’t forget their lurid first love. And over time, their outré passion went on to infect the broader pop-cultural imagination. You can almost hear the irrepressible Crypt-Keeper cackling: “Heh, heh, heh.”Mr. Hill put it like this: “They were to me what Grimms’ fairy tales were to children in the 19th century.”Terror That Stalked the NewsstandsThe men who ran EC knew that a bold title, coupled with over-the-top art, helped their comic books practically jump off the jam-packed newsstands of the early 1950s like rabid rats. Here’s a sampling of titles that had circulation impact:THE HORROR, THE HORRORTales From the CryptThe Vault of HorrorThe Haunt of FearTHE HUMOR, THE HUMORMadPanicMARS, THE SUBURBWeird ScienceWeird FantasySPINE-CHILLING NOIR (AND SCARY SPELLING)Crime SuspenStoriesShock SuspenStoriesHE-MAN ADVENTURETwo-Fisted TalesFrontline Combat