http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/world/asia/china-nanjing-chengguan.html
Chengguan, Widely Despised Officers in China, Find Refuge and a Kind Ear - The New York Times
Street Vendors (Non-Food),Nanjing (China),chengguan
Sept. 29, 2016
6014
BEIJING — They may be the most reviled public servants in China. A Chinese Academy of Social Sciences report on the popularity of government officials two years ago ranked the chengguan, or urban management officers, dead last. Unarmed but charged with enforcing order on city streets, they have been scorned as bullies who brutalize beggars, smash unlicensed fruit vendors’ carts, kill unregistered pets and assist in the forced demolition of people’s homes. Scuffles are common, sometimes ending in injury or even death.Needless to say, it is a high-stress job.In recognition of the pressures, China’s first Psychological Crisis Intervention Center for Chengguan opened in Nanjing this week, offering counseling and other support services for chengguan. And perhaps not too soon. The opening came just days after a chengguan in Nanjing was stabbed to death by a street vendor he was trying to discipline.Zhang Chun, one of 18 psychologists at the center, said that it would not only provide counseling for individual chengguan, but that it was conducting a survey of about 2,000 such officials to assess their needs. The center plans to issue a handbook of legal and safety guidelines for their work.“Chengguan have a very bad reputation,” Mr. Zhang said in an interview. “No matter what they do, their work is never recognized as something positive. Chengguan need a place like this to ease their stress.”“But at the same time,” he added, “there are many chengguan who are just too rough in their work. The wrong approach can end in tragedy. So we also hope to help them by changing how they work.”The chengguan system was established in 1997 as a supplement to the police, in part to cope with the millions of rural migrants who were streaming into the cities seeking work, sometimes in a legal gray zone. According to China National Radio, at the beginning of 2016 there were more than a million chengguan.Still, it was not until late last year that the government released a document clarifying the chengguan’s work and responsibilities. This year, the government invited public comment on draft legislation that would further define, and possibly expand, their range of duties.As of Thursday, the Nanjing center said that about 30 chengguan had visited or telephoned requesting assistance. In interviews, other chengguan talked about the difficulties they face and where they need help.Yu Gaozhong, 34, a chengguan who works in the city’s Gulou district, said he once tried discussing occupational pressures with a friend, who laughed and asked, “Isn’t it the street vendors who should be asking for sympathy?”Mr. Yu said he could see the need for a counseling center. “Not many people I know want to listen to a chengguan’s complaints,” he said, “because they think chengguan are the thugs who bully others.”Mr. Yu, who became a chengguan when he left the army in 2005, said he had occasionally considered quitting but never followed through.“My son isn’t proud of my work,” he said. “Once he wrote in a school composition that I was a chengguan and his classmates laughed at him. One reason I still do it is, first, it’s not easy to get a new job and, second, it’s stable. It’s secure, at least.”He says he takes preventive measures to avoid charges of brutality. “Sometimes, I keep both hands behind my back when the street vendors get close to me, to show people gathering around that I’m not beating anyone,” he said. “Even if I’m getting punched, bystanders usually say I’m the one who’s being cruel.”Zhao Yang, 43, a chengguan in the Xuanwu district who founded an online forum for the officers, said he thought the center was a good idea. “At least it shows people are paying attention to the issue,” he said. “But the center’s only for fixing problems. Preventing problems is more important.”“Chengguan are just the scapegoat,” Mr. Zhao said. “We’re just doing our job, but people take out their anger with the government, or other departments, at us, because we’re the people who are in direct contact with them. I think China needs more laws and regulations that clarify our responsibilities, and chengguan should be better equipped when we’re out doing our work to avoid harm.”Fang Jun, 38, a chengguan in the Qinhuai district, also complained of a lack of guidance for their work, and for dealing with people’s hostility.“We’re more stressed than anyone can imagine,” Mr. Fang said. “We’re cursed, even when we do exactly as the laws and regulations require.”A chronic problem is dealing with contradictory demands, he said. “Motorists demand that we clear away food stands that block lanes, but people who like shopping at street stands, where it’s usually cheaper, want us to leave them alone,” Mr. Fang said. “What should we do?”“But after so many years,” he added, “I’m kind of numb now. As long as no one posts photos of me working improperly online, I try not to mind how others see me.”Mr. Fang said he probably would not visit the center himself. “I’ve seen so many projects that just sound good,” he said. “I wonder if it’s just another one that will attract some attention and then be forgotten.”In the meantime, his way of dealing with angry street vendors who threaten him is to “run away fast.”