https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/opinion/grenfell-fire-britain-theresa-may.html
Political Clarity After the Grenfell Tragedy - The New York Times
Grenfell Tower Fire (June  2017),Great Britain,May  Theresa M,Public and Subsidized Housing,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,Accidents and Safety,Politics and Government,Fires and Firefighters
June 29, 2017
3968
There are disasters that enter history as much for the political mark they leave as for the death and destruction they wreak. Such was Hurricane Katrina for George W. Bush, leaving an indelible image of a president slow and weak in response to human suffering. And such may be the Grenfell Tower fire for Prime Minister Theresa May, and more broadly for the infatuation with austerity and deregulation of British governments for the past four decades.Mrs. May, like Mr. Bush, may have delayed visiting the disaster scene so as not to interfere with rescue efforts. But politics fixes on symbols, and the flames racing up the 24-story tower unleashed the pent-up anger of survivors and residents of other low-cost public housing, known in Britain as council flats, at an officialdom deaf to their complaints and conditions. The duty of national leaders at such a time is to be there, even if that means taking the brunt of the fury.Mrs. May must have known the anger was there. She had just suffered a drubbing in a national election at the hands of Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader who had been dismissed as a relic of an obsolete hard left. It turned out that he was far closer than she was to the popular anger over the systematic shrinking of the old quasi-socialist state through privatization, deregulation and corporate tax cuts begun under Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s and continued under the “New Labour” of Tony Blair — policies generically known as “austerity” that have left Britain deeply divided into haves and have-nots.Coming a week after the election, the Grenfell Tower fire seemed to summarize the political debate in a moment of terrifying clarity. As Jonathan Freedland wrote in The Guardian, the problem turned out to be not the European Union, or action on climate change, or immigration, but a local authority that decided to save 4,750 pounds — about $6,100 at today’s exchange rates — by opting for cheaper and more flammable cladding for the building, installed in 2015 and 2016. It did so fully aware of the risk of a catastrophic fire, since such cladding had resulted in many fires and many warnings. At a time when all governmental red tape, even that intended to protect the public, was seen as an evil to be shredded, saving money took precedence over safety.In the wake of the catastrophe, municipal authorities have begun an emergency effort to replace cladding on other vulnerable buildings, the government has pledged a full  inquiry, and the police have said they will consider bringing manslaughter charges after determining who was responsible. There is certainly no shortage of potential contributors to the disaster, from the manufacturers of the panels, the insulation and the Hotpoint brand refrigerator that set off the blaze, to the managers, contractors and inspectors who closed their eyes to the peril.More important, perhaps, is that Grenfell Tower offers tragic evidence that the British state, in its relentless pursuit of less government, has gone too far in shedding its fundamental duties to protect public health and safety. That is where the political and moral investigation must start.