http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/21/world/asia/21korea.html
Beef Furor Provokes a Turnover in Seoul - The New York Times
South Korea,Lee Myung-bak,Politics and Government,Mad Cow Disease (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy),Meat,International Trade and World Market,Cattle,Livestock Diseases,Food Contamination and Poisoning,Appointments and Executive Changes,Demonstrations and Riots
June 21, 2008
5190
SEOUL, South Korea — President Lee Myung-bak replaced 9 of 10 senior presidential aides on Friday, hoping the changes would help restore trust in his four-month-old government, which has been shaken by a deeply unpopular deal on importing American beef.United States and South Korean trade officials are close to an agreement in which American beef exports to South Korea would not be from cattle older than 30 months, according to officials close to the talks, despite an April deal in which South Korea agreed to import meat from older cattle as well.Younger cattle are thought to have a reduced likelihood of mad cow disease. Protesters who took to the streets of Seoul and other South Korean cities this month accused their government of ignoring the health risks of importing American beef products from older cattle. Both the United States and South Korean governments have said that beef from American cattle is safe.Mr. Lee, whose approval ratings have dipped below 20 percent, is struggling to quell the furor over the April beef agreement, which set off weeks of antigovernment demonstrations.On Friday, Mr. Lee appointed veterans of public service and politics to his staff, reflecting his desire to bring stability to his government, which has been virtually paralyzed by the demonstrations.Mr. Lee’s new chief of staff, Chung Chung-kil, a university president and policy adviser in previous administrations, is considered an authority on presidential leadership. The presidential spokesman, Lee Dong-kwan, was the only senior aide who was retained.“I intend to start anew,” President Lee said in a televised address. “I ask the people to trust my new aides and encourage me. We will be humble and do our best to serve the people.”Mr. Lee said he would replace some cabinet ministers in the coming weeks. At a time of political crisis, South Korean presidents often replace senior staff members and ministers as a gesture of apology, even if those dismissed were not directly responsible for the trouble.It was not clear whether the changes and the revised beef deal would be enough to end the demonstrations.In April, Mr. Lee’s government lifted a ban on American beef that was imposed in 2003 after a case of mad cow disease was confirmed in the United States.The protests caused Seoul to ask Washington last week to change the terms of the April agreement. The American trade representative, Susan C. Schwab, and Kim Jong-hoon, the trade minister of South Korea, negotiated the beef export issue over several days, and details of the new agreement are expected to be announced Saturday.On that day, Mr. Lee’s critics are planning a rally in Seoul to demand a complete renegotiation of the beef agreement.Mr. Lee has repeatedly apologized for the beef deal.