http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/28/world/europe/jeremy-hunt-to-hand-over-bskyb-messages.html
Jeremy Hunt to Hand Over Messages on Murdoch TV Bid - The New York Times
Great Britain,Hunt  Jeremy,British Sky Broadcasting Group (BSkyB),Murdoch  Rupert,News and News Media,Politics and Government,Lobbying and Lobbyists,Conservative Party (Great Britain),Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods,Crime and Criminals,News Corporation
April 27, 2012
6508
LONDON — A British cabinet minister who has been accused of being too cozy with Rupert Murdoch’s media empire said on Friday that he would turn over all text messages and e-mails relating to his role in Mr. Murdoch’s aborted $12 billion takeover bid for BSkyB, Britain’s main satellite broadcaster.“I am confident that they will vindicate the position that I handled the BSkyB merger process with total integrity,” the minister, Jeremy Hunt, whose responsibility extends to culture and media, told reporters outside his house in London. He said he would provide the relevant material to the Leveson inquiry on press ethics.Mr. Hunt has so far resisted calls to resign, and Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservative-led coalition government has said it stands behind him. But Mr. Hunt’s apparently sympathetic relationship with Mr. Murdoch’s company, as revealed in a cache of e-mails between one of his top aides and a Murdoch lobbyist, has proved highly uncomfortable for him and the government.The aide, Adam Smith, who was Mr. Hunt’s special adviser on the BSkyB bid, resigned two days ago after admitting that he had had an inappropriately friendly relationship with the News Corporation, Mr. Murdoch’s media company, during its efforts to take over the 61 percent of BSkyB that it did not already own.Mr. Hunt was the minister responsible for overseeing the takeover bid, which in any case was abruptly abandoned last summer as the phone hacking scandal at The News of the World mushroomed.In a more worrying development for the News Corporation, Ofcom, the British media regulator, has said it is broadening its investigation of whether the company is “fit and proper” to hold a broadcast license at all. Among the documents it is seeking are embarrassing material from the dozens of civil cases in which victims of phone hacking sued News Group Newspapers, the subsidiary of the News Corporation that published The News of the World.News Group has been heavily criticized in some of the cases, with a judge at one point accusing it of deliberately destroying evidence.“Ofcom has contacted News Group Newspapers requesting documents which it understands are held by the company and which may be relevant to this assessment,” Ofcom said in a statement.“The documents Ofcom is seeking relate to the civil litigation cases. Ofcom is seeking to obtain documents that were ordered to be disclosed in the civil litigation between numerous complainants and News Group Newspapers.”In extreme cases, Ofcom has the power to revoke broadcast licenses. The recent decision of Mr. Murdoch’s son James to resign as the BSkyB chairman was seen by some as removing an obstacle to the company’s ability to hold on to its license.None of this is helpful to the government, which had close ties to the Murdoch empire before the hacking scandal exploded. Friday’s offer did not satisfy critics of Mr. Hunt. Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, accused the prime minister of “organizing a cover-up” by shielding Mr. Hunt from further scrutiny.Simon Hughes, a senior member of the Liberal Democrats, the junior coalition partner, broke ranks by asking why Mr. Hunt was not being investigated by the civil servant responsible for overseeing the ministerial code of conduct.“What I cannot understand is why the matter of the ministerial code of conduct — which is to do with do you take responsibility for your special adviser — is not something the prime minister should immediately refer to the person who has been given the job of doing that,” Mr. Hughes said on British television.