https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/sports/baseball/miami-marlins-sale.html
What $1.2 Billion Buys in Miami: For Baseball, a Major Distraction - The New York Times
Baseball,Stadiums and Arenas,Major League Baseball,Marlins Park (Miami  Fla),Miami Marlins,Gimenez  Carlos A,Loria  Jeffrey,Miami (Fla)
July 4, 2017
9496
MIAMI — Few things make Carlos A. Gimenez more irritated than Marlins Park. A decade ago, Mr. Gimenez, then a county commissioner, was one of the few local politicians to oppose spending hundreds of millions of public dollars to help the Miami Marlins pay for a new stadium they said they could not afford to build on their own.Mr. Gimenez, who is now the mayor of Miami-Dade County, was outvoted. In the midst of a recession, the city and the county agreed to pay for about three-fourths of the $650 million retractable-dome stadium, even though the team would keep nearly all the revenue from the building. The city and the county will end up paying about $2 billion over the life of the bonds on the stadium, making it one of the more lopsided deals in professional sports.And now, the team’s owner, Jeffrey Loria, wants to sell the Marlins for an estimated $1.2 billion, nearly eight times what he paid for the team. Fans may indeed want a new owner to revive a club that has not made the postseason since 2003. But Mr. Gimenez can only think about how Mr. Loria may end up making hundreds of millions of dollars, in part, he says, because the publicly funded stadium, which opened in 2012, has substantially enhanced the value of the team.“I would think he’ll walk away with $500 million in his pocket,” Mr. Gimenez said. “It sticks in my craw.”The bidding for the Marlins has turned into a major distraction for Major League Baseball, which will host the All-Star Game in Miami on July 11. The three-day event is usually a chance for the sport to forget about troublesome issues and celebrate the national pastime and, particularly, its best players.The expected sale of the Marlins has instead thrust Mr. Loria into the spotlight. Eager to push a deal to the finish line, Commissioner Rob Manfred has publicly endorsed two of the groups that have shown interest in the team — one led by the former Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter and another by Tagg Romney, the son of Mitt Romney.But the chances of a handshake deal for the team before the All-Star Game faded after Mr. Jeter had a falling-out with one of his partners, Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, who is now working with Mr. Romney. A third potential ownership group is led by Jorge Mas, who is from a prominent Miami-based Cuban-American family that runs a multibillion-dollar infrastructure firm. Though the negotiations are still fluid, Mr. Jeter’s group may have nudged in front because he may have found enough deep-pocketed partners, according to The Miami Herald.The auction is being led by David Samson, the Marlins’ team president and Mr. Loria’s stepson. Unlike most teams going through a sale, the Marlins have not hired an investment bank to help broker a deal. Omitting this step will save the Marlins’ ownership from having to pay a hefty commission, but it also has led to a less-than-fluid process. And while Major League Baseball is eager to have a deal done, Mr. Loria has an incentive to wait until next year: After March, as part of the team’s deal with the county, he will no longer have to give the city and the county a 5 percent share of the profits from the sale of the team.The Marlins declined to make Mr. Loria and Mr. Samson available for comment.As this process has played out, some of the prospective buyers have had trouble assembling enough investors to meet the Marlins’ demands, and as a result, the estimated sale price has fallen to the current $1.2 billion figure from a reported $1.8 billion. Even so, sports bankers say the price is still too high.Though they play in a relatively new stadium with chic clubs and ample parking, the Marlins draw the fewest fans in the National League. The team is saddled with an estimated $400 million in debt, which is near the league maximum, and it lacks its own regional sports network, a big moneymaker for teams like the Mets and the Yankees. The Marlins have not had a winning season in eight years.Teams in cities like Chicago and San Diego benefit from development around their stadiums, with neighboring restaurants, bars and hotels helping to draw fans to games. In Miami, few businesses have opened near Marlins Park, which is surrounded on four sides by parking garages that, in effect, create a fortress around the stadium. In fact, the only people near the stadium who seem to have benefited are the homeowners who charge $15 per car to park in their driveways, and even they are disappointed.“There needs to be more events,” said Javier Erazo, who tried last week to entice drivers to park with a sign that read “Cash Credit Debit.” “I don’t think there’s a whole lot of support for baseball.”The Batting Cage, a neighborhood restaurant on game days that turns into a club at 10 p.m., opened in 2012 to cash in on fans coming to the stadium. But Mike McKinney, the manager, said the restaurant was busy only when the Mets, the Cubs and other popular teams were in town. “We don’t survive on baseball,” said Mr. McKinney, whose bar had only a sprinkling of patrons last week before a Mets-Marlins game. “One month of baseball nights doesn’t equal a single Friday or Saturday night” in the club.Like many Marlins fans, Mr. McKinney says he is frustrated with how the team has generally fared under Mr. Loria.Mr. Loria bought the Marlins in 2002 with the proceeds from his sale of the Montreal Expos and a subsidy from Major League Baseball. A year later, the Marlins won their second World Series title, beating the Yankees.But Mr. Loria angered fans by promptly trading away some of the team’s stars. And for years, Mr. Loria said he did not have the money to spend on big-name players because the Marlins played in an outdoor stadium without a roof to keep out the rain and seal out South Florida’s stifling humidity. Consequently, the argument went, too many fans stayed away.Mr. Loria eventually persuaded local lawmakers to pay for most of Marlins Park, yet attendance remained poor, even though the owner’s laments about the weather were addressed with a roof that is often closed.Last week, the entire upper deck was closed, too, and only a handful of fans sat in the second deck. The majority of the announced crowd of 18,743 appeared to be Mets fans, who periodically chanted, “Let’s Go Mets!”“I hope Loria sells,” said Chuck Rennert, a longtime season-ticket holder who nonetheless offered some praise for Mr. Loria. “Whether you believe he was the impetus or not, the stadium got built on his watch,” he said. Now, he added, “it’s time for someone else to bring it to the next level.”Even if the sale goes through and the team rebounds, the victories may be bittersweet for taxpayers, who will continue paying for the stadium long after Mr. Loria is gone.“It’s a nice stadium for people to enjoy, and we got an All-Star Game out of it,” Mr. Gimenez said. But, he contended, “it’s the most horrible deal every other way.”