http://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/11/international/middleeast/11CND-CHAL.html
Chalabi Files Suit in U.S. Challenging Conviction in Jordan - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Aug. 11, 2004
8641
WASHINGTON, Aug. 11 &#0151; On the day that Ahmed Chalabi was said to have returned to Iraq to face criminal charges there, his lawyers in Washington filed suit in federal court against the government of Jordan, challenging his conviction on bank fraud charges in Amman 12 years ago.The suit, his lawyers said, was part of a concerted strategy to salvage Mr. Chalabi's crumbling reputation. It says that he was penalized for his opposition to Saddam Hussein.The Pentagon long favored Mr. Chalabi to become the first democratic leader of Iraq, and just seven month ago he was a guest of President Bush at the State of the Union address. But he fell out of favor last spring; Iraqi police raided his home, and American officials alleged that he had passed classified information to Iran.Last weekend, while Mr. Chalabi was in Iran for a conference, an Iraqi judge ordered his arrest on counterfeiting charges. Mr. Chalabi said this week that the charges were groundless and politically motivated, and he vowed to return to Iraq to fight them. Aides said today that he had arrived in Baghdad, but there was no immediate confirmation of his whereabouts.Back in 1977, encouraged by the Jordanian royal family, Mr. Chalabi founded the Petra Bank in Amman. It prospered and grew to be the second-largest bank in Jordan, with a branch in Washington. Mr. Chalabi grew wealthy and lived a comfortable life in Amman.In 1989, however, the Jordanian government issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Chalabi, who fled the country. An Arthur Anderson audit showed that several hundred million dollars were missing from the bank, and in 1992 a military tribunal convicted Mr. Chalabi in absentia of embezzlement, theft, forgery and currency speculation, among other charges. He was sentenced to 22 years of hard labor and ordered to repay $230 million in embezzled funds.Mr. Chalabi has long denied the charges, but many Iraqis say they distrust him because of the case.Marissa Khurma, a spokeswoman for the Jordanian embassy, said today that the government was surprised by the suit but had not received a copy and could not comment. Still, she added: "Our position is still the same as it regards Chalabi. He is still wanted in Jordan."John Markham II, Mr. Chalabi's lawyer, said: "The real agenda has been to keep Ahmed Chalabi down and to marginalize him. We are finally seeking redress."The suit states that "in retaliation for Ahmad Chalabi's tireless efforts to unseat Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq, and for Chalabi's public exposure of Jordan's growing criminal complicity with Saddam Hussein's illegal purchases of embargoed weaponry and with his torture and murder of dissidents, defendants combined and conspired to destroy Ahmad Chalabi in his business and property and his influence."In broad principle, the argument is similar to the one he has used in Baghdad to fight political and legal charges against him. But in the suit, Mr. Chalabi's lawyers added a new twist. They charge that the Jordanian authorities sought to arrest him so they could turn him over to Iraqi agents:"This order was part of a plot to have him kidnapped by members of the Iraqi Mukhabarat (Saddam Hussein's notorious intelligence agency) and taken from Jordan to Baghdad, where, like many other dissidents before him, he would have been tortured and killed."All of this, the suit alleges, results from his opposition to Saddam Hussein and fear that he would disclose information about illegal Jordanian arms sales to Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war.The suit also names as defendants Saeed el-Nabulsi, former director of Jordan's Central Bank, and Muhdar Badran, the former Jordanian prime minister. It accuses them of looting the Petra Bank, attempted murder, mail fraud, fraud against a financial institution and obstruction of justice.