http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/23/dining/chilled-cucumber-soup-with-avocado-toast.html
Chilled Cucumber Soup With Avocado Toast - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Cucumbers,Soups,Recipes
July 23, 2013
2269
In What’s for Dinner?, Melissa Clark answers that universal question, offering recipes for simple, relatively quick dishes that use ingredients you can pick up on the way home. A chilled cucumber soup, whirled together in the blender to serve as an instant dinner, is one of the quiet rewards of midsummer. Any other time of year, a bowl of puréed cucumber could seem too scant as an entree. But when the temperature rises and our appetites — and desire to apply heat to food – diminish, it’s just about the perfect, effortless meal.The trick to making it hearty enough is to not stint on the seasonings, especially when something as mild as cucumber is the main ingredient. Garlic, plenty of herbs, jalapeño and anchovy add plenty of flavor, while buttermilk contributes a creamy, light texture. I added a final garnish of raw corn kernels for crunch and contrasting sweetness, but toasted pine nuts or diced red onion would work equally well.You could serve this with nothing more than some crusty or toasted bread on the side and be satisfied. I added a topping of soft avocado dressed with a little lemon juice and feta cheese, which fills out the meal nicely. And the muted green colors of avocado toast and cucumber soup look as cooling as they taste.Chilled Cucumber Soup With Avocado ToastTime: 15 minutesYield: 2 to 4 servings1 pound cucumbers, peeled, halved lengthwise and seeded2 cups buttermilk (or use 1 1/2 cups plain yogurt plus 1/4 cup water)1 large garlic clove, peeled and smashed2 anchovy fillets (optional)2 small whole scallions, trimmed1/2 jalapeño, seeded, deveined and chopped1/2 cup packed mixed fresh herbs (like mint, parsley, dill, tarragon, basil and cilantro)1/2 teaspoon sherry or white wine vinegar, more to taste3/4 teaspoon kosher sea salt, plus more to taste4 slices baguette or other bread, toasted1 avocado, pitted, peeled and thinly sliced1/2 lemon2 tablespoons crumbled feta cheeseExtra-virgin olive oil, for servingFreshly ground black pepper1 ear of corn, shucked, kernels sliced offFresh dill, for serving1. In the bowl of a blender or food processor, combine cucumber, buttermilk, garlic, anchovy, scallions, jalapeño, fresh herbs, sherry vinegar and salt. Blend until smooth and adjust seasoning as needed.2. Smash avocado slices on the toasted bread. Sprinkle with crumbled feta, squeeze the juice of the lemon half over the top and finish each with a drizzle of olive oil and some pepper. Transfer to a plate and set aside.3. Distribute soup between 4 bowls and garnish with raw corn kernels and a drizzle of olive oil. Serve avocado toast on the side.