https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/world/europe/virginia-raggi-rome-five-star-movement.html
Rome Mayor’s Troubled First 3 Months Raise Doubts on Her Five Star Movement - The New York Times
Raggi  Virginia (1978- ),Five Star Movement (Italy),Rome (Italy),Mayors
Sept. 19, 2016
1641
ROME — When Virginia Raggi, Rome’s first female mayor, was elected in June, she represented the anti-establishment Five Star Movement’s highest aspiration — to show Italy how nonprofessional politicians could turn things around.Yet three months later, the Five Star Movement’s shining moment has become a mess, and Ms. Raggi, 38, a lawyer with almost no political experience who ran as a clean-hands reformer, appears to be floundering.Garbage piled up in the streets through the summer. Five important officials have resigned, some tainted by investigations for malfeasance. By this month, things were so bad that the comedian Beppe Grillo, a founder of the movement, reversed a vow to stay out of politics and stepped in to shore up Ms. Raggi amid speculation about an early resignation.On Monday, one of Italy’s leading newspapers, La Repubblica, published excerpts from a letter to Ms. Raggi, signed by about 70 City Hall managers in Rome, that lamented administrative paralysis and a lack of guidance. Residents, too, seem to be at the end of their ropes.“Of course I voted for her — the rest of the politicians here are crooks,” said Isabella Vardelli, a market vendor in Rome. “But I am getting impatient. Maybe she is naïve, maybe she is incompetent. Is it possible that they can’t start working?”“I also wonder whether she really is as honest as she said she was,” Ms. Vardelli added.Rome has never been an easy city to govern, and it has proved the undoing of any number of parties and politicians who have tried.But Ms. Raggi’s early struggles have left analysts wondering whether the victory here, rather than helping the capital find some political stability, will show that the movement is riddled with many of the same flaws as the establishment it has railed against.The troubles in Rome have become an open wound for the movement, rippling out from the capital and tarnishing its image on the national stage.“Rome is an example of the limits of the Five Star Movement, and of the city of Rome per se,” said Sergio Fabbrini, the director of the school of government at Luiss Guido Carli University in Rome.“Winning the elections in Rome, paradoxically, was a defeat for the movement,” he said. “It’s showing how disorganized and divided they are.”Even prominent members of the movement have criticized Ms. Raggi’s close aides and chosen staff members as unfit to govern. Her lack of experience became more evident through the summer, during which questions were raised about her administrative skills as well as about transparency and honesty, two of the movement’s main selling points.At the end of August, a snowball effect began after rumors about the large salary of Ms. Raggi’s chief of cabinet led to her resignation.Soon after, another crucial member of Ms. Raggi’s cabinet, her budget adviser, quit, lamenting a “transparency deficit.” Then, in one day, top managers of Rome’s transportation and garbage agencies resigned, too, reinforcing a sense of administrative paralysis.For weeks during the most intense summer heat, the city was the hostage of garbage collectors as trash bags piled up at street corners.The garbage problem — the city’s sanitation agency is heavily indebted, and it needs more sites to dispose of its waste — is certainly not Ms. Raggi’s invention. Neither the previous mayor, the American-trained surgeon Ignazio Marino, elected as an outsider, nor the special commissioner who ran Rome before Ms. Raggi could find a solution.But the problem has grown so bad that early this summer, videos circulated of children playing by counting the dozens of rats surrounding Roman garbage bins.In what initially seemed like a hands-on approach, one of Ms. Raggi’s strongest advisers, Paola Muraro, who is responsible for the environment, walked into the city-controlled garbage company and ostensibly forced top managers to lay out a plan to fix the dysfunction.It later emerged, however, that Ms. Muraro had been an adviser to that company for about a decade, and that she was under investigation for wrongdoing as part of an inquiry into waste management in Rome.At first, Ms. Raggi denied knowing of the investigation, but she and a national leader of the Five Star Movement conceded later that they had been aware of it for over a month, and the national leader said they had misunderstood the situation.Early this month, Ms. Raggi’s newly appointed finance chief lasted only a few days, after it emerged that he, too, was under investigation, for abuse of office.The chaos in Rome set off such fierce criticism, as well as sparring among current and former members of the movement, that Mr. Grillo, one of the founders, stepped in to try to calm the situation.“We are demolishing a system that has been in place for 50 years,” he said in a speech this month in Nettuno, near Rome. “And the system is compact against us.”“Virginia will go on, and we’ll monitor,” he added, as he endorsed her.Mayors of Rome have historically attracted much attention. But it has not helped Ms. Raggi that the Five Star Movement’s relationship with the news media has never been particularly warm. Ms. Raggi’s staff did not respond to requests for comment.The storm around Ms. Raggi, as the first female mayor of Rome, has been especially intense and frosty. (Last week, Ms. Raggi posted a video of reporters stationed in front of her apartment in northern Rome with the comment, “I pity you.”) Some say her every move is being unfairly scrutinized.“Just to compare, La Repubblica one day dedicated eight pages to Rome’s crisis, the same they dedicated to the election of the pope,” said Aldo Giannuli, a professor of contemporary history at the University of Milan and a prominent elector of the Five Star Movement who is often cited on Mr. Grillo’s blog.The questions now are how lasting the damage will be, and whether it can be reversed. In one week, the movement lost more than four percentage points in approval ratings, according to some national polls. Still, some analysts argue that for now, the drop may not be all that consequential.“If we had a national election tomorrow, the Five Star Movement would still be stronger than in the 2013 elections,” Mr. Giannuli said.“Rome is the most difficult city to govern in Europe,” he added. “But it’s undoubted that the Five Star Movement didn’t even prepare the names for their cabinet members in advance, and made a lot of shallow mistakes.”One beneficiary may be Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, who is counting on the outcome of a referendum later this year on constitutional reform as validation of his mandate. The Five Star Movement is his fiercest enemy.“Surely all this chaos is helping Renzi for the referendum,” Mr. Fabbrini said. “They are proving to be unfit to govern.”