https://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/31/washington/31sudan.html
Obama Urges Sudan to Allow Aid Groups Back Into the Country - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,Sudan,Foreign Aid,United States International Relations,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Embargoes and Economic Sanctions
March 30, 2009
8714
WASHINGTON — President Obama on Monday repeated his request for Sudan to let more than a dozen expelled humanitarian aid groups back into the country and suggested that if it did not, he would “find some mechanism” to get food, water and medicine to the people of Darfur.Mr. Obama did not specify what that mechanism might be, but aides later said he meant increasing help to aid groups remaining in Sudan.Activists leaving a White House meeting with Mr. Obama  raised the possibility of targeted sanctions or “humanitarian corridors” guaranteeing safe passage of supplies, presumably with foreign military help.“If we get several weeks down the road and there hasn’t been any action, other options will have to be looked at,” said Jerry Fowler, president of the Save Darfur Coalition.The latest crisis in the long-troubled Darfur region stems from the International Criminal Court’s indictment this month of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan for crimes against humanity in connection with the deaths of 300,000 people. Mr. Bashir responded by expelling 13 nongovernmental organizations, accusing them of collaborating with the court, and leaving more than one million people without help.Mr. Obama is sending his newly appointed special envoy, Maj. Gen. J. Scott Gration, a retired Air Force officer, to the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, this week to press Mr. Bashir’s government to readmit the aid groups. “We have to figure out a mechanism to get those NGOs back in place, to reverse that decision or to find some mechanism whereby we avert an enormous humanitarian crisis,” Mr. Obama told reporters.A White House spokesman, Ben Chang, said the president “was referring to ongoing urgent efforts to maximize the reach of remaining humanitarian organizations who, in some cases, may be able to step into voids left by their colleagues."Some activists have criticized the Obama administration for not moving with more urgency on Darfur, despite lofty oratory on the campaign trail. On Monday, Mr. Obama made time to meet with the activists and members of Congress interested in the issue on a day when he was restructuring the auto industry, traveling to Capitol Hill to lobby for his budget and preparing to leave for his first European trip as president.“Obviously on a busy news day, I wanted us to make sure that we weren’t losing sight of something that has been an ongoing international crisis, and that is the situation in Darfur,” Mr. Obama said.