https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/16/business/media/kellyanne-conway-joe-mika.html
Kellyanne Conway Denies ‘Morning Joe’ Claims of Secret Disloyalty to Trump - The New York Times
Brzezinski  Mika,Conway  Kellyanne,Scarborough  Joe,Morning Joe (TV Program),MSNBC
May 16, 2017
7262
Kellyanne Conway on Tuesday denied claims by the hosts of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” that she had complained extensively about President Trump in private conversations with them before he was elected.Her response came a day after the hosts, Mika Brzezinski and Joe Scarborough, used their show to claim that Ms. Conway had complained off camera about having to act as Mr. Trump’s campaign manager and had taken the job only “for the money,” in Mr. Scarborough’s words.Ms. Conway, who is now a counselor in the White House, said the two hosts “have become virulent critics of the president and those close to them” and that she had to respond to “insults and insinuations,” calling them “absurd” and not true.“My beliefs, commitments and loyalties are plain to see,” she wrote in a statement attached to a tweet. “The notion that I am serving for ‘the money’ or a ‘paycheck’ is absurd. As campaign manager, I made a fraction of what other consultants have made on unsuccessful presidential campaigns.” She said she had “walked away from dozens of opportunities for millions of dollars, and instead walked into the White House.”“I would do it again,” she continued.Ms. Conway called working for Mr. Trump’s campaign and White House “a privilege.”She added, “I know him, I respect him, I believe in him, and I am confident in his capacity to be a transformative and successful president.”Ms. Brzezinski on Monday had quoted Ms. Conway as saying, after appearing on camera in her role with the Trump campaign, that she would have to “take a shower, because it feels so dirty to be saying what I’m saying.”Ms. Conway did not respond directly to that eye-catching statement.The “Morning Joe” hosts had banned her from their show in February. They took that step after Ms. Conway came under intense criticism for describing false White House statements as “alternative facts.”