http://www.nytimes.com/1998/04/04/world/ex-vichy-aide-is-ordered-to-pay-750000-in-damages-and-fees.html
Ex-Vichy Aide Is Ordered to Pay $750,000 in Damages and Fees - The New York Times
FRANCE,PAPON  MAURICE,FINES (PENALTIES),WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND OTHER MINORITIES
April 4, 1998
1270
Maurice Papon,  who was convicted on Thursday of having been an accomplice to Nazi crimes against humanity during World War II, was ordered by a criminal court today to pay nearly $750,000 in damages and legal fees to the victims and their lawyers.More than a score of lawyers representing 20 associations and 54 individuals who were complainants in the state's case against Mr. Papon had asked the Gironde Criminal Court court to make him pay a total of about $1.6 million in fees and $500,000 in damages. All the lawyers had been working without pay during the six months of the trial.The court, presided over by Judge Jean-Louis Castagnede, found Mr. Papon guilty of complicity in Nazi crimes against humanity because, as a French civil servant during the war, he turned Jews over to the Germans in occupied Bordeaux.The court sentenced him to 10 years in prison, but cleared him of charges of deliberately sending the victims to their deaths in Auschwitz as an accomplice to the Nazi plan for the elimination of all Jews from Europe. Mr. Papon, now 87, was secretary general of the Gironde regional prefecture in Bordeaux during the war.He has appealed his conviction and was not in court today. He can remain free at least until his case is heard at the appeals court in Paris, probably next year.His trial, the first of a French civil servant on such charges and the longest trial in modern French history, lasted six months and cost at least $2.5 million, according to estimates by legal authorities in Bordeaux that were made public today.The estimate did not include the cost to the state of providing bodyguards for Mr. Papon, who still has them, or of the 150 police officers who reinforced security at the courthouse throughout the proceedings.The national police chief of the French collaborationist government in Vichy, Rene Bousquet, was killed by an assassin in 1993 before he could be tried on similar charges. The only other Vichy figure to have been tried on charges of crimes against humanity was Paul Touvier, an official of a paramilitary police force, who was convicted in 1994 of ordering the execution of seven Jews near Lyons and sentenced to life in prison, where he later died.The lawyers' demand for payment, like the verdict, left mixed feelings today. Michel Slitinsky, a Polish-born Jew whose research turned up many of the documents that first incriminated Mr. Papon in 1981, said today: ''I'm a little shocked; it turns my stomach somewhat. The lawyers had all the incriminating documents brought to them on a platter. The case has become a commercial jumping-off point for them, and now they can attract new clients.''Mr. Slitinsky was rounded up in 1942 at Mr. Papon's authorization by the French police, accompanied by German officers, but managed to escape internment and eventual transfer to Auschwitz, unlike hundreds of other Jews whose illegal arrests and detentions Mr. Papon was convicted of ordering at German request.Serge Klarsfeld, whose son Arno represented some of the victims and also presented a bill, said today that Mr. Papon, a former postwar Government minister and prefect of police in Paris, had probably structured his financial affairs in a way that made it unlikely the lawyers or the victims would ever see much money.Mr. Papon's wife died last week at age 88 before the trial ended.