https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/magazine/tired-of-winning-you-should-be.html
Tired of ‘Winning’? You Should Be - The New York Times
English Language,Obama  Barack,Sheen  Charlie,United States Politics and Government
June 20, 2017
6423
Not long ago in America, there was a widespread belief that some things were good for everyone. Never mind balancing competing interests: Why should anyone have to lose? Back then, you often heard the phrase “win-win,” business-speak for an arrangement that could benefit all parties involved. Barack Obama, always keen to pitch his policies as a product of well-reasoned consensus, applied this phrase to everything from international relations to solar energy; in 2014, he even described new fuel standards for trucks as a “win-win-win — you’ve got three wins.”You do not hear “win-win” much lately. One of the loudest political messages of the past year, across the entire ideological spectrum, has been that all promises of balance and mutual gain are actually humiliating traps, set by exploitative people still snickering in secret over how easily you fell for the last one. And so we have barreled instead into the realm of pure “winning,” where there is no such harmony of interest. Either exert your power or slink home ashamed.A loud warning of this development came in 2011, cleverly disguised as shabby tabloid nonsense. This was the period currently summarized on Charlie Sheen’s Wikipedia page under the subheading “Meltdown,” when television’s highest-paid actor, after years of drug problems and abusing women, was fired from his CBS sitcom, had two of his children removed from his home by the police, gave grandiose interviews about his “tiger blood” and “Adonis DNA,” amassed a million Twitter followers and embarked on a nationwide speaking tour. Throughout, he remained so stubbornly committed to a single catchword and life philosophy that when a journalist suggested he might have bipolar disorder, he instead labeled himself “bi-winning.” “Every day is just filled with just wins,” he told “20/20.” “All we do is put wins in the record books.”The warning here lay not in the number of Americans who rubbernecked at this episode, but in how many were genuinely thrilled by it. A USA Today story quoted one fan as saying “The dude is awesome” and that he was “living the lifestyle most of us wish we could”; a woman who found Sheen’s “rants” troublesome said she was nevertheless “impressed with his honesty — so tired of the lame apologies offered by celebrities like Tiger Woods when they get caught misbehaving.” These responses offered proof of concept for something critical in American life: There appeared to be a market for a public figure who, insulated by enough wealth and public approval, could stomp past all the usual lines of shame, scandal and impropriety, roaring and grinning, shouting that he did not care how anyone reacted to his behavior and could not be stopped. People would even purchase tickets to see it. It was possible — difficult, but possible — to make erratic line-crossing and unrepentant bluster look like victory.Four years later, large segments of the Republican Party seemed to agree that they were faced with a very similar problem: a vain, volatile, win-infatuated celebrity running a squalid sideshow the country couldn’t help gawking at. In September 2015, early in the presidential primaries, Bobby Jindal ran an attack ad that juxtaposed clips of Donald Trump’s campaign speeches (which would soon culminate in lines like “We’re going to win so much, you’re going to be sick and tired of winning!”) with clips of Sheen bellowing about his own wins. But Trump’s rallies, unlike Sheen’s “My Violent Torpedo of Truth/Defeat Is Not an Option” speaking tour, only grew in size, and his focus on the nation’s win-loss record only deepened.In February, newly ascended to the presidency, he gave a speech that managed to turn the very concept of winning into a hypnotic, ambient fog, filling the air but signifying little: “We don’t win anymore. When was the last time we won? Did we win a war? Do we win anything? Do we win anything? We’re going to win. We’re going to win big, folks. We’re going to start winning again, believe me. We’re going to win.”Part of what makes the modern use of “winning” so strange is that it’s often used in contexts that are not competitions. The Trump campaign, for instance, only occasionally applied it to winnable things, like wars or the election itself. For the most part it remained notional, conceptual, a state of being. This makes more sense when you consider the core Trump worldview, in which winning and losing seem like existential issues — not the outcome of specific conflicts, but an almost theological separation of human beings into two types. Winners take bold actions, dominate others and impose their will on the world; losers hem and haw, dither and consult, exercise restraint. Trump may have joined Republicans in their flamethrower criticism of the Obama presidency, but his focus was rarely on policy, or what some considered tyrannical expansions of executive power; he saw Obama as weak and ineffectual, tweeting that it was “almost like the United States has no president” and telling a biographer that the “natural ability” for success was missing from Obama’s DNA.One obvious drawback of this mind-set — a gut-level inclination toward the hyperbolic exercise of power — is that it makes winning purely about imposing your will on reality, rather than, say, reaching an outcome that’s actually desirable or defensible. As a candidate, Trump promised that he alone could provide such will to the country as a whole, racking up national victories like Olympic medals. But once his administration entered the White House, these goal posts shifted with alarming speed. Suddenly it was the administration itself that needed to demonstrate a capacity for imposing its will; the entity that needed wins ceased to be the nation and became the executive branch.Hence this administration’s overwhelming attention to the form of victory, whatever the actual substance underlying it. Nowhere has this been clearer than with the American Health Care Act, an astoundingly unpopular measure that, according to Politico, Trump has very little interest in the details of, as long as its passage seems impressive. When the House eventually passed its version of the bill, Trump’s celebratory speech did little to mount a case that the bill would benefit American citizens; he spent far more time lauding a triumph of process. “A lot of people said, how come you kept pushing health care, knowing how tough it is?” he said. “Don’t forget, Obamacare took 17 months.” The speed of this bill’s passage, he reckoned, was praiseworthy in itself: “We’ve really been doing this for eight weeks, if you think about it.”Similar stagecraft has been applied to far lesser accomplishments. Early in June, lawmakers and the press were invited to the White House for the kind of signing ceremony that normally accompanies major legislation — but the document Trump signed was merely a memo, outlining “principles” for a potential overhaul of the air-traffic-control system. During a trip to the Middle East, he signed what was touted as a $110 billion arms deal with Saudi Arabia — which, on his return, appeared to consist largely of “letters of interest or intent, but not contracts,” according to a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. In the run-up to Trump’s 100th day in office, both the White House and the media seemed to fixate on the idea that the president needed “points on the board” — simple demonstrations of his ability to accomplish things. Almost any things would do. After the House passed that health care bill, Fox News’s Howard Kurtz wrote that the law was “messy” and its passage “ugly,” but he concluded that it was, nonetheless, a victory: “Trump is triumphant, silencing critics who say he doesn’t know how to deal with Congress.”“Silencing critics” is the beating heart of today’s “winning.” This is largely because your critics are not, in fact, competing with you; they have no formal power over you, are rarely seeking any and tend to do little more than express the opinion that you’ve done something wrong. They offer you a game you cannot lose. You don’t even need to be a public figure to benefit from this line of thinking: As soon as you decide your chief adversaries are the people who disapprove of your behavior (neighbors, doctors, elites, “the media,” climate scientists, other people on Facebook and Twitter), then simply continuing to do whatever you were already doing, no matter how ill advised or self-defeating, takes on the dimensions of a triumph.But this is a very strange measure of victory. This kind of winning doesn’t set goals and then judge success by how much progress is made toward achieving them. Its focus is entirely on reputation and status and the superficial image of power. Sometimes it picks goals based on ease. Sometimes it achieves things at random and then claims they were goals. If all else fails, it just declares victory and sits back looking satisfied — as when Trump recently announced that “with few exceptions” there has never in history been a president who has “done more things.” After all, if you really do hold the almost feudal belief that there are two kinds of people — those ordained by nature to dominate and the losers upon whom they exercise their prerogatives — what do the details matter, as long as you’ve claimed a seat among the winners?