https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/nyregion/penn-station-repairs-commute-new-york-new-jersey.html
Calm Commutes on the First Day of Penn Station Repairs - The New York Times
New York City,Commuting,Transit Systems,Railroads
July 10, 2017
1171
• Two months of train disruptions began Monday on New Jersey Transit, Long Island Rail Road and Amtrak, with track repairs underway at Pennsylvania Station in New York. See our commuting guide.• Commuters braced for the worst, but the day unfolded without major incident, as people amended their schedules to arrive at transit hubs early and took alternate routes.• Total ridership was slightly higher than usual despite the closures. Transit officials called the day a success and said they would remain vigilant in case the situation worsened in the days and weeks ahead.Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo had warned July 10 would be the start of the “summer of hell” for commuters in and out of Penn Station. But as the first day of emergency repairs to the station wound down Monday evening, what was most surprising for many commuters was just how uneventful the day had been.Trains ran mostly on schedule in both the morning and evening. Some commuters said the traffic seemed lighter and that the delays were better than expected. Monday, many said, seemed like almost any other transit experience, maybe even a little better.“It’s a remarkably unremarkable day” said Meda Barker, a grant specialist at the New York Genome Center in SoHo, who was commuting home to Elizabeth, N.J., through Penn Station during the evening rush.After missing her train to Elizabeth at 6:51 p.m. by four minutes, she had dreaded a long delay. Instead, she found that the next train would depart at 7:20.“That wait could’ve been a lot worse,” she said. “It’s been a lot worse in the past.”While riders seemed rather unfazed as they headed home, some of those tasked with helping them seemed buoyant. As the rush drew to a close, transit workers positioned at help desks and officers monitoring the area smiled and waved at familiar faces. Instead of fielding complaints, officers had time to answer less-pressing questions, like what song was playing over the intercom.The luckiest commuters of the day were perhaps those Long Islanders who drove to Belmont Racetrack to catch luxury coaches to Manhattan. The commuters there — less than 10 total in the morning rush — were nearly outnumbered by workers handing out free apple muffins. Among the unluckiest were those who chose to transfer from the L.I.R.R. to the E train in Jamaica, which was overloaded, hot and sweaty.“Everything seemed to go right,” said Joseph Lhota, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman, in a 6 p.m. news conference at Penn Station that amounted to an unexpected victory lap. “This is what happens when you plan.”But he also sounded a note of warning. The list of potential threats to continued smooth operations is long: a mishap in the Amtrak tunnels, a bad thunderstorm, even commuters who let down their guard and decide they no longer have to wake up early to avoid bottlenecks. Each one could cause the chaos that had been feared for today to materialize.“Tomorrow is another day, and we have to be as vigilant,” he said.— SHARON OTTERMAN, EMILY PALMER, JEFFERY C. MAYS AND VIVIAN WANG AND NATE SCHWEBERRidership on trains from both Long Island and New Jersey on Monday morning may have seemed lighter than usual, but the official figures suggested otherwise.New Jersey Transit said about 8,700 passengers rode the trains on its Morris and Essex lines, which were diverted to Hoboken Terminal from Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan. That was about 1,000 more rerouted passengers than the railroad’s officials had projected.The early-morning Morris and Essex trains that were not diverted from Penn Station carried twice the normal load, New Jersey Transit said. Between 6 a.m. and 7 a.m., four of those trains carried 3,800 passengers into Penn Station, compared with normal ridership of about 1,900 passengers during that hour, the agency said.The L.I.R.R. also saw increased ridership Monday, Mr. Lhota said at the evening news conference. About 7,000 more people rode the train in from Long Island on Monday morning compared to an average Monday at this time of the year, he said.The number who entered Penn Station itself dropped by about 7,000, he said, but about 7,000 more people than usual traveled to Atlantic Terminal, and almost 3,000 more into the Hunterspoint Avenue station in Long Island City, Queens.For the morning commute L.I.R.R. saw an increase of approximately 3,000 people, or 3 percent, over all, going from 100,000 to 103,000.— PATRICK McGEEHAN AND VIVIAN WANGOne of the rough points in the day’s commute was the E train. In his evening news conference, Mr. Lhota said too many L.I.R.R. commuters were transferring at Jamaica to the E subway line, instead of staying on to transfer to the 7 train at Hunterspoint Avenue or riding onward to Downtown Brooklyn. The result was a bottleneck that overloaded trains.Susan Bodossian, 50, of Port Washington, described the scene.“On the E train, people were dripping wet, packed up against the window,” Ms. Bodossian said of her commute this morning. On her way back to Penn Station on Monday evening, she waited 20 minutes to board an E train at 53rd Street and Fifth Avenue because so many trains were full. As a result, she missed her usual 6:24 p.m. train, and ended up delayed for nearly an hour.She scoffed at reports that everything had gone smoothly. “I’ve been waiting in Penn Station for 45 minutes. What do you mean, smooth?” she said.Mr. Lhota asked commuters to reconsider their routes to ease the crowding.“There was a general feeling that, ‘We’ve got to get out at Jamaica,’” he said. “That’s not necessarily the fastest way to get into Manhattan.”— VIVIAN WANGSome of the alternate routes planned by the transit agencies were, shall we say, underutilized.Just ask Sue Barker. She was the sole rider on a plush gray coach bus that arrived at Belmont Racetrack from Manhattan at 5:34 p.m. The mostly vacant park and ride lot had room for hundreds of cars.“I had my own private bus,” she beamed, as she walked toward the silver minivan she had parked in the lot about 11 hours earlier.She said she loved how relaxing and hassle-free her commute had been. To emphasize her good mood she yelled into a stiff, warm breeze, “The evening rush is me! I am the evening rush!”On the bus that arrived at 6 p.m., only three passengers disembarked. One of them said he had been given free apple crisp muffins on the morning bus to the city, a treat that he pronounced “delicious.”In his news conference, Mr. Lhota said that buses and ferries were not used as much as officials had predicted. The M.T.A. will continue to monitor bus and ferry use this week before deciding whether to scale back on those services, he said.In New Jersey, transit officials also reported that some of the bus services designed to replace the canceled trains were only lightly used.While 204 passengers took the bus from Maplewood to Manhattan, only 28 people took the bus from Broad Street in Newark, said Charles Ingoglia, a spokesman for New Jersey Transit. The agency said it hoped to do a better job of getting the word out about the buses in the coming days.— NATE SCHWEBER AND JEFFERY C. MAYSKeisha Walsh, 28, who works as a computer programmer in Manhattan, said she is being allowed to leave work an hour early for the next two months to help with her L.I.R.R. commute to Patchogue. Camren Knasel, 34, said he left his office job in human resources early to catch his PATH train to New Jersey.Flexible bosses, it seems, were a key factor behind the smoother than expected commute on Monday. Another thing that helped: beefed-up transit staff guiding commuters through unfamiliar routines.At the 33rd Street PATH Station, at least eight attendants answered questions and ushered customers onto the platforms through the evening rush. At Penn Station, workers in highlighter-orange M.T.A. vests and armed with maps and iPads stood ready to answer questions.— KHORRI ATKINSON, SHARON OTTERMAN AND JONATHAN WOLFE