http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/12/us/shetamia-taylor-dallas-shooting-victim.html
She Took Her Sons to See a Peaceful Protest in Dallas: ‘Then I Felt the Bullet’ - The New York Times
Blacks,Johnson  Micah X,Dallas  Tex  Shooting of Police Officers (2016),Taylor  Shetamia
July 11, 2016
2232
The Dallas sniper hoped to kill as many white police officers as possible, the authorities say, but one of the people wounded by a bullet at the rally was a black mother who was there with four of her sons.In her first detailed remarks, the woman, Shetamia Taylor, said during a news conference on Sunday that she had taken her family there to show them what a peaceful march looked like. They came away with a different lesson.The family was walking back to their car when the pandemonium began, Ms. Taylor told reporters at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas. Gunfire struck two officers in front of her and left her right leg badly broken by a bullet.“We heard a shot,” she said. A pause and confusion followed. Then, she said, another shot rang out and she saw a police officer — a big, white man — go down.“He said, ‘He has a gun. Run!’ ” she recalled.Unknown to them, the gunman, Micah Johnson, was targeting police officers as payback for the killings of blacks. He hoped to kill as many white officers as he could, officials said.Three of Ms. Taylor’s boys scattered down the block as the pops of gunfire grew in intensity, Ms. Taylor said. “Then I felt the bullet,” she said.One of her boys, Andrew Humphrey, 15, said he turned back for his mother. She grabbed the teenager and fell with him between a car and the curb, covering him with her body, Ms. Taylor said.“I’ve never heard anything like that before,” she said. “It was just shots all around.”As the two of them huddled there, another officer was hit in front of them, Ms. Taylor said. “There was two,” she said. She still doesn’t know if the men survived.One of her sons, Jajuan Washington, 14, sprinted several blocks away, while the oldest son, Kavion Washington, 18, grabbed 12-year-old Jermar Taylor and took shelter behind the column of a parking garage.Kavion Washington said an officer came over to them and said, “Go. I’ll cover you.”“He put himself in harm’s way to protect us,” he said. The brothers sprinted away, joining with other protesters fleeing downtown.Meanwhile, Andrew, who didn’t know his mother had been shot, said a police officer came over to them and asked, “Is anyone hit?” To his surprise, his mother replied, “Yes I’m hit.’”“At that point, all I wanted to do was get my mom out of there,” he said.Police officers then used their bodies to shield the boy and his mother against the gunfire, Andrew said, whisked them into the back of a bullet-pocked police car and sped them to a hospital.The officers “were really heroes for us,” Ms. Taylor said on Sunday. “They saved my life, They saved my son’s life. And I want to say thank you to them, first and foremost.”Dr. Alan Jones, who performed surgery on Ms. Taylor’s leg at Baylor University Medical Center, said that she suffered a “very bad fracture” of her tibia but that he expected her to make a full recovery.About an hour after being shot, Ms. Taylor received word at the hospital that all of her sons were fine. Around the same time, she said, she overheard a Dallas police officer tell another that one of their colleagues didn’t make it.“I’m celebrating my kids,” Ms. Taylor said through tears, pausing for a moment.“It hurt,” she added. “Of course, I’m thankful that my babies are O.K. But somebody’s dad isn’t, somebody’s husband isn’t.”Ms. Taylor said she had talked to her sons before the rally on Thursday about the shootings of black men that week in Louisiana and Minnesota. She advised them to always comply with orders from law enforcement.Then, she said, she decided to take them to the march in Dallas to show them “that we can be unified, that there could be a peaceful march.”The boys got a different lesson, Ms. Taylor said, but it is one for which she is grateful.“They have a clear understanding of how the world really can be,” she said. “And how some people really are selfish and they don’t take into consideration the lives of others.”