https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/02/sports/tennis/novak-djokovic-wimbledon-rain.html
Down Two Sets, Novak Djokovic Gets a Break After Rain Suspends Play at Wimbledon - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Djokovic  Novak,Querrey  Sam (1987- ),Rain
July 1, 2016
9756
WIMBLEDON, England — As Novak Djokovic and Sam Querrey headed back to their Wimbledon lodgings on Friday night, all the chatter about Djokovic’s Grand Slam was one set away from becoming a moot point.Querrey, the No. 28 seed, took a 7-6 (6), 6-1 lead over Djokovic, the No. 1 seed, in their third-round match before rain forced the players off Court 1 shortly after 8 p.m.Tournament officials later announced that play would not resume on Friday, which left Djokovic and Querrey with a great deal to think about overnight with their match scheduled to resume at noon on Saturday.“It could be a sleepless night for both players, Sam thinking about the opportunity and Novak trying to find the solution,” said Jim Courier, the United States Davis Cup captain and a former world No. 1.Djokovic, the elastic 29-year-old from Serbia, is on one of the most dominant runs in tennis history. He has set an Open-era record by winning 30 Grand Slam singles matches in a row and holds all four of the major titles. He also is chasing the Grand Slam, having won the first two major titles this year at the Australian Open and French Open.But he is now — to borrow a bit of British understatement — in a spot of bother, just as he was a year ago in the fourth round here before rallying from a two-set deficit to beat Kevin Anderson on his way to the title.“Margins are small, and I know we get carried away and say it’s impossible to beat him,” Roger Federer said of Djokovic after advancing to the fourth round on Friday. “Clearly, he’s beatable. It’s not impossible. He cannot win 200 straight matches in tennis. It’s not possible.”Federer added that Djokovic could still fight back and that the playing conditions on Saturday, whatever they may be, could alter the dynamic.“It’s still a long way to go for Sam to get it done,” Federer said, “especially with Novak’s track record right now in the Slams. They both know that.”At 28, Querrey is also aware how rare such opportunities are. He has yet to get past the fourth round at a Grand Slam singles tournament and has beaten Djokovic just once in their nine previous meetings. That was indoors in the second round of the Masters 1000 in Paris in 2014. Entering Friday’s match, he had lost seven straight sets to Djokovic by the following scores: 6-1, 6-0, 6-1, 6-2, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2.But Querrey, a 6-foot-6 Californian once ranked inside the top 20, has no shortage of firepower, with a huge serve and forehand. He also moves well for a player his size, and he played a deeply convincing first set and then closed it out after Djokovic rallied from 2-5 in the tiebreaker.Querrey stayed aggressive, attacking Djokovic’s second serve and coming to net off a slightly mis-hit backhand return. The rush forward seemed to catch Djokovic by surprise, and Djokovic knocked a passing shot into the net. On the next point, Querrey took the set by winning a scrambling baseline rally with a forehand down the line.With Djokovic looking low on energy, Querrey then took quick command of the second set, closing it out with an ace.“The early part of the second set, it was almost like Djokovic was shellshocked,” Tim Henman, the former British star, said on BBC. “Querrey maintained his level.”Djokovic was last beaten before the quarterfinals in a Grand Slam tournament in the third round of the French Open in 2009.But even at this dominant stage of his career, he has needed some great escapes. The most recent came in the fourth round of this year’s Australian Open, where he made 100 unforced errors against Gilles Simon of France before prevailing in five sets.Last year at Wimbledon, Djokovic also needed five sets to shake free of Anderson in a match that also stretched over two days after being suspended for darkness after four sets.“Novak needs the wake-up call somewhere,” said Jacco Eltingh, a Dutch television analyst. “It seems like he always has one.”