https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/magazine/should-i-help-an-unjustly-fired-co-worker.html
Should I Help an Unjustly Fired Co-Worker? - The New York Times
Dating and Relationships,Ethics (Personal),Families and Family Life,Online Dating,Gifts
June 21, 2017
6455
A work colleague, a level below me, has managed to succeed despite a pattern of bad performance. She doesn’t seek feedback early or take it well, so her projects consistently become last-minute scrambles that others must fix. She has also been dishonest about timelines and obtaining input from the right people. The pattern continues because she reports to a powerful executive who has not held her accountable for this behavior despite complaints from many co-workers, including me.Recently, she fired a competent, young, lower-level employee in her group who tried to improve these processes. To fire this employee, my colleague went through proper human-resources channels. In some ways the firing is merciful, as she was, at times, verbally abusive to the employee even as the employee was helping to fix her messes. Understandably, other co-workers who witnessed these incidents were upset by them and felt as if the employee was treated and terminated unfairly. The junior employee retained a lawyer to show that her firing was retaliatory.I believe this young employee was caught in the impossible situation of trying to make sure work was done well even as her boss wanted it done a different way, one that was clearly not optimal. Now I am being asked by the fired employee’s lawyer to tell what I know of the situation, and my company will ask me not to speak on the subject.What is my ethical obligation? If I am silent, I am complicit in what I think is an unfair judgment of this young employee, which will certainly have real implications for her and her career. But I cannot openly speak against the company and the way it allowed this situation to develop without damaging my own relationship with the company, which is otherwise good.I feel like I have to speak up for the “little guy,” but since nothing seems to stick to this colleague, I am afraid I will just hurt myself. Name WithheldAssuming your account is accurate, action should have been taken to correct your incompetent colleague’s bad performance and workplace abuse and to move toward terminating her if she didn’t improve. So why hasn’t this happened? That she’s protected by a powerful executive explains only why she is not in trouble; you can protect someone while also getting her to shape up. Now, as a result of her supervisor’s failure to put things right, the company has exposed itself to liability. In short, you’ve got two problematic employees to contend with, not just one.Down the road, if you’re required to testify under oath, you will, of course, have to tell the truth, whatever your bosses want. But for the moment, you face a choice: You can help someone who was unjustly fired, by voluntarily cooperating with her lawyer and agreeing to give evidence against your company, or you can protect your own position.Which way to go depends on at least two considerations. First, does the fired employee have sufficient evidence to get justice without your intervention? (You say that she didn’t do things as her boss preferred; that she followed her own better judgment. That’s not always O.K.) Second, how much damage would helping her do to your relationship with your own supervisors? Basically, if you can help her a lot by sacrificing a little, you ought to do it.The philosopher Richard W. Miller once imagined a situation in which you see an adult plunging out of a 10th-story window, and you know you can save his life if you cushion his fall — but at the cost to you of assorted broken bones and months of painful, imperfect healing. Doing your moral duty, Miller argued, didn’t oblige you to take the hit. Nor are you required to derail your career in order to assist the young woman’s legal case. But what if the trade-off isn’t so clear: What if you would be helping her somewhat and hurting yourself somewhat?You appear to believe that your supervisors will continue to tolerate the managerial incompetence of the powerful executive and the abusive subordinate in order to protect the company in the face of a possible lawsuit. That’s a plausible assumption. But if the cost to your work life wouldn’t be dire, you should go to your supervisor, describe your view of the situation, observe that you and others will have to tell the truth if the case gets to the point at which you are giving testimony under oath and point out that it’s in the company’s interest to stop this from happening again.My family has gone through a lot these past couple of years. My mother died of cancer after a yearlong battle, during which my father had a midlife crisis and an affair. The family business went under, and though we’re not exactly in poverty, we did lose our comfortable upper-middle-class lifestyle. Thankfully, my younger brother, and I (we are in our mid-20s) both have stable white-collar jobs that pay well enough. I do earn more than my brother and at times, I have helped him and my father financially. (I am happy to do so.)Last Christmas, I visited my maternal grandmother, who has had some financial quandaries of her own. She lives with my 40-year-old uncle, who has neither a career nor, it’s safe to say, much money; my parents had been their financial safety net until things started going downhill for my father’s business. During my visit, she asked me for a loan to invest in her small business. I would have given her the money as a gift — except that she’s asking for roughly two-thirds of my monthly salary, way more than what my brother or my father have ever asked for, and the amount is also something that I would feel.And now, I’m torn. She is my grandmother, after all, and I feel a sense of responsibility to help take care of her, but the amount she’s asking for is not something I can just give away. On another note, my late mother would be furious about this request. What should I do? Name WithheldThere’s a simple rule here. If you put money in the business of a family member just because she asks for it, it’s not really an investment; it’s a gift. And like all gifts, it should be something you can reasonably afford. An investment, by contrast, should be evaluated as such, and if you wouldn’t invest in your grandmother’s business if she weren’t your grandmother, you shouldn’t invest in it, period. Because, as you judge, it isn’t reasonable for a family member to ask you for a sum equal to two-thirds of your monthly income, and because you clearly wouldn’t invest in her business if she weren’t your grandmother, you shouldn’t feel obliged to give her the money. Your late mother would have had a point.Recently, I met a man on OkCupid who said that he was single and looking for a casual relationship. We hit it off and ended up going out on two dates within the span of a week. (We did not have sex.) We had a third date planned until I found out, through some online sleuthing, that the name he gave me was completely false and he is in fact married with two children. I immediately confronted him about this via text and never heard from him again. I also noticed that he disabled his profile. However, I’ve discovered that he has since reactivated his account, and he’s still advertising himself as a single guy. Am I morally obligated to inform his wife of his actions? The photos I found on Facebook suggest only a happy, loving marriage, but I don’t feel it’s right for such a deception to occur. On the other hand, I don’t want to be responsible for ruining this woman’s life. What should I do? Name Withheld, Brooklyn, N.Y.You don’t know very much about this man or his situation and so, as you imply, you have no idea what the effect would be of his wife’s hearing from a stranger that her husband is on a dating site. For that reason, it would be irresponsible to inform her.OkCupid’s contract says that a profile should be for “bona fide relationship-​seeking purposes” and urges all members to report “fraudulent registration or profiles.” They don’t explicitly mention pretending to be unmarried, but you might think that that was mala fide (i.e., the opposite of bona fide). So you could try telling OkCupid. And there’s a small chance you might be able to do something for other women in your situation by contacting this Lothario through the site and suggesting that, rather than pretending to be single, he should admit he’s after a little discreet adultery. Some people, alas, will indeed regard this as seeking a “bona fide relationship.”