https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/26/world/europe/russian-official-says-adoption-ban-violates-treaties.html
Russian Official Says Adoption Ban Violates Treaties - The New York Times
Russia,United States,Adoptions,Children and Childhood,Law and Legislation,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Treaties,Putin  Vladimir V,Golodets  Olga
Dec. 25, 2012
9959
MOSCOW — Russia’s deputy prime minister for social affairs has warned President Vladimir V. Putin that a proposed ban on adoptions of Russian children by American citizens would violate several international treaties as well as an agreement on adoptions ratified this year between the Russian government and the United States.The warning, which was made by Deputy Prime Minister Olga Golodets in a letter to Mr. Putin last week and became public on Tuesday, quickly widened a split over the measure at the highest levels of the Russian government. Russian lawmakers are pushing the ban as retaliation for a new American law punishing Russian citizens accused of violating human rights.In her letter, Ms. Golodets said the proposed ban, which has already been approved by the lower house of Parliament, would violate the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which took effect in 1980, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which went into force in 1990. Russia is a party to both agreements, though the United States is not. She also said such a ban would violate Russian federal law.The letter was first reported by the Russian edition of Forbes magazine, and it drew a sharp response from Russia’s commissioner of children’s rights, Pavel Astakhov, a longtime advocate of restricting international adoptions.“Russia will not violate any international legal standards,” Mr. Astakhov told the RIA Novosti news agency on Tuesday.He added, “And we can see that children handed over to the United States are not protected.”The adoption ban was proposed as a response to the new American law barring Russian citizens accused of human rights abuses from traveling to the United States and from owning real estate or other assets there. Critics of the Russian law say that it will most hurt orphans, who are already suffering in Russia’s deeply troubled child welfare system.Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, said the president had not seen the letter, and Mr. Peskov expressed annoyance at having the government’s internal discussions debated in public. “It is not always pleasant to learn about official correspondence from the media,” he told Russian news agencies.From the outset, the proposed ban has divided officials at the highest levels of the Russian government. Several senior officials, including the foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, who had a personal hand in negotiating the adoption agreement with the United States, have spoken out against it.At first, lawmakers proposed a bill that would impose sanctions on American judges and others accused of violating the rights of adopted Russian children in the United States. A number of cases involving the abuse or even deaths of adopted Russian children in recent years have generated publicity and outrage in Russia.The Russian bill was named for Dimitri Yakovlev, a toddler who died of heatstroke in Virginia in 2008 after his adoptive father left him in a parked car for nine hours. The father, Miles Harrison, was acquitted of manslaughter by a judge who ruled that the death was an accident.Mr. Astakhov, the children’s rights commissioner, on Tuesday reiterated his criticism that international adoptions are overly driven by profit motives. He said that international adoptions in Russia alone are a $1.5 billion business, and that each adoption costs $30,000 to $50,000. The Russian law would bar adoption agencies that work with Americans from operating in Russia. Nearly 1,000 Russian children were adopted by parents from the United States in 2011, more than from any other country.Russia’s upper house of Parliament, the Federal Assembly, is expected to approve the bill this week, which would send it to Mr. Putin for his signature.