http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/fashion/cooper-hewitts-triennial-asks-what-makes-something-beautiful.html
Cooper Hewitt’s Triennial Asks: What Makes Something Beautiful? - The New York Times
Design,Cooper Hewitt  Smithsonian Design Museum,Museums,Fashion and Apparel
Feb. 10, 2016
5415
Beauty can be a bad word in design, connoting ornament, surface and, that most suspect attribute, pleasure. These are three of the reasons that Ellen Lupton, the senior curator of contemporary design at the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, and Andrea Lipps, an assistant curator there, embraced beauty as the title of the museum’s Triennial, opening Friday.“We wanted to go for it,” Ms. Lupton said. “We wanted to embrace that side of design. The last Triennial we did was all about saving the world, and for the next one we wanted to push in a different direction. Part of what design does is sensual storytelling, emotionally storytelling. Designers tell stories that tease the mind and please our senses.”Beauty in this context is spiky, alien head pieces by Maiko Takeda, a Japanese designer, that look like vicious dandelion fluffs, or the suit/dress postgender clothing of Rad Hourani, who is Canadian. The exploded scale work of Melitta Baumeister, a German fashion designer, is here: her bulbous neoprene jackets and graffiti vinyl suits. A collection of jewelry called Wrinkles by Noa Zilberman, an Israeli industrial designer, is made from delicate slivers of gold that traced the lines on her face after the birth of her son. One astonishing piece is a “lorgnette” that follows the triangle of shadow under the eye and then erupts in a spray of laugh lines.“We wanted to see beauty as not just this young and perfect thing,” Ms. Lupton said, “but beauty as time and endurance and change.”Beauty is the lush typography of Non-Format, a graphic design practice in Minneapolis and Oslo, and the furniture, precise and ingenious, made by the Icelandic designer Brynjar Siguroarson, using feathers, hooks, rope and leather to mimic traditional fishing techniques.Books can be beautiful, not just their art direction and content but the quality of the binding, the color of the ink and the smell of the paper. This is why the show’s catalog, designed by Kimberly Varella of Content Object Design Studio, has flourishes like pink stitching, custom ink and a gatefold made from mirrored paper. “It’s all very esoteric and magical,” Ms. Lupton said.Beauty may also be a scent. Ms. Lupton and Ms. Lipps asked Sissel Tolaas, the Norwegian smell designer and odor theorist, to design an aroma based on Central Park. Ms. Tolaas, who once covered a gallery’s walls with paint embedded with the sweat and body odor of 20 men, will use the same technology — microencapsulation, “which is really scratch and sniff, but we don’t like that phrase,” Ms. Lupton said — to cover the walls of the Cooper Hewitt’s galleries. Ms. Tolaas conducted her research last October by walking through the park, Ms. Lupton said, “on one of the most beautiful days of the year. You could smell the leaves and the moisture and things changing.”To release the scent, visitors will have to rub the gallery walls, which in itself is a ravishing image.“Beauty is the ultimate user experience,” Ms. Lupton said. “Beauty happens because people are there to experience it.”“Beauty — Cooper Hewitt Design Triennial,” Friday to Aug. 21; 2 East 91st Street, 212-849-8400; cooperhewitt.org.