https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/05/nyregion/officer-liangs-partner-testifies-he-got-little-cpr-training.html
Officer Liang’s Partner Testifies He Got Little CPR Training - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Landau  Shaun (New York  NY  Police Officer),Liang  Peter (1987- ),Gurley  Akai,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR),East New York (Brooklyn  NY),Police,Butler  Melissa (1987- ),New York City
Feb. 4, 2016
7388
A police officer testified on Thursday that he had little knowledge of CPR the night that his partner, Officer Peter Liang, was involved in a fatal shooting inside a stairwell of a Brooklyn housing project.Officer Liang, 28, is on trial in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn on manslaughter and other charges, for the death in November 2014 of Akai Gurley, who was killed inside the Louis H. Pink Houses in the East New York neighborhood by a ricocheting bullet as he walked down the stairs.He also faces charges of official misconduct for not helping Mr. Gurley, who was 28, as he lay on a fifth-floor landing. Mr. Gurley’s girlfriend, Melissa Butler, crouched over his body, trying to revive him, but neither Officer Liang nor his partner performed CPR, as is required under Police Department rules.Officer Liang’s partner, Shaun Landau, 28, testified that he had received a little over two minutes of CPR training at the Police Academy, from which they both graduated in 2013. In a subdued voice, he admitted that he had never read the CPR textbooks he was given and that he was fed answers to his exams on the subject.In the chaotic moments in the stairwell, Ms. Butler seemed more qualified to try to resuscitate Mr. Gurley, Officer Landau said during cross-examination by Robert E. Brown, a lawyer representing his partner. Officer Landau, who testified before a grand jury and has been granted immunity at Officer Liang’s trial, is on modified duty.This week, while being questioned by the prosecution, Officer Landau spoke of the moments after Officer Liang’s gun went off as he opened a door on the eighth floor to inspect a stairwell, which was dark because the lights were broken. The two officers did not realize right away that Mr. Gurley lay three floors below them on a landing, mortally wounded, his heart pierced by the bullet after it bounced off a cement wall.The prosecution rested on Thursday afternoon, and the defense called three police officers to the stand. One, John Funk, who was another of Officer Liang’s classmates at the Police Academy, testified that his CPR training was scant — one class with about 300 students and a single instructor. By the time it was his turn to practice on one of about eight mannequins, Officer Funk said, “they ran out of time,” and he never did.Dr. Floriana Persechino, a forensic pathologist and senior medical examiner with the medical examiner’s office, told the jury that the bullet, flattened on one side before entering Mr. Gurley’s body, passed through his heart and lodged in his liver. CPR, she said, would not have saved him.After the shooting, the two officers spent about four minutes debating who would call a supervisor, as is required when a weapon is discharged, Officer Landau said. Neither made a call.Officer Landau said his partner had said, “I’m fired,” a statement that the prosecution, led by Marc Fliedner, an assistant district attorney, had told the jury was an indication that Officer Liang cared only about himself after the shooting, not Mr. Gurley.During Officer Landau’s cross-examination on Thursday, Mr. Brown raised the possibility that Officer Liang had been misquoted and had instead said, “I fired.” Mr. Brown read aloud a statement Officer Landau had given during a police interrogation immediately after being hospitalized following the episode, in which he said he could not fully remember what he had heard.“Is it possible he said, ‘I’m fired,’ or ‘I fired?’” Mr. Brown asked. “Do you recall saying, ‘I can’t remember exactly what Peter said’?” he said, referring to a transcript of the interrogation.“I was exhausted,” Officer Landau said. “I was pulled out of the hospital bed to do the interview, and I was still very, very stressed out at the moment.”Mr. Brown said, “So your memory got better over time is what you’re saying?”Officer Landau nodded. “Yes,” he said.Later in the day, prosecutors played a recording of a police radio message that Mr. Liang made shortly after he came upon Mr. Gurley’s body. In it, Mr. Liang mentions an accidental shot. It showed that Mr. Liang, his lawyer said, had in fact called in the incident and that his message amounted to a call for help. But the prosecution pointed out that he had never once asked for an ambulance.Officer Liang is expected to be called to the stand on Monday.