https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/29/world/middleeast/iran-elections-parliament.html
In Iran Elections, Conflicting Forecasts Emerge Along Rival Lines - The New York Times
Iran,Rouhani  Hassan,Elections,Legislatures and Parliaments,Embargoes and Sanctions,Assembly of Experts,Press TV,Haddad Adel  Gholam Ali,Yazdi  Mohammad (1931- )
Feb. 28, 2016
8319
TEHRAN —  A day after results in the capital showed a landslide victory for reformist and moderate allies of President Hassan Rouhani in Iran’s parliamentary elections, state television on Sunday reported a nationwide triumph for hard-liners.The English-language news channel Press TV echoed forecasts by news organizations affiliated with the hard-liners, saying that their candidates had won decisively outside the major city centers.But as final nationwide results had not been announced, it remained unclear how the hard-liners had done.In Tehran, where results are official, the urban middle classes voted in large numbers for the combined list of reformers and moderates who support Mr. Rouhani. In other large cities, many reformists also won. While Iran’s eight biggest cities make up more than half the country’s population, they control only 57 of the 290 seats in Parliament.More than 30 million Iranians voted Friday in what were actually two elections, one for a new Parliament and the other for an influential clerical council.The elections were the first since the completion of an international agreement to curb Iran’s nuclear program that included the lifting of economic sanctions against the country, a deal supported by the reformist camp and opposed by hard-liners. Voter turnout for the two contests exceeded 60 percent, according to Iran’s Interior Ministry.On Sunday, the Interior Ministry, where the votes are counted, announced that the one hard-liner who initially seemed to have secured one of the 30 parliamentary seats for Tehran had actually not made the threshold. The candidate, Gholam Ali Haddad Adel, is a former speaker of Parliament whose daughter is married to a son of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Now, all seats in Tehran have gone to the reformist-moderate list, a significant gain.Hard-liners close to Ayatollah Khamenei have cautioned against allowing the nuclear accord and its promised economic benefits to weaken Iran’s resolve to resist Western influences.It is, of course, still unclear how many seats the anti-reform candidates will ultimately win. But a robust minority of reformers and moderates could help Mr. Rouhani put in place economic reforms after the lifting of nuclear sanctions in January, analysts say.“All these people, the majority of the eligible voters, have spoken out against the hard-liners,” said Saeed Laylaz, a pro-government activist and economist who predicted that many of the independent candidates would end up supporting Mr. Rouhani. “Clearly, his power and influence have now increased.”The ministry also announced that in the election for the clerical Assembly of Experts, two influential hard-line clerics had failed to make the threshold. One, Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, the incumbent head of the assembly, whose 88 members are tasked with supervising the supreme leader, failed to garner enough votes in Tehran. Another, Ayatollah Mohammad-Taghi Mesbah Yazdi, 81, who was often called the spiritual father of former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, also failed to win re-election.The top vote-getter in Tehran was former President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a former chief of the council. A picture posted on his Instagram page showed him overlooking Tehran.The comments included a statement from his office that said, “No one is able to resist against the will of the majority of the people, and whoever the people don’t want has to step aside.”Mr. Rouhani, who came in third in the Tehran vote for the Assembly of Experts, also issued a statement praising the elections. “The people showed their power once again and gave more credibility and strength to their elected government,” he said, adding that he would work with anyone who won election to build a future for Iran.The Interior Ministry said official results were expected on Tuesday.