https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/11/world/asia/china-south-korea-thaad.html
North Korea’s Rocket Launch Frays Ties Between South Korea and China - The New York Times
China,South Korea,North Korea,Missiles and Missile Defense Systems,United States International Relations,International Relations,Xi Jinping,Park Geun-hye,Kim Jong-un,Nuclear Weapons,United States Defense and Military Forces,Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense,Defense and Military Forces
Feb. 10, 2016
4366
BEIJING —  When China’s leader, Xi Jinping, visited America’s firm ally South Korea in 2014, it seemed to be the beginning of a promising courtship.His host, President Park Geun-hye, returned the favor by coming to Beijing last year for an important military parade that other American allies boycotted, a gesture that Mr. Xi may have believed could lead to weaning her away from Washington.For her part, Ms. Park hoped that her new friend in Beijing — South Korea’s No. 1 economic partner — would tamp down the relentless pursuit of nuclear weapons by the leader of North Korea, Kim Jong-un.But the prospect of a friendly new era between China and South Korea seemed to collapse this week. After North Korea, China’s treaty ally, launched a rocket, apparently to test ballistic missile technology, South Korea embraced what China had been trying to prevent: an American antimissile defense system that will be deployed on China’s doorstep.China now appears angrier at the South Koreans than at Mr. Kim, who ignored its advice against the rocket launch.Ms. Park’s government said it was entering talks with the Obama administration regarding the deployment of the American system, and the Pentagon said the installation, paid for by the United States, would take place as quickly as possible.South Korea acted after China’s response to the North’s recent nuclear tests turned out to be more tepid than Ms. Park had expected after nearly two years of Mr. Xi’s wooing, South Korean analysts say.The system, known as Thaad, for Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense, would offer South Korea, and the nearly 30,000 American soldiers stationed there, superior protection against the North’s growing nuclear challenge than Seoul’s current inadequate missile defenses, those analysts say.“President Park was very disappointed and upset with Xi’s inaction and silence against North Korea when she desperately needed Xi’s help,” said Kim Heung-kyu, director of the China Policy Institute at Ajou University in Suwon, South Korea. Mr. Xi was then embarrassed domestically by Ms. Park’s rush to accept the American defense system, Mr. Kim said.“Xi Jinping’s efforts to enlist President Park as a friend have not gone as well as he hoped,” he said, “and she was certainly disappointed in his efforts to control Kim Jong-un.”After the rocket launch on Sunday, China expressed “regrets” and argued vigorously at the United Nations against sweeping new sanctions.In contrast, China said it was “deeply concerned” about South Korea’s decision to allow the deployment of the missile defense system. It warned that “every country must not undermine the security interest of other countries while pursuing its own security interests,” clearly implying that the missile system was aimed at solidifying Washington’s network of alliances in Northeast Asia rather than offering protection against North Korea.To demonstrate its annoyance, the Chinese Foreign Ministry summoned the South Korean ambassador in Beijing, Kim Jang-soo, to protest the talks between Seoul and Washington on the missile defense system. (In a nod to even-handedness, the Chinese also called in the North Korean ambassador, Ji Jae-ryong, over the rocket launch.)China’s anger at the imminence of an American missile system so close to its borders stems from two propositions, said Chu Shulong, a professor of international relations at Tsinghua University in Beijing.First, many in the Chinese government do not believe that North Korea would use its nuclear weapons, Mr. Chu said. Second, the belief that deploying the Thaad system is aimed principally at solidifying America’s position in Northeast Asia is widespread in Beijing, where officials fear the ultimate goal is to contain China.“North Korea is a bad regime, yes, everyone agrees on that,” Mr. Chu said. “Is North Korea going to use its weapons? Perhaps not. They are not seen as an immediate threat.”That judgment differs sharply from testimony to Congress on Tuesday by the United States’ national intelligence director, James R. Clapper Jr., who put North Korea at the top of what Washington views as nuclear- and proliferation-related threats.Of more concern to the Chinese than the North’s nuclear weapons, Mr. Chu said, is the notion that Thaad would knit South Korea and Japan, two American allies that have their own deep squabbles, more tightly under a United States umbrella.“Thaad will bring South Korea and Japan closer to the U.S. defense system, making much more of a military bloc that is targeting China and Russia,” he said.South Korea and Japan have taken other retaliatory actions in response to the North Korea rocket launch. On Wednesday, the South said it was closing an industrial park it runs jointly with the North, and Japan imposed sanctions including stricter limits on North Korean money transfers. But the expedited Thaad deployment appeared to be the most serious response.Chinese experts contend that Thaad has a radar range capable of reaching into China and threatening its own missile deterrence system.“China is worried about Thaad’s radar range — more than 2,000 kilometers — so long it can penetrate into China,” said Shen Dingli, a professor of international relations at Fudan University in Shanghai who is also a physicist.American experts say the criticism that the United States is exploiting the nuclear threat from North Korea to strengthen its defenses against China is misplaced.“Although the Thaad system has good radars, the U.S. is constantly monitoring China with its powerful intelligence and surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities,” Richard Weitz, a senior fellow, at the Hudson Institute, has written. The Thaad system would add little to those capabilities, he added.South Korea’s decision to stand by its security guarantor in Washington comes as the overall relationship between the United States and China has become more tense, marked not only by differences over North Korea but also by competition in the South China Sea.Next week, President Obama will host the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations at Sunnylands, the estate in California where he and Mr. Xi met in 2013. On that occasion, the two men pledged to work together on solving the North Korean nuclear question. This time, Mr. Obama is likely to ask the participants, if only indirectly, to stand with Washington over Beijing.For China, the “introduction of Thaad is a setback because it links South Korea to a U.S. regional strategy,” said Scott A. Snyder, senior fellow for Korea studies at the Council on Foreign Relations. “It remains to be seen whether China will respond to this setback by further limiting cooperation with the United States on North Korea or whether China is able to impose costs on South Korea for its decision.”