https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/11/fashion/tag-heuer-intel-google-raise-the-stakes-in-smartwatches.html
TAG Heuer, Intel and Google Raise the Stakes in Smartwatches - The New York Times
Wearable Computing,Tag Heuer,Intel Corporation,Google Inc
Nov. 10, 2015
3408
It wasn’t quite the frenzy of the Balmain x H&M event last week, but by noon on Monday, there were lines outside the TAG Heuer store on Fifth Avenue stretching at least partway down the block, as watch aficionados awaited their first glance at what has been thought of as the first real luxury competitor to the Apple Watch: the TAG Heuer Connected, a Swiss-engineered smartwatch with an Intel chip and a Google platform.The TAG Connected was billed as many things by the men behind it — including Jean-Claude Biver, chief executive of TAG Heuer; Brian M. Krzanich, chief executive of Intel; David Singleton, vice president of engineering for Android at Google; and even Bernard Arnault, the chief executive and majority shareholder of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the conglomerate that owns TAG Heuer, all of whom were present at the official unveiling of the watch, held at LVMH Tower just a few blocks north of the store, and all of whom were wearing the TAG Connected. But I think it’s really for a different audience from the Apple Watch.Because, despite the fact that it comes with three different faces and a variety of colored straps, it’s not a fashion watch. Not even close. And they don’t want it to be. Nor is it a gadgeteer’s dream.It’s something else: a high-end horological accessory (it costs $1,500) that is being held up as a symbol of cross-border diplomacy and a savior of a national industry that also happens to do a lot of stuff.Modeled very closely on the TAG Carrera, a watch introduced in 1963 and later endorsed by Brad Pitt and Leonardo DiCaprio (among others), the TAG Connected is unquestionably (and unfortunately) a man-only watch. With a diameter of 46.2 millimeters and a width of 12.8 millimeters, it is enormous — even for a woman who likes a man’s watch, and even though it is very light, thanks to a titanium body and black rubber strap. (They know this is an issue, and say they’re hard at work on a women’s version.)The giant face does, however, make it easy to read. You can choose to display a timer, alarm and stopwatch, all of which are touch-sensitive. The watch runs on Android Wear, connects via Bluetooth to both Android phones and iPhones, and the interaction is largely swipable and intuitive (though there is a crown that works with certain apps). It looks kind of like a big round toy. Which is good.Also good is that, for the first time in any smartwatch I have seen, the face does not go into sleep (i.e. blank) mode every time you stop waving your arms around. It dims, but the dial is still visibly a dial. This avoids the “Beam Me Up, Scotty” problem.The TAG Connected also does all the basic smartwatch stuff — emails, texts, calls, maps, search, translation — and is waterproof (Mr. Krzanich said that he had been wearing it in the shower and when water-skiing, and that when it came to the sport, “I fall a lot.”) It has 4GB of storage, which means you can download music to the watch, go for a run and leave your phone behind. The battery life is, Mr. Krzanich said, about a day, depending on use.But all that, apparently, is less important than what the watch represents. At the presentation, the functionality of the watch was barely discussed. Rather, the messages that Mr. Biver and co. were hammering home were political and long-term in nature. More than a smartwatch, Mr. Biver said, the TAG Connected was a “marriage between Watch Valley and Silicon Valley; the marriage between Switzerland and America.” (To emphasize the point, André Schaller, the Swiss ambassador, was in the room and made a short speech.)“In the books of 2478, it will say that on Nov. 9, 2015, the Swiss watch industry connected to the future,” Mr. Biver said. (Not to overstate the matter or anything.) He also said, “We are giving birth to eternity in a box.”That bit had to do with the fact that consumers who buy the TAG Connected will have the opportunity, after two years, to bring it back to the store and trade it in, paying another $1,500, for a mechanical version of the TAG Carrera specially made for TAG Connected owners (so they never run the risk of technology advances rendering their watches obsolete).To put this in perspective, a new TAG Carrera 39 millimeter costs about $3,150.“No computer brand can do that,” Mr. Biver said. “They don’t have the movements.” (O.K., so they are a little competitive with Apple.)Though arguably the trade-in (up?) option slightly undermines TAG’s stated belief in the smartwatch, it’s a sneaky, and — well, smart — way to attract a new consumer base: men (and women — although TAG’s consumer base is 70 percent male) who might want to switch between the digital and the analog world.As to how many consumers that might be, or even how many watches they might sell, Mr. Biver declined to say. “Apple does not give numbers, so why should I?” he said.We’ll know soon enough, I guess. The watch is available in 20 stores across the United States. It will roll out to Japan next week, and to Europe after that. Just in time, you know, for Black Friday and all related holiday buying, if you’re so inclined.