https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/04/travel/finding-a-health-insurance-plan-that-travels-with-you.html
Finding a Health Insurance Plan That Travels With You - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Hospitals,Evacuations and Evacuees
Sept. 28, 2015
8894
It’s easier than ever to travel to faraway places; explore remote islands; ski, climb, cycle, glide; and to do it all with your family in tow, or on your own. Should you buy travel health insurance before you set off? Or shrug and roll the dice?The answer depends on several factors, including what you plan to do and where (are you taking a literary walk in England or heli-skiing in Chile?), your age, health, existing insurance and appetite for risk.“Basically we recommend that people check their regular health insurance to see if there is any coverage while traveling, and consider purchasing a supplementary policy,” Dr. Phyllis Kozarsky, Travelers’ Health Consultant to the Division of Global Migration and Quarantine at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in an email.So where to begin?By figuring out what you already have — or don’t have. You may not realize it, but if you have insurance from a major provider, you could be covered abroad for certain medical care, like a visit to a doctor if you have a sore throat. For example, I have a Blue Cross Blue Shield PPO, which allows me to receive care from doctors and hospitals in around 200 countries. It’s a global plan, explained the representative when I called member services. So, in most cases, I would not have to pay upfront for inpatient care at BlueCard Worldwide hospitals.Even with such coverage, there are things that your insurance is unlikely to include — things that can seriously hurt your bank account. The State Department cautions, for instance, that few insurance companies will pay for medical evacuation back to the United States, which “can easily cost $10,000 and up, depending on your location and medical condition.” The same idea applies to credit cards, which some travelers think offer protection. That protection, however, is generally inadequate when it comes to big costs, including medical evacuation.To find out what, if anything, your insurance will cover when traveling internationally, call your provider. Here’s a checklist of what to ask about, written by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:• Exclusions for treating exacerbations of pre-existing medical conditions• The company’s policy for “out-of-network” services• Coverage for complications of pregnancy (or for a neonate, especially if the newborn requires intensive care)• Exclusions for high-risk activities such as sky diving, scuba diving, and mountain climbing• Exclusions regarding psychiatric emergencies or injuries related to terrorist attacks or acts of war• Whether preauthorization is needed for treatment, hospital admission, or other services• Whether a second opinion is required before obtaining emergency treatment• Whether there is a 24-hour physician-backed support centerAlso, the State Department suggests asking:• Will the insurance company pay foreign hospitals and foreign doctors directly?Getting answers is not necessarily easy. The representative may not know or make an effort to find out. I spoke to a nice man by calling the number on the back of my Blue Cross Blue Shield member card, but his answers were vague. For instance, I asked if there is a 24-hour physician-backed support center I can call. “That’s a great question,” he said. “I imagine that that 800-number could switch you to someone at any time.”Even when you get concrete answers, you are likely to find that not everything is covered. So I simply told the representative that I was trying to decide if I should buy supplemental insurance.“That is a smart thing to do,” he said. “Get that as backup.”Indeed. And in addition to supplemental insurance, consider medical evacuation insurance: air ambulance, evacuation or medical escort service coverage for overseas travelers, according to the State Department. Medical evacuation or escort service is not only crucial if you’re in a remote location, but also because the quality of care in the nearest hospital may not be adequate. (Note: The State Department says Medicare does not cover international hospital or medical costs.)While some people don’t bother with travel health insurance, it typically costs at most a few hundred dollars, and you will save thousands should something go wrong. For a weeklong trip to Argentina I found several plans that would cover emergency medical, dental and evacuation costs for about $30 to $60. Membership in an air medical transport program that included repatriation to the hospital of my choice in the United States was about $250.So how do you choose a provider? Again, I turned to the C.D.C. Here’s what travelers should ask about when shopping around:• Arrangements with hospitals to guarantee payments directly• Assistance via a 24-hour physician-backed support center (critical for medical evacuation insurance)• Emergency medical transport to facilities that are equivalent to those in the home country or to the home country itself (repatriation)• Any specific medical services that may apply to their circumstances, such as coverage of high-risk activitiesIf you travel abroad frequently, ask about an annual policy rather than one for which you pay each trip; it may cost a lot less.The State Department website, travel.state.gov/content/passports/english/go/health/insurance-providers.html, is a fine place to begin shopping. Here you’ll find a list of some insurance and medical evacuation providers, including veterans such as Travel Guard and MedjetAssist. The list is not exhaustive, and being on it does not mean that the company is endorsed by the State Department. Still, to be included a company must attest that it is in satisfactory professional standing.Among the companies you will find there is InsureMyTrip.com, which sells coverage from multiple carriers, allowing users to comparison shop.  There are several plans, including those for pre-existing conditions, evacuation, and more than one trip.When shopping, note that you can buy a comprehensive policy that also includes protection for such non-health-related things as trip cancellation. But those protections are often not necessary (that’s another column) and may add to the cost.And do your own homework. Don’t rely on a tour or cruise company to present you with insurance options; they may sell you what’s right for their pockets, not yours.It is also worth checking out the International Association for Medical Assistance to Travellers (Iamat). This isn’t an insurance provider. It’s a nonprofit organization (free to join; a donation is required to renew) that provides health advice about countries worldwide (necessary vaccinations, food and water conditions). Members may also walk into Iamat clinics and pay reasonable set rates (like up to $100 for an initial routine consultation, and up to $170 for night calls) to English-speaking doctors. Note, though, that these rates do not apply to hospitals, or to laboratory procedures including blood tests, so it’s not a substitute for insurance. More information is at iamat.org.The bottom line? If your health insurance is not comprehensive, if you have a pre-existing condition, or if you are an adventure traveler, or if you will be going someplace where the hospitals are questionable, budget for health and medical evacuation insurance. Your body and your bank account are worth it.