http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/world/asia/philippines-duterte.html
Philippines’ New President, Rodrigo Duterte, Vows Tough Stance on Crime - The New York Times
Duterte  Rodrigo,Davao (Philippines),Philippines,Aquino  Benigno S III
June 30, 2016
8159
Rodrigo Duterte was sworn in on Thursday as president of the Philippines, promising to carry out an uncompromising crackdown on crime across the country.Mr. Duterte said in his inaugural speech that the harm of corruption and drugs justified his tough approach, and he dismissed concerns that such a campaign would abuse the rule of law.“I know the limits of the power and authority of the president,” he said. “I know what is legal and what is not. My adherence to due process and the rule of law is uncompromising.”While mayor of Davao City in the southern Philippines, hundreds of people were killed by what human rights groups say were government-linked death squads. Mr. Duterte denied involvement with the killings but made little secret of his support for a violent approach to curbing crime.During his election campaign, he pledged to reinstate the death penalty and said he would unleash law enforcement officials to battle criminals on the streets. So many lawbreakers would die during his first months in office that the fish in Manila Bay “will grow fat,” he warned at one point.Such language, and coarse comments on the campaign trail on subjects like rape, did little to dent his appeal. He won about 16 million votes, nearly 39 percent of the total, with his closest rivals trailing by more than six million votes.Mr. Duterte, 71, took his oath in a low-key event at the presidential palace in Manila, the capital. Independent news media were barred from the ceremony, which was broadcast by state television and streamed live online.The new president has had a contentious relationship with news outlets. He has threatened to not grant interviews during his presidency and suggested that some of the high number of journalists killed in the country deserved their fate.In a rare joint editorial, several of the country’s leading news organizations called on Mr. Duterte to uphold transparency, adding that despite their tensions, “we must at all times cover him, his actions and his statements.”Mr. Duterte presented few details during his brief speech, saying instead that specifics would be “supplied to you in due time.”But he did say that one set of policy guidelines was significant enough to be outlined in his address. He called on officials to reduce redundant rules that delayed the approval of government projects and applications to agencies. And he demanded transparency and fairness in government contracts.During his campaign, Mr. Duterte expressed a willingness to try new approaches to difficult foreign policy questions. In May, he said that he would consider negotiating directly with China over conflicting claims in the South China Sea, if the Philippines’ and the United States’ longstanding advocacy of a regional response made no progress.On July 12, a tribunal at The Hague is scheduled to announce its ruling on a case filed by the Philippines that challenges China’s claims in the South China Sea. Beijing has called the proceedings illegal, and it said that it would not abide by any decision.Mr. Duterte still defends the Philippines’ claims in the South China Sea, and he said he would agree to talks only if China acknowledged those claims. He did not touch on that case or the territorial dispute during his speech, saying only that the Philippines “will honor treaties and international obligations.”