https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/world/europe/euratom-brexit.html
U.K. Plan to Quit European Nuclear Treaty Stirs Alarm - The New York Times
Great Britain,European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom),Nuclear Energy,Treaties,Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Cancer
July 12, 2017
300
The British government’s plan to withdraw from a seminal European treaty governing the movement of nuclear material is generating alarm that it might hobble Britain’s nuclear industry, destroy thousands of jobs and even deny cancer patients treatments that rely heavily on nuclear isotopes.At issue is the six-decades old European Atomic Energy Community, also known as Euratom, a seemingly arcane sounding treaty signed in 1957 with a nevertheless crucial role. It governs the development of nuclear energy and its trade across Europe, funding research and development and assuring that European countries do not divert nuclear materials to military uses.Prime Minister Theresa May has insisted that with Britain’s decision to leave the European Union, it can no longer be a party to the treaty. But leading members of both the Conservative and Labour parties, the nuclear industry and the medical establishment are lining up against her.The issue could come to a head on Thursday when the government announces a so-called repeal bill that would enshrine parts of European Union law into British law, a pivotal moment in its decision to leave the European Union.Advocates of Britain remaining in Euratom say it remains unclear what the bill will say about the treaty — if anything — and some members of Parliament, including some of Mrs. May’s fellow Conservatives, could revolt over the issue. Underlining those concerns, this week Dominic Cummings, director of the campaign to leave the European Union, turned to Twitter to castigate what he labeled “government morons” who want to withdraw from the treaty.Among the other voices expressing alarm is Dr. Nicola Strickland, president of the Royal College of Radiologists. Noting that Euratom regulates the trade of radioactive isotopes of the type used to diagnose and treat cancer, she said she was worried that the access to these materials could be undermined if Britain left the treaty.“The Royal College of Radiologists, like others in medicine and industry, is seriously concerned about continued access to these materials if we leave the Euratom treaty under Brexit,” Dr. Strickland said in a statement. She said she also wanted assurances that radiation safety laws and rules governing trade, enshrined in the Euratom treaty, would continue.Rupert Lewis, a spokesman for the Nuclear Industry Association, which represents the British civil nuclear industry, said that if Britain withdrew from Euratom, it could find itself sidelined from vital and lucrative nuclear trade agreements with the United States, Canada and Japan. And without a replacement agreement, he said, Britain’s trade in nuclear products and services could slow down or come to halt, potentially threatening some of the 65,000 jobs in its nuclear sector.Also at risk, Mr. Lewis said, was pioneering international fusion research underway at a test reactor in Culham, Oxfordshire, the world’s largest operational nuclear fusion device, which depends on funding by Euratom members. Some experts have estimated that if Britain leaves Euratom and the device is decommissioned, the loss in funding could run to hundreds of millions of dollars.Britain has the world’s largest stockpile of plutonium, Mr. Lewis said, and moving it outside the country could be hampered since the transfer of reprocessed nuclear fuel was mandated by Euratom under international law.Tom Greatrex, chief executive of the Nuclear Industry Association, said the decision to leave Euratom should be reassessed. “Euratom is a key enabler for the U.K. and European nuclear industries, and leaving it before successor arrangements are in place is a real concern for the industry,” he said.One solution for Britain being discussed by government officials, Mr. Greatrex said, would be for the country to abandon the treaty and instead become an associate member, like Switzerland or Ukraine. Alternatively, members of Euratom could rewrite the treaty.Michel Barnier, the European Union’s chief negotiator on Britain leaving the bloc, said at a news conference in Brussels on Wednesday that Euratom was among the issues that needed to be addressed before Britain’s exit at the end of March 2019. European Union officials are on record as saying that legally, Britain will have to leave Euratom if it forges ahead with leaving the bloc.The British government on Wednesday sought to reassure industry and Parliament that the country would be able to minimize any problems associated with leaving the treaty. Addressing a debate in Parliament, the energy minister, Richard Harrington, said that maintaining civil nuclear cooperation with Europe and the rest of the world remained a priority, and that the government would publish a paper clarifying its position on Thursday.Mr. Harrington warned against alarmism about leaving Euratom, saying that imports of “medical radioisotopes” could continue, and that Britain would keep the other benefits of Euratom.But not everyone agreed, and several lawmakers spoke out in favor of remaining in the treaty. Bob Neill, a Conservative, warned that leaving the treaty would be “cutting off your economic and scientific nose to spite your political face.”Simone Tagliapietra, an energy expert at Bruegel, a research organization in Brussels, said Britain would inevitably face higher costs as a result of leaving Euratom, mostly because the organization oversees safety rules and the delivery of nuclear fuels.“Now that the U.K. is deciding to exit Euratom,” he said, “it will have to establish its own agency for safety and nonproliferation. And that will entail major costs mostly because of how hard it will be to find skilled people who may be from other parts of Europe and no longer eligible to work in Britain automatically.”