http://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/27/us/cincinnati-officer-is-acquitted-in-killing-that-ignited-unrest.html
Cincinnati Officer Is Acquitted in Killing That Ignited Unrest - The New York Times
CINCINNATI (OHIO),LUKEN  CHARLES,WINKLER  RALPH E,ROACH  STEPHEN,THOMAS  TIMOTHY,POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT,MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS,BLACKS,CURFEWS,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,DECISIONS AND VERDICTS
Sept. 27, 2001
7327
A white police officer was acquitted today in the killing of an unarmed black man in April, an incident that sparked the city's worst racial unrest in three decades.The officer, Stephen Roach, had been charged with negligent homicide and obstructing official business in the death of Timothy Thomas, 19, whom he shot in a dark alley early on April 7.Judge Ralph E. Winkler of Hamilton County Municipal Court pronounced sentence after hearing the trial without a jury. Officer Roach did not testify.''This shooting was a split-second reaction to a very dangerous situation created by Timothy Thomas,'' Judge Winkler said. ''Police Officer Roach's action was reasonable.''The judge said Officer Roach had an unblemished record, while Mr. Thomas had been wanted on a variety of warrants and did not respond to an order to show his hands.Protesters gathered outside the courthouse and at a City Hall meeting after the verdict, shouting and chanting, ''No justice, no peace.''Later, near a vigil for the victim where hundreds of people had gathered, some cars were pelted with rocks and bottles and a few trash cans were set afire, officials said. There were no reports of serious injuries.Officer Roach, 27, a city policeman since 1997, had faced up to nine months in jail if convicted of both charges. He still faces departmental administrative proceedings under which he could face penalties that include firing, the police said.In three nights of disturbances that followed the shooting, dozens of people were injured and more than 800 were arrested before a citywide curfew was imposed. The city had not seen such racial unrest since the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination in 1968.Officer Roach glanced down while the verdicts were read today, and his wife, Erin, sobbed into her hands.''Unfortunately, this is a tragedy for everybody involved,'' Officer Roach said later outside the courtroom, holding hands with his wife. ''I would give anything to change the outcome of what happened that night, but unfortunately I can't.''Mr. Thomas' mother, Angela Leisure, said the verdict was unfair.''Why is it that officers are not responsible for their acts when other citizens are?'' she asked.Mr. Thomas was the 15th black man killed by the Cincinnati police since 1995. The police union has noted that 10 of those men had fired or pointed guns at police officers, and that two of the victims drove at officers or dragged them from cars.After the disturbances, Mayor Charles Luken appointed a commission to look into improving opportunities for blacks, who make up 43 percent of the city's population, and reducing violence in city.Officer Roach was believed to be the first Cincinnati police officer to go to trial on charges of killing a suspect, the police officials said.Mr. Thomas had been wanted on 14 warrants, including traffic charges and fleeing the police. On the night of the shooting, he ran from three other officers and scaled fences in a neighborhood plagued by drugs and violence, Officer Roach's lawyer said.The prosecutor, Stephen McIntosh, said Officer Roach ran after Mr. Thomas with his finger on the pistol's trigger, in a departure from the training of the Cincinnati Police Department.