https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/12/world/europe/uk-theresa-may-britain.html
Theresa May Battles to Hold On as U.K. Prime Minister - The New York Times
Conservative Party (Great Britain),May  Theresa M,Great Britain,Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Elections
June 12, 2017
4759
LONDON — Battling to hold on as prime minister of Britain after losing her majority in Parliament in the election last week, Theresa May shored up her position on Monday by expressing contrition to fellow Conservative Party lawmakers and promising to consult them more.“I got us into this mess, I’m going to get us out of it,” Mrs. May told the lawmakers, according to several who attended a private meeting with her in Parliament on Monday. They said she got a generally positive reception.Mrs. May met for more than an hour on Monday with the Conservative caucus in the House of Commons, known as the 1922 Committee, after shaking up her cabinet over the weekend to broaden its appeal to her party’s rank and file.To survive for long as the head of a minority government, she will need all of the caucus members’ votes. The defections of even a few could block major legislation and force her to resign, or she could be toppled through a party leadership challenge.Mrs. May was greeted at the meeting by lawmakers banging their desks as a sign of approval, an indication that she had at least bought herself some time. “She knows what went wrong, and that she played a part in that — and she said what I think colleagues wanted to hear,” said Alistair Burt, a Conservative lawmaker who attended the meeting. Mr. Burt said the prime minister’s approach had combined humility with a focus on the task of forming a government.In a sign that Mrs. May had not yet nailed down the backing she needs from her own party and an alliance with the Democratic Unionist Party, there were indications on Monday that the Queen’s Speech might be delayed. The speech, which lays out the government’s legislative agenda, was expected to be delivered June 19, but Mrs. May’s office refused on Monday to confirm that date.Mrs. May’s future remains in grave doubt after her party’s setback at the polls. She had called the early election hoping to bolster her position and receive a clear mandate as negotiations begin over Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union, known as Brexit. But what at first looked to be an easy victory turned into an electoral debacle for the Tories, prompting George Osborne, the former chancellor of the Exchequer who now edits The London Evening Standard, to describe Mrs. May on Sunday as a “dead woman walking.”Even so, the Conservatives appear to want to draw a breath and help her to stay on as leader and prime minister, at least for the time being. The talks with the European Union, perhaps the most consequential set of negotiations Britain has faced since World War II, are scheduled to begin next week. And with British voters in an unpredictable mood, few Conservatives want to risk a change of party leadership that would generate pressure for another election.Though Mrs. May’s office insisted on Monday that there was no change to her strategy of seeking a clean break with the European Union, withdrawing from its single market and customs union in March 2019, that strategy is being questioned by leading Conservatives, threatening to reawaken a latent civil war within the party over Europe.Mrs. May also has yet to finalize an arrangement with the Democratic Unionists, the Northern Irish party whose 10 votes she now needs to form a majority. A deal with the D.U.P. is seen as controversial in Britain because of the party’s social conservatism, its opposition to same-sex marriage and its hostility to abortion. It would also be likely to cause complications in Northern Ireland, where the British government tries to act as an impartial mediator in restoring the power-sharing arrangement between the mainly Protestant D.U.P. and the main Catholic nationalist party, Sinn Fein.Having made the decision to call a snap election and then run a personalized campaign, Mrs. May owns its disastrous outcome. She tried on Saturday to defuse some of the anger at her leadership style and her habit of relying heavily on a small circle of advisers by parting ways with her two closest aides, Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy. Both had developed reputations for secrecy and highhanded, arrogant treatment of colleagues.Then, on Sunday, she reconstructed her cabinet. The biggest surprise in the reshuffle was the return of Michael Gove, whom she had fired last summer when she first became prime minister.Mrs. May and Mr. Gove had frequently clashed when both were in government, and only last week, when an interviewer asked her about him, Mrs. May answered dismissively, saying, “I seem to remember Michael was secretary for state for education at one point.”Now he will be secretary of state for the environment, food and rural affairs, prompting Tom Watson, deputy leader of the opposition Labour Party, to ask publicly whether his return had been requested by Rupert Murdoch, whose tabloid newspapers lean heavily toward the Conservatives. Mr. Gove conducted an interview with President Trump for one of the Murdoch papers.Mrs. May’s reshuffled cabinet retains Philip Hammond as chancellor of the Exchequer. There had been news reports before the election that Mrs. May was planning to reassign him because he has argued behind the scenes for a softer, more business-friendly exit from the European Union.That cause has been aided by the promotion of Damian Green to serve as the first secretary of state, and the emergence of Ruth Davidson, the leader of the Conservatives in Scotland, where the party gained seats in the election while losing them elsewhere. Ms. Davidson, who is gay, also said she had assurances from Mrs. May that a deal with the Democratic Unionists would not erode gay rights in Northern Ireland.British business leaders sense an opportunity to press for a softer form of “Brexit.” Writing in The Financial Times, the director general of the Confederation of British Industry, Carolyn Fairbairn, called for a “reset that prioritizes prosperity.”Yet other powerful voices and party rivals, including David Davis, the cabinet minister responsible for leaving the bloc, insist that the election has changed nothing on that front.The leader who may be Mrs. May’s most likely successor — Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary — warned in an article in the tabloid The Sun that there must be “no backsliding” on a British exit. Mr. Gove, too, favors a clean break with the bloc.The disarray is welcome news for the opposition Labour Party, led by Jeremy Corbyn. Though it finished second in the election, it defied widespread expectations by denying Mrs. May a majority.Among those who confidently predicted a poorer result for the Labour Party was Matthew Goodwin, a professor of politics and international relations at the University of Kent, who promised to eat his own book if Mr. Corbyn achieved at least 38 percent of the vote.Mr. Corbyn surpassed that mark, and during an interview with Sky News, Mr. Goodwin was filmed chewing several pages.