https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/08/science/the-fight-to-save-a-prairie-chicken.html
The Fight to Save a Prairie Chicken - The New York Times
Grouse (Bird),Endangered and Extinct Species,Attwater Prairie Chicken National Wildlife Refuge (Texas),Texas,Birds,Attwater's Prairie Chicken
Sept. 4, 2015
8908
EAGLE LAKE, Tex. — Every spring during mating season, the few dozen remaining male Attwater’s prairie chickens gather to perform an elaborate courtship ritual.They drum their feet against the earth in a rapid tat-tat-tat reminiscent of Native American dances, and they inflate the bright orange air sacs at their necks, emitting an eerie booming sound that, with the wind blowing in the right direction, can be heard half a mile away.“It still makes my neck hairs kind of stand upright,” said Terry Rossignol, the manager of the Attwater Prairie Chicken National Wildlife Refuge here. “It’s like it’s crying out, ‘Help me!’ ”The prairie chicken has urgently needed help for some time. Almost a million of them once roamed the coastal prairie of Texas and Louisiana. But by 1919, the birds had disappeared from Louisiana, and in 1967, with only 1,070 left, the chicken, in fact a type of grouse, was listed as endangered.Since then, its numbers have declined precipitously, despite a vigorous captive breeding program and painstaking efforts to protect young chicks in the wild. In 2002, the yearly count of the birds by the federal Fish and Wildlife Service, which runs the refuge, dipped to 40, an all-time low. This year’s total was 104.Endangered species around the world now number in the tens of thousands: The International Union for Conservation of Nature lists almost 23,000 plants and animals as threatened with extinction, from charismatic mega-fauna like giant pandas and polar bears to insects and plants that few people have ever heard of.But the Attwater’s prairie chicken, named for the Texas conservationist Henry Philemon Attwater, is a sobering example of how difficult it can be to recover a species once its numbers have dwindled to perilous lows and its natural habitat has been largely destroyed.For decades, the scientists attempting to rescue the Attwater’s have negotiated a seemingly endless course of obstacles, solving one problem only to confront a host of others. Times of heady optimism, when the prairie chickens seemed to be increasing, have been followed by harsh disappointment, as the count once again plummeted.Recent progress in understanding the barriers to survival for Attwater’s chicks in the wild has given him more hope, said Mr. Rossignol, who has worked at the wildlife refuge for 22 years and leads the Attwater’s recovery team. But, he added, the question of when to concede failure “is always at the back of our minds.”“I guess I’m of the philosophy that when you have tried absolutely everything to the best of your ability and it doesn’t seem to work, maybe it is time to call it quits,” he said. “But we hadn’t reached that point yet, and we still haven’t.”The federal recovery plan calls for removing the Attwater’s from the endangered list only after a minimum of 6,000 prairie chickens have been breeding annually for 10 years. The plan estimates that the recovery would cost about $192 million over 50 years. The recovery program receives about $1 million a year in federal financing, according to Mr. Rossignol.Given the bird’s roller-coaster history, overconfidence is not a trap that Mr. Rossignol and his team are likely to fall into.In the wild, the prairie chicken, a relatively small grouse with brown and tan feathers and a turkeylike tail, has a brief life span: An adult bird, if it is lucky, might live two years. Very young chicks can easily succumb to heavy rain or unusual heat, their bodies unable to regulate temperature until they are older. Numerous predators include hawks, great horned owls, coyotes, bobcats, skunks, snakes and raccoons.“Unfortunately, everybody likes chicken,” Mr. Rossignol said.In mating season, males gather on flat areas called leks or booming grounds, where they fight off competitors and do their best to attract the attention of females. The male that manages to hold the center generally prevails.“One or two males do 87 percent of the mating,” said Michael Morrow, a conservation biologist who has worked at the refuge even longer than Mr. Rossignol.In 1995, the recovery team tried releasing a group of Attwater’s chicks bred in captivity into the wild, keeping them at first for 14 days in an outdoor pen, so that they could acclimate to their new environment, and then sending them out on their own into the prairie grasses.But right away there were problems. On the eighth day after the chicks were freed, all 15 perished.“We suspect it was probably an issue of they didn’t know where to go get water,” Mr. Rossignol said. “They were dying of what seemed like dehydration and just exposure.”For the next releases, the team made sure that water was available. But several years later, they checked one of the acclimation pens and found that the young chicks inside had been decapitated. A great horned owl had apparently swooped in and frightened the chicks. Mr. Rossignol said the chicks may have stuck their heads up through the netting, only to have them lopped off by the owl.After that, a second layer of netting was added. But it did nothing to protect the birds from the ensuing drought. When a bird died in a release pen, it spread botulism to the other chickens that had pecked at the carcass, killing many of them.Even getting the birds to breed in captivity was far from easy.The Houston Zoo, one of four organizations participating in the breeding program, set up pens on the grounds of NASA’s Johnson Space Center. “I like to joke that I get to take care of endangered species that are protected by armed guards,” said Hannah Bailey, the zoo’s curator of birds and natural encounters.At first, the zoo kept a male-and-female pair of prairie chickens in each pen and placed visual barriers between the enclosures. But the eggs laid by the females were unfertilized.“It’s a female-choice situation,” Ms. Bailey said. “The males display on the leks, and the females choose which male is best looking or fittest or whatever weird thing Attwater’s prairie hens find attractive.”Housing the birds in isolated pairs was disrupting that system, the recovery team realized. The barriers were taken down, and the males responded, spending more time strutting and booming and pecking at each other through the fencing. The females became more fertile, laying eggs that could be carefully incubated for 26 days until they hatched.Ms. Bailey keeps a stud book in which every mating pair is recorded. Birds are matched carefully, and genetic testing is done to minimize the chance of inbreeding.Still, for a long time, it seemed that whatever the recovery team did, the chicks’ survival rate in the wild remained dismally low. From 1995 to 2007, 1,185 prairie chickens hatched in captivity were released. But the total number of birds still alive at the end of each year declined and then hovered below 50.“We just kept seeing the numbers fall and fall and fall,” Mr. Rossignol said. “The little inside joke at the time was, ‘If the bird blinks out, are you going to have a job anymore?’ It definitely was not a really good feeling.”Then, five years ago, scientists at the refuge made a discovery. Mr. Rossignol and Dr. Morrow had been aware for some time that red fire ants, an invasive species that has spread across the southeastern United States, could pose a threat to Attwater’s chicks. They had found dead chicks that had been swarmed by the ants. The fire ants had even killed a hen that refused to leave her brood.But Mr. Rossignol and his staff had also come across dead chicks that had not been attacked, and that was puzzling. What had killed them?The answer, when they found it, was surprising. The fire ants, it turned out, were decimating the insect population on the prairie, a fact demonstrated in a 2010 study by Dr. Morrow and four colleagues. Young prairie chickens dine primarily on insects for the first three or four weeks of life, and these chicks were starving to death.To Mr. Rossignol and the recovery team, the breakthrough was exhilarating.“It may not be the entire silver bullet, but it’s a pretty good chunk of that silver bullet,” he said. “We now have at least something that we can do to really change things around and get this bird’s survival going.”Efforts to exterminate the fire ants have made a difference. Chicks hatched in the wild began to live for more than two weeks. Adding more plants that attracted insects in the refuge also helped, ensuring a steadier source of food.But as Dr. Morrow pointed out, when the population of a species drops enough, the pull toward extinction — the “extinction vortex,” as it is known — is powerful, and winning even a significant battle does not necessarily mean winning the war.Last year, hopes at the refuge ran high, as a group of chicks passed the two-week mark and appeared to be thriving. “We had 60 percent survival,” Dr. Morrow said. “So we were feeling really good last spring that, hey, the fire ant treatment worked.”But that May, a storm dumped more than 10 inches of rain on the refuge in a few days. Some chicks drowned. The others died of exposure.And so it goes with the rescue efforts. Ms. Bailey said that in working with endangered species, “you tend not to hear a lot about it until you get the good stories. You don’t necessarily always hear about the 15 years of pain before you got the successful releases or the nesting in the wild.”Mr. Rossignol, for one, has not given up. This year, he noted, almost 600 birds will be released, and with a 19 percent survival rate and the addition of chicks hatched in the wild, the population could exceed 150. Besides, other species — the whooping crane, for example — have seen their numbers drop even lower and have still recovered.Mr. Rossignol said he tended “to see the glass as 60 percent full.”But, he said, even if the Attwater’s prairie chicken goes extinct, “whatever we learn from this species I see as very applicable to other species, before they get to the point that the Attwater is in right now.”Still, it would hurt.“You try to kind of stay out of it, try to keep your feelings neutral,” he said. “But it’s hard to do.”