http://www.nytimes.com/2004/03/12/world/south-korea-parliament-votes-to-strip-president-of-powers.html
South Korea Parliament Votes To Strip President of Powers - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,ROH MOO HYUN,GOH KUN,IMPEACHMENT,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT,LAW AND LEGISLATION,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,ELECTIONS
March 12, 2004
5182
South Korea's opposition-dominated Parliament on Friday passed an unprecedented bill to impeach President Roh Moo Hyun, accusing him of illegal campaigning and suspending his powers.Prime Minister Goh Kun assumed leadership of the country and will keep the post until a ruling by the constitutional court. The court has up to 180 days to decide.A total of 193 lawmakers in the 273-seat National Assembly voted in favor of impeaching Mr. Roh, surpassing the necessary two-thirds vote.The police beefed up security around the National Assembly, where hundreds of Roh supporters rallied. Another large group of South Koreans who favor Mr. Roh's impeachment also staged their own rally near the National Assembly.Demonstrating the level of emotion gripping the country, a supporter of the South Korean president doused himself with a flammable liquid and set himself on fire late Thursday night to protest the impeachment effort.In a bid to diffuse the standoff, Mr. Roh, speaking through his aide, apologized Friday for his part in the political fracas. But his political opponents were not satisfied, and said it was too late.The main opposition Grand National Party said it was appalled by the president's lack of legal and political awareness.Politicians with the Uri Party that supports Mr. Roh had been staging a sit-in inside the National Assembly, blocking the speaker of the assembly from sitting in his chair to preside over the impeachment vote. Opposition lawmakers had until Friday evening to hold an impeachment vote after the impeachment motion was submitted Tuesday.But around 11 a.m. on Friday, opposition lawmakers and the speaker of the assembly, Park Kwan Yong, entered the main hall of Parliament escorted by security guards.Both opposition lawmakers and security guards dragged the protesting pro-Roh lawmakers off the speaker's podium and convened the impeachment vote session.The scenes in the National Assembly were broadcast live on television.The dramatic political development comes just ahead of crucial parliamentary elections in mid-April. It also raises questions about how the country's budding economic recovery and international attempts to stop North Korea's nuclear weapons ambitions would be affected.Mr. Roh raised the number of his political opponents last year when he left the Millennium Democratic Party that backed his bid for the presidency. That party is currently the second-largest opposition group in the National Assembly.Mr. Roh set off the latest clash with his opponents when he said in a televised news conference last month that he wanted to do everything within legal limits to prompt votes for the Uri Party.