https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/14/world/asia/china-heilongjiang-governor-mine-protest.html
Official Admits He Gave Misleading Account of Chinese Miners’ Plight - The New York Times
China,Coal,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Lu Hao,Layoffs and Job Reductions,Mines and Mining,Wages and Salaries
March 13, 2016
7509
BEIJING —  Protests by angry workers at a vast failing state coal mine in the rust belt of northeastern China have forced a senior official to admit that he understated their problems, and signaled how President Xi Jinping’s plans to shake up slumping state-owned industries could run into resistance.The demonstrators had denounced the official, Lu Hao, the governor of Heilongjiang Province, after he said miners working down shafts there had been paid on time even as the government was trying to cut costs and jobs at the mine.“We must live, we must eat,” said some banners displayed by protesters, according to images on a website that monitors social unrest across China. “Lu Hao tells lies while his eyes are wide open,” said another.Mr. Lu made the rare public reversal Saturday in Beijing, where officials have gathered for the annual meeting of the legislature, the National People’s Congress. Their discussion this year has focused on cutbacks at mines and sectors of heavy industry that are producing more than China’s slowing economy can consume.The state-owned Longmay Mining Group, which Mr. Lu had held up days before as an example of progress in restructuring, now looks more like an example of how the effort could go awry. A thousand or more miners and their supporters at a subsidiary in Shuangyashan City, Heilongjiang, took to the streets last week, according to images and reports online, as well as messages from residents.In comments that appeared late on Saturday, Mr. Lu acknowledged that Longmay workers’ wages were overdue and obliquely blamed subordinates for his earlier misleading statement, according to a report on a Heilongjiang government website.“I had known that aboveground workers had wages in arrears, but it’s also true that workers down shafts are also in arrears, and I spoke wrongly about that,” Mr. Lu said in follow-up comments on Sunday reported by a news website in Beijing. “Mistakes must be fixed, and after they are, you have to work hard to solve the problems and thoroughly absorb the lessons.”In his public comments, Mr. Lu did not mention the protests, and the Chinese state-run news media has not reported on them.But Mr. Lu has indicated that cuts at failing state businesses must go ahead as part of the government’s plans to rein in excess industry and mining. He cited demands from Mr. Xi, who has called the changes part of “supply-side structural reform.”Last Monday, the president asked officials at the National People’s Congress how Longmay was coping, the company reported on its website. He urged the company to “face the market.”There were no reports of new protests on Sunday. But Liu Zhaohui, 32, a mine electrician in Shuangyashan, said an unorganized group of several hundred residents had gathered. “Since the end of last year,” he said, “there have been consistent problems with irregular payments from the company.”Such protests could multiply, especially in China’s hard-hit northeastern industrial regions, unless the central government assigns more money to ensure that laid-off workers receive unpaid wages and social welfare and pension contributions, said Geoffrey Crothall, a spokesman for the China Labor Bulletin in Hong Kong.“There are a lot of delinquent employers across the country now, but the problem is especially serious in the northeast,” Mr. Crothall said by telephone. “Local government and enterprises there often simply don’t have the money to pay.”During the boom times for China’s coal industry, big state-owned mines across northeastern China took on hundreds of thousands of employees whose wages were sustained by rising coal prices. But demand has slumped as the Chinese economy has slowed and relied less on industrial growth.Coal consumption for energy fell 3.7 percent in 2015 compared with the previous year, when it had also fallen. Mining conglomerates are struggling with an oversupply of workers and production capacity. Longmay, the biggest coal miner in northeastern China, sa id in September that it planned to lay off 100,000 workers.Yet Mr. Lu had told reporters that the Longmay Group showed that the difficult changes could be accomplished without ignoring workers’ needs.“Longmay has 80,000 workers down mines, and today, not one has not been paid monthly wages and their income hasn’t fallen a penny,” Mr. Lu said at the National People’s Congress a week ago, according to The Paper, a Chinese news service.Last week, angry workers and their supporters gathered in front of government and company offices in Shuangyashan, demanding that Mr. Lu and other officials accept their complaints that wages had often gone unpaid for months.Some online accounts said many thousands of people, even 10,000, had taken part. But pictures from the protests suggested numbers lower than that.After calling together Heilongjiang officials in Beijing on Saturday, Mr. Lu said the provincial government would support Longmay in “overcoming its hardships and do its utmost to have employee wages issued on time.”