https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/02/sports/tennis/juan-martin-del-potro-stuns-stan-wawrinka-at-wimbledon.html
Juan Martín del Potro Stuns Stan Wawrinka at Wimbledon - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,del Potro  Juan Martin,Wawrinka  Stanislas
July 1, 2016
9757
WIMBLEDON, England — The last time Juan Martín del Potro was on Centre Court at Wimbledon, he was trading blows with Novak Djokovic during a classic five-set semifinal in 2013.After three operations on his left wrist, del Potro no longer has the pop on his backhand that he did on that day three years ago.But he is a Grand Slam champion and a former top-five player, and if his body could just stay together to hold his prodigious talent, more great moments would come.Del Potro created one on Friday, when he was back on Centre Court defeating another Grand Slam champion, fourth-seeded Stan Wawrinka, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (2), 6-3, in a second-round match.The win was del Potro’s most significant since he returned from his third operation in February.But winning was almost beside the point. While he was recovering from surgery at home in Argentina, del Potro, 27, said that he was “really sad” and that he missed the game. On Friday, he was on tennis’s grandest stage again, with the support of an adoring crowd.“I was so happy on court,” he said in a BBC interview after the match. “It doesn’t matter the score.”He added: “My hand is shaking. It’s a great sensation for me. I feel alive.”The match was the first between two Grand Slam champions in the second round at Wimbledon since Djokovic lost to Marat Safin in 2008. It was also only the second time in two and a half years that del Potro had faced a top-10 player.Del Potro, the 2009 United States Open champion, used to be a top-10 player himself, having achieved a career-high ranking of fourth in January 2014, two months before the first operation on his wrist.He had not played a Grand Slam tournament since and had adjusted his expectations accordingly.“I couldn’t expect to be in the third round of Wimbledon after three years,” said del Potro, now ranked 165th.Friday began like so many other days this week, with rain falling and the outside courts covered with tarps. Play started late and was very brief. Dustin Brown and Nick Kyrgios played all of three points in their second-round match on Court No. 2 before they packed up and went back inside.It has been that kind of week at Wimbledon. With few matches to watch, fans at the All England Club resorted to cheering the sun.When it appeared on Friday afternoon, tournament officials scrambled to get the second round of singles completed to avoid having matches on Sunday, the traditional off day.But with two more rain delays in the early evening and four second-round matches unfinished, officials announced that matches would be played on the middle Sunday for the fourth time in tournament history and the first time since 2004.Venus Williams and Daria Kasatkina were left in an awkward position by the frequent stoppages. After the first set of their third-round match was started and stopped several times, an early evening shower came just as Williams had earned a match point at 7-6 in the third set.“I can’t say that I’ve ever had a rain delay at match point,” said the eighth-seeded Williams, at 36 the oldest woman in the draw.When the players returned to the court about an hour later, Williams hit a backhand into the net to end a five-shot rally and went on to lose the game. She closed out the match four games later, winning, 7-5, 4-6, 10-8.For largely uninterrupted play, one needed a ticket to Centre Court, and fans there got their money’s worth, capped off by Roger Federer’s 6-4, 6-2, 6-2 victory over Dan Evans of Britain.After del Potro dispatched Wawrinka, top-seeded Serena Williams dueled with her fellow American Christina McHale, rallying from a break down in the third set to win, 6-7 (7), 6-2, 6-4.Williams had a set point at 5-4 in the first set, but a McHale shot that had been called out was reversed after a challenge. McHale won the point when they replayed it and went on to win the set.Williams spent part of the ensuing changeover beating the ground with her racket.“I was just really, really, really angry,” she said. “I had a lot of chances. She got really lucky on some shots. She just was playing great. I was a little disappointed in myself at that point.”In the second set, she took out her frustration on McHale, a 24-year-old from New Jersey who is ranked 65th. But McHale broke Williams in the second game of the third set, putting Williams in “warrior mode,” as Jim Courier called it on the BBC broadcast.With McHale serving at 2-0, 40-15, Williams reeled off 11 straight points to get back on serve and had three break-point chances to go up, 3-2. McHale, who had lost a three-set match to Williams in Miami this year, fought back with a gutsy hold.But Williams got a break four games later for a 5-4 lead, and with the path to the third round on her racket, she hit three aces to end the match.“There were times where I was down and out,” she said. “I just kept fighting. That’s what I know I can do best. I knew that I could count on that, rely on that.”She could even joke about the broken racket once the win was secured. She signed it and gave it to a fan after the match.“I look at it like I didn’t crack one at the French Open or Rome, so I was doing really good,” she said. “I don’t want to go too long without cracking a racket.”There was no great escape for Wawrinka, who was the highest-seeded man to lose, after seven seeded players were eliminated Thursday. Wawrinka, who won the 2014 Australian Open and the 2015 French Open, had never advanced past the quarterfinals at Wimbledon. He had added the former Wimbledon champion Richard Krajicek to his team to help him with his grass-court play.Wawrinka said he was “not playing completely free, not playing aggressive enough.”Del Potro remains a strong server, and his forehand, one of the great weapons in tennis, seems close to its old self, too. The wrist operations most affected his two-handed backhand, forcing him to use a one-handed slice most of the time.Del Potro had only one backhand winner in two matches. It was not a power blast from the past, but a two-hander that landed short and took an odd bounce.But the fluky winner gave del Potro match point. He converted it when Wawrinka hit a backhand shot wide, which served as an appropriate ending.Wawrinka’s one-handed backhand has been among the game’s best, but he had 21 unforced errors and only seven winners from that side in the match. He had 48 unforced errors over all and five double faults, including one that gave del Potro the only break of the second set.After the biggest victory of his comeback, del Potro spoke of a more distant future. He said he believed his best could come in the next year, not in the next round.“I know how far I am from my high level,” he said. “I’ve been working hard to be 100 percent on next season.”