https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/insider/a-sea-change-for-climate-coverage.html
A Sea Change for Climate Coverage - The New York Times
New York Times,Global Warming,Great Barrier Reef (Australia),Australia,Fairfield  Hannah,Cave  Damien,Gillis  Justin
March 16, 2017
1830
When considered individually, the main journalistic components of today’s article on the troubling state of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef are nothing new — a focus on the climate, an international dateline (“SYDNEY, Australia”), arresting visuals. Each is a mainstay of New York Times reporting.In this case, though, their combination in a single article quietly hints at a series of changes.The article resulted from a collaboration involving two recent projects at The Times: a newly established bureau in Sydney, and a newly formed team of journalists devoted entirely to climate issues — both of which played crucial roles in the article’s conception and execution.“The climate team was formed to handle breaking news stories exactly like this one, along with bigger enterprise pieces like last month’s story on the water crisis in Mexico City,” said Hannah Fairfield, who leads the new group from Washington.The team, which has been around for a little longer than a month, exists as its own desk in the newsroom (just like, say, the national desk or the sports desk) and consists of editors and reporters in New York and Washington. The goal, Ms. Fairfield says, is to produce visual, explanatory and investigative journalism at a time when, as today’s article indicates, the calamities caused by climate change seem to be intensifying.The team is also coming together at a time of uncertainty regarding the Trump administration’s environmental policies. Just yesterday, President Trump announced a rollback on fuel-economy standards set by President Barack Obama.Climate change has long been a critical area of coverage in The Times’s news report. And the establishment of a dedicated team for climate coverage is just the latest iteration in an evolving approach to reporting on the environment. (A similar team, called the environment desk, existed from 2009 to 2013, for example, but was disbanded to allow for a more interdisciplinary approach.)But Ms. Fairfield, who took on the role of climate editor after working for nearly 15 years on The Times’s graphics desk, aims to direct the coverage with an emphasis on visual journalism; she was the visual editor for several other projects that predate the formation of the climate team, including “Greenland Is Melting Away” and “Living in China’s Expanding Deserts.”In addition, a brigade of climate journalists, she said, will help to bring a greater degree of consistency and a centralized expertise to a subject area that is affecting more and more of the world’s population.Of course, the global ramifications of climate change mean that the climate team is a prime candidate for collaborations with The Times’s far-flung bureaus — which brings us back to the international dateline.The new bureau in Sydney, led by Damien Cave, an author of today’s article who also serves as the Australia bureau chief, was introduced as part of The Times’s $50 million plan to expand its international audience. (Other global initiatives include a Spanish-language version of The Times’s website and the expansion of its news operations in Canada.)Mr. Cave shipped off to his new post in early January, but not before brainstorming story ideas with members of the new climate team.“Before Damien went to Australia, we got together and looked at some opportunities to work together,” Ms. Fairfield said. “And we identified the demise of the Great Barrier Reef as a good potential story.”The plan was to produce a longer-term piece of enterprise journalism — until Mr. Cave and Justin Gillis, who reported on the story from New York, caught wind of a study (to be published today as the cover article in the journal Nature) that detailed the extent of the reef’s destruction.“They quickly put their heads together,” Ms. Fairfield said, “and wrote a big story off the news.”Many similar collaborations — enterprise and otherwise — are likely to follow, and that jibes with Ms. Fairfield’s vision for The Times’s climate coverage.“Climate change is by definition a global story,” she said. “And we want to be able to reach readers all over the world.”