https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/us/photos-and-video-show-protests-in-ferguson-turning-violent.html
Photos and Video Show Protests in Ferguson Turning Violent - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Brown  Michael (1996-2014),St Louis Post-Dispatch,Ferguson (Mo)
Aug. 10, 2015
7336
On Sunday afternoon, it looked as if the anniversary of the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager shot by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., was going to be remembered for forceful but peaceful protests.By the light of day, the protests, at times, took on an almost parade-like atmosphere. A man cradled a child as he marched.An elderly woman looked on as a marching band passed by. Shouts of “Hands up, don’t shoot!” and “You can’t stop the revolution” could be heard through the music and the car horns.There was also silence.A crowd gathered to mark the anniversary of Mr. Brown’s killing and stayed quiet for four and a half minutes, to recall the four and a half hours that his body was left on the street after he was shot and killed by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, who was not indicted in the killing.But, as it did for months after Mr. Brown was killed, nightfall in Ferguson brought with it a more chaotic mood. Tweets and video captured over the course of the evening showed how quickly the atmosphere turned violent.A colleague said that Paul Hampel, a reporter for The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, was assaulted and robbed after documenting looting attempts by the crowd. “We’re ready for war,” protesters chanted soon before Mr. Hampel snapped a picture of a hair salon with broken windows.Gunfire began to ring out, the police said, as rival groups began shooting at each other. The St. Louis County Police said that Trevion Hopson, a 17-year-old, was arrested after firing on a protest crowd on West Florissant Avenue, the center of the protests, around midnight. The police said that Mr. Hopson was being held and a 22-year-old man was found injured with a gunshot wound to his arm.Nearby, a man was shot and critically injured by police after he opened fire on officers in an unmarked vehicle, Jon Belmar, St. Louis County’s police chief, said at a news conference. The man, Tyrone Harris, 18, was charged with four counts of assault on law enforcement, prosecutors said. A stolen gun was recovered, and four officers were placed on administrative leave after the shooting, the police said.In video filmed of the incident, a man can be heard pleading for the police to help a bloodied man who is on the ground.“Please get him some help,” a man was heard saying. “He’s bleeding out, man.”The police tweeted pictures of the vehicles they said were damaged during the incident.The police said the crowd of people who were looting and firing guns were not affiliated with those who were marching peacefully during the day.“There is a small group of people out there that are intent on making sure that peace doesn’t prevail,” Chief Belmar told reporters on Monday morning. “There are a lot of emotions. I get it. But we can’t sustain this as we move forward.”Around 3 a.m., protesters reported that the police were using tear gas to disperse the crowd.Andre Johnson, Ferguson’s interim police chief, told the news media that the police were asking for patience and were trying to work with the community. That interview was interrupted by the sound of gunfire and the scramble of protesters.The front page of Monday’s St. Louis Post-Dispatch perhaps told the starkest story. An early edition of the newspaper was emblazoned with the headline “In This Together,” quoting Police Chief Belmar saying of the crowd and the police, “Everybody understands we’re in this together.”By the end of the evening, the story was very different.