https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/sports/soccer/us-squanders-lead-but-edges-martinique-in-gold-cup.html
U.S. Squanders Lead but Edges Martinique in Gold Cup - The New York Times
Soccer,Martinique,United States Men's National Soccer Team,Bicycles and Bicycling,Tour de France (Bicycle Race),Froome  Christopher,Kittel  Marcel,Basketball,National Basketball Assn,Boxing,McGregor  Conor (1988- ),Mayweather  Floyd Jr,Swimming,Lochte  Ryan,Golf,Johnson  Trish,Football,Dallas Cowboys,New York Yankees
July 13, 2017
3727
Jordan Morris’s second goal of the game broke a tie in the 76th minute, and the United States edged tiny Martinique, 3-2, on Wednesday night in the Concacaf Gold Cup in Tampa, Fla., after wasting a two-goal lead against a team that is not even a member of FIFA.Failing to score in the first half, the United States built a 2-0 lead on goals by Omar Gonzalez in the 53rd minute and Morris in the 64th.But Martinique tied the score on goals by Kevin Parsemain, the first a long-range shot that went past goalkeeper Brad Guzan on a bounce and the second a pass that hit Parsemain and went in on the deflection.The United States, which opened with a 1-1 tie against Panama over the weekend, will complete group play against Nicaragua on Saturday in Cleveland. In an earlier game in Tampa on Wednesday, Panama defeated Nicaragua, 2-1.DISGRACED EXECUTIVE DIES Chuck Blazer, the disgraced American soccer executive whose admissions of corruption set off a global scandal that ultimately toppled Sepp Blatter, FIFA’s longtime president, has died. He was 72.Blazer’s death was announced by his lawyers, Eric Corngold and Mary Mulligan. At a November 2013 court hearing during which Blazer entered guilty pleas to federal charges, he said he had rectal cancer, diabetes and coronary artery disease.Ahead of two grueling days filled with some punishing ascents, the main contenders in the Tour de France were hoping Wednesday would be a nice, relaxed day on the bike. It was not.Instead of what riders call a “transition” day, with a comfortable run to the gateway to the Pyrenees, Stage 11 proved to be brutal for some of the top riders as a series of crashes left them nursing cuts and bruises.When crosswinds made riders nervous toward the end of the 126-mile stage, from Eymet to Pau, the stress became palpable and led to several crashes at the back of the peloton.The German sprinter Marcel Kittel steered clear of trouble and claimed the stage in a sprint finish, taking his tally to five stage victories.The Frenchman Romain Bardet, who is third over all behind Chris Froome, fell and slightly hurt his knee, but he was able to continue after changing bikes and did not lose any time.The two-time champion Alberto Contador went down twice, and Fabio Aru, who is second, lost one of his Astana teammates, Dario Cataldo, who retired with a broken wrist after a crash in the feed zone midway through the stage.Froome kept his overall lead ahead of the big battle in the Pyrenees. He has an 18-second lead over Aru, with Bardet 51 seconds off the pace.The N.B.A. is trying to make games go a little more quickly. The league’s Board of Governors unanimously approved changes that could eliminate four timeouts a game, help speed the final minutes of games and emphasize a timely resumption of play after halftime. The changes go into effect for this coming season.Teams will be limited to two timeouts in the final three minutes of a game, instead of having up to three. All four quarters will have two mandatory timeouts, after the seven- and three-minute marks. In addition, delay-of-game penalties will be issued if teams are not ready to play immediately when halftime ends.The Ultimate Fighting Championship star Conor McGregor played to a partisan Toronto audience and made fun of Floyd Mayweather Jr.’s tax problems at the second stop of their four-city promotional tour. They are scheduled to meet in an exhibition boxing match Aug. 26 in Las Vegas.McGregor, one of the biggest stars in mixed martial arts, was clearly the fan favorite, with the crowd chanting at Mayweather: “Pay your taxes! Pay your taxes!”The I.R.S. still has Mayweather on the hook for $7.2 million in taxes from 2010, according to records that show a lien as unresolved. That is on top of the $22.2 million that Mayweather, an undefeated boxer nicknamed Money, owes in 2015 taxes for the year he earned $200 million to fight Manny Pacquiao.Ryan Lochte is returning to U.S.A. Swimming competition this week for the first time since a 10-month suspension for his behavior at last year’s Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Lochte will compete at the L.A. Invitational, which begins Thursday on the Southern California campus, where he trains with Trojan Swim Club.Lochte, a six-time Olympic gold medalist, is entered in the 50- and 100-meter freestyles and the 200 individual medley. He is the top seed for the 100 free and the I.M. with times of 48.16 seconds and 1 minute 54 seconds.Lochte was ineligible to compete at the recent United States nationals, which kept him from qualifying for the world championships beginning July 23 in Hungary.Trish Johnson completed a wire-to-wire victory in the Senior L.P.G.A. Championship, closing with a one-over-par 73 to beat Michelle Redman by three strokes in the inaugural event in French Lick, Ind.Johnson, a 51-year-old Englishwoman, finished at four-under 212 on French Lick Resort’s Pete Dye Course and earned $90,000.The Dallas Cowboys are worth $4.2 billion, making them the most valuable sports franchise for the second straight year, according to Forbes. In its annual rankings, Forbes placed the Yankees second — up from fourth a year ago — with a value of $3.7 billion.Next were three soccer clubs: Manchester United ($3.69 billion), Barcelona ($3.64 billion) and Real Madrid ($3.58 billion). The rest of the top 10 included the New England Patriots ($3.4 billion), the Knicks ($3.3 billion), the Giants ($3.1 billion), the San Francisco 49ers ($3 billion) and the Los Angeles Lakers ($3 billion).