https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/16/sports/golf/hootie-johnson-dies-augusta-national-golf-club.html
Hootie Johnson, Who Opposed Letting Women Into Augusta National, Dies at 86 - The New York Times
Johnson  Hootie,Augusta National Golf Club,Women and Girls,Golf,Masters Golf Tournament,Discrimination,Deaths (Obituaries)
July 16, 2017
1976
Hootie Johnson, who forcefully resisted efforts to admit women as members of Augusta National Golf Club, home of the Masters tournament, died on Friday in Columbia, S.C. He was 86.His daughter Jennifer Todd said the cause was congestive heart failure.Mr. Johnson’s clash with a women’s rights activist named Martha Burk in the spring and summer of 2002 drew national attention. And it brought a renewed focus to the issue of how social discrimination against women could affect their professional ambitions, because Augusta National, in Georgia, had many corporate leaders among its members.Mr. Johnson, a prominent South Carolina banker, took the club’s reins as chairman in 1998, succeeding Jack Stephens, an Arkansas financier, in the post first held by Clifford Roberts, a founder of the club and the Masters in the early 1930s with the famed golfer Bobby Jones.The Masters, the only men’s golf major played on the same course every year, is steeped in tradition, exemplified by its awarding of a green jacket to the winner. It was an early spring staple of national television sports coverage in Mr. Johnson’s time and remains so.All seemed serene at Augusta National until June 2002, when Mr. Johnson received a letter from Ms. Burk, who was the chairwoman of the National Council of Women’s Organizations, a coalition of more than 160 groups.“We know that Augusta National and the sponsors of the Masters do not want to be viewed as entities that tolerate discrimination against any group, including women,” the letter said. “We urge you to review your policies and practices in this regard, and open your membership to women now, so that this is not an issue when the tournament is staged next year.”Mr. Johnson considered Augusta National to be a private entity that was free to choose its members as it wished, although the Masters itself was a public event. He sent copies of Ms. Burk’s letter and his response to numerous news media outlets to ensure that his position was clear.He told Ms. Burk that he assumed that she envisioned a campaign that “would attempt to depict the members of our club as insensitive bigots and coerce the sponsors of the Masters to disassociate themselves under threat — real or implied — of boycotts and other economic pressures.”“There may well come a day when women will be invited to join our membership,” he continued, “but that timetable will be ours and not at the point of a bayonet.”Augusta National dropped its television sponsors for the 2003 and 2004 Masters, fearing that its corporate backers might experience boycotts from women’s groups. As a result, the tournament was shown on TV without commercials.During the 2003 tournament, Ms. Burk led a demonstration near the course that drew wide coverage. But only about 40 protesters were on hand.“This is symbolic of all the ways women are left out,” Ms. Burk told The New York Times. “It legitimizes sex discrimination when American C.E.O.s are engaging in it with impunity.”But the Augusta issue faded after that, and when Mr. Johnson retired as chairman of the club in 2006, it still had no female members.Mr. Johnson was often portrayed as an unreconstructed southerner, but he offered opportunities for women and blacks at his banks, pushed for integration of higher education in South Carolina and supported black candidates for public office.As the chairman of Augusta National, he toughened the Masters course and lengthened it, enhanced official world rankings as a determining factor in qualifying for the tournament and expanded TV coverage of the event.William Woodward Johnson was born in Augusta, Ga., on Feb. 16, 1931, one of three children of Dewey Johnson and the former Mabel Woodward.When he was 5, a friend called him Hootie.“I had an older brother and sister, and they thought it was cute, so it stuck,” Mr. Johnson told The Augusta Chronicle in 1999. “But my mother called me William till I was 21. Then she started calling me Hootie.”By age 8, he was golfing with his father, a banker, at a country club he belonged to near Augusta National. Soon afterward, his father bought a small bank in Greenwood, S.C., and moved the family there.Hootie was a fullback on the University of South Carolina football team and graduated with a business degree.After his father’s death in 1961, Mr. Johnson took over his banking interests and became president of Bankers Trust of South Carolina. Its successor bank was later merged into Bank of America, and he became chairman of the executive committee of its board. He joined Augusta National in 1968.In addition to his daughter Jennifer, Mr. Johnson is survived by his wife, the former Pierrine Baker; his daughters Marie Fairey, Sally Wrenn and Jane Breeden; and many grandchildren and great-grandchildren.Augusta National admitted its first women as members in 2012, simultaneously inducting Condoleezza Rice, who was national security adviser and secretary of state in President George W. Bush’s administration, and Darla Moore, a financier and Mr. Johnson’s fellow South Carolinian, whom he sponsored for membership.Mr. Johnson was quoted by The Chronicle saying, “This is wonderful news for Augusta National Golf Club, and I could not be more pleased.”After his death, however, Ms. Burk told The Associated Press: “I think history will remember him as the Lester Maddox of golf,” referring to the segregationist governor of Georgia who refused to serve blacks in his restaurant.