http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/14/international/asia/14australia.html
Australian Police Move to Control Ethnic Unrest - The New York Times
AUSTRALIA,VIOLENCE,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS
Dec. 14, 2005
9829
SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 13 - The authorities moved to crack down on rioters Tuesday after two days of ethnic unrest in Sydney's beachside suburbs, with people of Middle Eastern descent apparently being assaulted by whites in two other cities as well, the police said.The police stopped and searched dozens of cars in the Sydney suburb of Cronulla -- where an attack on Sunday by 5,000 white youths against people they believed were of Lebanese descent set off two nights of riots. But no arrests were reported Tuesday and an uneasy calm returned to Sydney.The rioting on Sunday began on Cronulla Beach, where the youths -- rallied by neo-Nazi groups and cellphone text messages -- attacked people believed to be of Arab or Middle Eastern descent after rumors spread that Lebanese youths had assaulted two lifeguards earlier this month. The police fought back with riot sticks and pepper spray.Carloads of young Arab men then struck back in several Sydney suburbs on Sunday and Monday nights, fighting with police and smashing the windows of stores, homes and parked cars. Nearly 40 people were injured and 27 arrested in the disturbances, the police said.Ethnic tensions in Australia have been rising in recent years, with anti-Muslim sentiment fueled by the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United States and the deadly bombings on the Indonesian island of Bali that killed 202 people, including 88 Australians, in October 2002.They were also heightened by a gang-rape case in 2002 in which prosecutors said members of a Lebanese gang hurled abuse at their rape victims, all of whom were of European background. The ringleader, Bilal Skaf, was sentenced to 55 years, an unusually severe sentence for the country.In response to the violence, lawmakers in Sydney's state, New South Wales, will meet Thursday to pass laws giving officers tough new powers to crack down on rioters, including ordering bars to shut and erecting roadblocks to effectively seal off suburbs, the state premier, Morris Iemma, announced.Elsewhere, Australian Broadcasting Corporation radio reported Tuesday that a family of Middle Eastern origin was attacked Monday night in the western city of Perth by a group of 11 white men, who threw eggs and shouted abuses.Superintendent Shayne Maines of the Perth police said the authorities could not rule out a link between the attack and the violence in Sydney. "There was some suggestion they did make ethnically related comments," the superintendent said.In Adelaide, a taxi driver of Lebanese origin, Hossein Kazemi, was injured Tuesday when he was punched by a passenger. The police said there had been an argument over the fare, but the victim had also been taunted about the riots because he was of Lebanese descent.And on the Gold Coast in Queensland state, text messages singling out ethnic groups have called for people to start "cracking skulls," The Australian Associated Press reported.Prime Minister John Howard denounced the violence and called for calm. "The incidents were appalling," Mr. Howard said in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he was attending a regional summit meeting.