https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/sports/basketball/gordon-hayward-signs-boston-celtics.html
Gordon Hayward Says He Will Join the Boston Celtics - The New York Times
Basketball,Free Agents (Sports),Boston Celtics,Cleveland Cavaliers,Utah Jazz,Hayward  Gordon,Stevens  Brad (1976- )
July 4, 2017
9249
Gordon Hayward, one of the top free agents in the N.B.A., decided to mix things up. With stars congregating in the Western Conference, Hayward opted, eventually, to move east.Hayward, an All-Star forward who spent the first seven seasons of his career with the Utah Jazz, announced Tuesday on the website The Players’ Tribune  that he would join the Boston Celtics. In Boston, Hayward will reunite with Coach Brad Stevens, his collegiate coach at Butler.Hayward, 27, captivated much of the league’s attention as he weighed his decision. An unrestricted free agent, he visited with officials from the Miami Heat, the Celtics and the Jazz in recent days. On Tuesday afternoon, a reporter from ESPN, citing unnamed sources, said on Twitter that Hayward had agreed to sign with the Celtics. Mark Bartelstein, Hayward’s agent with Priority Sports, quickly disputed that report, telling several news media outlets that Hayward had not made a decision.About five hours later, Hayward confirmed that he did, in fact, intend to sign with the Celtics.In his piece for The Players’ Tribune, Hayward noted the influence and advice of Stevens as he decided whether to leave Butler after his sophomore year.“And that unfinished business we had together, back in 2010, when I left Butler for the N.B.A.,” Hayward wrote, “as far as I’m concerned, all of these years later, we still have it: And that’s to win a championship.”In the end, the Celtics emerged as an even greater threat to the Cleveland Cavaliers, winners of the past three Eastern Conference championships. Last season, after finishing with the fourth-best record in the league, the Celtics lost to the Cavaliers in the conference finals. But the Celtics were without Isaiah Thomas, their All-Star point guard, for the final three games of the series because of an injury, and in his absence his teammates were little match for LeBron James’s Cavaliers.Boston has since bolstered its rotation — even after missing out on a potential deal for Paul George, whom the Indiana Pacers shipped to the Oklahoma City Thunder last week. In addition to acquiring Hayward, the Celtics selected Jayson Tatum, a 19-year-old forward from Duke, with the third overall pick in last month’s draft.Hayward, whom the Jazz selected with the ninth overall pick in the 2010 draft, has grown into one of the league’s most dynamic players, and his steady development has mirrored the Jazz’s rise to respectability in the West, no easy feat given the competition.As a first-year player, Hayward averaged 5.4 points in 16.9 minutes a game, mostly off the bench, as the Jazz finished out of playoff contention with a 39-43 record.Last season, Hayward averaged a career-high 21.9 points a game and made his first All-Star team as the Jazz went 51-31, finishing tied for the fourth-best record in the West. Their season ended against the Golden State Warriors, who swept them in the conference semifinals on their way to winning the N.B.A. championship.With his decision to bolt for Boston, Hayward left many fans in Utah despondent. But he has a long relationship with Stevens, who coached Hayward for two seasons at Butler, where they were enormously successful together. As a sophomore, Hayward led the Bulldogs to the N.C.A.A. championship game, where they lost to Duke.In other moves around the league, Zach Randolph, a longtime staple with the Memphis Grizzlies, and George Hill, a point guard who at one time was believed to be targeted by the Knicks, agreed to new deals with the Sacramento Kings, according to multiple reports. The Kings had money to burn, while the Knicks do not.Last year, the most significant moment of the N.B.A.’s free-agency period also occurred July 4: Kevin Durant’s announcement, also via The Players’ Tribune, that he was leaving Oklahoma City to sign with the Warriors. It was a seismic moment for the league — and for Golden State, which was grateful to have Durant on its side. Last month, with Durant leading the way, the Warriors capped a dominating postseason run to win their second championship in three seasons.No one expects Hayward to make that much of an impact. But in a soft conference, with few other legitimate contenders, the Celtics are making it known that they want to challenge the Cavaliers — and perhaps earn a shot at the West’s superteam, assuming the Warriors continue with their stretch of dominance.For the Celtics, Hayward makes that goal more realistic than ever.