https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/30/world/asia/myanmar-deflects-un-criticism-over-rohingya.html
Asian States Say They’ll Focus on Causes of Migrant Crisis - The New York Times
Myanmar,Bangladesh,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Indonesia,Rohingya (Ethnic Group),United Nations
May 29, 2015
2889
BANGKOK —  A meeting held here on Friday to address the continuing exodus of migrants and refugees from Myanmar and Bangladesh ended with a commitment by the participants to target the root causes of the crisis and an ambitious plan of assistance for the impoverished and strife-torn native areas of would-be migrants.Without mentioning the specific areas or the people who would be helped, delegates from more than 17 governments agreed to create job incentives, provide skills training and enhance “a sense of security and belonging.”So far this year, an estimated 25,000 people have left Bangladesh and Myanmar on boats — double the number last year — and several hundred are believed to have died at sea. The largest number fleeing are Rohingya, members of a stateless and persecuted Muslim group living both in Myanmar and Bangladesh.A statement issued after the one-day meeting by its host, Thailand, called for “full respect for human rights and adequate access of people to basic rights and services such as housing, education and health care.”The deputy United States secretary of state, Antony J. Blinken, who visited Myanmar this month and discussed the migrant crisis with officials there, said later on Friday that the very fact that the meeting had occurred was an “important step forward.”“There is something to be hopeful for in the meeting today and in the commitment to greater cooperation,” he said in a Skype interview from Washington. But he also warned that a deeply entrenched resentment of the Rohingya within Myanmar would need to be overcome. “Over all, there is a reluctance to accept the legitimacy of their presence,” he said.There appeared other reasons to be skeptical of the meeting’s list of recommendations. U Zaw Htay, a deputy director general of the office of the president of Myanmar, said his country could “accept the statement in a general sense.” But he called it a proposal.“Our delegation will report back to us, and then we will decide on the implementation of the proposal,” he said by telephone from Naypyidaw, the capital of Myanmar.Underlining the difficulties of dealing with the migrant crisis, Myanmar reported on Friday that a boat carrying 727 people, including 45 children, had been stopped by the country’s naval forces that morning in waters off Myanmar and brought to a naval base. Norachit Sinhaseni, the permanent secretary of Thailand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, described efforts to develop areas the Rohingya are fleeing as long-term goals.“If you expect one meeting to resolve it, I think you are expecting a miracle,” he said. “And I am not one who believes in miracles.”The meeting’s recommendations also seemed at odds with some of the day’s proceedings, including Myanmar’s forceful rejection of assertions by the United Nations that the root cause of the migration crisis was the country’s treatment of the Rohingya.The head of Myanmar’s delegation said his government should not be singled out for the refugee crisis, that its policies toward the Rohingya were a “domestic jurisdiction” and that outsiders were misinformed about what was motivating the Rohingya to leave.U Htin Lynn, Myanmar’s representative at the meeting, said the United Nations was wrong in its assessment of the problem. “They need to be more informed,” he said. “This issue of illegal immigration of boat people, you cannot single out my country.”Mr. Htin Lynn was responding to opening comments to the delegates by Volker Türk, a representative from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Mr. Türk said Myanmar should remove restrictions on the movement of the Rohingya within Myanmar and offer “basic freedoms” to stabilize their lives.More than 100,000 Rohingya in Myanmar live in camps, having been chased from their homes by mobs over the past three years. Mr. Türk said the government should facilitate the return of the Rohingya to their homes.“Granting of citizenship is the ultimate goal,” he said. “Recognizing that Myanmar is their own country is urgently required.”The Rohingya in Myanmar number more than one million and are widely reviled in the country, where anti-Muslim feelings run strong among the majority Buddhist population. The resentment toward the Rohingya appears to be grounded in the notion that they came during colonial times or more recently and that they do not belong.The preferred path of the Rohingya and of Bangladeshi migrants has been to board boats in the Indian Ocean and head to Malaysia, where they seek jobs or political asylum, and often both. A delegate from Malaysia at the conference said that his country was currently home to 152,830 registered asylum seekers and refugees, of whom 149,920 were from Myanmar.Shahidul Haque, the foreign secretary of Bangladesh, said he estimated that about 30 percent of those who landed in Malaysia and Indonesia were from Bangladesh. Mr. Haque urged the diplomats and government officials gathered at a luxury hotel to help eliminate the suffering of the migrants and “uphold their dignity.”“We are talking about human beings who are victims or potential victims,” he said. “They deserve our compassion.”