https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/sports/basketball/nba-drafts-come-and-go-but-carmelo-anthony-always-remains.html
N.B.A. Drafts Come and Go, but Carmelo Anthony Always Remains - The New York Times
Basketball,Draft and Recruitment (Sports),Sacramento Kings,Divac  Vlade,Fox  De'Aaron,Cousins  DeMarcus,New York Knicks,Jackson  Phil (1945- ),Anthony  Carmelo
June 23, 2017
9254
Everyone has a favorite prodigy on N.B.A. draft night, an evaluative insight to share in 140 characters or more.On Thursday night, many praised the boldness of the Philadelphia 76ers for trading up to take Markelle Fultz, who played at Washington, with the first pick over all. Others insisted that Lonzo Ball, who played at U.C.L.A. and went second, to the Los Angeles Lakers, would emerge as the class of 2017’s best player, the next Jason Kidd.There even were claims that the Knicks had landed their own sleeper in point guard Frank Ntilikina, an 18-year-old Frenchman. But here is another intuitive tout, inspired by De’Aaron Fox as he made an introductory case for a future as illuminating as his winning personality.Selected with the fifth pick, by the Sacramento Kings, Fox was asked in the interview room at Barclays Center about his new team’s next pick in the first round, at No. 10. Might it be his recent Kentucky backcourt mate, Malik Monk?“If they take him, I’d be happy playing with Malik again,” he said, with a hopeful smile.At that moment, Fox, 19, flashed his point guard vision, his awareness of the whirl around him. His eyes shifted — as if spotting a teammate alone at the rim — to a television screen in the back of the room.“I think they’re about to pick now,” he said.Promptly informed that the Kings had traded the 10th pick to Portland, with Monk soon to be taken by the Charlotte Hornets with the 11th pick, Fox responded deftly to the speed of the pro game. He left Monk behind and addressed what a reporter called a harder question, the state of the moribund and leaderless Kings.“I know it’s going to be tough to change a team, but for me, I wanted to come in and be able to affect the game right away,” he said. “A lot of people say I could be a franchise changer, and that’s what I really want to be.”How does a franchise long consigned to a treadmill of despair step away and begin to gain competitive traction? By being bold and unafraid to sever ties with unfulfilled potential and broken promises, the way Vlade Divac finally resisted the estimable talent of his tempestuous center, DeMarcus Cousins.Not exactly celebrated for his deal-making acumen as the Kings’ vice president for basketball operations and general manager, Divac shipped Cousins to the New Orleans Pelicans in February. And he did so just days after Cousins stated with sincerity his preference for remaining in the city he had starred in for seven technical-foul-filled seasons.Divac didn’t get great value in return, an uninspiring package of draft picks and players, but at least he made the sage determination that the Kings needed a divorce from Cousins, who is a bigger version of Carmelo Anthony. In other words, a scoring machine, but a leading man who drains the enthusiasm from others rather than enhancing it.After much deliberation, Divac decided not to take the easy way out. He didn’t hand over the five-year, $219 million extension Cousins was eligible for, and he certainly never considered going the full Phil Jackson and attaching a no-trade clause to it.Instead, Divac jettisoned Cousins, getting rid of one headliner from Coach John Calipari’s one-and-done fellowship program at Kentucky, and taking a chance on another, Fox, who was one of four point guards taken in the top eight picks Thursday night, including Ntilikina by the Knicks.“When a team is not doing too well, they probably didn’t have the leadership they wanted,” said Fox, who many have compared to yet another Kentucky product, the Washington Wizards’ speedy John Wall.Fox meant leadership on the court, an indictment of Cousins, but losing franchises typically suffer from poor guidance from the top down. Take the Knicks, whose draft-night narrative included an appearance at Manhattan’s City Winery by the team’s eternally besieged owner, James L. Dolan, who was fronting his hobby-inspired blues band.Dolan’s most recognized song to date is one called “Fix the Knicks,” which we know he has failed to do in more than a decade and a half as the Madison Square Garden strongman. Having surrendered the operating reins in 2014 to Jackson, while making a vow of noninterference his mantra, Dolan’s next album should be titled “Ask Phil.”After a season of boycotting New York reporters, Jackson has resurfaced of late, but there is one question he hasn’t addressed because there really is no sane explanation for why he gave Anthony a no-trade clause when he re-signed him to a five-year deal in the first major decision of his Knicks presidency.Re-upping Anthony was not a mistake. Handing him control of his destiny, along with the franchise’s, was a haunting blunder. Much of what ails the team — including Jackson’s silly feud with Kristaps Porzingis, the team’s most desirable commodity — is related to the reputation-tarnishing behavioral depths Jackson has sunk to in trying to persuade Anthony to go.Obscured in the stunning news this week that Jackson was fielding trade offers for Porzingis, which led nowhere, at least for now, was his admission in an interview Wednesday night on MSG Network that Anthony had again indicated his preference for staying. It could be a bluff, with Anthony daring Jackson to buy out his contract so he can sign elsewhere — say, Cleveland, with the Cavaliers not having to surrender an asset.Or perhaps Anthony wishes to remain in New York for personal reasons. It’s entirely his call because that’s what the contract Jackson offered grants him. Don’t blame Anthony if a full-blown rebuild cannot blossom for as long as he stays. And the more Jackson agitates for him to leave, the more he will alienate Porzingis — along with prospective free agents — for the perceived mistreatment of Anthony, who is popular with his peers.Jackson desires an Etch A Sketch clearance of his team’s culture, the kind now afforded Divac, who will hand the ball to Fox, a southpaw who is 6-foot-4 with a seven-foot wingspan. As Calipari said, he is “a young man with a buzz about him.”Who knows how these things work out? Last year’s fifth pick, by Minnesota, was Kris Dunn, a point guard out of Providence College, who hardly played last season and was traded Thursday night to Chicago in a deal that sent Jimmy Butler to the rising Minnesota Timberwolves.These decisions are never easy. Guesswork is involved. Fingers are crossed. Even worse, in the case of Anthony, Jackson’s hands are tied. He may never live down his first mistake, that no-trade clause, the original sin.