https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/10/opinion/europes-sluggish-response-to-vw.html
Europe’s Sluggish Response to VW - The New York Times
Fuel Emissions (Transportation),Automobiles,Volkswagen AG
March 10, 2017
6767
Volkswagen’s diesel emissions fraud, exposed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in 2015, is finally rocking Europe, where cozy relations between government regulators and industry have allowed VW — and other diesel car manufacturers — to pollute with impunity for too long.Between 2008 and 2015, 11 million VW cars worldwide were equipped with software that lowered emissions of dangerous nitrogen oxides to legal limits during testing and then allowed them to return to levels up to 40 times greater. After lying and obfuscating about their “clean diesel” cars, VW finally pleaded guilty in January to criminal charges in the United States and agreed to pay $4.3 billion in fines. The cost to VW for its fraud in the United States so far is some $25 billion, including fines, customer claims and buybacks. In addition, six VW executives face criminal charges. One, Oliver Schmidt, was arrested in Florida in January and will be tried in April.The others are believed to be in Germany, which does not normally extradite citizens. But Germany is conducting its own investigation. On Wednesday, Chancellor Angela Merkel testified before a parliamentary committee on when, and how much, she knew about VW’s fraud. She said she “learned of the allegations against VW from the media” only after the E.P.A. went public. And she hedged on VW’s culpability, saying: “I explicitly reject describing this incident as a gigantic scandal.” She also emphasized that automakers provide jobs.That is the weakest argument in VW’s favor. The fact is, pollution costs lives and money. A study published last week by scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology concluded that if nothing is done to bring the current fleet of VW diesel passenger vehicles in Germany into compliance with European standards, 1,200 people will die prematurely, costing the economy nearly 2 billion euros ($2.1 billion). Yet VW just sticks to its talking point that, technically, its cheating isn’t illegal in Europe, and it has refused to compensate European customers.The American case has goaded the European Commission to act. In January, it tightened rules to “ensure car manufacturers comply strictly with all E.U. safety, environmental and production requirements.” This week, the E.U. justice commissioner, Vera Jourova, met with national European consumer protection agencies to coordinate holding fraudulent diesel polluters to account. On Monday, Luxembourg opened a criminal investigation into VW’s cheating. Britain is considering opening one.It is up to Ms. Merkel’s government to compel VW to move swiftly to clean up its cars. It is no use having standards that save lives if politicians won’t force companies to respect them.