http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/16/world/china-s-new-premier-fast-riser-who-tamed-economy-in-chaos.html
China's New Premier: Fast Riser Who Tamed Economy in Chaos - The New York Times
CHINA,TAIWAN,ZHU RONGJI,SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS,CABINETS AND SUB-CABINETS,INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,LABOR,ENVIRONMENT,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS,BANKS AND BANKING
March 16, 1998
7493
Correction AppendedZhu Rongji, who is expected to be chosen as Prime Minister of China on Tuesday, is a career Communist planner whose meteoric rise to power has been driven largely by the sheer force of his achievements.In the last five years, as chief of economic policy, Mr. Zhu, 69, has steered the economy out of runaway inflation without stifling its growth, a record that would do the International Monetary Fund proud.Well before the Asian financial crisis hit last year, Mr. Zhu (whose name is pronounced Joo Rong-JI) had applied bitter medicine to China, including denying loans to officials' pet projects.By this year the annual rate of inflation had dropped to just 1 percent, from 24 percent in 1993. Mr. Zhu won the respect of other Chinese leaders and superlatives from Western business executives.He will become head of China's Cabinet at a time when the world's most populous country is emerging as an economic and political heavyweight. He will serve under the President and Communist Party chief, Jiang Zemin, who remains No. 1 in the ruling circle.By any measure, Mr. Zhu will face daunting tasks: remaking an economy still rooted in thousands of money-losing companies owned by the Government, salvaging banks that by outside standards are insolvent, reversing the calamitous pollution of air and water, finding work for tens of millions who once thought they had jobs for life and building a new system of social welfare from scratch -- just for starters.As he takes on new economic and social issues, Mr. Zhu will also, for the first time, have direct responsibility for foreign policy questions like volatile relations with Taiwan and for China's stand on human rights issues, which has been much criticized in the West.Perhaps the ultimate issue that will face Mr. Zhu in his five-year term is how the Communist Party can maintain control over a society that is becoming more complex and pluralistic by the day. Trained as an engineer and state planner, Mr. Zhu has so far betrayed no strong interest in democracy, only in a more efficient economy and party.''I see him as a classic Leninist apparatchik,'' said David Shambaugh, an expert on Chinese politics at George Washington University. ''But it is true that he is also a no-nonsense, tough bureaucrat who is very decisive.''The two sides of Mr. Zhu were shown during a speech he gave in 1995 to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Impressing the gathered business and financial leaders by speaking in English, he told them to ''call me'' if they had any problems in China. But when asked for a phone number, he became flustered and said, ''That is a state secret,'' recalled a person who attended the meeting.In a system that rewards conformity, where leaders typically retreat behind dogmatic cant, Mr. Zhu is famous for his frank talk, his sometimes brutal impatience with officials and his results-oriented manner.That approach has gained him the admiration of ordinary Chinese people, as well as the begrudging regard of the sprawling bureaucracy he will head. Those who work under him refer to him as ''the Boss.''Reforms Gain Him Foes in the BureaucracyBut with his determined pursuit of economic cutbacks, and now his goal of slashing the bureaucracy, he has gained many enemies around the country, too, perhaps leaving him vulnerable should his magic touch with the economy fail him.Mr. Zhu is replacing Li Peng, who is moving to another senior position after serving the two five-year terms as Prime Minister allowed by China's Constitution. Chinese people often compare Mr. Zhu favorably with Mr. Li, who is widely disliked for his central role in the violent suppression of the 1989 student-led democracy movement.Mr. Zhu has angrily rejected the label, sometimes applied to him by Western admirers, of ''China's Gorbachev.'' The man who presided over the dismantling of the Soviet Union is officially loathed here. Mr. Zhu's own views on broadening participation in political decision-making have remained private, but he has not been known to question the primacy of the Communist Party.''The touchstone for a Chinese leader is how much chaos is being created,'' a Western diplomat said. ''If there is the threat of serious social disturbance, I don't doubt for a moment that he'll use the necessary force to stop it.''Mr. Zhu, who spent long years as a political outcast, has scaled the heights of power with astonishing speed, in large part because he was sponsored by Deng Xiaoping, another pragmatist, who also suffered under Mao.Humble Birth, Technical EducationMr. Zhu was born in humble circumstances in Changsha, Hunan Province, on Oct. 1, 1928. His father died before his birth, and his mother died while he was still a small boy, leaving him to be raised by relatives.He studied electrical engineering at Qinghua University in Beijing, China's M.I.T. There he was chairman of the student union and in 1949, the year the People's Republic was founded, he joined the Communist Party.There, too, he met his wife, Lao An, now said in an official biography to be on the board of directors of an engineering company. The couple has two daughters, according to the biography, but little is known publicly about the family.Mr. Zhu worked as an industrial planner in China's northeast, then in the State Planning Commission in Beijing. But he met disaster in 1956, when he took at face value Mao's invitation to ''let a hundred flowers bloom'' -- that is, criticize party policy. By the next year labeled a rightist, he was ousted from the party and relegated to low-level jobs. Later, during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, he was forced to spend years working on farms.Deng's climb back to power in the late 1970's allowed Mr. Zhu's rehabilitation, too, after 20 years in the political doldrums. In 1982, the Minister of Petroleum Industry, Kang Shien, gave him a senior position and brought him to the attention of Deng, who put him on the fast track.Mr. Zhu gained national notice in 1988 when he was named Mayor of Shanghai, China's largest city and the vibrant rival of Beijing. There, too, began a complex relationship with Jiang Zemin, who as the city's Communist Party chief was his superior.His first project in Shanghai was an anti-corruption drive, immediately winning him popularity. He instructed the city's anti-corruption body to aim its sights on 506 director-level bureaucrats. If officials at that middle level remain upright, Mr. Zhu said, they will see that the people below them do so as well.Today, Shanghai officials who worked with Mr. Zhu recall being amazed by how relentlessly he drove those working with him, and how he took to scolding lackluster officials in a most un-Chinese manner -- in public.As Shanghai's Mayor, Mr. Zhu went out of his way to woo foreign investors and took the unusual step of setting up a business advisory council of foreign executives. Playing host to high-powered members like Maurice Greenberg, chairman of the insurance giant AIG; John Reed, chairman of Citicorp, and John F. Smith, chairman of General Motors, once a year not only exposed them to Shanghai, it also forced recalcitrant local officials to consider outside ideas.Another celebrated Zhu innovation was the ''one-chop shop,'' the creation of a single office in the Shanghai government to grant swift approval for foreign investment projects. As often as the concept has been praised, though, Mr. Zhu has admitted that it never actually worked as advertised.Keeping Shanghai Cool During '89 ProtestsFor Mr. Zhu, as for many Chinese, 1989 was a searing and telling year. As student-led demonstrations grew in Beijing and Mr. Jiang was called to the capital, Mr. Zhu took charge in Shanghai. After June 4, when the army crushed the demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square, outraged students and workers in Shanghai threatened to mount a general strike.Mr. Zhu went on television to address Shanghai residents directly and delivered what is still widely remembered as a brilliant address. Amazingly, he did not repeat the official line, that the killings by the army in Beijing had been a necessary response to a ''counterrevolutionary rebellion.''''Historical facts cannot be covered up by anybody,'' Mr. Zhu said. ''The truth will always come out.'' All sides were free to interpret his comments in their own way, and demonstrators dispersed without bloodshed.Deng moved Mr. Zhu to Beijing as a Deputy Prime Minister in 1991. Mr. Zhu soon opened the Economic and Trade Office, which he filled with reform-minded economists and officials and used as a power base.When Communist leaders from all over China gathered for a party congress in 1992, Mr. Zhu was just an alternate member of the Central Committee, placing him only in the top 300 members of the party hierarchy.But at that congress, on Deng's instruction, Mr. Zhu made a rare ''triple jump'' -- into the 150-member Central Committee, the 20-member Politburo and even the Politburo's 7-member Standing Committee, all at once.Suddenly, Mr. Zhu ranked fifth in the Party. Beijing's political cognoscenti saw a future Prime Minister, and some in the old guard began taking pot shots at the impudent reformer.As Boss of Economy, Zhu Curbs InflationBut the leadership, increasingly dominated by Mr. Jiang, would soon desperately need Mr. Zhu's help. By 1993, the economy was in danger of overheating, growing 14 percent on a reckless surge in money supply, rampant real estate speculation and inflation that raged at 24 percent a year, raising fears of social turmoil.When Prime Minister Li disappeared from public view in early 1993, apparently from a heart attack, Mr. Zhu was promoted to Executive Deputy Prime Minister and given broad authority to get the economy under control.Mr. Zhu promptly dismissed the head of the central bank and took over the job himself, personally directing an unpopular policy of tightly limiting loans and curbing Government spending. His strict enforcement of austerity measures, aided by the tongue-lashings he doled out when visiting officials in the provinces, would earn him enemies as well as admirers.Soon, officials began spreading a Zhu-inspired line that China would aim to achieve a ''soft landing'' by bringing down inflation while maintaining a high and steady growth rate. The notion that was roundly ridiculed by outside economists.But a 33 percent devaluation of the yuan, China's currency, in 1994 spurred exports without worsening inflation. By 1995 inflation declined to 10 percent, in 1996 it hit 6 percent and by 1997 inflation was close to 1 percent. Meanwhile, growth remained high, though it is projected to slide to 8 percent in 1998.In Mr. Zhu's strategy, China is entering a difficult phase, with a vast array of state-owned companies that must be made solvent or discarded. At the same time, the old ''iron rice bowl'' that provided lifetime job security is being dismantled, to be replaced by a modern system of social insurance and welfare programs. It is a dangerous course politically, with the potential to breed unrest, but senior leaders seem to agree that they have no alternative.Since Deng's death early last year, Mr. Zhu has stayed aloft politically without a senior patron, and if events go badly in years to come, he will be an easy scapegoat. Although President Jiang and Mr. Zhu have worked together for nearly 10 years, Mr. Zhu has never been considered part of the President's inner circle.''Jiang and Zhu have always had some tension between them because of their different backgrounds and leadership styles and their shared political ambitions,'' said Li Cheng, a political science professor at Hamilton College. ''I think this tension will become stronger as Zhu moves to the front seat now.''He will also be in a potentially awkward situation with his predecessor as Prime Minister, Mr. Li, who will apparently remain in second place in the all-powerful party hierarchy while serving in a less powerful Government job, as Speaker of the National People's Congress, the nominal Parliament. Yet Mr. Zhu, the aggressively competent achiever, has in recent years shown that he can do his own job well without totally upstaging his superiors.And Mr. Jiang, a skilled politician and consensus builder who has surprised everyone with his ability to lead China's global emergence in recent years, may know he needs Mr. Zhu to keep the engines of China's progress running smoothly.Correction: March 19, 1998, Thursday  An article on Monday about Zhu Rongji, China's new Prime Minister, referred to his children incorrectly, based on erroneous information in an official biography. He has a son and a daughter, not two daughters, according to a new official biography.