https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/us/terence-crutcher-unarmed-man-killed-by-tulsa-police-had-pcp-in-his-body-coroner-finds.html
Unarmed Man Killed by Tulsa Police Had PCP in His Body, Coroner Finds - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Scott  Keith Lamont (1973-2016),Shelby  Betty J (1974- ),Tulsa (Okla),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Crutcher  Terence (1976- 2016),Drug Abuse and Traffic
Oct. 11, 2016
2340
An unarmed man who was fatally shot last month by a police officer in Tulsa, Okla., had a high level of the drug PCP in his body, a coroner reported on Tuesday, confirming what the police surmised at the time.Officer Betty Jo Shelby, 42, has been charged with manslaughter in the death of Terence Crutcher on Sept. 16. Video of the shooting showed Mr. Crutcher, 40, walking away from her with his hands raised, and then stopping beside his sport utility vehicle and lowering his hand just before she fired a single shot from several feet away.The police said that Mr. Crutcher, who was black, had stopped his vehicle in the middle of a road and gotten out, leaving the engine running. He was talking nonsensically and not responding to commands from the officer, who is white. After the shooting, the police said, officers found in the vehicle a vial of phencyclidine, known as PCP, a drug that can induce powerful hallucinations.Mr. Crutcher’s was one in a series of highly publicized deaths of black men at the hands of the police, which have prompted searing debates about the roles of race and law enforcement. The shooting sparked protests, which were overshadowed days later by much larger demonstrations in Charlotte, N.C., where another black man, Keith Lamont Scott, was fatally shot by an officer.An autopsy report released Tuesday by the Oklahoma Office of the Chief Medical Examiner said that Mr. Crutcher’s body had 96 nanograms of PCP per milliliter of blood. That is a high level, according to drug studies, which have found that hallucinations can occur at much lower concentrations, but the studies also show that the correlation between blood levels of the drug and intoxication is loose at best.The medical examiner also reported finding traces of tenocyclidine, or TCP, a drug related to PCP, and no other illicit substances.The autopsy showed that the bullet entered Mr. Crutcher’s chest from the right side, fracturing ribs and striking his right lung and his heart, and lodging under the skin on the left side of his chest.